NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROFESSIONAL PARTNERSHIPS AND MATCHING IN OBSTETRICS
Andrew Epstein
Jonathan D. Ketcham
Sean Nicholson
Working Paper 14070
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14070

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

We appreciate helpful comments from David Bradford, David Meltzer, Doug Staiger, Jonathan Skinner,
and seminar participants at NBER, Syracuse University, the 2005 Annual Health Economics Conference,
the 2006 American Society of Health Economists conference, and the 2007 American Economic Association
annual meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Andrew Epstein, Jonathan D. Ketcham, and Sean Nicholson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Professional Partnerships and Matching in Obstetrics
Andrew Epstein, Jonathan D. Ketcham, and Sean Nicholson
NBER Working Paper No. 14070
June 2008, Revised September 2008
JEL No. D83,I12,J44,L15,L25
ABSTRACT
Theory indicates that internally-differentiated professional partnerships can promote matching between
heterogeneous consumers and professionals, particularly when consumers have imperfect information
or markets have barriers to referrals between firms. We test this in obstetrics markets, relying on random
assignment of patients to physicians to generate unbiased measures of a physician's treatment style
and skill, and on simulations to measure a physician's specialization. Consumers match to professionals
along all three dimensions -- specialization, style and skill -- based on consumers' observed characteristics
and unobserved preferences. We conclude that internally-differentiated partnerships promote matching
in ways that improve consumers' welfare and health.

Andrew Epstein
School of Public Health
Yale University
60 College St, Room 301
New Haven, CT 06520
andrew.epstein@yale.edu
Jonathan D. Ketcham
Assistant Professor
School of Health Management and Policy
W.P. Carey School of Business
Arizona State University
300 E. Lemon Street
Tempe, AZ 85287-4506
ketcham@asu.edu

Sean Nicholson
Assistant Professor
Department of Policy Analysis and Management
Cornell University
123 Martha Van Rensselaer Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
sn243@cornell.edu

I.

Obstetrics Markets
Many theoretical models of professional service partnerships have been developed to

understand better the formation of such firms, their boundaries and their scopes. These models
have focused on the benefits to the professionals or firms themselves. For example, partnerships’
profit-sharing can effectively spread the risk of demand shocks across the members (Gaynor and
Gertler 1995). Alternatively, Chou (2007) proposes that human-capital intensive firms merge to
establish a single brand identity that obfuscates the individual market value of the individuals or
firms within the larger firm. The rationale for mergers between firms in this model is the merged
firm’s ability to capture more of the investment in human capital such as knowledge, skill, or
specialization. Other models have considered the ability of partnerships to signal higher quality to
consumers in markets where quality is not readily observable, which they achieve by screening
out low-quality professionals through their hiring decisions (Levin and Tadelis 2002) or by
creating incentives for members to invest in quality-improving human capital (Morrison and
Wilhelm 2004).
Other theoretical models have focused on the advantages of firms with heterogeneous
workers. Firms with specialized workers can coordinate their production (Alchian and Demsetz
1972; Garicano 2000; Hart and Moore 2005), facilitate the flow of information among specialists
(Bolton and Dewatripont 1994), and match them with the most appropriate tasks (MacDonald
1982). In professional services markets, “tasks” can refer to individual, heterogeneous customers.
The welfare implications of product differentiation in markets with heterogeneous consumers
depend on the ability of consumers to match with products. In markets with imperfect or
asymmetric information, firms can facilitate matching of consumers with goods and services by
reducing consumers’ search and diagnosis costs (Wolinsky 1993) or by eliminating or reducing
disincentives to refer consumers (Garicano and Santos 2004). In Garicano and Santos (2004),
under many but not all conditions, professional partnerships create incentives for within-firm

3

referrals that enhance matching between specialists and uninformed consumers beyond those
achieved through (post-diagnosis) spot markets or (pre-diagnosis) retainer contracts between
professionals in different firms.
In this paper we empirically consider the consumer benefits from firms of professionals
who are differentiated in specialization, style and skill. We study these effects conditional on the
existing makeup of firms rather than testing the various models that explain the organization of
professionals into firms. Specifically we analyze whether obstetrics partnerships promote
matching between heterogeneous consumers (patients) and professionals, as proposed by
Garicano and Santos. In this context, “partnerships” refer to physician group practices that share
costs and revenues in ways that permit referrals without violating anti-kickback regulations that
prevent payments between firms. The three specific types of matching we consider in this paper
are: 1) whether a patient with a specific health condition is assigned to a physician who
specializes in treating that condition; 2) whether a patient who prefers to be treated intensively is
assigned to a physician with an intensive treatment style or skill advantage for that treatment; and
3) whether a patient who is medically appropriate for cesarean section is assigned to a physician
who is skilled at performing that treatment.
One empirical challenge to identifying producer differentiation, subsequent matching and
their welfare implications is the endogenous matching of workers with jobs (Ackerberg and
Botticini 2003). We rely on simulations to quantify the extent of specialization, and we capitalize
on the random pairing of physicians and patients on weekends to measure physicians’ styles (i.e.
propensity to perform a cesarean section) and skills (as revealed by maternal health outcomes)
without bias due to matching on unobserved patient or physician characteristics. To do this, we
exploit the fact that because the timing of childbirth is uncertain and physicians’ weekend call
schedules are predetermined, most women being treated by a physician in a group practice who
go into labor on the weekend are randomly assigned to a member of the practice who is on call at
the time. We first confirm this feature and then use it to determine whether group practices match

4

physicians skilled at performing cesarean sections with patients clinically appropriate to receive
the procedure, as well as whether patients with preferences for being treated by cesarean section
match with physicians who have the appropriate treatment style or skill advantage. We also rely
on the random pairing to identify the health benefits of matching specialization by comparing the
health outcomes of high-risk patients randomly assigned to physicians who specialize in that
particular health condition to the outcomes of other high-risk patients in the practice who were
randomly assigned to non-specialists.
We find that the proportion of high-risk patients matched with a specialist is larger
among internally-differentiated group practices (i.e., practices where some but not all physicians
specialize) than among solo practitioners or homogeneous groups for 11 of the 12 specific health
conditions we examine. This additional matching is most pronounced for health conditions that
develop during a pregnancy, when physicians’ financial disincentives to refer across firms are
largest. Although in most cases this matching does not affect maternal health outcomes during the
delivery or the subsequent hospital stay1, when it does affect maternal health, the magnitudes of
the estimated effects are large.
We also find that physicians in group practices vary from their fellow group practice
members in treatment style and skill levels. Although we do not find clear evidence that groups
match patients with preferences for cesarean section with physicians who have a high propensity
to perform them (style), our results indicate that they are treated by physicians in the group who
are relatively more skilled at cesarean sections. Likewise, group practices direct patients for
whom cesarean sections are more clinically appropriate to these more skilled physicians. Taken
together, our results indicate that differentiation among physicians within an obstetrics practice
promotes patient-physician matching in ways that improve welfare.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II provides an overview of obstetrics markets
and Section III describes the data. In Section IV we examine whether group practices promote
1

We are not able to examine the effect of specialization on babies’ health outcomes due to data limitations.

5

physician specialization and whether differentiated groups enhance physician-patient matching
based on patients’ health conditions relative to patients treated by obstetricians in homogeneous
practices. We then analyze the effects of matching and mismatching on mothers’ delivery
outcomes in Section V. In Section VI we examine whether patients in group practices match with
physicians based on patient treatment preferences and physicians’ treatment styles, as well as
based on physicians’ skills and patients’ clinical characteristics. Section VII concludes.

II.

Obstetrics Markets
Obstetrics markets are characterized by heterogeneous consumers, asymmetric

information, heterogeneous professionals often organized into partnerships, and disincentives for
referrals between practices. These markets differ from the assumptions of the Garicano and
Santos (2004) model in several important ways. First, “self-referral” regulations commonly
known as the “Stark law”2 prohibit both spot markets and retainer contracts between physicians
who are not members of the same group practice. At the same time, payment for prenatal care
typically is bundled with payment for the delivery, with all or almost all of the payments made to
the physician performing the delivery.3 One implication of this is that a physician’s expected
profit-margins are lower at the outset of the pregnancy than they are closer to the delivery.
Because partnerships typically share revenues, members of a group medical practice have no or
smaller financial disincentives to avoid referrals between members of the same group. Together
these provide strong disincentives for a physician to refer outside of but not within his own
practice, particularly later in the pregnancy when the marginal expected profits are higher. As a
result, groups might be especially effective at promoting matching on clinical characteristics that
become known later in a pregnancy, such as preterm gestation, malpositioned fetus, pregnancy2

The most recent regulations are officially titled, “Physicians’ referrals to health care entities with which
they have financial relationships,” and are available at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgibin/getpage.cgi?dbname=2001_register&position=all&page=856.
3
For one example, see http://www.tuftshealthplan.com/providers/pdf/payment_policies/obgyn.pdf.
Accessed April 25, 2008.

6

related hypertension, congenital anomalies or chromosomal abnormalities.4 In addition to these
physician disincentives for late-term referrals across groups, high search costs and switching
costs might discourage patients from changing practices (Wolinsky 1993), which creates an
additional option value from selecting a partnership over a solo physician. Moreover, while
Garicano and Santos (2004) assume consumers are uninformed, expecting mothers are likely to
acquire information regarding their health condition and the characteristics of obstetricians
through a number of sources, including referring primary care physicians, their own experiences,
word-of-mouth, or externally-produced comparisons such as quality report cards (Hoerger and
Howard 1995). Thus we would expect some matching to occur between patients and obstetricians
in homogeneous practices (including solo physicians) based on information that is available to
patients and their referring physicians. Although we cannot observe referrals directly, if the same
amount of information exists ex ante in the market regarding physicians in homogeneous groups
and those in groups with differentiated physicians, the additional matching that occurs in
differentiated groups would be due purely to within-group referrals.
Groups with differentiated physicians have the potential to promote matching, but
relative to homogeneous groups they also could foster more mismatches because of how group
practices schedule obstetricians, hospital staffing patterns, and the emergent nature of childbirth.
Most obstetrical group practices designate a physician to perform deliveries on all patients from
the practice that go into labor during a particular 24-hour period, although some physicians make
themselves available to perform their patients’ deliveries during the week (but not weekend) even
when not on call (Schauberger, Gribble and Rooney 2007).5 Thus many patients who go into
labor naturally (i.e., without being induced) are randomly assigned to a member of the group
practice, particularly on weekends.
4

Although risk factors observed at the outset might provide evidence to physicians about the likelihood of
developing hypertension from pregnancy, to our knowledge women have equal observable risk of having a
malpositioned fetus.
5
In other practices, on weekdays physicians perform deliveries for patients who begin labor between 7am
and 5pm, but rely on physicians on “night call” to cover deliveries during the remaining hours.

7

If a patient or the physicians in the group practice want to guarantee that a particular
physician performs a patient’s delivery, they can either schedule a cesarean section or schedule
labor to be induced when the preferred physician is on-call at the hospital. Induced deliveries and
scheduled cesarean sections are much more likely to occur on a weekday than a weekend because
hospitals are staffed more heavily during the week, and many physicians value leisure time on the
weekend more highly. Scheduled cesarean sections and induced deliveries are common, which
means there are many opportunities for intentional matching of patients and physicians on
weekdays. During our 1999-2004 sample period, 17.1 percent of all deliveries in Florida and New
York were scheduled cesarean sections, and almost all of these occurred on a weekday.
Nationally, 20 percent of deliveries in the United States in 2000 were induced, and these were 2.3
times more likely to occur on a weekday than a weekend (Martin et al. 2003).
III.

Data
We construct our sample from the Florida and New York hospital discharge data sets for

the 1999 to 2004 time period. Our analytic data set contains information on 1.6 million deliveries
that occurred at every non-federal, short-term acute care hospital in those states.6 We observe the
mother’s demographic information (age, race), her insurance coverage (e.g., HMO, Medicaid),
codes for the principal and secondary diagnoses, procedure codes that allow us to determine
whether the baby was delivered vaginally or via cesarean section, a unique physician identifier
that is consistent across hospitals and years, a unique and consistent hospital identifier, and the
quarter and year the patient was discharged. The diagnoses codes allow us to control for objective
health conditions that affect the probability a physician will perform a cesarean section (e.g.,
whether a woman had a cesarean section prior to this delivery, whether the fetus was
malpositioned during the delivery, and whether the labor occurred before the fetus was full-term).

6

There were a total of 2.38 million deliveries in Florida and New York hospitals between 1999 and 2004.
About 740,000 of these deliveries are excluded from the analysis because the physician performed fewer
than 100 weekend laboring deliveries, a woman received a scheduled cesarean section on a weekend, or we
could not identify the physician who performed the delivery in the physician databases.

8

Women are much more likely to receive a cesarean section in these situations (Gregory et al.
2002).7
To minimize concerns about measuring physician specialization, treatment styles and
skill with error, throughout the paper we restrict the analysis to physicians who performed at least
100 deliveries between 1999 and 2004 for patients who went into labor and delivered on
weekends. We rely on the work of others (Henry et al. 1995; Gregory et al. 2002) to determine
whether a woman went into labor. Women who delivered vaginally or had codes indicating fetal
distress, labor abnormalities, cord prolapse, or a breech converted to vertex presentation were
interpreted as having labored.
Because the physician identifiers are consistent and the data include all hospital
discharges, we are able to examine a physician’s entire inpatient practice. Using the physician
license numbers as a link, we obtained each physician’s telephone number(s) and office name in
April 2005 from the Florida State Licensure Database and American Medical Information, a
private company that tracks physicians for general marketing purposes. Where telephone numbers
or office names were missing, we relied on internet searches conducted in September 2005 and
January 2007 to identify them. If a physician had a unique telephone number in our sample, we
concluded that he is a solo practitioner; physicians who shared the same telephone number were
considered to be in the same group practice.8 Identical practice names and physicians with
multiple telephone numbers were used to identify two or more different locations of the same
practice.9
A total of 1,655 physicians (930 in New York and 725 in Florida) performed 100 or more
weekend laboring deliveries between 1999 and 2004. On average, each physician performed 796
7

Regression results below confirm this.
Because physicians who performed fewer than 100 weekend deliveries between 1999 and 2004 are
omitted from the sample, some of the physicians who qualify as being solo practitioners may in fact be in a
group practice with other low-volume obstetricians, or with physicians who do not deliver babies (e.g.,
gynecologists.)
9
We measure physicians’ practice affiliations with error if they changed between the start of our sample
period (1999) and when we identified them (2005 and 2007).
8

9

weekday and 187 weekend laboring deliveries over the six-year period. We identify 12 high-risk
health conditions (e.g., twins) that substantially increase the likelihood that a pregnant woman or
her baby will experience an adverse health outcome during delivery (Gregory et al. 2002). Table
1 reports sample means and standard deviations for patients treated by physicians who met the
threshold volume of weekend deliveries, separately for weekend and weekday deliveries. Overall,
26.2 percent and 17.3 percent of women who delivered during the week or on the weekend,
respectively, had at least one of these 12 conditions. The presence of a high-risk condition
substantially increases the probability that a woman will receive a cesarean section, which is a
surgical procedure, rather than delivering vaginally, and increases the probability that the mother
or the baby will have a negative health outcome during or shortly after the delivery. For example,
among women who delivered on a weekday, 54.6 percent of women who had a high-risk
condition received a cesarean section, versus 21.6 percent of women without a high-risk
condition.
IV.

Matching on Specialization
Obstetricians can specialize in treating particular types of patients. For example, some

obstetricians perform a relatively large number of deliveries for women who have specific health
risks such as hypertension (high blood pressure, or pre-eclampsia), a malpositioned fetus (e.g., a
breech baby), or antepartum bleeding, while other obstetricians avoid such cases. A physician
who specializes in treating a specific health condition might produce better health outcomes for
the mother or the baby than a physician who avoids such cases, either due to innate skill
differences between obstetricians or from learning-by-doing (e.g., technical proficiency acquired
through experience) (Britt, Eden and Evans 2006). If this occurs, then the welfare effects of
specialization depend on the extent to which women with a particular health condition are able to
match with a physician who specializes in that health condition.

10

We compare the number of each type of high-risk delivery10 each obstetrician in Florida
and New York actually performed between 1999 and 2004 on weekdays, when patients have
opportunities to choose the delivering physician by scheduling a cesarean section or requesting an
induced delivery, to the number of deliveries expected if patients were randomly assigned to an
obstetrician in the market. An obstetrician is then categorized as a “specialist” if he performs
significantly more high-risk deliveries than expected, an “avoider” if he performs significantly
fewer high-risk deliveries than expected, or a “generalist” otherwise. This allows us to compare
the extent of specialization in group practices versus solo practices. It also defines whether the
practice consists of differentiated or homogeneous physicians. We use this to consider the effects
of within-practice differentiation on the proportion of patients who match (i.e., high-risk patients
assigned to specialist physicians or low-risk patients assigned to avoiders) or mismatch (i.e., highrisk patients assigned to avoiders or low-risk patients assigned to specialists).
In each of 1,000 iterations of a simulation, each weekday patient is randomly assigned to
a physician in the patient’s Local Health Council District (LHCD) in Florida, or Health Service
Area (HSA) in New York,11 such that each physician receives his actual number of weekday
patients for each year in the sample period. A physician is defined as a specialist in each of the 12
high-risk conditions if the prevalence of that condition among his actual patients exceeds the 99th
percentile of the simulated prevalence of that condition; an “avoider” if his actual prevalence falls
below the 1st percentile in the simulation; and a generalist otherwise.12
In Table 2 we report the proportion of physicians who are specialists and avoiders for
each of the 12 high-risk conditions, as well as for the summary indicator of whether a woman has
10

A delivery is counted separately for each high-risk condition a patient has.
The 11 LHCDs in Florida were formed by the state for purposes of health planning (see
http://www.flhealthplanning.org/). The eight HSAs in New York were formed for a similar purpose. Each
consists of one or more contiguous counties.
12
Our results are qualitatively similar if we instead set the thresholds at the 95th and 5th percentile, or if we
define the market as the hospital where the physician performs the majority of his deliveries. The
LHCD/HSA and the hospital approaches represent extremes of the possible market, because the former
definition is likely to be too large and the latter too small.
11

11

any of the 12 high-risk conditions. The conditions are arranged in descending order according to
the mean number of deliveries performed by a specialist physician over the six-year period
(shown in the last column). The results in the first column of Table 2 indicate that specialization
is infrequent. Based on the unweighted average across the 12 conditions, 13 percent of physicians
are specialists and 22 percent are avoiders. There is variation across conditions, from 7 percent of
physicians specializing in pregnancies with congenital anomalies or chromosomal abnormalities
up to 20 percent specializing in patients with any of the 12 high-risk conditions. The percentage
of physicians who are avoiders likewise ranges from a low of 11 percent for antepartum bleeding
to a high of 32 percent for uterine scarring. The difference in the volume of deliveries for patients
with each high-risk condition between a specialist and an avoider is substantial, as indicated in
the last column. Specialists perform two to 127 times more deliveries, on average, relative to
avoiders.
In the second and third columns of Table 2 we report the proportions of physicians who
are specialists and avoiders, separately for solo practitioners and members of a group practice.
Physicians in group practices are slightly more likely than solo practitioners to specialize and are
less likely to be avoiders, although we cannot determine whether groups purposefully recruit
physicians different from their existing members or whether the organizational structure
facilitates differentiation. A larger proportion of physicians in group practices specialize in
patients who have a multiple birth, congenital anomalies, or hypertension, predominantly from
pregnancy-related severe hypertension, relative to solo practitioners. None of these risk factors is
observable until later in a pregnancy,13 which is consistent with groups’ referring relatively more
patients within the group when it is particularly costly to refer to a different practice. A smaller
proportion of physicians in group practices are avoiders for 8 of the 13 conditions relative to solo

13

Of the 12 risk factors for which we have data, malpositioned fetus is the only additional one that is not
observable until later in the pregnancy.

12

practitioners, whereas the opposite is true for only a single condition. Thus the random
assignment of patients to on-call physicians appears to limit the number of avoiders in groups.14
With these measures of physician specialization, for each risk factor we then determine
whether group practices are homogeneous (i.e., all specialists, all generalists, or all avoiders) or
differentiated (e.g., a specialist and two generalists). In column 6 and column 7 of Table 2 we
report the proportion of physicians who are specialists and avoiders separately for homogenous
groups and differentiated groups. Across all health conditions, the proportion of physicians in
differentiated groups who are specialists (17 percent) is more than twice that of homogenous
groups (7 percent), and the proportion of physicians in differentiated groups who are avoiders is
almost twice as large (25 percent versus 13 percent).
To test whether differentiated groups facilitate matching and minimize mismatching, in
Table 3 we report the proportions of high-risk patients delivering on weekdays who are matched
with specialists and mismatched with avoiders, separately for patients of differentiated group
practices versus patients of solo practitioners or homogeneous groups. This indicates how many
more high-risk patients are assigned to an appropriate physician in practices that have chosen to
differentiate themselves and can refer between partners versus practices that by choice cannot
refer within the practice (solo practitioners) or have chosen not to differentiate from one another
(homogeneous group practices). On weekdays, differentiated groups achieve much greater
matching than solo practitioners and homogeneous groups. The proportion of high-risk patients
who are assigned to a specialist is higher among patients of differentiated group practices overall
and for 11 of the 12 individual high-risk health conditions. On average, the share of high-risk
patients who match with a specialist is 12 percentage points higher in differentiated group versus
solo or homogeneous group practices. Four of the five largest differences in matching rates occur

14

About 25% of deliveries performed by physicians in solo practices were for mothers with at least one of
the 12 high-risk conditions, compared with 26% for physicians in group practice, suggesting that the
differences in specialization do not stem from solo practitioners’ positioning themselves to have healthier
patients in general.

13

in the conditions that develop late in a pregnancy, where members of a group practice do not face
the financial disincentives to refer that physicians in homogeneous practices do: multiple fetuses
(28 percentage point difference), malpositioned fetus (23 percentage point difference),
pregnancy-related severe hypertension (17 percentage point difference), and preterm gestation
(15 percentage point difference).
High-risk patients in differentiated practices are slightly less likely to be assigned to
avoiders (i.e., to mismatch) than those in homogeneous practices. Patients of differentiated group
practices have a five percentage point lower mismatch rate than patients in homogeneous
practices for the summary high-risk health measure, and the differentiated group mismatch rate is
significantly lower for 5 of the individual measures of patient risk. These results are consistent
with models of partnerships that form to lower the barriers to referrals among differentiated
members (Garicano and Santos 2004).15
V.

Matching and Mothers’ Health Outcomes
Given these differences in matching and mismatching due to within-firm specialization,

we next analyze whether and how matching and mismatching affect mothers’ health during the
delivery and subsequent hospital stay. Our identification of the health effect relies on random
pairings of particular types of patients (based on whether they have a specific high-risk health
condition) with a given type of physician (specialist, generalist, or avoider for that health
condition) to eliminate differences in unobservable patient characteristics between physicians in a
group due to referrals or other sources of patient-practice matching. As a result, we restrict the
sample to group practice patients who delivered on the weekend, because typically these patients
are randomly assigned to a physician within the group.

15

We also compared the matching rates separately for patients who are uninsured or have Medicaid
insurance versus patients with private health insurance, and found them to be similar. This suggests that
maternal income and education do not appear to be important for creating matches, and that the benefits of
within-group referrals do not vary by socioeconomic status. These results are available from the authors by
request.

14

A small number of weekend deliveries are scheduled for a cesarean section or
inducement, where scheduling can permit the patient and the physician to match intentionally.16
Thus we further restrict the weekend sample to deliveries where a woman goes into labor, thereby
excluding scheduled weekend cesarean sections and reducing the amount of non-random pairing
in this sample. Because we cannot observe from the discharge data whether a delivery was
induced, a small part of the weekend laboring sample might contain non-randomly-paired patients
and physicians. To ameliorate the potential for bias, we further restrict the sample to groups that
simulations indicate assign their weekend laboring patients randomly. The analysis considers only
within-group differences, because call schedules assign patients to physicians randomly only
within a group practice, and patient sorting into groups is likely to occur on the basis of
unobserved characteristics that affect outcomes. As a result, only internally-differentiated groups
can be used to identify the health benefits of matching.
Whether a group is internally-differentiated and randomly assigns its patients is
determined separately for each health condition we examine. To identify and exclude any groups
that do not randomly pair weekend patients with physicians, we perform 1,000 iterations of a
simulation that randomly assigns a group’s weekend, laboring patients to the physicians in that
group, where the yearly number of simulated patients assigned to each physician equals his actual
volume of weekend laboring cases. After each iteration we record the mean patient characteristics
for each physician (e.g., the proportion of his patients who have antepartum bleeding, severe
pregnancy-induced hypertension, or a malpositioned fetus). Group practices with at least one
physician whose actual mean for a particular health condition is below the 5th percentile or above
the 95th percentile of the physician-specific distribution of the simulated mean of that health
condition are considered to violate the assumption that weekend patients are randomly assigned
for that health condition, and are excluded from the outcomes analysis. We perform this test for

16

Previous studies indicate that most induced deliveries nationally occur on weekdays, when hospitals are
staffed more heavily (Martin et al. 2003).

15

ten of the 12 high-risk health conditions separately as well as for an indicator of whether a patient
has any of the 12 conditions. We omit the two health conditions where specialists are most
infrequent and have very low patient volumes: uterine scarring (a mean of 7.5 deliveries over a
six-year period for specialists) and congenital anomalies or chromosomal abnormalities (a mean
of 6 deliveries over a six-year period for specialists).
To measure mothers’ outcomes, we use a coding system established by HealthGrades
(2007) to determine whether or not a woman experienced an adverse outcome during the delivery
or subsequent hospitalization. This system identifies 66 discrete diagnosis codes for adverse
outcomes for a cesarean section and 64 discrete diagnosis codes for adverse outcomes for a
vaginal delivery. Examples include injury to pelvic organs, rupture of the uterus, 4th degree
perineal laceration, anemia due to acute loss of blood, or major puerperal infection. In our
sample, adverse outcomes for the mother during or shortly after delivery occurred for 10.3
percent of deliveries where a woman went into labor and delivered on the weekend. To create a
single summary measure of mothers’ outcomes that allows the utility loss to vary across the
different adverse events, we conduct regressions of the form
(1) Oi = φ 0 + φ1 Ri + Fi + ε 1
where Oi is the number of days that a woman spends in the hospital following a delivery, Ri is a
vector of indicator variables for whether the woman experienced each of the adverse events
specified by Health Grades, and Fi represents hospital fixed effects. This approach assumes that
the utility loss from an adverse event is proportional to the marginal effect of that event on the
length of a mother’s hospital stay, controlling for the hospital of admission.
We estimate these regressions separately by state and delivery mode (i.e., vaginal and
cesarean section) using data from 1998, the year prior to the beginning of our sample. Results are
reported in Appendix A. In the cesarean section regressions, the coefficients are greater than 0.50
and significantly different from zero for 20 of the adverse outcomes in Florida and 19 in New

16

York, whereas in both Florida and New York 11 events in the vaginal delivery regressions have a
positive coefficient of that magnitude. That is, these events are associated with a woman spending
at least an extra half day in the hospital following the delivery. To generate a single, continuous
measure of each woman’s health outcome, we multiply the vector of adverse outcome
coefficients from the 1998 regressions by the vector of indicator variables for whether the woman
in the 1999-2004 sample actually experienced each adverse event, so that larger values indicating
a worse outcome.17
With measures of patient types, physician types, and mothers’ outcomes, we analyze the
impact of matching on mothers’ health with regressions of the form
(2) Ôi = σ0 + σ1Hi + σ2Sj + σ3Aj + σ4Hi*Sj + σ5Hi*Aj + σ 6Xi + σ7Y + σ8G + ε2
where Ôi is the predicted incremental length of stay due to adverse events experienced by a
patient estimated in equation (1), Hi is an indicator of whether a patient has high-risk condition i;
Sj and Aj are indicators for specialist and avoider physicians, respectively (with generalist
physicians as the reference category); Xi is a vector of characteristics of the patient and her
delivering physician; and G is a vector of group practice fixed effects. The vector Xi includes an
indicator of whether the physician is female, years of physician experience and its quadratic, an
indicator if experience is missing, an indicator for New York patients, calendar year indicators, a
patient’s age and its quadratic, an indicator if age is missing, an indicator is a patient is a minority
(black or Hispanic) and an indicator if race/ethnicity is missing, indicators for whether a patient is
uninsured or covered by Medicaid, an indicator for whether the patient has had a previous
cesarean section, and indicators for each of the other 11 high-risk conditions. It is worth repeating
that we classify physicians as specialists, generalists or avoiders on their weekday deliveries,

17

As a robustness check, we also create a dichotomous outcome variable measuring whether a woman
experienced any of the major adverse outcomes, where major is defined as an outcome with an incremental
effect on length of stay (φ1 ) of 0.5 or greater. The overall pattern of results with this dependent variable
was similar.

17

when intentional matching occurs, whereas we examine the impact of matching due to withingroup differentiation on outcomes based on weekend deliveries, where our simulation has
validated the assumption that the call schedule randomly assigns high- and low-risk patients to
physicians within the practice.
We rely on linear models to test the effects of matching on mothers’ outcomes. Because
the dependent variable is generated from the predicted coefficients from equation (1), we correct
for heteroskedasticity by weighting each observation in equation (2) by the inverse of the
standard error of the prediction of Ôi (Mayda 2006).18 Robust standard errors are calculated,
however no clustering is done: despite the hierarchical nature of the data, the intra-group
correlation coefficients of the regression residuals are all zero, indicating that clustering is
unnecessary and inefficient, particularly with the large number of patients per group.19
If the following hold: (1) assigning a patient who has a particular (observed) health
condition to a physician within the practice who specializes in that condition (i.e., matching)
improves the patient’s delivery outcome, (2) assigning such a patient to an avoider (i.e.,
mismatching) worsens her outcome, (3) assigning a patient who does not have a particular health
condition to a physician within the practice who avoids that condition (i.e., matching) improves
the patient’s delivery outcome, and (4) assigning such a patient to a specialist (i.e., mismatching)
worsens her outcome, then we would expect the following results:
-

σ2 > 0: low-risk patient outcomes are worse when randomly assigned to a specialist
physician (i.e., a mismatch) rather than a generalist physician (the omitted category)
σ3 < 0: low-risk patient outcomes are better when randomly assigned to an avoider (i.e., a
match) rather than a generalist
σ3 - σ2 < 0: low-risk patient outcomes are better when randomly assigned to an avoider
rather than a specialist
σ4 < 0: high-risk patient outcomes are better when randomly assigned to a specialist (i.e.,
a match) rather than a generalist
σ5 > 0: high-risk patient outcomes are worse when randomly assigned to an avoider (i.e.,
a mismatch) rather than a generalist

18

The pattern of results from these weighted least squares estimates was not different from the pattern of
estimates using robust standard errors alone to account for heteroskedasticity.
19
Hansen (2007) provides additional details.

18

-

σ4 - σ5 < 0: high-risk patient outcomes are better when randomly assigned to a specialist
rather than an avoider.
In Table 4 we report estimated coefficients and robust standard errors separately for a

woman’s delivery outcome if she has one of 10 specific health conditions, as well as whether she
has any high-risk condition. Overall, the results provide some evidence that matching improves
mothers’ outcomes and mismatching harms them. Of the 66 tests of the hypotheses listed above
(i.e., six tests in 11 regressions), the hypotheses are accepted at the five-percent level in seven
instances (10.6 percent), while providing statistically significant counterfactual evidence in only
one (1.5 percent) instance, indicating that the counterfactual findings are likely due to chance
while the supporting results are not
The benefits of matching occur primarily from assigning low-risk patients to avoider
physicians as opposed to generalist or specialist physicians. Specifically, matching low-risk
patients with avoider physicians (σ3 < 0, or σ3 – σ2 < 0) significantly (at the five-percent level)
improves outcomes for women who do not have any high-risk condition, any hypertension, a
malpositioned fetus, or antepartum bleeding. Surprisingly, there is only one instance (for an
unengaged fetal head) of a statistically significant (at the five-percent level) benefit from
matching high-risk patients with specialists rather than generalists (σ4 < 0), and even here the
difference between a specialist and avoider is insignificant. Contrary to the hypotheses above, in
one case there is a statistically significant benefit associated with mismatching: assigning a
woman with any hypertension to a physician who avoids that condition rather than a specialist is
associated with improved outcomes, although being assigned to an avoider is not statistically
different from a generalist. Finally, there is only one case where mismatching has negative health
consequences for the mother: assigning a woman who does not have antepartum bleeding to a
specialist rather than a generalist (α2 > 0) is associated with worse outcomes.20

20

Mismatching a pregnancy without unengaged fetal head to a specialist also has worse outcomes at the
ten-percent level.

19

When they exist, the positive benefits of matching and the negative consequences of
mismatching are large. Based on the mean of the dependent variable for women who do not have
the specific health condition, there are large predicted improvements in a mother’s delivery
outcome if she is matched with an avoider physician rather than a specialist for any hypertension
(22 percent fewer predicted days in the hospital due to complications), malpositioned fetus (23
percent), or antepartum bleeding (52 percent). Similarly, mothers without any of the 12 risk
factors experience 19 percent fewer predicted hospital days due to complications when paired
with an avoider physician who treats few patients with any high-risk factors rather than a
generalist. In the one instance of negative consequences of mismatching, a woman who does not
have antepartum bleeding is predicted to spend 41 percent more days in the hospital due to
complications if assigned to a physician who specializes in that risk factor relative to being
assigned to a generalist.
Our approach measures the effect of within-group specialization on the outcomes of
women who go into labor and deliver on the weekend. The results are likely to underestimate the
overall benefits of specialization and matching and underestimate the costs associated with
mismatching for several reasons. First, groups might respond to the potential risks of mismatches
for certain patients and assign them to specific physicians by inducing or scheduling their
deliveries during the week, as supported by the observed differences in the health conditions of
weekday and weekend patients (Table 1). If groups do this for the patients who benefit the most
from matching, then the weekend estimates, which rely on random assignment for the remaining
patients, should be lower-bound estimates of the benefits of non-random matching on health
characteristics. That is, we estimate the benefits of specialization and matching on a relatively
healthy group of patients who may benefit less from matching than the average patient. This also
holds true if matching occurs across groups for conditions that are known at the outset of the
woman’s pregnancy. Second, we consider matching only along a single dimension (either a single
risk factor, or an indicator for the presence of any risk factor) at a time, but the health outcomes

20

might depend on successful matching across multiple dimensions simultaneously.21 Third, we
observe matching only for the delivery itself, whereas matching for prenatal care might also be
important.22 Fourth, because of data limitations, we do not observe the delivery and subsequent
health outcome of the baby, who may be the primary beneficiary of specialization and matching.
The benefits of matching in Table 4 occur primarily from matching low-risk patients (i.e.,
patients who do not have a specific health condition) with avoider physicians. This raises the
question of whether group practices are better able to facilitate such matches relative to solo
practitioners for weekday deliveries, when the greatest opportunity for within-group referrals
exists. To address this question we replicated Table 3 for low-risk instead of high-risk patients.
As shown in Table 5, low-risk patients in differentiated group practices are generally more likely
to be matched with an avoider physician than in solo or homogeneous group practices.
Differentiated groups have higher matching for 10 of the 12 risk factors individually, although
homogenous practices have a higher matching rate for the summary measure. Differentiated
groups are significantly more likely to match low-risk patients with avoider physicians for
antepartum bleeding (20% vs. 9%, p<0.001) and a malpositioned fetus (23% vs. 19%, p<0.001),
the conditions with the largest benefits of matching. For the other two risk factors where
matching significantly affected mothers’ health (any hypertension and unengaged fetal head),
however, homogeneous practices achieved greater matching. Similarly, low-risk patients in
differentiated groups are much more likely to be mismatched with a specialist for most conditions

21

However, patient risk factors do not correlate highly. Only two pairs had correlations of at least 0.10
(multiples and malpositioned fetus, ρ=0.10, and multiples and preterm gestation, ρ=0.13).
22
In order to address this issue, we created an indicator variable if there is a specialist (and separately for
an avoider) for a particular health condition in the patient’s practice, regardless of whether that specialist
actually delivered the baby on the weekend. These variables were interacted with the vector of dummies for
the patient’s health condition. Results from these models for the effects of matching for the delivery were
qualitatively similar to those reported in Table 4, and they indicated little additional effect due to the
potential to match for prenatal care.

21

including for antepartum bleeding (14% vs. 8%, p<0.001), where these mismatches resulted in
worse outcomes for mothers.23
V.

Matching on Style and Skill

A.

Within-group matching by physician cesarean section style and unobserved patient
preferences
There might be benefits of specialization beyond those based on a patient’s observed

health condition and a physician’s experience treating that condition. In this section we examine
whether group practices facilitate two other types of matching: directing patients who prefer to be
treated aggressively to physicians who have such treatment styles; and directing patients with
those preferences or high-risk patients to physicians who are skilled in a particular delivery
method (cesarean sections).
Previous research suggests that obstetricians differ substantially in their treatment style,
defined as their propensity to perform a cesarean section conditional on a patient’s pre-delivery
health condition, although these measures might be biased due to patient-physician matching on
unobserved characteristics (Grant 2005; Epstein and Nicholson 2005). If patients have
homogeneous preferences for this dimension of a physician’s treatment style and there is a single
style that produces the best expected outcome for all types of patients, then this variation reduces
welfare. Although we are not aware of any research that has examined preferences for cesarean
sections specifically, mothers have strong, heterogeneous preferences for related factors in
obstetrics, such as the site of delivery (e.g., Donaldson, Hundley, and Mapp 1998; Miller 2006).
This suggests that some of the observed differentiation in physicians’ treatment styles might arise
when women with different preferences match with physicians who have particular styles. Such
differentiation would improve welfare (Wolinsky 1993).

23

Differentiated groups were actually less likely to mismatch pregnancies with unengaged fetal head (15%
vs. 17%, p<0.001), which also had marginally significant negative health effects from such mismatching.

22

We use the same data set to examine whether group practices with differentiated
physicians promote the matching of patients based on obstetricians’ style and skill. Our measure
of an obstetrician’s style is his risk-adjusted cesarean section rate for patients randomly paired
with him: that is, the probability that a patient who labors on the weekend would receive a
cesarean section if treated by the physician, controlling for the mother’s observed characteristics.
A cesarean section is a surgical procedure and, all else equal, is more expensive than a vaginal
delivery, requires a longer recovery period, and presents increased health risks for the mother. In
certain clinical situations, however, a cesarean section improves the expected health of the mother
and infant.
The cesarean section rates in Florida and New York have increased sharply since the
mid-1990s. As of 2004, cesarean sections accounted for 34.4 percent of all deliveries in Florida,
as displayed in Figure 1. Cesarean sections either can be scheduled in advance of labor or can
occur after a woman goes into labor. The recent increase in the Florida cesarean section rate has
been driven primarily by a doubling of the scheduled cesarean section rate, from 10.9 percent in
1996 to 24.8 percent of all deliveries in 2004. Scheduled cesarean sections now account for about
two-thirds of all cesarean sections in Florida. Figure 1 also shows the percentage of total
deliveries that are scheduled cesarean sections separately for women with and without a high-risk
condition.24 The latter, sometimes referred to as “patient-choice” cesarean sections, now
constitute slightly more than one-half of all scheduled cesarean sections in Florida. Figure 2
shows comparable data on deliveries at in New York hospitals. Although cesarean sections are
used less frequently in New York than in Florida, the basic patterns in cesarean section rates over
time are similar between the two states.
To generate each physician’s treatment style (cesarean section propensity), we perform
cross-sectional ordinary least squares regressions for all patients, separately for Florida and New

24

We consider a woman to be high-risk if she has one or more of the 12 health conditions listed in Table 1.

23

York and separately for weekend deliveries for mothers who went into labor and weekday
deliveries (Baicker, Buckles, and Chandra 2006):
(3) Cis = βjJ+ βpsXi + βysY + ε3s
(4) Cdis = βdjJ + βdpsXi + βdysY + ε4s
Cis is an indicator variable for whether a patient i in state s received a cesarean section; J
is a full vector of physician fixed effects; X is a vector of patient characteristics that affect the
likelihood of receiving a cesarean section (age, race, indicators for whether age or race were
missing, type of health insurance, and health conditions); Y is a vector of fixed effects for year of
delivery; and the superscript d refers to weekday deliveries. The coefficient estimates of the
patient characteristics from equations (3) and (4) are reported in Appendix B. From these
estimates we generate a predicted propensity to receive a cesarean section for each patient,
conditional on the patient’s characteristics and holding fixed the physician’s treatment style:

Cˆ is = βˆ j J * + βˆ ps X i + βˆ ys Yi for weekend laboring patients in state s, and

Cˆ isd = βˆ jd J * + βˆ psd X i + βˆ ysd Yi for weekday patients, where J* represents a physician selected
arbitrarily from J. The overall median predicted cesarean section propensity was 0.140.
Among group practices that assign their weekend patients randomly, Equation 3 allows
us to measure group members’ treatment styles as if they were to treat an identical patient
population. Specifically, the coefficients on the physician indicators, βˆ j , in the weekend
regressions measure the average adjusted probability that physician j performed a cesarean
section on a patient randomly-assigned within the group practice, controlling for observed patient
characteristics. Thus differences in βˆ j within a given medical group should be due to differences
in style, i.e., physicians’ perceptions about how to treat a common set of patients who labor,
rather than due to within-practice physician-patient matching based on unobservable
characteristics. Therefore, only the 407 physicians in group practices that assign their weekend

24

patients randomly based on patients’ predicted cesarean section propensity are included in the
following analyses, where we use the simulation method described in Section III to identify
practices that randomize.25
Because the randomness of the call schedule can eliminate unobserved differences in
patient characteristics only across physicians in a given group, we repeat the estimates of
equations (3) and (4) but replace the physician fixed effects with group practice fixed effects.
With these results, we then generate the group-demeaned measures of each physician’s c-section

(

)

style, βˆ j − βˆ g , where the subscript g refers to a group practice. We find a degree of withingroup variation across physicians’ c-section style, spanning -0.024 (i.e., 2.4 percentage points) at
the 10th percentile to 0.021 at the 90th percentile, with a mean of -0.001 and a standard deviation
of 0.019.
With measures of physicians’ treatment styles, we consider whether patients match with
physicians whose styles are consistent with their preferences. For example, a patient who places a
high cost on the adverse outcomes associated with a cesarean section could reduce the probability
she will have a cesarean section by scheduling her labor to be induced by a conservative
obstetrician with a low cesarean section style, or she may request that a particular physician
perform the delivery if she goes into labor during the week. Conversely, a woman in good health
who wants to avoid laboring altogether might be matched to a physician in the practice willing to
perform a patient-choice cesarean section.26
If patients with particular preferences match within groups with physicians who have
commensurate treatment styles, patients who want intensive treatment would match with
physicians who have a large/positive βˆ j relative to their colleagues within the group practice
25

One limitation of investigating within-firm heterogeneity and matching in this context is that many of the
firms are small: 45% of these physicians are in groups of 2, and the mean number of physicians in the
group is 3.2.
26
An obstetrician quoted in a 2003 New York Times article confirms that these types of decisions occur:
“Obstetrics has become very consumer-driven. When a woman can’t get what she wants from one doctor,
she’ll go to another” (Brody 2003).

25

(βˆ

j

)

− βˆ g , and patients who want less intensive treatment would match with physicians who

have a small/negative βˆ j . As a result, a physician who performs many patient-choice scheduled

(

)

cesarean sections on weekdays, for example, would have a large βˆ jd − βˆ gd because his actual
proportion of cesarean sections will exceed the predicted proportion based on his patients’
observed characteristics, and vice versa for physicians who are attracting patients who want to be
treated conservatively.
As a result, if group practices promote matching based on patient preferences and
physician styles, there would be more variation across physicians in a group in their weekday
cesarean section rates when there are ample opportunities for patients and physicians to
intentionally match than in their weekend rates: σdg/σg > 1 where σdg = variance(βdj | g).27 This
should be true even when cesarean section rates are adjusted for observed patient characteristics,
because patients with unobserved preferences will be matching with specific physicians.
Physician treatment styles on the weekend are measured less precisely than weekday styles
because the weekend sample size is substantially smaller. Therefore, we report the results of the
variance test both without and with a Bayesian shrinkage adjustment. The Bayesian shrinkage
adjustment will move a physician’s treatment style toward the sample mean if it has a low signalto-noise ratio (Hofer et al. 1999), which may result in less variation between physicians on the
weekend (due to a relatively small sample size) relative to the weekday.
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests reject normality of the distributions of these group-level
ratios of the weekday and weekend variances in physician cesarean section style. Consequently,
we report results from the non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank tests in Panel A of Table 6.
These reject the hypothesis that σdg > σg. We confirm this by testing whether the median group’s
ratio of the weekend to weekday intra-group variances is equal to one, where we bootstrap the
27

We would also expect σdg to exceed σg if patients with unobserved health characteristics that increase the
expected marginal benefit of cesarean sections to match with physicians who have a high propensity to
perform cesarean sections to improve their expected health outcome.

26

standard errors with 1,000 iterations. Results are similar when we consider only groups of three
or more physicians. These results are not consistent with sorting based on unobserved patient
preferences for physician treatment styles.
One shortcoming of testing whether the weekday and weekend variances are equal is that
the variables are affected by both physician and patient decisions. For example, physicians with
high cesarean section styles might convince some of their patients that do not have strong
preferences for cesarean sections to schedule cesarean sections during the week. If this
phenomenon accounts for the similar variance between weekday and weekend treatment styles,
the welfare benefits are more ambiguous than they would be if the differences are driven by wellinformed patients.28

(

)

We therefore also test whether the correlation βˆ j − βˆ g , Q dj − Q gd is greater than zero,
where (Qdj – Qdg) is the difference between the number of weekday scheduled patient-choice
cesarean sections physician j performs and the average of his group practice. Finding that
physicians who perform more cesarean sections relative to their colleagues on randomly-assigned
laboring weekend patients also perform a large number of scheduled weekday patient-choice
cesarean sections would suggest that patient preferences are driving the matches. Scheduled highrisk cesarean sections, on the other hand, could be initiated by either a patient or a physician.

(

)

In Panel B of Table 6 we report the correlations of βˆ j − βˆ g , Q dj − Q gd for all cesarean
sections and each type of cesarean section separately. The correlations are significantly different
from zero for all cesarean sections and for both high-risk and patient-choice cesarean sections.
The latter are presumably initiated by the patient. Low-risk patients who nevertheless want an
28

The ambiguity results from the fact that physicians with higher cesarean section propensities might also
have greater skill for cesarean sections than vaginal deliveries, thus leading to better outcomes (Chandra
and Staiger 2007), but this could be offset by the mothers’ preferences for a vaginal delivery. However, the
correlation of physicians’ cesarean section style and skill measures, relative to their peers’, is 0.05
(p=0.32), where the positive coefficient indicates that those with worse cesarean section outcomes tend to
perform more cesarean sections on their randomly-paired weekend laboring patients. This low correlation
allows us to separately test matching based on style and skill, which we investigate in the analysis that
follows.

27

elective cesarean section appear to match with a physician in the practice who has a style inclined
toward cesarean sections. This supports the interpretation that patient preferences create some of
the observed variation in obstetricians’ treatment styles. Physicians in the sample performed an
average of 13.6 weekday patient-choice cesarean sections per year. A physician who is at the 90th
percentile of the difference between his own weekend cesarean section rate and that of his group
is predicted to perform 8.8 more weekday patient choice cesarean sections per year than his
colleague who is at the 10th percentile of the distribution.29 This represents a fairly large (65
percent) increase in a physician’s annual quantity of patient-choice cesarean sections. The
apparent discrepancy between Panels A and B of Table 6 in whether unobserved patient
preferences contribute to weekday matching is due to the fact that physicians with styles geared
toward cesarean sections also perform a higher total volume of weekday deliveries relative to
their peers (ρ=0.12, p=0.019). The result is that these physicians’ weekday cesarean section
volumes are higher but their weekday styles are not farther from their group’s average , because
the definition of style depends on the total volume as well.

B.

Within-group matching by physician cesarean section skill
We also test whether group practices match physicians and patients based on skill and

patients’ clinical characteristics and/or their unobserved preferences. Specifically, we first
examine whether a groups’ patients are matched with physicians during the week based on a
physician’s absolute or comparative advantage in performing cesarean section deliveries, relative
to his peers in his group, and the appropriateness of a c-section for the patient, predicted from
equation (4) above. To examine this, we estimate:
(5) Oˆ i = ξ 0 m + ξ1m X i + ξ jm J + ε 5 m ,
29

To calculate this, we regressed (Qdj – Qdg) on (βj – βg) and used the estimated coefficients to generate
predicted values of (Qdj – Qdg) at the 10th and 90th percentiles of (βj – βg). At the 10th percentile of (βj – βg)
(-0.027), the predicted value of (Qdj – Qdg) was -4.45, and at the 90th percentile of (βj – βg) (0.024), the
predicted value of (Qdj – Qdg) was 4.31.

28

separately by mode of delivery m for laboring weekend patients of groups that randomly assign
their weekend patients to physicians. Ôi is a woman’s delivery outcome generated from equation
(1) above; X is a vector of patient characteristics; J is a full set of physician indicator variables; ξjc
is the physician’s skill at performing cesarean sections; and ξjv is his skill at performing vaginal
deliveries. Lower values of Ôi indicate better outcomes. A physician will have a negative ξjc if
his patients who deliver by cesarean section have fewer or less severe complications than
expected given the patients’ observed pre-delivery health. Because we rely on the random withingroup pairing of physicians with patients who labor on the weekend, as before we restrict the
analysis to those groups that randomly assign patients based on clinical factors. Because this
identification strategy eliminates unobserved differences across physicians in the same group
only, we continue to examine group-demeaned measures of skill by repeating equation (5) to

(

)

generate ξ jc − ξ gc .
Physicians vary substantially in their skill at performing cesarean sections. For example,
weekend patients randomly assigned to physicians at the 10th percentile of the distribution of the
absolute advantage measure of skill average 0.20 more hospital days due to complications than
the group’s average than those treated by physicians at the 90th percentile, and the standard
deviation of this distribution is 0.10.
To consider matching based on absolute advantage and the appropriateness of a cesarean

(

)

section for a patient, we test whether the correlation ξ jc − ξ gc , Cˆ djs − Cˆ gsd is less than zero.
Results in Table 7 Panel A indicate that physicians with better weekend outcomes treat patients
for whom cesarean deliveries are more appropriate during the week, supporting the hypothesis
that weekday patients match with physicians based on skill and observed clinical characteristics.
This is consistent with group practices internally referring the most difficult cesarean section
cases to physicians who are skilled at performing cesarean sections. We also consider matching

29

based on absolute advantage and patient preferences by examining whether the correlation

(ξ

jc

)

(

)

− ξ gc , β jsd − β gsd is less than zero. The term β jsd − β gsd is the physician’s group-demeaned,

risk-adjusted weekday cesarean section rate, which reflects differences in patients’ preferences.
Results in Table 7 suggest that this type of matching occurs.
Alternative interpretations exist for both of these measures of matching based on skill.
Both correlations would also be negative if skill is acquired by learning through performing more
cases. Likewise the second correlation could be negative if physicians more highly skilled at
cesarean sections are more likely to perform them, holding observed and unobserved patient
characteristics fixed. Neither of these alternatives is supported by the correlation (ξjc – ξgc, Qdjc –
Qdgc), which indicates that physicians who perform more weekday patient-choice cesarean
sections did not have better weekend outcomes (ρ=-0.056, P=0.256). Likewise, the negative and
insignificant relationship between physicians’ cesarean section skill and style reported above does
not support the alternative explanation that physician treatment decisions rather than unobserved
patient preferences account for the higher propensity for physicians more highly skilled at
cesarean sections to also have higher weekday risk-adjusted cesarean section rates.
Because absolute advantage in cesarean section skill ignores opportunity costs, we repeat
this analysis using physicians’ comparative advantage for cesarean sections over vaginal

⎛ξ
ξ ⎞
deliveries relative to his peers, defined as ⎜ jc − gc ⎟ . Results in Panel B of Table 7 are similar
⎜ξ
⎟
⎝ jv ξ gv ⎠
to those in Panel A but smaller in size and significance. This greater importance of absolute
advantage is consistent with existing theory, which predicts that absolute advantage will be a
better proxy for optimal assignment than comparative advantage (MacDonald and Markusen
1985, Sattinger 1993.) Together these results suggest that groups match patients to physicians
based on their skill in welfare-increasing ways.

30

VI.

Conclusion
In this paper we observed a professional services market in which firms play an important

role in coordinating differentiated high-skilled workers due to barriers in markets that derive from
imperfect or asymmetric information, incentives, and regulation. We found that the greatest
amount of additional matching due to firm coordination occurred in situations where regulations
and payment methods created the highest financial barriers to across-firm referrals. Specifically,
obstetrics partnerships appear to facilitate greater matching by promoting within-group referrals
and pairing specialized physicians with high-risk patients, particularly for health conditions that
become known only later in the pregnancy. In addition to matching based on patient and
physician clinical characteristics, we found some evidence of matching within groups along other
dimensions. Internally-differentiated partnerships appropriately matched patients with observed
clinical characteristics and unobserved preferences to physicians based on physicians’ absolute
skill advantage. However, the extent to which partnerships promoted matching based on
unobserved patient preferences and physician style was ambiguous.30 Despite the institutional
peculiarities of obstetrics markets, these results are consistent with a number of related theoretical
and empirical studies in other settings. Additional work could consider whether matching in this
context is also influenced by organizational characteristics other than the degree of specialization,
or the presence of a managerial hierarchy (Garicano and Hubbard, 2007).
Partnerships of heterogeneous obstetricians and subsequent patient-physician matching
enhances welfare via both improved maternal health outcomes and greater incorporation of
patient preferences. Yet it remains unclear whether the overall level of differentiation across
physicians in obstetrics markets is optimal. Such issues are important to consider as various
technologies are developed to standardize physician treatment decisions. Similarly, from the
perspective of the industrial organization of and labor force planning for obstetrics, it remains

30

The identification strategy precluded a direct comparison between the degree of matching in groups with
differentiated physicians with the degree in homogeneous groups and solo practices.

31

unclear whether greater matching and welfare would result from more within-firm heterogeneity,
more consolidation of physicians into larger partnerships, or expanded scope of existing
partnerships (Farrell and Scotchmer 1988).
One reason for this ambiguity is due to the random pairing of patients and physicians
within obstetrics partnerships. While econometrically convenient to generate unbiased measures
of physicians’ styles and skills, it also incorporates a tradeoff into partnerships’ decisions about
the degree of internal differentiation. Referring patients between physicians allows a group
practice to match patients with appropriate physicians during the week, but this also creates
mismatches from patients and physicians being paired randomly due to call schedules on week
nights and weekends. We found that differentiated groups were less likely than solo practices to
have “avoider” physicians who treat fewer high-risk patients than expected, and more likely to
match low-risk patients with specialists. This random pairing of patients and physicians for
deliveries also might results in less heterogeneity than in other high-skilled labor markets.
Alternatively, the non-emergent nature of pregnancy, as opposed to the delivery itself, likely
contributes to more matching relative to other high-skilled labor markets, particularly in
medicine.

32

References
Ackerberg, Daniel A., and Maristella Botticini. 2002. “Endogenous Matching and the Empirical
Determinants of Contract Form.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(3): 564-591.
Afendulis, Christopher C., and Daniel P.Kessler. 2007. “Tradeoffs from Integrating Diagnosis
and Treatment in Markets for Health Care.” The American Economic Review, 97(3): 10131020.
Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. 1972. “Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization.” The American Economic Review, 62(5): 777-795.
Baicker, Katherine, Kasey S.Buckles, and Amitabh Chandra. 2006. “Geographic Variation in the
Appropriate Use of Cesarean Delivery.” Health Affairs, 25: w355-w367.
Bolton, Patrick, and Mathias Dewatripont. 1994. “The Firm as a Communication Network.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4): 809-839.
Britt, David W., Robert D. Eden, and Mark I. Evans. 2006. “Matching risk and resources in highrisk pregnancies.” The Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, 19(10): 645-650.
Brody, Jane E. 2003. “As Cases of Induced Labor Rise, So Do Experts’ Concerns.” The New
York Times, Section F Col. 1, p. 7.
Chandra, Amitabh and Douglas Staiger. 2007. “Productivity Spillovers in Health Care: Evidence
from the Treatment of Heart Attacks.” Journal of Political Economy, 115(1): 103-140.
Chou, Eric S. 2007. “The Boundaries of Firms as Information Barriers.” The Rand Journal of
Economics, 38(3): 733-746.
Donaldson, Cam, Vanora Hundley, and Tracy Mapp. 1998. “Willingness to Pay: A Method for
Measuring Preferences for Maternity Care?” Birth, 25(1): 32-39.
Epstein, Andrew and Sean Nicholson. 2005. “The Formation and Evolution of Physician
Treatment Styles: An Application to Cesarean Sections.” NBER working paper 11549.
Gaynor, Martin, and Paul Gertler. 1995. “Moral Hazard and Risk Spreading in Partnerships.” The
Rand Journal of Economics, 26(4): 591-613.
Garicano, Luis. 2000. “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production.” The
Journal of Political Economy, 108(5): 874-904.
Garicano, Luis and Thomas N. Hubbard. 2007. “Managerial Leverage is Limited by the Extent of
the Market: Hierarchies, Specialization, and the Utilization of Lawyers’ Human Capital.”
Journal of Law and Economics, 50: 1-43.
Garicano, Luis and Tano Santos. 2004. “Referrals.” The American Economic Review, 94(3): 500525.
Grant, Darren. 2005. “Information and Sorting in the Market for Obstetrical Services.” Health
Economics, 14: 703-719.

33

Gregory, Kimberly D., Lisa M. Korst, Jeffrey A. Gornbein, and Lawrence D. Platt. 2002. “Using
Administrative Data to Identify Indications for Elective Primary Cesarean Delivery.” Health
Services Research, 37(5): 1387-1401.
Hansen, Christian B. 2007. “Generalized least squares inference in panel and multilevel models
with serial correlation and fixed effects.” Journal of Econometrics, 2: 670-694.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 2005. “On the Design of Hierarchies: Coordination versus
Specialization.” Journal of Political Economy, 113(4): 675-702.
HealthGrades. 2007. Hospital Report CardsTM Maternity Care and Women’s Health 2007-2008
Methodology White Paper (2003- 2005 Data),
http://www.healthgrades.com/consumer/index.cfm?fuseaction=modnw&modtype=content&
modact=hrc_methodology_consumer, accessed April 25, 2008.
Henry, Olivia A., Kimberly D. Gregory, Calvin J. Hobel, and Lawrence D. Platt. 1995. “Using
ICD-9 Codes to Identify Indications for Primary and Repeat Cesarean Sections: Agreement
With Clinical Records.” American Journal of Public Health, 85(8): 1143-1145.
Hoerger, Thomas J., and Leslie Z.Howard. 1995. “Search Behavior and Choice of Physician in
the Market for Prenatal Care.” Medical Care, 33(4): 332-349.
Hofer, Timothy P., Rodney A. Hayward, Sheldon Greenfield, Edward H. Wagner, Sherrie H.
Kaplan, and Willard G. Manning. 1999. “The Unreliability of Individual Physician ‘Report
Cards’ for Assessing the Costs and Quality of Care of a Chronic Disease.” JAMA, 281(22):
2098-2105.
Hubbard, Thomas N. 1998. “An Empirical Examination of Moral Hazard in the Vehicle
Inspection Market.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 29(2): 406-426.
Levin, Jonathan, and Steven Tadelis. 2005. “Profit Sharing and the Role of Professional
Partnerships.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1): 131-171.
MacDonald, Glenn M. 1982. “Information in Production.” Econometrica, 50(5): 1143-1162.
MacDonald, Glenn M., and James R. Markusen. 1985. “A Rehabilitation of Absolute
Advantage.” The Journal of Political Economy, 93(2): 277-297.
Martin, Joyce A., Brady E. Hamilton, Paul D. Sutton, et al. 2003. “Births: Final Data for 2002.”
National Vital Statistics Report, 52(10): 1-116.
Mayda, Anna M. 2006. “Who is against immigration? A cross-country investigation of individual
attitudes toward immigrants.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3): 510-530.
Miller, Amalia R. 2006. “The Impact of Midwifery-Promoting Public Policies on Medical
Interventions and Health Outcomes.” Advances in Economic Analysis and Policy, 6(1): 1-34.
Morrison, Alan D, and William J. Wilhelm, Jr. 2004. “Partnership Firms, Reputation, and Human
Capital.” The American Economic Review, 94(5): 1682-1692.

34

Sattinger, Michael. 1993. “Assignment Models of the Distribution of Earnings.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 31(2): 831-880.
Schauberger, Charles W., Robert K. Gribble, and Brenda L.Rooney. 2007. “On Call: A Survey of
Wisconsin Obstetric Groups.” The American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 196(39):
39.e1-39.e4.

Wolinsky, Asher. 1993. “Competition in a Market for Informed Experts’ Services.” The
RAND Journal of Economics, 24(3): 380-398.

35

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for the Patient-level Cross-section Data Set (1999-2004)

Variable
Patient Health Condition
Any of the 12 high-risk conditions
Preterm gestation
Any hypertension
Malpositioned fetus
Macrosomia
Maternal soft tissue disorder
Pregnancy-related severe hypertension
Antepartum bleeding
Multiples (twins)
Herpes
Unengaged fetal head
Uterine scarring
Congenital anomaly or chromosomal abnormality
N Deliveries

Weekend Laboring
Deliveries
Standard
Mean
Deviation
0.173
0.065
0.041
0.028
0.015
0.015
0.004
0.009
0.006
0.010
0.011
0.000
0.001

All Weekday Deliveries
Standard
Mean
Deviation

0.378
0.246
0.198
0.165
0.120
0.120
0.066
0.092
0.075
0.097
0.105
0.020
0.024

0.262
0.440
0.070
0.256
0.068
0.252
0.068
0.251
0.029
0.167
0.028
0.165
0.012
0.107
0.017
0.128
0.013
0.112
0.014
0.117
0.014
0.119
0.002
0.046
0.001
0.032
1,327,461

312,695

Patient Demographics
Age
Black or Hispanic
Medicaid or other public health insurance
Florida

27.1
0.512
0.513
0.480

6.2
0.500
0.500
0.500

27.8
0.475
0.471
0.534

6.3
0.499
0.499
0.499

Delivery Characteristics
Mother went into labor
Delivery performed by c-section:
- Scheduled, high-risk
- Scheduled, patient-choice
- Unscheduled (following labor)

1.000
0.099
0.000
0.000
0.099

0.000
0.299
0.000
0.000
0.299

0.789
0.302
0.104
0.107
0.091

0.408
0.459
0.305
0.309
0.288

Health outcome (continuous measure)*
Predicted C-section probability**

0.030
0.077

0.169
0.120

0.039
0.335

0.216
0.295

* Generated from regressions reported in Appendix A
** Generated from regressions reported in Appendix B

Table 2: Extent of Specialization on Weekdays, by Health Condition and Practice Type
Practice Type
Mean
Homo- Differen- Deliveries with
Overall
Solo
Group Group geneous
tiated
Condition per
(N=1,655) (N=720) (N=945) Solo P-value Group
Group MD, 1999-2004
Patient Health Condition
Any of the 12 high-risk conditions
N=347
N=598
Specialists
0.20
0.19
0.20
0.01
0.621
0.16
0.23
371.2
Avoiders
0.28
0.33
0.24
-0.09
0.000
0.23
0.25
207.7
Preterm gestation
N=391
N=554
Specialists
0.15
0.14
0.17
0.03
0.109
0.11
0.21
149.1
Avoiders
0.28
0.32
0.26
-0.06
0.010
0.20
0.30
44.8
Any hypertension
N=305
N=640
Specialists
0.19
0.16
0.21
0.05
0.010
0.12
0.25
134.0
Avoiders
0.25
0.28
0.23
-0.06
0.009
0.19
0.25
47.5
Malpositioned fetus
N=439
N=506
Specialists
0.13
0.13
0.13
0.00
0.771
0.05
0.20
120.9
Avoiders
0.16
0.19
0.14
-0.05
0.006
0.07
0.19
48.6
Macrosomia
N=366
N=579
Specialists
0.17
0.18
0.16
-0.02
0.282
0.10
0.19
60.7
Avoiders
0.25
0.30
0.21
-0.09
0.000
0.22
0.20
13.3
Maternal soft tissue disorder
N=294
N=651
Specialists
0.17
0.16
0.18
0.01
0.491
0.14
0.19
55.8
Avoiders
0.25
0.27
0.23
-0.04
0.087
0.18
0.26
12.8
Pregnancy-related severe hypertension
N=443
N=502
Specialists
0.10
0.08
0.11
0.03
0.052
0.05
0.16
37.1
Avoiders
0.19
0.23
0.16
-0.07
0.000
0.07
0.23
4.0
Antepartum bleeding
N=483
N=462
Specialists
0.09
0.09
0.08
-0.01
0.687
0.03
0.14
37.1
Avoiders
0.11
0.12
0.09
-0.03
0.096
0.00
0.19
7.1
Multiples (twins)
N=445
N=500
Specialists
0.09
0.06
0.12
0.06
0.000
0.05
0.18
35.4
Avoiders
0.15
0.15
0.14
0.00
0.850
0.04
0.23
4.5
Herpes
N=371
N=574
Specialists
0.13
0.12
0.14
0.03
0.098
0.06
0.19
35.1
Avoiders
0.18
0.21
0.17
-0.05
0.017
0.09
0.21
5.1
Unengaged fetal head
N=347
N=598
Specialists
0.17
0.20
0.14
-0.05
0.004
0.11
0.17
34.0
Avoiders
0.25
0.22
0.27
0.05
0.022
0.17
0.33
4.0
Uterine scarring
N=239
N=706
Specialists
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.00
0.732
0.04
0.08
7.5
Avoiders
0.32
0.32
0.33
0.01
0.521
0.23
0.36
0.1
Congenital anomaly or chromosomal abnormality
N=430
N=515
Specialists
0.07
0.05
0.08
0.03
0.021
0.03
0.11
6.1
Avoiders
0.23
0.24
0.22
-0.03
0.223
0.14
0.29
0.1
Unweighted average
Specialists
0.13
0.12
0.13
0.01
0.07
0.17
Avoiders
0.22
0.24
0.20
-0.03
0.13
0.25
Notes: Solo includes physicians who practiced alone and physicians in group practices with other physicians who failed
to meet the minimum threshold of 100 weekend deliveries between 1999 and 2004.

Table 3: Extent of Matching and Mismatching for High-Risk Patients on Weekdays, by Health Condition
and Practice Type
Practice Type
Differentiated
Solo &
Group - (Solo &
Homogeneous Differentiated Homogeneous
Overall
Group
Group
Group)
P-value

Patient Health Condition
Any of 12 risk factors
Matched with Specialist
0.31
Mismatched with Avoider
0.24
Preterm gestation
Matched with Specialist
0.34
Mismatched with Avoider
0.18
Any hypertension
Matched with Specialist
0.35
Mismatched with Avoider
0.17
Malpositioned fetus
Matched with Specialist
0.26
Mismatched with Avoider
0.13
Macrosomia
Matched with Specialist
0.39
Mismatched with Avoider
0.13
Maternal soft tissue disorder
Matched with Specialist
0.39
Mismatched with Avoider
0.12
Pregnancy-related severe hypertension
Matched with Specialist
0.37
Mismatched with Avoider
0.07
Antepartum bleeding
Matched with Specialist
0.21
Mismatched with Avoider
0.05
Multiples (twins)
Matched with Specialist
0.30
Mismatched with Avoider
0.05
Herpes
0.36
Matched with Specialist
Mismatched with Avoider
0.07
Unengaged fetal head
Matched with Specialist
0.43
Mismatched with Avoider
0.07
Uterine scarring
Matched with Specialist
0.31
Mismatched with Avoider
0.00
Congenital anomaly or chromosomal abnormality
Matched with Specialist
0.47
Mismatched with Avoider
0.00
Unweighted average
Matched with Specialist
0.35
Mismatched with Avoider
0.09

0.29
0.26

0.33
0.21

0.04
-0.05

0.000
0.000

0.28
0.19

0.44
0.18

0.15
-0.01

0.000
0.002

0.30
0.18

0.44
0.16

0.14
-0.02

0.000
0.000

0.18
0.13

0.41
0.13

0.23
0.00

0.000
0.450

0.36
0.15

0.44
0.09

0.08
-0.05

0.000
0.000

0.38
0.12

0.39
0.14

0.01
0.02

0.079
0.000

0.31
0.08

0.48
0.06

0.17
-0.01

0.000
0.002

0.18
0.03

0.29
0.08

0.11
0.04

0.000
0.000

0.21
0.04

0.48
0.08

0.28
0.04

0.000
0.000

0.30
0.07

0.47
0.07

0.17
0.00

0.000
0.342

0.43
0.05

0.41
0.11

-0.02
0.06

0.014
0.000

0.30
0.00

0.33
0.00

0.03
0.00

0.065
0.120

0.43
0.00

0.54
0.00

0.11
0.00

0.000

0.30
0.09

0.43
0.09

0.12
0.01

Table 4: Effects of matching for delivery on the mothers' delivery outcomes, measured by incremental length of stay due to complications

Low risk patient * specialist (σ 2)
Low risk patient * avoider (σ 3)
High risk patient * specialist (σ 4)
High risk patient * avoider (σ 5)
N
R2
(σ3) - (σ2)
(σ4) - (σ5)
Mean of dependent variable for
high risk patients
Mean of dependent variable for
low risk patients

Pregnancyrelated
severe
Antehyperpartum
tension
bleeding Multiples

Any of 12
MalRisk
Preterm Any hyper- positioned
Factors gestation tension
fetus

Macrosomia

Maternal
soft
tissue
disorder

-0.003
[0.002]
-0.005***
[0.002]
0.004
[0.007]
-0.002
[0.005]
41309
0.013
-0.003
[0.003]
0.006
[0.007]

-0.003
[0.002]
-0.003
[0.002]
0.015
[0.009]
0.004
[0.007]
38032
0.016
0.001
[0.003]
0.011
[0.010]

0.002
[0.003]
-0.004**
[0.002]
0.016
[0.015]
-0.012
[0.011]
39691
0.020
-0.007
[0.003]**
0.028
[0.013]**

0.001
[0.003]
-0.006**
[0.003]
0.016
[0.018]
0.020
[0.029]
22899
0.014
-0.007
[0.004]*
-0.004
[0.031]

0.005
[0.003]
-0.000
[0.003]
0.007
[0.014]
0.043
[0.027]
28662
0.010
-0.005
[0.004]
-0.036
[0.029]

0.003
[0.004]
-0.000
[0.002]
0.024
[0.031]
-0.006
[0.023]
23174
0.016
-0.003
[0.005]
0.029
[0.032]

-0.009*
[0.005]
-0.001
[0.002]
0.107
[0.232]
0.078
[0.207]
21833
0.017
0.008
[0.006]
0.028
[0.302]

0.011***
[0.004]
-0.004
[0.002]
0.013
[0.028]
0.025
[0.029]
19600
0.030
-0.014
[0.004]***
-0.012
[0.038]

0.0459

0.0289

0.0681

0.0567

0.0444

0.0716

0.190

0.0261

0.0289

0.0319

0.0309

0.0274

0.0267

0.0289

Herpes

Unengaged
fetal head

0.002
[0.004]
-0.001
[0.003]
-0.095
[0.061]
-0.098
[0.060]
16200
0.017
-0.003
[0.005]
0.003
[0.020]

-0.001
[0.004]
-0.001
[0.002]
0.008
[0.019]
0.042
[0.037]
22318
0.015
0
[0.004]
-0.034
[0.039]

0.008*
[0.004]
0.001
[0.002]
-0.094**
[0.042]
-0.054
[0.049]
23308
0.013
-0.007
[0.005]
-0.041
[0.033]

0.0402

0.0650

0.0422

0.0760

0.0268

0.0283

0.0300

0.0271

Notes: Ordinary least squares results for incremental length of stay due to major complications, controlling for group practice fixed effects, state, year, and
patient and physician characteristics listed in the text. To account for heteroskedasticity, each observation is weighted by the inverse of the standard error
of the dependent variable, which is the prediction from an auxiliary regression.
Robust standard errors in brackets.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 5: Extent of Matching and Mismatching for Low-Risk Patients on Weekdays, by Health Condition
and Practice Type
Practice Type
Differentiated
Solo &
Group - (Solo &
Homogeneous Differentiated Homogeneous
Overall
Group
Group
Group)
P-value

Patient Health Condition
Any of 12 risk factors
Mismatched with Specialist
0.20
Matched with Avoider
0.34
Preterm gestation
Mismatched with Specialist
0.17
Matched with Avoider
0.32
Any hypertension
Mismatched with Specialist
0.21
Matched with Avoider
0.29
Malpositioned fetus
Mismatched with Specialist
0.15
Matched with Avoider
0.20
Macrosomia
Mismatched with Specialist
0.18
Matched with Avoider
0.29
Maternal soft tissue disorder
Mismatched with Specialist
0.18
Matched with Avoider
0.30
Pregnancy-related severe hypertension
Mismatched with Specialist
0.13
Matched with Avoider
0.22
Antepartum bleeding
Mismatched with Specialist
0.10
Matched with Avoider
0.12
Multiples (twins)
Mismatched with Specialist
0.12
Matched with Avoider
0.17
Herpes
0.16
Mismatched with Specialist
Matched with Avoider
0.21
Unengaged fetal head
Mismatched with Specialist
0.16
Matched with Avoider
0.29
Uterine scarring
Mismatched with Specialist
0.08
Matched with Avoider
0.30
Congenital anomaly or chromosomal abnormality
Mismatched with Specialist
0.09
Matched with Avoider
0.28
Unweighted average
Mismatched with Specialist
0.14
Matched with Avoider
0.25

0.18
0.37

0.23
0.30

0.04
-0.07

0.000
0.000

0.14
0.32

0.24
0.33

0.10
0.01

0.000
0.000

0.16
0.29

0.29
0.27

0.13
-0.02

0.000
0.000

0.10
0.19

0.25
0.23

0.15
0.04

0.000
0.000

0.15
0.32

0.23
0.22

0.08
-0.10

0.000
0.000

0.17
0.29

0.20
0.31

0.04
0.02

0.000
0.000

0.10
0.21

0.19
0.24

0.10
0.04

0.000
0.000

0.08
0.09

0.14
0.20

0.07
0.11

0.000
0.000

0.07
0.13

0.22
0.26

0.15
0.13

0.000
0.000

0.12
0.20

0.23
0.23

0.11
0.03

0.000
0.000

0.17
0.23

0.15
0.38

-0.02
0.15

0.000
0.000

0.08
0.28

0.09
0.33

0.01
0.05

0.000
0.000

0.07
0.25

0.12
0.35

0.06
0.10

0.000
0.000

0.12
0.23

0.20
0.28

0.08
0.05

Figure 1
Percentage of C-section Deliveries in Florida by Type, 1992-2004

35%
30%
“Patient-choice”
scheduled c-sections

25%
20%

High-risk
scheduled
c-sections

15%
10%
5%

Unscheduled
c-sections

% of deliveries
where woman
labors

88.2%

88.5%

82.9%

20
03
20
04

20
02

20
01

19
99
20
00

19
97
19
98

19
95
19
96

19
93
19
94

19
92

0%

75.2%

Note: a delivery during which a woman does not labor is classified as a scheduled c-section. If a woman
has any of the first 12 health conditions listed in Table 1, she is classified as “high risk.”

Figure 2
Percentage of C-section Deliveries in New York by Type, 1992-2004

35%
30%
“Patient-choice”
scheduled c-sections

25%
20%

High-risk
scheduled
c-sections

15%
10%
5%

Unscheduled
c-sections

% of deliveries
where woman
labors

88.0%

88.8%

83.9%

20
04

20
03

20
02

20
01

20
00

19
99

19
98

19
97

19
96

19
95

19
94

19
93

19
92

0%

78.7%

Note: a delivery during which a woman does not labor is classified as a scheduled c-section. If a woman
has any of the first 12 health conditions listed in Table 1, she is classified as “high risk.”

Table 6: Matching on Physician Style
Panel A. Group-level ratio of the weekday to weekend intra-group
variances in physicians' risk-adjusted c-section rates (N=152 groups)
Bayesian
Shrinkage
Unadjusted
Groups with σdg > σg
77
75
d
Groups with σ g < σg
75
77
P value from Wilcoxon Signed-Rank Test
0.47
0.60
Median σdg/σg

1.00

1.00

Bootstrapped P-value

0.84

0.97

Panel B: Correlation Coefficients to Test Mechanism of Sorting on Patient Preferences
(N=407 physicians)

Q

Overall

β

js

− β gs

P-value

d
js

d
− Q gs

Total

High-risk

Patient-choice

0.136

0.120

0.137

[0.006]

[0.015]

[0.006]

Notes: All analyses restricted to groups that randomly pair patients and physicians on
weekends, as measured by patient's predicted cesarean-section propensity.

Table 7: Matching on Physician Skill
Panel A: Matching based on a physician's absolute
advantage for cesarean sections, relative to the group
average (N=407 physicians)
Correlation coefficient

(ξjc – ξgc)

Matching on observed clinical characteristics

Cˆ

d
js

− Cˆ

d
gs

P-value from 1-sided test

-0.091
[0.033]

Matching on unobserved preferences

β

d
js

− β

d
gs

-0.093

P-value from 1-sided test

[0.030]

Panel B: Matching based on a physician's comparative
advantage for cesarean sections, relative to the group
average (N=407 physicians)

Correlation coefficient

Cˆ

d
js

− Cˆ

d
gs

P-value from 1-sided test

β

d
js

− β

d
gs

P-value from 1-sided test

⎛ ξ jc ξ gc ⎞
⎜ − ⎟
⎜ξ
⎟
⎝ jv ξ gv ⎠
-0.057
[0.125]
-0.073
[0.071]

Notes: All analyses restricted to physicians in groups that
randomly pair patients and physicians on weekends, as
measured by patient's predicted cesarean-section propensity.

Appendix A: Creating a Continuous Health Outcome Variable for the Mother’s Health

Major Complication
Secondary thrombocytopenia
Acute edema of lung
Urinary complications
Puncture or laceration by an instrument
Respiratory failure
3rd degree perineal laceration
4th degree perineal laceration
Laceration of the cervix
High vaginal laceration
Injury to pelvic organs
3rd stage post-partum hemorrhage
Post-partum hemorrhage w/in 24 hours
Delayed post-partum hemorrhaging
Coagulation defects
Anesthesia complication
Major puerperal infection
Complication of OB surgical wound
Hemorrhage or hematoma
Other complications
Acute anemia due to loss of blood
Respiratory failure
Cardiac complications
Respiratory complications
Gastrointestinal complications
Anemia following the delivery
Retained placenta
Other OB wound surgical complication
Disruption of c-section wound
Postoperative infection
Other specified complications
Any Maternal Labor Dummy
Constant
N Deliveries

Florida
Vaginal Delivery
C-section
Beta
SE
Beta
SE
0.489
0.147
0.626
0.230
2.808
0.183
2.736
0.200
0.419
0.194
0.723
0.285
0.767
0.237
0.581
0.168
4.856
0.299
3.592
0.233
0.153
0.013
0.228
0.019
0.434
0.048
0.131
0.019
-0.031
0.015
0.513
0.044
1.486
0.163
0.331
0.017
0.313
0.061
0.663
0.042
0.872
0.272
0.682
0.065
0.835
0.103
0.989
0.121
0.613
0.173
1.752
0.060
1.745
0.046
0.839
0.085
1.060
0.068
0.945
0.247
0.340
0.197
1.621
0.119
1.140
0.183
0.299
0.035
3.197
0.429
1.042
0.385
1.152
0.207
1.393
0.140
0.111
0.034
0.219
0.184
1.026
0.082
0.893
0.117
2.471
0.280
1.039
0.163
0.319
0.012
2.487
0.017
3.720
0.060
142,526

44,185

R2
0.088
0.151
Notes: Models include hospital fixed effects. Standard errors are unadjusted.

New York
Vaginal Delivery
C-section
Beta
SE
Beta
SE
0.162
0.092
0.265
0.161
3.206
0.215
2.062
0.222
0.992
0.221
1.374
0.387
0.766
0.260
0.625
0.177
2.888
0.326
3.358
0.289
0.131
0.010
0.168
0.017
0.402
0.035
0.103
0.019
-0.023
0.014
0.638
0.035
0.871
0.125
0.301
0.015
0.344
0.056
0.519
0.039
1.025
0.219
0.705
0.060
0.739
0.098
0.557
0.080
0.356
0.126
2.093
0.042
1.612
0.033
0.719
0.075
1.166
0.051
0.046
0.353
0.393
0.214
1.397
0.094
1.514
0.160
0.308
0.042
2.820
0.408
0.861
0.256
1.108
0.268
1.576
0.148
0.347
0.027
0.545
0.153
1.119
0.073
1.210
0.086
2.644
0.368
1.286
0.227
0.355
0.010
2.276
0.020
3.892
0.056
187,211

56,489

0.057

0.198

Appendix B: OLS Coefficient Estimates of the Likelihood of Receiving a C-section in Florida and New York, 1999-2004

Regressor
Patient Age
Patient Age Squared
Patient Age is Missing
Patient is Minority
Patient Minority Status is Missing
Medicaid or Uninsured
Previous C-Section Comorbidity
Malposition of Fetus Comorbidity
Antepartum Bleeding Comorbidity
Herpes Cormorbidity

Florida
New York
Weekend Laboring Deliveries
All Weekday Deliveries
Weekend Laboring Deliveries
All Weekday Deliveries
Coefficient
Std Err
Coefficient
Std Err
Coefficient
Std Err
Coefficient
Std Err
-0.005 ***
0.001
-0.007 ***
0.001
-0.003 ***
0.001
-0.004 ***
0.001
0.000 ***
0.000
0.000 ***
0.000
0.000 ***
0.000
0.000 ***
0.000
-0.046
0.070
-0.048
0.045
0.021
0.069
0.084 **
0.041
0.004 **
0.002
0.003 ***
0.001
0.007 ***
0.002
0.009 ***
0.001
-0.002
0.006
-0.001
0.003
-0.001
0.004
0.003
0.002
-0.013 ***
0.002
-0.019 ***
0.001
-0.020 ***
0.002
-0.026 ***
0.001
0.130 ***
0.004
0.634 ***
0.001
0.136 ***
0.003
0.601 ***
0.001
0.287 ***
0.004
0.494 ***
0.002
0.214 ***
0.004
0.487 ***
0.002
0.087 ***
0.008
0.327 ***
0.003
0.076 ***
0.008
0.350 ***
0.004
0.010
0.007
0.207 ***
0.003
0.005
0.008
0.211 ***
0.005

Pregnancy-related Severe Hypertension Comorbiditity
Uterine Scar Unrelated to C-section Comorbidity
Multiple Gestation Comorbidity
Macrosomia Comorbidity
Unengaged Fetal Head Comorbidity
Maternal Soft Tissue Disorder Comorbidity
Other Types of Hypertension Comorbidity
Preterm Gestation Comorbidity
Congenital Fetal CNS Anomaly or Chromosomal
Abnormality Comorbidity
Cerebral Hemorrhage Comorbidity
Asthma Comorbidity
Maternal Renal Abnormality Comorbidity
Maternal Liver Abnormality Comorbidity

0.176
0.240
0.105
0.217
0.795
0.139
0.093
-0.058

Diabetes or Abnormal Glucose Tolerance Comorbidity
Maternal Thyroid Abnormality Comorbidity
Maternal Substance Abuse
Mental Disorder Comorbidity
Maternal Congenital and Other Heart Disease
Comorbidity
Isoimmunization Comorbidity
Intrauterine Fetal Demise Comorbidity
Intrauterine Growth Restriction Comorbidity
Oligohydramnios Comorbidity
Polyhydramnios Comorbidity
Ruptured Membrane > 24 hrs Comorbidity

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

0.010
0.035
0.011
0.005
0.007
0.006
0.003
0.003

0.330
0.465
0.173
0.283
0.675
0.178
0.121
-0.012

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

0.004
0.009
0.004
0.002
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.002

0.188
0.208
0.072
0.189
0.809
0.186
0.079
-0.045

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

0.012
0.036
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.006
0.004
0.003

0.351
0.490
0.153
0.273
0.695
0.205
0.118
-0.012

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

0.005
0.010
0.004
0.003
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.002

0.019
0.368 *
0.025 ***
0.007
0.032

0.028
0.200
0.006
0.024
0.026

0.152
0.172
0.036
0.054
0.044

***
***
***
***
***

0.013
0.060
0.003
0.011
0.014

-0.011
-0.118
0.031 ***
0.060 **
-0.032

0.030
0.186
0.005
0.025
0.029

0.210
0.304
0.036
0.062
0.006

***
***
***
***

0.015
0.070
0.003
0.013
0.018

-0.005
0.008
-0.006
-0.015 ***

0.008
0.008
0.019
0.004

0.036 ***
0.024 ***
0.003
0.000

0.004
0.004
0.012
0.003

0.015
0.007
-0.018
-0.002

0.011
0.006
0.011
0.005

0.079
0.015
-0.024
0.013

***
***
***
***

0.007
0.003
0.008
0.003

0.017
-0.011
-0.109
0.000
0.146
0.075
0.082

0.007
0.006
0.042
0.009
0.012
0.007
0.006

0.004
0.003
0.025
0.003
0.005
0.003
0.004

0.007
-0.005
-0.056
0.020
0.133
0.075
0.091

0.006
0.005
0.050
0.010
0.012
0.005
0.005

0.019
-0.001
-0.163
0.109
0.125
0.094
0.038

***

0.004
0.003
0.026
0.004
0.006
0.002
0.003

**
*
***
***
***
***

0.022
-0.006
-0.275
0.107
0.143
0.122
0.046

***
*
***
***
***
***
***

**
***
***
***

***
***
***
***
***

Appendix B (continued): OLS Coefficient Estimates of the Likelihood of Receiving a C-section in Florida and New York, 1999-2004

Regressor
Chorioamnionitis Comorbidity
Other Maternal Infection Comorbidity
Uterine Rupture Comorbidity
Maternal Hypotension or Obstetrical Shock Comorbidity
Pulmonary Embolism Comorbidity
Year = 2000
Year = 2001
Year = 2002
Year = 2003
Year = 2004
Intercept
N Deliveries
R-squared

Florida
New York
Weekend Laboring Deliveries
All Weekday Deliveries
Weekend Laboring Deliveries
All Weekday Deliveries
Coefficient
Std Err
Coefficient
Std Err
Coefficient
Std Err
Coefficient
Std Err
0.218 ***
0.005
0.209 ***
0.003
0.271 ***
0.005
0.262 ***
0.004
0.111 ***
0.006
0.078 ***
0.004
0.100 ***
0.006
0.077 ***
0.005
0.469 ***
0.045
0.197 ***
0.016
0.466 ***
0.034
0.229 ***
0.017
-0.009
0.128
0.002
0.012
0.017
0.019
0.028
0.102
150,124
0.17

***
***
***
***
***

0.024
0.142
0.002
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.003
0.031

0.045
0.332
0.014
0.032
0.050
0.069
0.082
0.167
708,692
0.43

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

0.012
0.066
0.001
0.001
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.017

0.032
0.383
0.006
0.001
0.009
0.010
0.014
0.062
162,571
0.18

***
**
***
***
***
**

0.023
0.108
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.027

0.052
0.303
0.011
0.022
0.032
0.041
0.056
0.174
618,769
0.43

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

0.014
0.051
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.002
0.035

Notes: The dependent variable is an indicator for whether a delivery was by c-section. All models include physician fixed effects. Indicators are also included for whether a
patient’s race is missing and whether her age is missing.

