                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHAT GOOD IS WEALTH WITHOUT HEALTH? THE EFFECT OF HEALTH ON
                 THE MARGINAL UTILITY OF CONSUMPTION

                                         Amy Finkelstein
                                        Erzo F.P. Luttmer
                                      Matthew J. Notowidigdo

                                        Working Paper 14089
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14089


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We are grateful to Raj Chetty, David Cutler, Jean-Paul L'Huillier, Erik Hurst, Olivia Mitchell, Jim
Poterba, Ivan Werning, Justin Wolfers, seminar participants at the MIT Public Finance lunch, the Kennedy
School faculty lunch, Wharton, the Chicago Fed, the Harvard/MIT/BU Health Seminar, the NBER
Summer Institute, Toronto, Columbia, Dartmouth, the Harris School, the AEA meetings, Berkeley,
and Urbana-Champaign for helpful comments, and to James Wang for excellent research assistance.
This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration through grant #10-P-98363-1-05
to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement Research Consortium.
The findings and conclusions expressed are solely those of the authors and do not represent the views
of SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, or the NBER. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Amy Finkelstein, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Good Is Wealth Without Health? The Effect of Health on the Marginal Utility of Consumption
Amy Finkelstein, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo
NBER Working Paper No. 14089
June 2008, Revised July 2009
JEL No. D12,I1

                                              ABSTRACT

We estimate how the marginal utility of consumption varies with health. To do so, we develop a simple
model in which the impact of health on the marginal utility of consumption can be estimated from
data on permanent income, health, and utility proxies. We estimate the model using the Health and
Retirement Study’s panel data on the elderly and near-elderly, and proxy for utility with measures
of subjective well-being. We find robust evidence that the marginal utility of consumption declines
as health deteriorates. Our central estimate is that a one-standard deviation increase in the number
of chronic diseases is associated with an 11 percent decline in the marginal utility of consumption
relative to this marginal utility when the individual has no chronic diseases. The 95 percent confidence
interval allows us to reject declines in marginal utility of less than 2 percent or more than 17 percent.
Point estimates from a wide range of alternative specifications tend to lie within this confidence interval.
We present some simple, illustrative calibration results that suggest that state dependence of the magnitude
we estimate can have a substantial effect on important economic problems such as the optimal level
of health insurance benefits and the optimal level of life-cycle savings.


Amy Finkelstein                                      Matthew J. Notowidigdo
Department of Economics                              MIT Department of Economics
MIT E52-357                                          E52-204F
50 Memorial Drive                                    50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142                                  Cambridge MA 02142
and NBER                                             noto@mit.edu
afink@mit.edu

Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Kennedy School of Government, Mailbox 25
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu
1. Introduction
   It has long been recognized that a dependence of the shape of the utility function on health
status has implications for a range of important economic behaviors (e.g., Zeckhauser 1970,
Arrow 1974). Yet it is standard practice in applied work to assume that the shape of the utility
function does not vary with health. For example, state independence is routinely assumed by
papers that estimate the demand for (or value of) health-related insurance products such as acute
health insurance (e.g., Feldstein 1973, Feldman and Dowd 1991), long-term care insurance
(Brown and Finkelstein 2008), annuities (e.g., Mitchell et al. 1999, Davidoff et al. 2005), or
disability insurance (e.g., Golosov and Tsyvinski 2006). It is also assumed in models that
explain why preferences for health spending rise with income (Hall and Jones 2007), and it is
also standard in calibrations of individuals’ optimal life-cycle savings (e.g., Engen, Gale and
Uccello 1999, Scholz, Seshadri and Khitatrakun 2006). Yet, as we show below with some
simple, stylized numerical examples, even a moderate amount of state dependence can have a
substantial effect on the conclusions of such calculations. Moreover, not only the magnitude but
also the sign of any potential state dependence is a priori ambiguous. On the one hand, the
marginal utility of consumption could decline with deteriorating health, as many consumption
goods – such as travel – are complements to good health. On the other hand, the marginal utility
of consumption could increase with deteriorating health, as other consumption goods – such as
prepared meals or assistance with self-care – are substitutes for good health.
   Despite its potential importance, there has been relatively little empirical work on how the
marginal utility of consumption varies with health. This presumably reflects the considerable
challenges involved in constructing credible estimates of how the shape of the utility function
varies with health. We begin our paper with a discussion of the different empirical options for
estimating state dependence; each has important limitations, which we describe.
   We adopt an approach in which we compare how the difference in individual utility between
healthy and sick states of the world varies with consumption. If the difference in utility increases
with consumption (as in Figure 1A), we infer that the marginal utility of consumption declines as
health deteriorates, a phenomenon we refer to as negative state dependence. By contrast, if the
difference in utility declines with consumption (as in Figure 1B), we conclude that marginal
utility increases as health deteriorates (positive state dependence). Moreover, the magnitude of
the change in the difference in utility across health states by consumption level allows us to



                                                                                                   1
quantify the magnitude of any state-dependent utility.




                             Figure 1: State-dependent utility functions
   There are two key practical challenges to implementing this conceptually straightforward
approach. First, data with broad-based consumption measures are notoriously scarce, and none
exists that contains the other variables needed for the analysis. We therefore develop a simple
model of optimizing behavior that allows us, under conditions which appear to be empirically
valid, to infer how marginal utility of consumption varies with health status from estimates of
how marginal utility of permanent income (which is more widely available) varies with health
status. Second, the approach requires a valid proxy for utility. In our context, a valid proxy is one
whose signal-to-noise ratio is high enough to detect any true state dependence, and that is not
contaminated by measurement error that varies with health differentially by permanent income.
Our baseline utility proxy is a measure of subjective well-being (SWB), specifically whether or
not the individual agrees with the statement “much of the time during the past week I was
happy”.
   Economists, rightly, tend to be skeptical about the use of subjective data. We discuss some of
the concerns with the SWB measures below. However, we emphasize that most of the well-
known issues would tend to decrease the precision of our estimates without biasing the
coefficients. We also thoroughly investigate the concern that our estimates could be biased due
to systematic errors in our assumed mapping from latent cardinal utility to measured SWB; we
conclude that such errors are unlikely to be driving our estimates and provide some intuition for
why this potential type of bias should not be a concern in practice in our particular setting.
   We implement our approach using the Health and Retirement Study’s (HRS) panel data from



                                                                                                    2
a representative sample of the elderly and near-elderly in the United States. We estimate the
effect of chronic disease on the marginal utility of non-medical consumption, evaluated at a
constant level of non-medical consumption. So that health does not affect non-medical
consumption – and hence estimated marginal utility – through changes in labor income or
because of medical expenses, we restrict our sample to individuals without labor income and
with medical insurance.
   Across a wide range of alternative specifications, we find statistically significant evidence
that the marginal utility of consumption declines as health deteriorates. Our central estimate is
that, relative to marginal utility of consumption when the individual has no chronic diseases, a
one-standard-deviation increase in an individual’s number of chronic diseases is associated with
an 11 percent decline in marginal utility. Our 95 percent confidence interval on this central
estimate allows us to reject declines in marginal utility associated with a one-standard-deviation
decline in health of less than 2 percent or more than 17 percent. The point estimates from a wide
range of alternative specifications tend to lie well within this 95 percent confidence interval.
   To illustrate the potential implications of these findings, we examine the impact of our
central estimate for simple calibration exercises of the optimal levels of health insurance benefits
and life-cycle savings. The results suggest that, relative to the standard practice of assuming a
state-independent utility function, accounting for our estimate of state dependence lowers the
optimal share of medical expenditures reimbursed by health insurance by about 20 to 45
percentage points and lowers the optimal fraction of earnings saved for retirement by about 1
percentage point. Of course, considerable caution should be exercised in using the results of our
extremely stylized calibrations. Nonetheless, at a qualitative level, they underscore the likely
substantive importance of the state dependence that we detect.
   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section two presents some motivating calibrations
on the potential importance of even moderate state dependence. Section three describes the main
options for estimating state-dependent utility. Section four describes our empirical approach and
data. Section five presents the main results and their interpretation. Section six discusses
potential threats to the validity of our empirical strategy and demonstrates the robustness of our
findings along a number of different dimensions. The last section concludes.


2. The potential importance of state-dependent utility: some simple numerical calibrations



                                                                                                     3
    We allow for health-state dependence by assuming a utility function of the form:
U (C , S ) = ! 0 S + (1 + ! 1 S )u (C ) ,                                                          (1)

where C denotes consumption, S denotes sickness (or the state of poor health), and u is a standard
CRRA sub-utility function. This is a standard formulation of the utility function (see, e.g., De
Nardi et al. 2006 or Palumbo 1999).
    For ease of exposition, it is useful to think of S as a binary variable, so that S=1 denotes
sickness, and S=0 denotes good health. The term γ0 S allows for the level of utility to vary with
health, but we would not characterize this as state dependence because it leaves the shape of the
utility function unchanged. The term γ1 S captures state dependence because it allows the state of
health to affect the marginal utility of consumption. For example, a γ1 of -0.10 would imply that
the marginal utility of consumption is 10% lower in sickness (S=1) than in health (S=0), when
the marginal utilities are evaluated at the same level of consumption. More generally, we use the
term negative state-dependent utility to refer to the case in which sickness reduces the marginal
utility of a given level of consumption (i.e., γ1<0; the utility curves fan out as in Figure 1A).
Conversely, positive state-dependent utility refers to the case in which sickness increases the
marginal utility of a given level of consumption (i.e., γ1>0; the utility curves fan in as in Figure
1B). Testing for whether the utility curves fan out or fan in lies at the heart of our empirical test
of state-dependent utility.
    Our first calibration exercise illustrates the impact of state dependence on the optimal level of
health insurance. Following the derivation in Baily (1978) and Chetty (2006a), we find that the
optimal level of health insurance under moral hazard is implicitly defined by:
us! (Cs ) " uh! (Ch ) d log H
                     =         = # H ,b ,
      uh! (Ch )        d log b

where b is the benefit rate as a fraction of medical expenses, ! H ,b is the elasticity of demand for

health care with respect to the benefit level, H is health spending, and u !s (C s ) and u h! (C h ) are

marginal utility in the sick and healthy states, respectively. Baily and Chetty derive the optimal
level of insurance b* under the assumption that the marginal utility of consumption is the same
across health states (i.e., γ1=0). As we show in Appendix A, allowing for " 1 ! 0 results in the

following formula for the optimal level of insurance:



                                                                                                           4
       Ch # # 1 + ! 1 &             &
                            1/ )

b = 1+
    *
          %%                     * 1(,
       H %$ $ 1 + " H ,b ('         ('

where Ch / H is the ratio of consumption (in the healthy state) to health spending and α is the
coefficient of relative risk aversion. The optimal level of benefits thus involves a tradeoff
between the social cost of moral hazard, which depends on ! H ,b , and the gains from increased

consumption smoothing, which depends on risk aversion, state dependence, and the ratio of
consumption to health expenses.
        This expanded formula suggests that even modest amounts of state-dependent utility can
have quantitatively important effects on the optimal level of health insurance benefits of the
same order of magnitude as modest variations in risk aversion. For this illustrative calibration,
we choose estimates of ! H ,b and Ch / H from the literature,1 and we choose several plausible

values of risk aversion (α) and state-dependent utility ( ! 1 ) to produce the following table:
                                                      TABLE 1
                                     OPTIMAL HEALTH INSURANCE LEVEL, b*

                                                                γ1
                                         α       -0.10        0.00         0.10
                                         2      59.8%        73.9%        87.2%
                                         3      72.6%        82.3%        91.4%
                                         4      79.2%        86.6%        93.5%


        This table shows that, for a given level of risk aversion, allowing health shocks to affect the
marginal utility of consumption by just 10% changes the optimal level of health insurance by
roughly 10 percentage points. This effect is of the same order of magnitude as the effect of
increasing the coefficient of relative risk aversion from 2 to 4.
        Our second calibration exercise illustrates the impact of health-state dependence on optimal
life-cycle savings. We use a very simple two-period model in which the agent must decide how
much of her first-period fixed wage w to save for consumption in the second period, given that
she faces a probability p of becoming sick in the second period. Savings yield e rT between
periods, where r is the annual rate of return on savings and T is the number of years between

1
    We use ! H , B = 0.20 based on the RAND Health insurance experiment (Manning et al. 1987), and we use C h / H =
3 using data from the MEPS and the CAMS (see Appendix A for more details).


                                                                                                                      5
periods. The agent discounts the second period by e !T and has CRRA per-period utility (with a
coefficient of relative risk aversion α). The full maximization problem of the agent and the
formula for the optimal level of savings are given in Appendix A. The following table shows the
optimal level of savings for various degrees of risk aversion and state-dependent utility, choosing
sensible values for the other parameters (r = 5% per year, T = 25 years, δ = 4% per year, p = 0.5):
                                                        TABLE 2
                                           OPTIMAL LEVEL OF SAVINGS, s*

                                                                γ1
                                           α       -0.10       0.00        0.10
                                           2       24.0%      24.5%       25.0%
                                           3       23.4%      23.7%       24.0%
                                           4       23.1%      23.4%       23.6%


The results suggest that varying risk aversion between 2 and 4 under the assumption of no state
dependence (i.e. γ1=0) has roughly the same effect on the optimal fraction of earnings saved as
holding risk aversion fixed and varying the effect of health shocks on the marginal utility of
consumption by 20 percentage points.


3. Approaches to estimating the state dependence of the utility function
       There are two broad classes of possible approaches to estimating health-state dependence.2
One class of approaches is based on individuals’ revealed demand for moving resources across
health states. For example, health insurance demand – with its associated state-dependent payoff
stream – would seem to be a natural way to infer state dependence. In practice, however,
inferences about state dependence based on health insurance demand would be sensitive to
assumptions about other parameters of the utility function that affect insurance demand, such as
risk aversion. This may pose challenges given the wide range of estimates of risk aversion in the
literature (see, e.g., Cohen and Einav 2007). Another practical difficulty is that moral hazard
issues presumably preclude the offering of health insurance policies that pay out more than
medical expenditures; thus if marginal utility increases as health deteriorates, this could be
difficult to uncover from estimates based on health insurance demand.
       A related approach would be to try to infer state dependence from information on how the

2
    We offer a more detailed discussion of these possible approaches in Finkelstein et al. (2009).


                                                                                                     6
time profile of consumption varies across otherwise identical individuals with different health
trajectories; optimizing individuals will adjust their consumption path to increase consumption in
periods when marginal utility is high and decrease it in periods when marginal utility is low.
Conceptually the most attractive way to implement this approach would be to compare the
consumption profiles of otherwise identical individuals who differ in their expected future
health, but in practice we know of no dataset with information on consumption and in which
expected future health differs for currently similar individuals. Alternatively, one could examine
how consumption responds to unexpected health shocks. However, a key limitation to such an
approach is that, since the life-cycle budget constraint must be satisfied (resources must be
consumed or left to the next generation), any inference about even the existence and sign of state
dependence (let alone the magnitude) will be sensitive to what is assumed about bequest
motives. At a practical level, there is a marked lack of consensus on how to model bequest
motives, and the choice of model can have a profound effect on the inference about state
dependence drawn from the consumption trajectory. For example, if we assume that individuals
receive no utility from bequests (e.g., all observed bequests are accidental as in, for instance,
Abel 1985), then an individual with state-dependent utility who experiences a permanent health
shock will not change her level of consumption because the only thing on which she can spend
her remaining lifetime income is consumption. In contrast, if intentional bequests are allowed, an
unexpected permanent health shock can affect consumption even when utility is not state
dependent. For example, in the strategic bequest model of Bernheim, Shleifer and Summers
(1985), if utility from seeing your children increases when your health declines, you may want to
consume less (and thus have more for bequests) when you receive an unexpected negative health
shock.3
    The second broad class of approaches is to estimate how the within-individual utility change
associated with a health change varies across individuals of different consumption levels or
resources. This is the approach we adopt, and the next section describes in detail how we
operationalize it. It of course also has its limitations, which we discuss in detail below. However,

3
  Despite these obstacles, Lillard and Weiss (1997) pursue just such an approach. They build a structural model of
consumption in which they make the key assumption that marginal utility of consumption depends on health but the
marginal utility of bequests does not. Inferring consumption from panel data on asset changes and income flows in
the Retirement History Survey, they compare consumption paths across individuals who vary in their predicted
probability of entering poor health (based on different demographic characteristics such as education and wealth).
They estimate that the marginal utility of consumption rises as health decreases.


                                                                                                                 7
given the formidable obstacles to the revealed demand approach, we believe it offers a valuable
and complementary avenue for obtaining estimates of state-dependent utility.
    In a series of papers, Viscusi and co-authors pursue a very different version of this general
type of approach. They survey individuals regarding how much money they would require to
compensate them for hypothetical exposure to specific health risks, and examine how these self-
reported compensating differentials vary with income. This approach has yielded a wide range of
estimates, from those indicating no state dependence (Evans and Viscusi 1991), to estimates
suggesting that marginal utility in the diseased state is only 8 percent of the marginal utility in
the health state (Sloan et al., 1988), as well as estimates in between these two (Viscusi and Evans
1990).4


4. Empirical approach
    Figure 1 above illustrated the intuition behind our empirical approach: if sickness causes a
larger decline in utility for individuals with higher consumption than for individuals with lower
consumption, it follows that the utility curve for good health must be steeper than the one for
poor health, which means that the marginal utility of consumption falls in poor health.
Conversely, if the drop in utility is smaller at higher levels of consumption, the marginal utility
of consumption increases in poor health.
    If we could observe information on health, consumption, and a proxy for utility, we could
directly and straightforwardly estimate how marginal utility of consumption varies with health.
We would simply regress the utility proxy on consumption, health, and the interaction of
consumption and health; the coefficient on the interaction term between consumption and health
would give an estimate of state-dependent utility. In practice, however, we know of no panel
dataset with a sufficient sample size that contains information on consumption, health, and utility
proxies. Reliable consumption data are notoriously scarce, especially broad-based consumption
measures which this approach requires.
    We therefore use the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), a nationally representative panel
of the elderly and near-elderly, which contains data on permanent income, in addition to utility


4
  The range of estimates may reflect the different populations and diseases studied, as well as different assumptions
regarding the coefficient of relative risk aversion (i.e., how the marginal utility of income changes with income),
which determines how the empirical estimate of the relationship between income and the size of the compensating
differential is translated into a relationship between income and the marginal utility of health.


                                                                                                                        8
proxies and detailed health measures.5 In Section 4.1, we outline a simple model of optimizing
consumption behavior that yields conditions under which we can infer how marginal utility of
consumption varies with health status from estimates of how marginal utility of permanent
income varies with health status. The key requirement, as we explain in more detail below, is
that consumption in the sick state is pre-determined, or in other words that health shocks do not
lead to changes in consumption.
    We select a baseline sample for which this assumption seems a priori plausible: specifically,
we restrict our sample to individuals who are not in the labor force – so that deteriorations in
health do not have a first-order effect on income – and who have health insurance – to avoid the
direct impact of health on consumption through its effect on medical expenditures.6 In Section
6.2.3 we extend the baseline model to illustrate that the most likely result of relaxing the
assumption that consumption does not vary with health is to bias against our empirical finding of
negative state-dependent utility. We also present complementary empirical evidence that is
consistent with the validity of our key assumption for our baseline sample and that suggests that
any potential biases in our favor (i.e., toward negative state-dependent utility) are, in practice,
likely to be small in magnitude.
4.1 Motivating theory and estimating equation
    Optimizing individuals allocate lifetime income over consumption in two periods, taking into
account that the marginal utility of consumption depends on health status. For expositional ease,
we assume that health is binary. All individuals are healthy (S=0) in the first period and have
probability p of falling ill (S=1) in period 2.
    Using the notation introduced in Section two, lifetime utility is given by:
U(C1 ,C2 , S) = u1 (C1 ) + 1+1! u2 (C2 , S) =    1
                                                1" #                (                             )
                                                       C11" # + 1+1! $ 0 S + (1 + $ 1S) 1"1# C21" # ,         (2)

where C1 and C2 denote first- and second-period consumption respectively, δ denotes the


5
  As we describe in more detail in Section 6.4 and Appendix B, consumption data are available for a very small
subsample of the survey. Not surprisingly, when we use this consumption data to estimate state dependence, the
estimates become so imprecise as to preclude any meaningful inference on state dependence.
6
  While the effect of health on labor income is relevant for the optimal insurance problem (where lost income would
be fully replaced if utility is state independent), this is a mechanical effect that is conceptually separable from the
effect of the shape of the utility function depending on health. For a similar reason, we also wish to ignore the
impact of health on medical expenditures, as does other empirical work on state dependence with respect to health
(e.g., Lillard and Weiss, 1997). Ultimately, of course, the optimal level of insurance depends both on our estimate of
state dependence, as given by γ1, and on the conceptually and practically distinct questions of how health affects net
resources (e.g., due to changes in labor income and medical expenses).


                                                                                                                     9
discount rate, and α is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. The utility function is a standard
additively separable CRRA utility function except for the terms involving S. The objective is to
recover an unbiased estimate of γ1.
        In period 1, before the individual knows her future health status, the individual allocates
permanent income (or wealth) Y over first- and second-period consumption. The resulting budget
constraint is:
Y = C1 + 1+1 r C2 .
From the perspective of period 1, health in period 2 is a random variable, and the individual
maximizes expected lifetime utility in period 1. Using the budget constraint to eliminate C1, we
find expected utility as a function of C2:
                                   1! "
                    #       C2 &
E[U ] =       1
             1! "   %$ Y !     (
                           1+ r'
                                                (                              )
                                          + 1+1) * 0 p + 1!1" (1 + p* 1 ) C21! " .

Expected utility is maximized for:

C   *
        =
                  ( (1 + p! 1 )(1 + r) / (1 + " ))
                                                  #

                                                         Y $ cY ,
          1 + ( (1 + p! 1 )(1 + r) / (1 + " )) / (1 + r)
    2                                          #



where c is a parameter that expresses the optimal second-period consumption as a fraction of
permanent income (Y). Note that second-period consumption is increasing in permanent income
and does not depend on the realization of the health shock.
        Substituting the optimal level of second-period consumption into the second-period utility
function yields indirect utility, v(Y,S), in the second period:
                1                                  1+ !1
v(Y , 0) =         (cY )1! " , and v(Y ,1) = ! 0 +       (cY )1" # .
               1!"                                 1"#
These indirect utility functions suggest a nonlinear regression of the following form:
v = !1 S " Y !2 + ! 3 S + ! 4Y !2 + # ,                                                          (3)
which yields the parameter estimates:
     $ c1" # '                                            c1" #
!1 = &          *   , !   = 1 " # , !   = "   , and !   =       .
     % 1 " # )(                                           1"#
                  1     2             3     0         4



        The estimate of β1, the coefficient on the interaction term between permanent income and
sickness in equation (3), measures whether (and in what direction) the marginal utility of
consumption is affected by health. We reject the hypothesis of state independence if we reject the


                                                                                                       10
null hypothesis β1= 0. Furthermore, β1< 0 indicates that marginal utility declines as health
deteriorates, while β1> 0 suggests that marginal utility increases as health deteriorates.
    We operationalize equation (3) by running a fixed effects regression of the following form:

                     (
UtilityProxyit = g !1 Sit " Yi !2 + ! 3 Sit + Xit#1 + $ i ,)                                                 (4)

where i indexes individuals and t indexes time periods. The explanatory variables consist of a
measure of sickness (S), a measure of permanent income ( Y ), and demographic covariates (X).
The individual fixed effects (θ i) absorb any direct effect of permanent income and any other
time-invariant characteristics on utility. Finally, β1, β2, β3, and the vector Ψ1 are coefficients to
be estimated, and g(.) is a monotonically increasing mapping from latent cardinal utility to the
utility proxy.7
4.2 Identifying assumptions
    The coefficient β1 denotes the additional marginal utility of permanent income when sick
relative to marginal utility when healthy. To interpret the estimate of β1 as a test of state
dependence, we need to make two identifying assumptions. Our first identifying assumption is:
the difference between our imposed mapping g(.) and the true mapping from latent cardinal
utility to the utility proxy does not vary with health differentially by permanent income. In other
words, there may be error in our assumed mapping g(.) from latent cardinal utility to the utility
proxy, but this error cannot vary systematically with health times permanent income. This
assumption allows us to compare changes in latent cardinal utility across individuals of different
levels of permanent income and health by comparing observed changes in the utility proxy.
Misspecification of the mapping g(.) can cause incorrect inference of the true magnitude – or
even the true sign – of state dependence; this issue resembles the dissimilarity that can arise
between the magnitude and sign of a marginal effect and the magnitude and sign of an
interaction term in a nonlinear model (Ai and Norton, 2003). With this concern in mind, we
assess in great detail the sensitivity of our estimates to different assumptions and estimates of g(.)
in Section 6.1.
    Our second identifying assumption – needed to interpret the estimate of β1 as a test of state


7
 For example, in our OLS specification, g(v) equals v+εit, with εit denoting the error term in utility. In the probit
specification, g(v) equals Φ(v), with Φ(.) denoting the standard normal cumulative density function. In Section 6.1,
we explore more general specifications of g(.).


                                                                                                                   11
dependence – is the following: conditional on sickness S, control variables X, and fixed effects θ,
there are no omitted determinants of utility that vary with health differentially by permanent
income (i.e., are correlated with S × Y ). This assumption is considerably more palatable in the
panel than it would be in a cross section. In a cross section, there might well be person-specific
characteristics (such as optimism / pessimism) that are correlated with utility, health, and
permanent income (e.g., more optimistic people are happier, work harder, and are healthier). In
the panel, however, the individual fixed effects absorb any such person-specific characteristics.
In the same spirit as typical identification for difference-in-differences estimation, it is only a
problem for our analysis if health changes within individuals vary across individuals of different
permanent income in ways that are correlated with utility. In Section 6.2 we discuss potential
threats to the validity of this identifying assumption in greater depth. We offer a number of
alternative specifications and auxiliary tests, which are generally supportive of this identifying
assumption.
    To interpret the magnitude of β1, we scale the coefficient by the effect of permanent income
on utility in the healthy state, i.e., by β4 from equation (3). Since this effect is absorbed by the
individual fixed effects in equation (4), we recover it by running an auxiliary regression of the
estimated fixed effects from equation (4) on permanent income and demographic controls:
!ˆi = " 4Yi "2 + Xit#2 + $it .                                                                  (5)

    Our empirical estimate of β1/β4 gives the proportional change in the marginal utility of
permanent income resulting from moving from good to poor health. The underlying structural
parameter of interest is the proportional change in the marginal utility of consumption due to
falling into poor health evaluated at a constant consumption level, i.e., γ1 as defined by in
equation (1). These two are the same, given the key assumption in our baseline model that
second-period consumption is proportional to permanent income or, equivalently and more
generally, that consumption in the sick state is pre-determined. Violation of this assumption is
one way to invalidate our second identifying assumption; we explore the validity of the pre-
determined consumption assumption in Section 6.2.3 below.
    Identification of β4 requires the additional identifying assumption that, conditional on S, X,

and S × Y , there are no omitted determinants of utility that are correlated with Y . In other
words, the only reason why people with higher permanent incomes have higher levels of utility is


                                                                                                       12
because of their higher levels of consumption, and not because of any other determinants of
utility that are correlated with permanent income. This is a considerably stronger assumption
than what is required for identification of β1. We emphasize, however, that it is needed only to
provide one way of scaling (interpreting) our key parameter β1; it is not fundamental to our
identification of the existence of state-dependent utility.
4.3 Data and baseline specification
    We use all cohorts in the first seven waves of the HRS and limit the sample to individuals
(and their spouses) aged 50 and older who are not in the labor force and who have health
insurance. The resulting sample of 45,447 person-years consists of an average of about 4
observations on 11,514 unique individuals. Appendix B provides more detail on our sample and
variable definitions. Table 3 presents some descriptive statistics. The sample is 63 percent female
and 87 percent white with an average age of 72. About three-fifths of the person-years are
married.
    To operationalize equations (4) and (5) we must choose measures of the explanatory
variables and a functional form. We describe our baseline choices here and later show robustness
to a wide range of alternative choices. We measure an individual’s permanent income ( Y i ) as the
average across all waves of their total annual household income, adjusted for household
composition, and a 5 percent annual draw down of current financial wealth; average permanent
income in our sample is about $29,200. Our baseline measure of health status (Sit) is the number
of chronic diseases that individual i in wave t has ever been told by a doctor that she has had
(NUM_DISEASEit); we code each disease as an absorbing state. Following standard practice
(see, e.g., Smith 1999), we consider the following 7 diseases that are asked consistently over
time: hypertension, diabetes, cancer, heart disease, chronic long disease, stroke, and arthritis.8 On
average, a person in our sample has 1.95 diseases; the within-person standard deviation in
number of diseases (which is our key right-hand side variation) is 0.625.
    Our baseline utility proxy is the response to the question: “Much of the time during the past
week I was happy. (Would you say yes or no?)” We code this as an indicator variable HAPPY in
which an affirmative answer is given the value 1 and consider this to be an index of latent utility.
On average, 87 percent of person-years respond in the affirmative. The within-person standard

8
 We exclude psychiatric illnesses since they may affect the reporting of subjective well-being. They are often
excluded from measures of chronic disease (see, e.g., Smith 1999); our results are not sensitive to including them.


                                                                                                                      13
deviation in the response (which is our key left hand side variation) is 0.28.
    Finally, we operationalize the general regression equation (4) for our baseline specification
by assuming that the mapping g(.) is linear and that β2 → 0, or, equivalently, the coefficient of
relative risk aversion α → 1.9 We will relax both assumptions in Section 6.1.
    Our baseline specification is therefore the following linear probability model:
HAPPYit = !1 NUM _ DISEASEit " log(Yi ) + ! 3 NUM _ DISEASEit + Xit#1 + $ i + % it .                        (6)

We estimate (6) using de-meaned values of Yi so that the coefficient on NUM_DISEASEit (β3)

describes the relationship between an individual’s change in sickness and change in utility at the
sample average level of permanent income. The estimated fixed effects ( !ˆi ) denote the
individual’s average utility when NUM_DISEASEit = 0. We include in X it controls for time-

varying individual characteristics that might be correlated with changes in utility and health:
household size, an indicator for whether the individual is married, a quadratic in age, and a fixed
effect for each of the seven waves of the HRS.
    We operationalize equation (5) in the same fashion, estimating:
!ˆi = " 4 log(Yi ) + Xit#2 + $it .                                                                          (7)
We use the same time-varying X’s from (6) and also include additional time-invariant individual
controls (a constant, race and gender) which are absorbed in (6) by the individual fixed effects;
we do this so as not to confound the relationship between permanent income and SWB in (7)
with demographics that are correlated with permanent income.


5. Main Results
5.1 Baseline results
    Table 4 shows our baseline estimates of equation (6) and the auxiliary regression equation
(7). Our utility proxy looks sensible: it is decreasing in number of diseases (β3 < 0) and
increasing in permanent income (β4 > 0). The coefficient β3 on Sit of -0.011 (s.e. = 0.003)
indicates that, for someone of average permanent income, an increase of one chronic disease is


9
  While, as a practical matter, we use a range of values of permanent income and therefore need to make an
assumption about curvature (i.e., α), in principle this is not essential for our empirical strategy. In principle, we
could estimate state-dependent utility in our setting without making an assumption about curvature. This can be seen
in Figure 1 and imaging we only observed permanent income in two places (e.g., low and high).


                                                                                                                  14
associated with a statistically significant 1.1 percentage point decline in the probability the
individual is happy; this is identified within-person using variation in their health state over time.
The coefficient β4 of 0.048 indicates that a 10 percent increase in permanent income is associated
with a 0.48 percentage point increase in the probability an individual reports that he is happy
most of the time in the past week (off of a mean of 87 percent). Of course, this cross-sectional
comparison of happiness across individuals of different permanent incomes may conflate the
causal effect of permanent income with the effects of other characteristics of high-permanent-
income individuals that are themselves determinants of subjective well-being. For this reason, we
do not rely on such cross-sectional variation to identify state-dependent utility (i.e., β1).
     The key coefficient of interest is β1, which we estimate to be -0.009 (s.e. = 0.004). The
negative sign indicates that the marginal utility of permanent income declines as health worsens.
It is statistically significant at the 5-percent level, which implies that we reject the null of state-
independent utility.
     The bottom panel of Table 4 reports several ways to interpret our estimate of β1. The ratio
β1/β4 of -17.9% indicates that for a healthy person (i.e., someone with no diseases), acquiring
one chronic disease is associated with a 17.9 percent decline in marginal utility.10 Likewise, a
one-standard-deviation increase in the number of chronic diseases is associated with an 11.2
percent decline in marginal utility for a previously healthy individual, with a 95 percent
confidence interval ranging from 2.7 percent to 16.8 percent. Marginal utility falls from 0.048 for
a healthy (disease-free) individual, to 0.039 with one disease, 0.030 with two diseases, 0.021
with 3 diseases, and 0.012 with 4 diseases (only 3.2% of our sample has more than 4 diseases);
this is the empirical counterpart to the stylized picture in Figure 1B of utility curves “fanning
out.”
     Our finding of negative state dependence implies that the optimal level of health insurance
and the optimal fraction of earnings saved for retirement are lower than indicated by the standard
formula that assumes no state dependence. To calibrate the models in Section 2, which were
based on a binary health variable, we reran our model with the variable NUM_DISEASE replaced
by an indicator variable for being in the sick state, which we defined as having the median


10
  We bootstrap the sample at the individual level (10,000 replications) to calculate standard errors, p-values, and
confidence intervals of our estimates of β1/β4 and σβ1/β4 in this table and in all subsequent tables.


                                                                                                                      15
number of diseases (2) or more. This yields (in results not shown) an estimate of γ1 (i.e., β1/β4) of
-0.29 (bootstrapped p-value = 0.132), which means that the marginal utility of those in the sick
state (2 or more diseases) is 29 percent lower than the marginal utility of those in the healthy
state (less than 2 diseases). The stylized models presented in Section 2 suggest that with this
amount of state dependence, the optimal level of health insurance is roughly 20 to 45 percentage
points lower than it would be in the absence of state dependence. Likewise, the models suggest
that the optimal fraction of earnings saved for retirement is about 1 percentage point lower (or
about 4 percent lower) than it would be with a state-independent utility function. While these
calculations should be viewed as merely illustrative, they suggest that the magnitude of state
dependence we have detected may have a non-trivial effect on important economic phenomena.
5.2 Additional analysis
       Our approach yields an estimate of the average effect of deteriorating health on the marginal
utility of consumption in a representative sample of the elderly and near elderly. This is the
economically relevant parameter for savings and health insurance decisions; indeed, we consider
it a strength of our approach that it yields estimates of the average effect of common health
conditions in the population on the marginal utility of consumption. However, because the
marginal utility of consumption may not change with the onset of each disease in the same way,
we examine the effect on marginal utility of each disease separately.
       Table 5 interacts each of the seven disease dummies with the log of permanent income and
includes all seven interaction terms and the seven disease dummies in one regression. The first
seven columns give the estimates on the interaction term, the disease dummy for each of the
seven diseases, and log permanent income. Not surprisingly, the precision of the estimates is
often considerably worse than the baseline number of diseases variable. Indeed, we estimate
statistically significant state dependence only for blood pressure and lung disease. Nonetheless,
with the exception of heart disease and arthritis, the point estimates on the interaction terms are
uniformly negative; moreover, we are unable to reject at the 10% level the hypothesis that all
seven interaction terms are equal (p-value = 0.131). In the final column, we show that the
prevalence-weighted sum of the seven interaction terms from this specification is statistically
significant and that the magnitude (-10.5%) is very similar to our baseline result of -11.2%.11 In
unreported results, we also examine whether the magnitude of the drop in marginal utility from

11
     Prevalence-weighting is based on the person-years in the baseline sample that have the disease dummy turned on.


                                                                                                                  16
an additional disease depends on the number of diseases that the individual already has. We find
no evidence of such nonlinearities and cannot reject the hypothesis that the effect of an
additional disease on the marginal utility is the same for each number of pre-existing diseases (p-
value = 0.360).
   Table 6 reports the results from several additional sensitivity analyses. In this and all
subsequent robustness tables, Column 1 replicates our baseline results from Table 4. Subsequent
columns always report results for one specified change relative to this baseline. To facilitate
comparability of the magnitude of state-dependent utility across these and later analyses, the
bottom row reports the implied percent change in marginal utility for a healthy person associated
with a one-standard-deviation decline in health (i.e., σβ1/β4). This provides a scale-free way of
comparing different estimates.
     Column 2 shows that the results are not sensitive to excluding the demographic controls
(Xit). Column 3 restricts the analysis to individuals who are always single. Since three-fifths of
our sample is married, our estimates are potentially confounded by correlations in health changes
within a couple and by any effects that spousal health has on one’s own marginal utility. As
shown in Column 3, the point estimate of state dependence is still negative among single
individuals. However, based on just 30 percent of the original sample, the estimate is no longer
statistically significant. Column 4 shows that the estimate of β1 is unaffected by adding
additional covariates for spousal health and the interaction of spousal health with log permanent
income. Interestingly, the results suggest that while a deterioration in spousal health has a similar
impact on an individual’s utility as a deterioration in own health, a deterioration in spousal health
has no detectible effect on an individual’s marginal utility.
   Oswald and Powdthavee (2007) show that individuals partly adapt to disability; the onset of
disability reduces happiness more in the short run than in the longer run. While their finding
concerns adaptation of the level of utility, it raises the question of whether marginal utility also
adapts to health shocks. In column 5, we test for such habituation effects by adding a two-year
lag of the number of diseases as well as this lag interacted with log permanent income as
regressors. We find that the coefficient on permanent income interacted with lagged number of
diseases is small and statistically insignificant. In other words, the decline in marginal utility
after a negative health shock does not appear to diminish over time.
   Finally, Table 7 investigates the sensitivity of our results to alternative measures of our key


                                                                                                       17
variables. Columns 2 and 3 show that we continue to estimate negative and statistically
significant state dependence (i.e., β1 <0) if we replace our permanent income measure Y with,
respectively, education and wealth, which are other reasonable proxies for consumption
opportunities; in both columns, the magnitude of our estimate of state dependence (i.e., σβ1/β4
shown in the bottom row) is slightly larger than in the baseline estimate. Columns 4 through 7
show that we continue to obtain negative and (usually) statistically significant estimates of state
dependence if, instead of our baseline measure of the number of chronic diseases, we use other
standard measures of health, including (respectively) limitations to activities of daily living
(ADLs), limitations to instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), other functional
limitations (OFLs), and a health index measure in the spirit of Dor et al. (2006) in which we sum
the three limitation measures and the individual’s reported pain score.
    The last three columns of Table 7 report results for alternative utility proxies. In addition to
the baseline utility proxy (the subjective well-being question “Much of the past week I felt happy
[yes or no]?”), the HRS contains seven other items from Radloff’s (1977) CES-D depression
scale. These items have a similar format but instead of “I felt happy” substitute “I enjoyed life”,
“I felt sad”, “I felt lonely”, “I felt depressed”, “I felt that everything I did was an effort”, “my
sleep was restless”, and “I could not get going”. We code these 0/1 measures such that 1
corresponds to higher utility and define a CESD-8 variable as the sum of the answers over these
eight questions. We also follow Smith et al. (2005) by defining a subjective well-being measure
CESD-4 that consists of the sum of answers to the first four items from the Radloff scale; these
focus more on happiness and less on the feelings more typically associated with depression or
stress.
    Columns 8 and 9 of Table 7 report results of estimating equations (6) and (7) using CESD-8
and CESD-4 respectively as our utility proxy. Both have desirable properties for a utility proxy
in that they both decline with worsening health (i.e., β3 < 0) and increase with permanent income
(i.e., β4 > 0). Most importantly, both indicate a decline in the marginal utility of permanent
income associated with deteriorating health, i.e., β1 < 0, though this decline is only statistically
significant for CESD-8. The bottom row of Table 7 shows that the magnitude of the estimated
state dependence (i.e., σβ1/β4) is somewhat smaller than in our baseline, although it lies within




                                                                                                       18
the baseline’s 95 percent confidence interval.12 In column 10, we draw on a similar sample of
individuals in a different data set – the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) – to perform the
analysis with subjective life satisfaction (measured on a 7-point scale), a commonly used
alternative subjective well-being measure; appendix B describes these data in more detail. We
continue to estimate negative state-dependent utility (i.e., β1 < 0) with a magnitude (i.e., σβ1/β4)
of -14.0%, which is quite similar to our baseline estimate of -11.2% using different data, from a
different country, with a different SWB measure. However, in the considerably smaller sample,
our estimate of state-dependent utility is no longer statistically significantly different from zero.
6. Threats to identifying assumptions
     Threats to validity come from violations of the identifying assumptions that allow us to
interpret the estimate of β1 as a test of state dependence. In Section 6.1, we evaluate the first
identifying assumption, that there are no errors in our specification of the mapping g(.) from
latent cardinal utility to the utility proxy that vary with health differentially by permanent
income. In Section 6.2 we explore in detail several possible threats to the second identifying
assumption that, conditional on sickness S, control variables X, and fixed effects θ, there are no
omitted determinants of utility that vary with health differentially by permanent income. While it
is never possible to directly test the identifying assumptions, our reading of the results in this
section is that they greatly alleviate concerns that these types of potential biases are responsible
for our finding of negative state-dependent utility.
6.1 Differential errors in the mapping from cardinal utility to subjective well-being
     There is growing evidence that measures of self-reported well-being are meaningful
measures of utility: people who rate themselves as happy are more likely to be rated happy by
others; self-reports of happiness correlate in the expected direction with objective life
circumstances (e.g., increasing in income and health, decreasing in divorce and unemployment);
happier people are less likely to commit suicide; subjective well-being correlates with activity in
the brain’s left-prefrontal cortex, which is known from clinical and experimental evidence to
12
  Smith et al. (2005) compare the impact of moving from no ADL limitations to at least two ADL limitations on
CESD-4 by household net worth. They find that those with below-median net worth experience a significantly larger
drop in subjective well-being as a result of acquiring two ADL limitations than those with above-median net worth.
Because their sample also includes individuals in the labor force and those without health insurance, these estimates
could be driven by negative consumption shocks as a result of the onset of disability rather than by positive state-
dependent utility. Indeed, the estimate on our interaction term also becomes positive if we add to our sample
individuals in the labor force and individuals without health insurance, but we argue that the interaction term in this
case no longer estimates state dependence because it is biased by the direct effect of disability on consumption.


                                                                                                                    19
process pleasure.13 As noted earlier, in our data we find the (sensible) properties that SWB
increases with permanent income and declines with adverse health events.
     Such findings suggest that subjective well-being data can be useful in economic research,
especially for questions that cannot be credibly answered using observed choices such as in Di
Tella, MacCulloch, Oswald (2001), Gruber and Mullainathan (2005), or Luttmer (2005).
Additionally, in our context, an important advantage of using proxies for utility to infer state-
dependent utility is that they do not require individuals to accurately forecast how their utility
function will change once they become ill. Loewenstein et al. (2003) and Conlin et al. (2007)
show that individuals suffer from “projection bias”: people put too much weight on their current
preferences when forecasting their future preferences. This would imply that healthy people
underestimate the effect of sickness on their marginal utility and, as a result, do not sufficiently
adjust their demand for insurance or their consumption behavior.
     At the same time, however, there is doubtless considerable measurement error in SWB
measures as utility proxies. It is well documented that answers to these questions can be sensitive
to wording, framing, question order, social desirability, or how the respondent processes the
question (see, e.g., Bertrand and Mullainathan, 2001). Indeed, in one study, researchers were
able to elicit a significant movement in self-reported happiness with subjects’ lives as a whole by
experimentally manipulating whether subjects found a dime (Schwarz and Strack, 1991).
     Random (even non-mean-zero) measurement error in SWB does not bias our estimate of
state dependence. As discussed in Section 4.2, the key assumption needed about our utility proxy
for the validity of our analysis is that errors in our specification of the mapping g(.) from latent
cardinal utility to the utility proxy cannot vary systematically with the interaction of health and
permanent income. In other words, a given change in true underlying utility associated with a
given change in health must map into the same change in the latent variable corresponding to our
proxy for utility at different levels of permanent income.
     To see how the shape of the mapping g(.) may cause this assumption to fail, suppose that the
true mapping from underlying utility to the utility proxy is quadratic, but that we use a linear
specification for g(.) in our estimation. Suppose that the onset of an illness causes true utility for
high-income individuals to drop from 5 to 4 and causes true utility for low-income individuals to


13
  See Frey and Stutzer (2002), Di Tella and MacCulloch (2006), or Krueger et al. (2008) for more extensive
discussions of the validity and usefulness of happiness data in economic research.


                                                                                                             20
drop from 2 to 1; in this example the true utility function is state independent. If the true
mapping is quadratic, the onset of disease would cause the utility proxy to drop by 9 (from 25 to
16) for high-income individuals but only by 3 (from 4 to 1) for low-income individuals. If we
were to use a linear specification of g(.) in our estimation, we would wrongly infer negative state
dependence. The fundamental cause of this mistake is that the derivative of the true mapping
increases with utility (which, in turn, depends on income), so that a given change in true utility
from a health shock maps into a larger change in the utility proxy for a high-income individual
than for a low-income individual.
   In the example above, the misspecification of g(.) led to an incorrect inference because the
high-income individual had higher utility levels than the low-income individual so that different
ranges of the mapping function were relevant for each of them. Alternatively, consider a high-
income individual and a low-income individual who both have mean utility proxies (over time)
of 3 and who both experience the onset of a disease. Suppose that the disease causes utility to
drop from 5 to 1 for the high-income individual, but only from 4 to 2 for the low-income
individual; in this example the true utility function is characterized by negative state dependence.
It is easy to see that any monotonically increasing mapping from true utility to the utility proxy
will lead to a larger drop in the utility proxy for the high-income individual than for the low-
income individual. More generally, when we compare the effect of the onset of a disease within
bins of high-income and low-income individuals with same mean levels of utility,
misspecification of g(.) will not lead to incorrect inference about the sign of state dependence.
While misspecification in g(.) will lead to errors that vary by utility, by construction utility does
not vary with permanent income within the bin, and these errors in the estimated effect of the
onset of a disease are therefore not correlated with permanent income. This observation forms
the basis for our nonparametric test of state dependence. Although on average high-income
individuals have higher utility levels than low-income individuals in our data set, there is
considerable overlap in the levels of the utility proxy by income because of variation across
individuals in other (non income-related) determinants of utility. This considerable overlap
allows us to implement our nonparametric test and, more importantly, suggests that the effects of
potential misspecification of g(.) may not be significant in our setting.
   The results from the nonparametric test (described in 6.1.1) show clear and consistent
evidence of negative state dependence. The (considerable) advantage of the nonparametric



                                                                                                     21
approach is that it is robust to arbitrary monotonically increasing mappings from true utility to
the utility proxy. However this flexibility comes at a cost: the nonparametric approach cannot be
used to estimate the magnitude of state dependence, only its sign. Therefore, in Section 6.1.2 we
explore a range of alternative parametric assumptions and estimates of g(.), and we are reassured
that they all yield similar quantitative estimates of the magnitude of state dependence.
6.1.1 Nonparametric test of the sign of state dependence
     The logic behind the nonparametric test is the insight, explained in the preceding example,
that when we compare the effect of the onset of a disease within bins of high-income and low-
income individuals with same mean levels of utility, any misspecification of g(.) will not lead to
incorrect inference about the sign of state dependence. The reason for this insensitivity is that
within such bins, high- and low-income individuals are on average at the same range of the g(.)
function. To ensure that we are comparing individuals with similar levels of health, we further
define the bins by mean values (over time) of the number of diseases.
     For each bin based on mean values of the utility proxy and mean values of the number of
diseases, we run an OLS regression of the utility proxy on number of diseases and an interaction
of the number of diseases with permanent health.14 Since the number of observations in these
narrowly defined bins is low, the estimates of the coefficients on the interaction term will be
imprecise. Still, under the null hypothesis of no state dependence, the t-statistics of these
coefficients will follow a t-distribution with the number of degrees of freedom determined by the
number of observations in each bin. The CDF of each t-statistic will be a draw from the
uniform(0,1) distribution under the null hypothesis of no state dependence, and therefore the
mean of the CDFs should be ½. If the mean of the CDFs is significantly lower than 0.5, we can
reject the null of no state dependence in favor of the alternative of negative state dependence.
     Table 8 shows the results of the nonparametric test. Column 1 shows our baseline case in
which we have sorted individuals into 10 categories based on their mean level of happiness and
into 14 categories based on their mean number of diseases. Of the resulting 140 bins, 85 have
sufficient observations that we can estimate a t-statistic on the interaction term between number
of diseases and permanent income. A majority (62 percent) of these t-statistics is negative,
which provides a first indication of negative state dependence. Moreover, the mean of the CDFs

14
  We also include a control for permanent income; however, since permanent income does not vary over time and
the mean level of the utility proxy has virtually no variation within bins by construction, the coefficient on
permanent income is not typically identified.


                                                                                                             22
of the t-statistics is 0.402, which is significantly different from the expected value of ½ under the
null hypothesis of no state dependence (p = 0.003). Columns 2 through 5 show that we obtain
similar results for alternative choices for the bin sizes. Hence, the nonparametric test indicates
that our finding of negative health state dependence is not driven by differential errors in the
mapping from true cardinal utility to the utility proxy.
6.1.2 Robustness to alternative parametric assumptions and estimates of the mapping function
     As discussed above, the nonparametric test allows us to flexibly estimate the sign of health
state dependence but does not provide information on the magnitude of state dependence. In this
section therefore we examine the robustness of our quantitative estimates to alternative
parametric assumptions or estimates of g(.). Table 9 summarizes the results from three different
classes of approaches to investigating the sensitivity of our quantitative estimates to potential
misspecifications of g(.).
     As a first step, we examine the robustness of our estimates to an alternative common
specification of the mapping. Specifically, we estimate a probit model rather than the linear
probability model in the baseline specification.15 In the linear probability model, we implicitly
assume that the probability that an individual responds “Yes” to the happiness question is a
cardinal measure of true utility. In the probit specification, the implicit assumption is instead
that the latent variable in the probit model is a cardinal measure of true utility. Column 2
presents results from a fixed effects probit model. In the table, we report marginal effects
evaluated at the mean, but we use the original probit coefficients to calculate the magnitude of
state dependence (i.e., σ β1/β4).16 Our sample size is reduced because we cannot include
individuals who never change their response to the happiness question, but we still estimate a
statistically significant decline in marginal utility that is roughly twice as large as the baseline
result (-28.7% versus -11.2%). The larger magnitude from the fixed effects probit specification
appears to be a result of the different sample used rather than the alternative functional form;
column 3 demonstrates that running the baseline (linear) specification on the same sample used
in the fixed effects probit yields very similar results. Thus, we are reassured to find similar
estimates for state dependence for two common but quite different specifications of the mapping
15
   Our exploration in Section 5.2 of the robustness of our findings to alternative utility proxies (see Table 7 columns
8 through 10) can be seen as another way of exploring the robustness of our findings to alternative mappings from
latent utility to the utility proxy.
16
   Because of the large number of fixed effects in the nonlinear model, we use a “zig-zag” approach to maximizing
the log-likelihood function (Heckman and MaCurdy 1980).


                                                                                                                     23
function of cardinal utility to subjective well-being.
     Our second approach is to assess the plausibility of the assumed mapping by estimating the
level of risk aversion (curvature) implied by our mapping function. In our baseline specification,
we imposed a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 1. We can instead estimate the implied
curvature by estimating equation (5) by nonlinear least squares; the coefficient of relative risk
aversion, α, is given by one minus the exponent on permanent income (i.e., α = 1-β2). We
estimate the coefficient of relative risk aversion using the cross-sectional variation in subjective
well-being and permanent income because we do not have variation in permanent income within
individuals over time.17 Naturally, our estimate of α will be affected by our assumption
regarding the mapping function g(.); this provides one way of gauging the plausibility of our
assumed mapping.
     We conduct this exercise for both the linear and probit mappings. Column 4 shows that the
linear mapping function implies a coefficient of relative risk aversion of 2.1, and column 5
shows that the fixed effects probit specification implies a coefficient of relative risk aversion of
3.5.18 Our estimates of negative state dependence remain significant and are very close in
magnitude to the linear and probit specifications in columns 1 and 2, which imposed a coefficient
of relative risk aversion of 1. While there is hardly a consensus in the literature on the magnitude
of the coefficient of relative risk aversion (see e.g. Cohen and Einav 2007 for a review of the
range of existing estimates), our estimates are well within the range of the most commonly used
values. Hence, both the linear and the probit mappings imply latent utility measures that contain
plausible levels of curvature. Of course, these findings do not rule out the possibility that
alternative mappings exist which are also consistent with reasonable levels of risk aversion but
which would yield different estimates of the magnitude of state dependence.
     Our third approach uses semiparametric estimation to further explore this possibility. Here
we once again impose a value for the coefficient of relative risk aversion, but we now flexibly
estimate the monotone mapping g(.) such that the latent utility variable exhibits the assumed
degree of risk aversion. Then, using this estimate of the mapping g(.), we estimate the sign and

17
   We then use our estimate of β2 from the cross-sectional equation (5) in our panel equation (4). We iterate until β2
converges.
18
   Our estimates are somewhat higher than those by Layard, Nickell, and Mayraz (2008), who estimate the
coefficient of relative risk aversion based on the curvature of the relationship between subjective well-being and
income in six different surveys. They posit a linear mapping and find estimates of the coefficient of relative risk
aversion ranging from 1.19 to 1.30.


                                                                                                                    24
magnitude of health state dependence. We find that imposing CRRA values between 1 and 5 and
flexibly estimating g(.) yields very similar estimates of state dependence.
    We flexibly estimate the mapping g(.) by allowing the latent variable in the probit model to
be a monotonically increasing ninth-degree polynomial function of our measure of cardinal
utility, v:
Pr(HAPPYi) = g(vi) = Φ(h(vi)),
where Φ(.) denotes the standard normal cumulative density function and h(.) is the flexible
polynomial. We impose on v the curvature that corresponds to a coefficient of relative risk
aversion of α by specifying vi = ! 1Yi 1" # / (1 " # ) + ! 0 . The function h(.) is identified cross-

sectionally because we only have cross-sectional variation in permanent income Yi . Of course,

the estimate ĥ(.) will depend on our assumed degree of risk aversion. Next, we define our

mapping from our cardinal utility measure v to the utility proxy HAPPY as ĝ(.) = !(ĥ(.)) . We

use the estimated mapping ĝ(.) and set β2 = 1-α when we estimate equation (4), which identifies

state dependence by the interaction between permanent income and health in a panel regression
with individual fixed effects. Appendix C provides further technical details of this procedure.
    Columns 6 through 8 show the estimates for state-dependence when we select the mapping
g(.) such that the coefficient of relative risk aversion in latent cardinal utility equals 1, 3, and 5,
respectively. We choose these three values of relative risk aversion since they span the most
commonly used values in the literature. As is in the case with the standard fixed effects probit
regression, individuals who never change their response to the happiness question must be
excluded from the sample. The estimates in columns 6 through 8 should therefore be compared
to the estimate of the standard fixed effects probit regression in column 2. We find that our
estimate of state dependence ranges between -20% and -29% for these three mappings, which is
similar to the estimate of -29% in the standard fixed effects probit regression in column 2. The
estimate is statistically significant at the 5 percent level for the mapping corresponding to a
coefficient of relative risk aversion of 3, and for the other two mappings, the p-value of our
estimate of state dependence lies around 10 percent.
    Overall, we believe the evidence presented in section 6.1 greatly alleviates concerns that our
results are primarily due to errors in the specification of the mapping from true cardinal utility to
the utility proxy that are correlated with the interaction between permanent income and health,


                                                                                                        25
though we recognize that it is impossible to completely rule out this concern. We suspect that
the estimates of state dependence turn out to be relatively insensitive to the specification of
mapping g(.) because, in practice, there is a large amount of overlap in utility levels for
individuals of different levels of permanent income; this presumably reflects the importance of
other individual-specific factors uncorrelated with income in determining utility. This overlap
ensures that in the semiparametric specifications the comparisons between high- and low-income
individuals to a large extent take place in the same range of the mapping function rather than at
different ranges. When high- and low-income individuals are in the same range of the mapping
function, any errors in the mapping function will not be strongly correlated with permanent
income or with the interaction of permanent income and health.


6.2 Omitted determinants of utility that vary with health by permanent income
     We explore three possible threats to our second identifying assumption that, conditional on
sickness S, control variables X, and fixed effects θ, there are no omitted determinants of utility
that vary with health differentially by permanent income. These possible threats are: (i)
differential trends over time in utility by permanent income, (ii) differential disease reporting by
permanent income, and (iii) failure of the assumption of predetermined consumption.
6.2.1 Differential trends over time in utility by permanent income
     If the consumption path of the poor increases more (or declines less) than that of the rich, this
tendency could show up in our estimates as negative state dependence. Since the number of
diseases increases over time, it could look like the rich have a greater drop in utility with the
onset of a disease simply due to different trends in underlying utility. Reassuringly we find (in
unreported regressions) that the consumption path of the poor declines (in percentage terms)
relative to that of the rich over time; this would in fact bias us against our finding negative state
dependence.19
     A related issue is that our estimates of the differential effect of health changes by permanent
income may in part capture differential effects of other time varying covariates by permanent
income. We therefore allowed the effect of permanent income to vary not only with number of

19
  See Appendix B for a description of the consumption data. An alternative way to investigate this issue would be to
add an interaction of permanent income with time. Unfortunately, the high collinearity between time and the onset
of a disease makes it hard to disentangle the two effects; not surprisingly, our estimate of the interaction of
permanent income with health becomes insignificant (not shown).


                                                                                                                 26
diseases but also with martial status and with household size. The estimate of the interaction term
of permanent income and number of diseases remains similar in magnitude to our baseline
estimate, but is no longer statistically significant at conventional levels (not shown).20
6.2.2 Differential reporting of diseases by permanent income
     If, conditional on reporting a disease, the severity of the disease varies by permanent income,
this would violate our identifying assumption and bias our inferences. For example, if,
conditional on reporting a disease, severity is greater for the rich than the poor, we would
estimate a larger decline in utility for those with higher permanent income, thus biasing us
toward finding negative state dependence; the converse would bias us in the opposite direction.
Note however, that there is no bias from differential rates of disease occurrence for individuals of
different permanent income. This rate simply affects the frequency with which we observe the
sick state.
     The existing evidence suggests that if any reporting differences by socio-economic status
(SES) exist, they would likely bias against our finding of negative state dependence. Banks et al.
(2006) compare the education-disease gradient for individuals aged 40 to 70 in the 1999-2002
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) based on self-reported health
measures and on biological measures.21 For hypertension, the gradients using the two different
health measures are virtually indistinguishable; for diabetes, there is some evidence of under-
reporting by individuals of lower education (Banks et al., 2006 Table 4). Our own analysis of the
HRS shows that conditional on reporting that a doctor has told them they have a particular
disease, individuals of higher permanent income are less likely to report conditions that indicate
a more severe form of the disease (see Table 10). This suggests that the threshold for reporting a
disease is higher for the poor, since conditional on reporting that they have a disease, they are
more likely to have a severe form of the disease. Under the (reasonable) assumption that this
under-reporting by the poor exacerbates the difference in health status among the poor between
those who report that they have a diseases and those who do not, this would bias against our
finding of negative state-dependent utility.
6.2.3 What if consumption is not predetermined?

20
   Note that if the effective interest rate or discount rate varies by permanent income, it would not cause bias in our
estimate of state dependence as long as second-period consumption is some monotonically increasing function of
lifetime income. See Appendix D for details.
21
   Both the NHANES and HRS self-reported measures are based on the question “has a doctor ever told you that you
have X” rather than respondent’s subjective assessment, which may mitigate potential differential reporting.


                                                                                                                    27
    We discuss the effect of relaxing our key modeling assumption from Section 4.1 that
consumption in the sick state is pre-determined. As we explain, any resulting bias would likely
be against our finding of negative state-dependent utility. We also present complementary
empirical evidence that is consistent with the assumption of pre-determined consumption in our
baseline sample as well as the empirical effects of relaxing it.
Relaxing the assumption of pre-determined consumption:
    Consumption would not be pre-determined if health has a mechanical effect on the resources
available to consume. For example, health may affect labor income, out-of-pocket medical
expenditures, household production, and longevity. In addition, consumption would not be pre-
determined if optimizing individuals are able to re-allocate consumption in response to their
state-dependent preferences; this could occur if health shocks are anticipated or transitory,
relatives provide informal insurance, or there is an outside and future consumption good whose
marginal utility is state independent, such as bequests as in Lillard and Weiss (1997).
    When consumption is not pre-determined, health can affect marginal utility of consumption
for two distinct reasons: its direct effect on the slope of the utility function (i.e., the state-
dependent parameter of interest), and its indirect effect through its effect on consumption.
Appendix D provides a formal treatment of the effect of extending the baseline model to allow
for health to directly affect consumption. Here, we limit ourselves to an informal discussion
designed to convey the intuition behind the bias that may result.




        Figure 2: Estimates of state dependence when consumption varies with health
    Figure 2 illustrates the natural case in which consumption falls with health, due for example


                                                                                                     28
to reduced income or increased medical expenses. Because our regression specification does not
correct for the consumption drop (we proxy consumption by permanent income, which does not
change), the estimated utility curve runs through points A and B. The nature of any bias this
creates for our estimate of state-dependent utility depends on two parameters: the curvature of
the utility function and the proportionality (or not) of the drop in consumption associated with
the health decline. Curvature is captured by the parameter α, the coefficient of relative risk
aversion.
     Consider first the case in which the drop in consumption is proportional to consumption in
the healthy state. If α =1, the slope of the utility curve is inversely proportional to consumption.
Thus, the bias in the estimate of utility (=absolute drop in consumption × slope of utility curve) is
the same independent of income or consumption, as illustrated in Figure 2. Since the estimate of
the slope of the utility curve in poor health is unbiased, the estimate of γ1 remains unbiased.
While there is some support in the literature for a coefficient of relative risk aversion of one (e.g.,
Metrick 1995, Chetty 2006b) many papers estimate a substantially higher level of relative risk
aversion (e.g., Gertner 1993, Cohen and Einav 2007). If α>1, then the marginal utility of
consumption falls more than proportionally with consumption, resulting in a smaller drop in
utility for high-consumption individuals than for those at lower levels of consumption. This will
cause the slope of the estimated utility curve for poor health to be biased upward, leading to a
positive bias in γ1 and biasing against our finding of negative state-dependent utility.
     Other cases follow the same basic intuition. For example, the drop in consumption may be
less than proportional to consumption in the healthy state if there are absolute expenses
associated with poor health, such as medical expenses. As a result of these absolute expenses, the
drop in utility associated with poor health is smaller at higher consumption levels, creating even
more positive bias in our estimate of γ1, assuming " ! 1 .22 Of course, if deterioration in health
causes an increase in consumption – for example because of reduced life expectancy for
individuals who are not completely annuitized – the sign of the bias is exactly the opposite of
what has just been discussed, and therefore biases in favor of our estimate of negative state-
dependent utility. We show below that any such bias is likely to be small in practice.

22
   The opposite would be true for a coefficient of relative risk aversion of less than 1 (for which there is little support
in the literature) or potentially for the case in which the drop in consumption is disproportionately larger for higher
consumption individuals (which seems empirically less relevant).


                                                                                                                        29
     Finally, the same basic intuition applies when health changes are anticipated or transitory, or
when there is an outside future consumption good with a state-independent marginal utility.23 In
such cases, individuals would adjust their savings (re-allocate consumption) to equate marginal
utility across current and future periods (and/or the outside good). For example, for negative
state-dependent utility (i.e., γ1<0), people who know they will become sick will save less than
they otherwise would have for future consumption. As a result of such re-allocation, our estimate
of state-dependent utility would be biased toward zero (for α>1) and would be unbiased for α=1,
whether or not the true state dependence were positive or negative.
Is consumption pre-determined in our sample? Some suggestive evidence
     The evidence in Table 11 is consistent with our assumption that, in our sample of elderly
individuals not in the labor force and with health insurance, consumption is pre-determined and
cannot be adjusted in response to health events. We examine how current income and
consumption change as health deteriorates. Since both income and consumption are household
measures, our health measure becomes the number of chronic diseases that the respondent and
his or her spouse report as a fraction of the maximum number of diseases possible (7 for singles
and 14 for couples). We now include household fixed effects instead of individual fixed effects,
and continue to include wave fixed effects and controls for time-varying household
characteristics (specifically, household size, a quadratic in average household age, and a dummy
for marital status). Column 1 indicates that a one-standard-deviation increase in the number of
household diseases is associated with marginally statistically significant but economically
insignificant 0.9 percent increase in current household income.
     More informatively, we are also able to examine whether consumption changes with adverse
health events. The Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS) – a small topical module
administered to about 30% of households in the HRS for only three waves (i.e., about 10 percent
of our person-years) – allows us to construct a broad-based measure of total consumption as well
as non-durable consumption; Appendix B provides more detail. The results in columns 3 and 5
respectively suggest that a one-standard-deviation increase in the number of household diseases
is associated with a statistically insignificant 1.3 percent increase in total consumption and 1.5

23
   Our health conditions were chosen to be chronic ones, so as to minimize the chance they are transitory. Indeed,
they are coded as absorbing events. It is less clear the extent to which they are anticipated. Smith (2005) argues with
respect to the same chronic disease measures that while people may to some extent be able to anticipate the onset of
a chronic disease, “much of the actual realization and especially the timing may be unanticipated.”


                                                                                                                    30
percent increase in non-durable consumption. There is therefore no evidence of a statistically
significant change in consumption or income following an adverse health event. Moreover, the
resultant downward bias in our estimate of γ1 if we use the point estimate of the 1.5 percent
increase in consumption following a one-standard-deviation decline in health is too small to
explain our finding of negative state dependence.24
     Estimates of state dependence will also be biased if a decline in health leads to a proportional
consumption change that differs by level of permanent income. For example, if, compared to the
case where a health shock leads to the same proportional change in consumption for everyone, it
leads the poor to consume relatively more than the rich, then we will underestimate the utility
decline due to the health shock for the poor and overestimate this decline for the rich, thereby
biasing toward our finding of negative state dependence. In columns 2, 4 and 6, we find that
neither the income nor the consumption response differs significantly by level of permanent
income. The point estimate on the interaction term between the number of diseases and
permanent income is positive, indicating that, if anything, a health shock leads to a relative
consumption increase for the rich, which would generate a positive bias in the estimate of state
dependence, thus biasing against our finding of negative state dependence.
     The most plausible reason why consumption might increase following an adverse health
event – and thus bias toward our finding of negative state dependence – is that the onset of
disease reduces life expectancy, resulting in an increase in the effective resources available for
consumption for individuals who are not fully annuitized. To gauge this potential bias, Table 12
compares the results in the full sample (column 1) to results in a sample limited to those with
more than 50 percent of their permanent income annuitized through Social Security or defined-
benefit pensions (column 2) or more than 75 percent annuitized (column 3).25 The implied

24
   As we derive in Appendix C, the bias can be computed given an assumption about the curvature of utility and the
proportionality of the effect of health on consumption. We assume any increase in consumption following a negative
health event is proportional to consumption when healthy. Equation (8) in Appendix C shows that with no state-
dependent utility, our estimate of β1/β4 will be -(α-1)n, where α is the coefficient of relative risk aversion and n is
the proportional change in net resources from a health shock. For log utility (α = 1) there is no bias. If we assume α
=3, which is a standard assumption in models of insurance demand (e.g. Mitchell et al., 1999, Brown and Finkelstein
2008), or savings (e.g. Scholz et al. 2006) then the point estimate of a 1.5 percent increase in non-durable
consumption would produce an estimate of state-dependent utility of -3.0%, which cannot fully explain our point
estimate of an 11.2% decline in the marginal utility of consumption for a one-standard-deviation increase in the
number of diseases.
25
   The percent of permanent income annuitized is calculated by summing the total household income from IRAs,
pensions, SSDI, and social security and averaging this total across all waves. This average total is then divided by
the total household permanent income.


                                                                                                                    31
magnitude of state dependence, shown in the bottom row, remains remarkably stable, though the
decrease in sample size causes the estimate in column 3 to become only marginally significant.
     As previously discussed, most empirically relevant scenarios suggest that the direct effect of
health would be to decrease consumption and therefore bias against our finding of negative state-
dependent utility. These scenarios are less of a concern because we can remain confident that our
ability to reject the null of β1 = 0 is interpretable as negative state-dependent utility. However,
these potential sources of bias are relevant for the magnitude of our estimate. Two likely causes
of decreased consumption when health deteriorates are the effect of health on labor market
income and medical expenditures. In part for these reasons, we excluded individuals who were in
the labor force and individuals without health insurance from our baseline sample. Columns 4
and 5 show the results from adding in, respectively, individuals without health insurance and
individuals in the labor force; we continue to restrict attention to individuals aged 50 and over.
The inclusion of individuals without health insurance has no detectable effect on our estimate of
β1, perhaps because those individuals comprise less than 15 percent of our sample. By contrast,
adding in individuals in the labor force has a substantial effect in the expected direction.
Specifically, the negative coefficient on β1 falls by half and is no longer statistically significant at
conventional levels (p-value = 0.118). This is exactly the sign of the bias we would expect if
deteriorating health reduces labor market earnings for those in the labor force, thus reducing
resources and hence potential consumption.26
     Finally, we limit the sample to individuals who are at least 65 years old, which is the
Medicare eligibility age. In this sample, 19.5 percent are in the labor force. By defining the
sample based on age, we limit potential concerns about the sample selection on retirement and
health insurance decisions. Column 6 shows that our estimate for state dependence is very
similar for this sample.


7. Conclusion
     If the marginal utility of consumption varies with health, a number of well-studied economic
problems, including the value of insurance and the optimal profile of life-cycle savings, will be
affected. Yet the sign of any such state dependence is a priori ambiguous, and there are relatively

26
   In a similar vein, we also examined a further restriction of the baseline sample to individuals whose spouses were
also not in the labor force. The baseline estimates were not affected (not shown).


                                                                                                                   32
few empirical estimates of state dependence.
    Our approach is to estimate how within-person adverse health events affect a proxy for
utility, and to compare this effect across individuals of different levels of permanent income. We
implement this approach using seven waves of panel data on older individuals from the Health
and Retirement Study and using a measure of subjective well-being as our primary proxy for
utility. Across a wide range of alternative specifications, we find robust evidence that a health
deterioration is associated with a statistically significant decline in the marginal utility of
consumption. Our central estimate is that a one-standard-deviation increase in the number of
chronic diseases of an individual is associated with an 11 percent decline in marginal utility of
consumption relative to marginal utility of consumption when the individual has no chronic
diseases. The results from two highly stylized calibration exercises suggest that this magnitude of
state dependence can have a substantial effect on important economic behaviors. For example,
these exercises suggest that, relative to the standard practice in the applied literature of assuming
a state-independent utility function, the level of state dependence we estimate lowers the optimal
share of medical expenditures reimbursed by health insurance by about 20 to 45 percentage
points and lowers the optimal fraction of earnings saved for retirement by about 1 percentage
point (or about 4 percent).
    Our findings also raise several important questions for future work. We estimate the average
effect on marginal utility from the onset of different chronic diseases in a population of older
individuals. While the average effect is the relevant one for many economic questions (such as
the optimal level of savings), it would nonetheless be interesting to explore whether different
chronic diseases have the same effect on marginal utility; unfortunately we lack the statistical
power to do so. Likewise, the data do not permit us to estimate the effect of acute diseases on
marginal utility, nor do they permit analysis of state dependence in a prime-age population. In a
similar vein, our analysis has focused on the possibility that marginal utility varies with health
while leaving unexplored the possibility of other types of state dependence, such as how
marginal utility of consumption is affected by leisure relative to labor. We hope that our paper
serves as a point of departure for further work on these important topics.




                                                                                                     33
Appendix A: Derivation of formulas used in calibration

Optimal insurance calibration:
An agent faces probability p of receiving a health shock. If the agent receives the health shock,
she receives insurance for a fraction b of her health expenses, H. When she does not receive a
health shock, she pays an insurance premium τ. The agent maximizes utility given permanent
income Y :

 max (1 ! p)uh (Ch ) + p(us (Cs ) + "(H ))
Ch ,Cs , H

      s.t. Y ! # ! Ch $ 0                      ,
             Y ! Cs ! (1 ! b)H $ 0

where Ψ(H) is a function that captures the effect of health spending on utility, and Ch and Cs
denote, respectively, consumption in the healthy and sick state. Utility is state dependent, with
uh(·) denoting the utility function in the healthy state and us(·) denoting the utility function in the
sick state.
        The planner chooses b and τ to maximize agent utility subject to the budget-balance
constraint (insurance premiums collected equal benefits paid in expectation). Following the
derivation in Chetty (2006), the problem above has the following exact solution:

u "s (C s ) # u h" (Ch ) d log H
                        =         = ! H ,b .
       u h" (Ch )         d log b

Our modification to the standard Baily/Chetty set-up involves introducing state-dependent utility
of the following form: us! (C) = (1 + " 1 )uh! (C) = (1 + " 1 )u !(C) . This results in the following exact
solution for optimal insurance:

(1 + " 1 )u # (Cs ) $ u # (Ch )
                                = ! H ,b .
           u # (Ch )

The above formula makes it clear that with no moral hazard and no state-dependent utility, there
will be full insurance and consumption will be equalized across states. Using the agent’s budget
constraint and assuming CRRA utility, we can solve for the optimal level of insurance, b*, in the
above expression:

(1 + ! 1 )(Ch " (1 " b)H )"# " Ch"#
                                    = $ H ,b       
                 Ch"#


       Ch # # 1 + ! 1 &              &
                             1/ )

b = 1+
  *
          %                       * 1( .
       H %$ %$ 1 + " H ,b ('         ('




                                                                                                        34
This is the formula that we use to create the table of optimal insurance values in the paper. We
choose ! H ,b = 0.2 based on Manning et al. (1987). We approximate Ch / H = 3 based on data on
the distribution of health spending and the distribution of annual household consumption. Since
H is the incremental health spending associated with becoming sick, we approximate it using
data from the 2000 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) on the difference in mean total
medical spending for those whose medical spending is above the median (~$9,800) and those
whose medical spending is below the median (~$790). Using the consumption data in the CAMS
survey (described in more detail in Appendix B), we find that median consumption is about
$25,000.27 We use median consumption divided by the difference in average health spending
(between average spending for those above and below the median) to get our estimate for
Ch / H : $25,0000 / ($9,800 - $790) ≈ 3. Using these two values and allowing γ1 and α to vary,
we calculate each cell in the calibration table.


Optimal savings calibration:
We use a two-period model of optimal savings for retirement. The agent must decide how much
of her first period (fixed) wage w to save for consumption in the second period. The agent faces a
probability p of becoming sick in the second period. Savings yield e rT , where r is the annual rate
of return on savings and T is the number of years between periods. As before, state-dependent
utility is introduced by allowing a proportional change in the marginal utility of consumption if
the agent receives a health shock: u !s (C ) = (1 + " 1 )u h! (C ) . Finally, the agent discounts the second
period by e !T and has CRRA per-period utility (with coefficient of relative risk aversion α). The
full maximization problem of the agent is the following:

max u h (C1 ) + e !"T (pu s (C 2 ) + (1 ! p )u h (C 2 ) )
     s

         s.t. s = w ! C1                                                 .
            C2 = e srT




                                                                                             C 1! "
where s is the fraction of the first-period (fixed) wage to save for retirement and uh (C) =        .
                                                                                             1!"
Unconstrained maximization of the above problem yields the following formula for the optimal
level of savings:

                                 w
s* =                                                                 .
           1 + (1 $ p + p (1 + # 1 ) )        e rT e $T (r $" )/ !
                                     $1 / !




27
  Since consumption in the CAMS is calculated on a household basis, we then convert it to an individual-level
variable using the OECD adjustment for household composition described in the text.


                                                                                                                35
Appendix B: Data Appendix

I. Health and Retirement Study
Our analysis uses data from all cohorts (and their spouses) in the first seven waves of the HRS.
The original HRS cohort is surveyed in every even year starting in 1992. The AHEAD cohort is
surveyed in 1993, 1995, 1996, 1998, 2000, 2002 and 2004. The War Baby and CODA cohorts
are surveyed in 1998, 2000, 2002 and 2004. For more detail on the data and the sample see
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/intro/index.html. We use the RAND HRS data set, which is a
“cleaned, easy-to-use, streamlined version” (http://hrsoline.isr.umich.edu/meta/r/and/ ), and
merge on some additional variables that are needed.

Sample selection:
   • Aged 50 and older. This restriction is only binding for spouses, since the HRS only
       sampled main respondents age 50 and older.
   • Not in labor force: We define an individual as not in the labor force if they (1) self
       report that they are either retired or that the retirement question is “inapplicable”
       (presumably reflecting no serious prior labor market attachment) and (2) have annual
       earnings of less than $5,000. Since the retirement question is not asked in the 1994/1995
       waves, we include individuals in this wave if they meet the criteria in the prior wave.
   • Have health insurance: We define an individual as having health insurance if she is
       covered by any private or public insurance.
   • We require that the individual maintains her retirement status and insurance coverage
       while she is in the sample. Individuals who do not initially meet these criteria can enter
       our sample in subsequent waves if they subsequently meet the criteria, but we drop all
       spells in the sample that do not terminate with the last observation of the individual
       meeting the sample selection criteria.28
   • We exclude the bottom percentile of the permanent income (defined below) distribution
       from our analysis, given the potential sensitivity of the coefficient on the log of
       permanent income (see equation 6) to such outliers. In practice, including these
       individuals does not have a substantive effect on the results.
   • Finally, we require that the individual appear in the baseline sample for more than one
       wave, and only use person-years where the key variables have non-missing values.

Variable definitions
   • Annual household income (adjusted for household composition): Total annual household
      income is the sum of household income from wages and salaries, capital income
      (business income, dividend and interest income, and other asset income), pensions,
      government transfers and other sources. We also add 5% of the household’s current
      financial wealth (that is, total household wealth not including housing or automobile) to
      this aggregate household income measure to account for the fact that elderly households
      may be spending down their accumulated financial savings; results are unaffected if we
      instead assume a 10% or 0% “drawdown” rate of financial wealth. We use the OECD
28
  As a specification check, we also define a sample where once an individual enters the sample, the individual
remains in the sample indefinitely regardless of changes to health insurance and retirement status, and the results are
extremely similar. As an additional specification check, we applied the sample criteria on a year-by-year basis, and
again find very similar results.


                                                                                                                    36
         adjustment for household size (Atkinson et al. 1995), dividing total household income by
         1.7 if the respondent is married and living with a spouse in the same household in that
         wave.
     •   Permanent income: Average across all waves of annual household income (adjusted for
         household composition)
     •   Measures of chronic disease: The exact question is “Has a doctor ever told you that you
         had X.” These have been coded in the RAND data set to be absorbing.
     •   Wealth measure (used in Table 6 column 4 as an alternative measure of permanent
         income): The wealth measure used is constructed by averaging household wealth across
         all waves in which a household appears. The measure of wealth we use excludes net
         housing wealth and automobile wealth. It includes the sum of the net value of financial
         wealth (e.g., stocks, mutual funds, investment trusts, checking, savings, money markets,
         CD’s, T-bills) and other savings and assets minus non-housing and non-automobile debts.
         We limit the sample to households with more than $1,000 in wealth, which results in a
         roughly 20% reduction in sample from baseline sample.

Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS)
The Consumption and Activities Mail Survey (CAMS) – a small topical module administered to
about 30% of households in the HRS for three waves – allows us to construct a broad-based
measure of total consumption, as well as non-durable consumption. The CAMS survey was
mailed to 5,000 households selected at random from the 13,214 households in HRS 2000; they
received 3,866 responds in 2001 and followed up with the respondent sample in 2003 and 2005
to form a household-level panel data set on consumption.

We use all three waves of CAMS, matching each to the preceding HRS survey years since the
CAMS asks about consumption in the previous year. The survey asks about 6 “big-ticket”
durable consumption items and 26 non-durable consumption categories that are modeled after
the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and designed to encompass the exhaustive set of non-
durable consumption categories in the CEX. We follow Hurd and Rohwedder (2005) to construct
measures of total consumption and total non-durable consumption; they also provide more detail
on the survey and the underlying data. We exclude medical expenditure from both consumption
measures.

II. British Household Panel Survey (BHPS)
    The British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) is an annual longitudinal survey covering
“labor markets outcomes, income, savings and wealth, household organization, housing,
consumption, social and political values, education, and training.”29 The original sample
contained about 5,500 households and about 10,000 individuals. Initially, the response rate was
very high (>95%), but by year 2000 there was moderate attrition (65% of wave 1 respondents
who were still alive and in United Kingdom in 2000 gave an interview in 2000, and 55% of
respondents gave responses in all waves).
    We use the 14 waves between 1990 and 2003, and we impose baseline sample restrictions
similar to those that we used with the HRS sample. In particular, just as in the HRS, we limit the
BHPS sample to age greater than 50 who are not in the labor force and are covered by health
29
  The BHPS is described in more detail here: http://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/ulsc/bhps/quality-profiles/BHPS-QP-01-
03-06-v2.pdf


                                                                                                             37
insurance.
    The proxy for utility that we use in the BHPS is the answer to the following question: “How
dissatisfied or satisfied are you with your life overall?” Individuals respond on a 7-point scale
where 1 corresponds to “not satisfied at all” and 7 corresponds to “completely satisfied”
(intermediate values are not explicitly defined). This 7-point scale may capture movements in
subjective well-being better than our binary happiness measure in the HRS. A possible drawback
of the BHPS measure, however, is that it asks about a global evaluation of one’s life, which may
be a harder question to answer than one’s current feeling of happiness (and, therefore, perhaps
more prone to judgment biases). Further, a global evaluation of happiness may be affected by
past or future well-being rather than just current well-being. A more general drawback to using
the BHPS data set is the considerably smaller sample size of individuals who meet the baseline
sample restrictions (only about 4,500 individuals and 20,000 observations in the BHPS versus
roughly 11,500 individuals and 45,000 observations in the HRS).
    As with the HRS data set, we compute household permanent income by taking an average of
total household income (including pension payments, annuity payments, disability payments,
government transfers and other government allowances) across all waves. The primary health
measure that we use in the BHPS sample is the individual’s total number of reported diseases,
using the diseases that appear consistently in all waves (excluding depression, alcohol use, drug
use, and epilepsy): problems with arms/legs/hands, difficulty hearing, difficulty seeing, skin
problems, chest/breathing problems, heart problems and/or hypertension, stomach/digestion
problems, diabetes, migraines, and other diseases.30 Note that this set of diseases is somewhat
different from the HRS set (see Table 3 for a description of diseases used to construct the HRS
health measure).




30
     Cancer and Stroke (which are diseases that also appear in HRS) appear only in the last 3 waves.


                                                                                                       38
Appendix C: Semiparametric estimator of the mapping g(.)
    We generalize the standard probit model by flexibly estimating a nonlinear, monotonic
transfer function h(v). In our application, this transfer function maps cardinal utility v to the
latent variable in a probit model with a binary subjective well-being outcome variable, HAPPY:

         #1 if h(vi ) > ! i
HAPPYi = $                  ,
         %0 if h(vi ) " ! i

where εi is a standard normal error term. The transfer function h(v) is specified as a ninth-order
polynomial that is constrained to be monotonically increasing using the rearrangement technique
of Chernozhukov, Fernandez-Val, and Galichon (2009). Without loss of generality, we
normalize h(0)=0 and h'(0)=1. We impose latent utility v to have the amount of curvature that
corresponds to a coefficient of relative risk aversion of α:

           Yi 1" #
vi = ! 1           + !0 ,
           1"#

where π1 and π0 are parameters to be estimated. The polynomial coefficients and π1 and π0 are
estimated by maximizing the following log likelihood function:

                    &      & Yi 1$ %       )                                   & Yi 1$ %       ) )
 max , ( HAPPYit " log(#(h ( ! 1     + ! 0 + )) + (1 $ HAPPYit ) " log(1 $ #(h ( ! 1     + ! 0 + ))+ ,
h(.), ! 0 , ! 1
                i,t '      ' 1$%           *                                   ' 1$%           * *

where Φ(.) denotes the standard normal cumulative density function. The outcome of this
maximization problem is an estimated transfer function ĥ(.) , which will depend on our choice of
α.
    Next, we define the mapping from our cardinal utility measure v to the utility proxy HAPPY
as ĝ(.) = !(ĥ(.)) . We use the estimated mapping ĝ(.) and set β2 = 1-α when we estimate
equation (4), which identifies state dependence by the interaction between permanent income
and health in a panel model with individual fixed effects. We estimate equation (4) by maximum
likelihood.31 Finally, using our estimated fixed effects, we estimate equation (5) which identifies
the marginal utility of permanent income (β4).
    We report bootstrapped standard errors clustered by individual for two reasons. First, this is
a three-step estimator – the first step estimates h(.), the second step estimates β1, fixed effects
(θis), and other parameters given ĥ(.) , and the third step estimates β4 given the fixed effect
estimates. Second, we are most interested in the magnitude of state dependence (σβ1/β4) and
bootstrapping allows us to take into account the covariance between β1 and β4, which are
estimated in two separate equations. A single iteration of the three-step estimator takes about 4
hours to run, so we only run 100 iterations to compute our bootstrapped standard errors. We
report p-values based on asymptotic t-tests constructed from our point estimate and the
bootstrapped standard errors.
31
  As with our baseline fixed effects probit model, we maximize the log likelihood function using a “zig-zag”
approach which iterates between maximizing over the fixed effects holding the other parameters fixed and
maximizing over the other parameters using current estimates of the fixed effects.


                                                                                                               39
Appendix D: Estimates of State Dependence when Consumption Varies with Health
        We model consumption responses to health states by allowing the individual’s income to
                                                                         !
be state dependent. In particular, let the individual receive net income N(S) in period 2 (in
                                                                          !
addition to the permanent income Y received in period 1). We think of N(S) consisting of
medical insurance payments, effects of health on labor income and household production,
informal transfers from friends and family that depend on health status, or resources that would
have otherwise been used on an outside state-independent consumption good (such as bequests).
 !
 N(S)  is lowered by medical expenses and other possible negative shocks to income available for
consumption.
        The lifetime budget constraint now becomes:

                 (  !
Y = C1 + 1+1 r C2 ! N(S) .      )
                        !
Further, assume that N(0)              ! = N. Because C2 is stochastic, we express expected
                             = 0, and N(1)
utility as a function of C1 (rather than of C2 as we did in the basic model):

                               %           (1 ! p) 1!1" ( (1 + r)(Y ! C1 )) + (
                                                                           1! "
                 1! "
E[U ] =    1
                 C      + 1+1# '                                                      *.
                               '& $ 0 p + p(1 + $ 1 ) 1 ( (1 + r)(Y ! C1 ) + N )1! " *)
          1! "   1
                                                     1! "



There is no closed form solution for C1, but denote the solution of this maximization problem by
C1* . Next, consider the effect of relaxing the budget constraint in the second period by providing
additional resources R in the second period. Since we are only interested in the derivative of
utility with respect to R, we can set the level of R at zero. The realized marginal utility of
additional resources in period 2 depends on health and is given by:


!U                1
             =       ((1 + r)(Y # C1* ))#$
!R               1+"
     |S=0



!U               1+ "1
                         (                         )
                                                       $%
             =         (1 + r)(Y $ C1* ) + N
!R               1+#
     |S =1


Since C1* is chosen before the random variable health status is realized, C1* is independent of
health status for any individual. Next, we define net income shocks n as a fraction of second
period consumption in the healthy state:

            N
n=
     (1 + r)(Y ! C1* )




                                                                                                  40
This allows us to express the marginal utility of resources in the sick state as a fraction of the
marginal utility of resources in the healthy state:


!U                !U
                              = (1 + " 1 )(1 + n)#$
!R                !R
     |S =1             |S=0


This expression tells us that the ratio of the marginal utility of resources depends on two factors.
First, it is proportional to the marginal utility of consumption in ill health to the marginal utility
of consumption in good health when both marginal utilities are evaluated at the same level of
consumption. Second, it depends on the effect of illness on the level of consumption. If the
individual’s net income falls in poor health (n<0), her level of consumption will fall with illness.
Since the elasticity of marginal utility with respect to consumption is -α, this second factor will
increase her marginal utility of resources as health declines.
         This expression also gives insight into the optimal level of net state-dependent income.
This income should depend on health such that the marginal utility of resources is equalized
across states of the world. So, the optimal level of net state-dependent income is:

n* = (1 + ! 1 )
               1/ "
                      #1 $ !1 /"

Thus, absent state dependence (γ1 = 0), the optimal level of net state-dependent income is zero
(n* = 0), i.e., it is optimal for health expenditure shocks to be fully covered by insurance.
However, if the marginal utility of consumption is lower in poor health (γ1 < 0), then less than
full insurance is first-best optimal. In other words, even in the absence of moral hazard, partial
insurance is optimal in this case. Similarly, if γ1 > 0, optimal insurance would more than cover
medical expenditure.
        Even though we cannot obtain a closed form solution for C1, it is clear that second-period
resources from savings are increasing in permanent income. We parameterize this relationship as
(1+r)(Y-C1) = ! 0Y !1 , with θ0 >0 and θ1>0. Modeling second-period resources as a
monotonically increasing function of permanent income also captures cases in which the
effective interest rate, discount rate, or probability of diseases varies by permanent income. It
follows that second-period indirect utility, v(Y,S), equals:

             1                   # 1! "
v(Y , 0) =       (# 0Y #1 )1! " = 0 Y (1! " )#1 , and
          1!"                    1!"
                1+ !1                $1 1" #        (1 + n)1" # (1 + ! 1 )$ 01" # (1" # )$1
v(Y ,1) = ! 0 +         ((1 + n)$ 0Y ) = ! 0 +                                   Y          .
                1"#                                          1"#

Thus, running the regression given by equation (3) yields the following parameter estimates:

     % " 1# $ (                                                                    " 1# $
!1 = ' 0 * ( (1 + n)1# $ (1 + + 1 ) # 1) , ! 2 = (1 " # )$1 , ! 3 = " 0 , and ! 4 = 0 .
     &1#$ )                                                                        1#$



                                                                                                     41
As before, the parameter ratio β1/β4 allows us to estimate state dependence:

!1 / ! 4 = (1 + n)1" # (1 + $ 1 ) " 1 % $ 1 " (# " 1)n(1 + $ 1 ) .                                (8)

This expression formalizes the intuition developed from Figure 2 concerning the bias from
having net state-dependent income. If α = 1, the ratio β1/β4 yields an unbiased estimate of the
state dependence in the marginal utility of consumption, even in the presence of state-dependent
net income shocks. For α >1, the bias has the opposite sign as the sign of the net state-dependent
income shocks.
         In certain cases, individuals may be able to choose the level of net state-dependent
income. This may occur if there are well functioning (informal) insurance networks of if the
individual has an outside good of which the utility does not dependent on health. In that case,
individuals would set n such that the marginal utility of resources is equalized across health
states, so n* = (1 + ! 1 ) # 1 . The estimated of ratio of the marginal utility of permanent income
                          1/ "


now becomes:

!1 / ! 4 = (1 + n)1" # (1 + $ 1 ) " 1 = ((1 + $ 1 )1/# )1" # (1 + $ 1 ) " 1 = (1 + $ 1 )1/# " 1

As before, there is no bias if α=1. If α>1, the estimate of state dependence is biased towards
zero.
        We can also model predictable or temporary health changes in this framework.
Individuals who can predict health changes will adjust their savings such that the marginal utility
of second-period consumption is equal to the marginal utility of first-period consumption. Such
individuals can effectively self-insure, so we can think of them as selecting n such that the
marginal utility of consumption is equalized across periods. However, the cost of the insurance is
fully born by the person knowing that he will fall ill, so the analogy with insurance would only
hold exactly if we could ignore this cost. Since the analogy does not hold exactly, we now derive
the consumption decisions of individuals who can predict their future health status.
        The first-order condition for those knowing they will fall ill is given by:

         1+ r
              (1 + $ 1 ) ( (1 + r)(Y ! C1 )) =0,
                                            !"
C1!" !
         1+#

while the first-order condition for those knowing they will remain healthy is given by:

         1+ r
C1!" !        ((1 + r)(Y ! C1 ))!" =0.
         1+#

Both first order conditions have analytical solutions. Substituting these solutions into the second-
period utility function yields indirect utility as a function of income and health status. As before,
the indirect utility function is linear in Y 1! " . The estimator β4 is found as the coefficient on Y 1! "
in the indirect utility function when healthy and β1 is the additional effect of Y 1! " when sick.




                                                                                                        42
When the discount rate equals the interest rate, the ratio of these parameters is given by:32
                                        1* #
           $        2+r             '
!1 / ! 4 = &                   1/ # )
                                               (1 + " 1 )1/# * 1 .
           % 1 + r + (1 + " 1 ) (

As before, if α = 1, then the ratio of the marginal utility of permanent income, β1/β4, yields an
unbiased estimate of γ1.
       Taking a first-order Taylor series approximation around γ1=0, yields the following
expression for the bias term:

                      & (% " 1)(1 + r) )
(!1 / ! 4 " # 1 ) $ " (                  #
                      ' % (2 + r) +* 1

This means that for α > 1, the estimate of γ1 is biased toward zero.




32
     The expression for δ ≠ r is lengthier and therefore harder to interpret, but qualitatively similar.


                                                                                                           43
References

Abel, Andrew. 1985. “Precautionary Savings and Accidental Bequests.” American Economic
Review 77(4): 771-791.

Ai, Chunrong and Edward C. Norton. 2003. “Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models.”
Economics Letters 80(1): 123-129.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1974. “Optimal Insurance and Generalized Deductibles.” Scandinavian
Actuarial Journal 1-42. Reprinted in Collected Papers of Kenneth J. Arrow, Volume 3,
Cambridge MA, Harvard University Press, 1984, 212-260.

Atkinson, A.B., L. Rainwater, and T. M. Smeeding. 1995. “Income Distribution in OECD
Countries.” OECD Social Policy Studies No. 18:
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/61/52/35411111.pdf

Baily, Martin Neil. 1978. “Some Aspects of Optimal Unemployment Insurance.” Journal of
Public Economics 10(3): 379-402.

Banks, James, Michael Marmot, Zoe Oldfield, and James Smith. 2006. “Disease and
Disadvantage in the United States and England.” Journal of the American Medical Association
295(17): 2037-2045.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer, and Lawrence Summers. 1985. “The Strategic Bequest
Motive.” Journal of Political Economy 93(6): 1045-1076.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. “Do People Mean What They Say?
Implications for Subjective Survey Data.” American Economic Review 91(2): 67-72.

Brown, Jeffrey R. and Amy Finkelstein. 2008. “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance:
Medicaid and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” American Economic Review 98(3): 1083-
1102.

Chernozhukov, Victor, Ivan Fernandez-Val, and Alfred Galichon. 2009. “Improving Point and
Interval Estimates of Monotone Functions by Rearrangement,” Biometrika, forthcoming.

Chetty, Raj. 2006a. “A General Formula for the Optimal Level of Social Insurance.” Journal of
Public Economics 90(10-11): 1879-1901.

Chetty, Raj. 2006b. “A New Method of Estimating Risk Aversion.” American Economic Review
96(5): 1821-1834.

Cohen, Alma, and Liran Einav. 2007. “Estimating Risk Preferences from Deductible Choice.”
American Economic Review 97(3): 745-788.

Conlin, Michael, Ted O'Donoghue, and Timothy J. Vogelsang. 2007. “Projection Bias in Catalog



                                                                                              44
Orders.” American Economic Review 97(4): 1217-1249.

Davidoff, Tom, Jeffrey R. Brown, and Peter A. Diamond. 2005. “Annuities and Individual
Welfare.” American Economic Review 95(5): 1573-1590.

De Nardi, Mariacristina, Eric French, and John B. Jones. 2006. “Differential Mortality,
Uncertain Medical Expenses, and the Saving of Elderly Singles.” NBER working paper no.
12554.

Di Tella, Rafael, and Robert MacCulloch. 2006. “Some Uses of Happiness Data in Economics.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(1): 25-46.

Di Tella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew J. Oswald. 2001. “Preferences over
Inflation and Unemployment: Evidence from Surveys of Happiness.” American Economic
Review 91(1): 335-41.

Dor, Avi, Joseph Sudano, and David Baker. 2006. “The Effect of Private Insurance on the Health
of Older, Working Age Adults: Evidence from the Health and Retirement Study.” Health
Services Research 41(3): 759-787.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale and Cori E. Uccello. 1999. “The Adequacy of Household
Savings.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 65-187.

Evans, William N., and W. Kip Viscusi. 1991. “Estimation of State-Dependent Utility Functions
Using Survey Data.” Review of Economics and Statistics 73(1): 94-104.

Feldman, Roger and Bryan Dowd. 1991. “A New Estimate of the Welfare Loss of Excess Health
Insurance.” American Economic Review 81(1): 297- 301.

Feldstein, Martin. 1973. “The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance.” Journal of Political
Economy 81(2): 251-280.

Finkelstein, Amy, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2009. “Approaches to
Estimating the Health State Dependence of the Utility Function.” American Economic Review
99(2), forthcoming.

Frey, Bruno S. and Alois Stutzer. 2002. “What Can Economists Learn from Happiness
Research?” Journal of Economic Literature 40(2): 402-435.

Gertner, Robert. 1993. “Game Shows and Economic Behavior: Risk-Taking on ‘Card Sharks’.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(2), 507-521.

Golosov, Mikhail and Aleh Tsyvinski. 2006. “Designing Optimal Disability Insurance: A Case
for Asset Testing.” Journal of Political Economy 114(2): 257-269.

Gruber, Jonathan H. and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2005. “Do Cigarette Taxes Make Smokers



                                                                                               45
Happier?” B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis and Policy: Advances in Economic Analysis and
Policy 5(1): 1-43.

Hall, Robert E., and Charles I. Jones. 2007. “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health
Spending.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1): 39-72.

Heckman, James J. and Thomas E. Macurdy. 1980. “A Life Cycle Model of Female Labour
Supply.” The Review of Economic Studies 47(1): 47-74.

Hurd, Michael D. and Susan Rohwedder. 2005. “Consumption and Economic Well-Being at
Older Ages: Income- and Consumption-based Poverty Measures in the HRS.” Prepared for the
7th Annual Conference of the Retirement Research Consortium “Towards a Secure Retirement
System.” http://www.mrrc.isr.umich.edu/publications/conference/pdf/cp05-Hurd.pdf

Krueger, Alan B., Daniel Kahneman, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz, and Arthur A. Stone.
2008. “National Time Accounting: The Currency of Life.” Unpublished manuscript, Princeton
University.

Layard, Richard, Stephen J. Nickell, and Guy Mayraz. 2008. “The Marginal Utility of Income.”
Journal of Public Economics 92(8-9): 1846-1857.

Lillard, Lee A. and Yoram Weiss. 1997. “Uncertain Health and Survival: Effects of End-of-Life
Consumption.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 15(2): 254-268.

Loewenstein, George, Ted O'Donoghue, and Matthew Rabin. 2003. “Projection Bias in
Predicting Future Utility.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4): 1209-1248.

Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2005. “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3): 963-1002.

Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, Arleen Leibowitz,
and M. Susan Marquis. 1987. “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence
from a Randomized Experiment.” American Economic Review 77(3): 251-277.

Metrick, Andrew. 1995. “A Natural Experiment in ‘Jeopardy!’.” American Economic Review
85(1): 240-253.

Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown. 1999. “New
Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities.” American Economic Review 89(5):
1299-1318.

Palumbo, Michael G. 1999. “Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving Near the
End of the Life Cycle.” Review of Economic Studies 66(2): 395-421

Oswald, Andrew J. and Nattavudh Powdthavee. 2007. “Does Happiness Adapt? A Longitudinal
Study of Disability with Implications for Economists and Judges,” Journal of Public Economics,



                                                                                            46
forthcoming.

Radloff, Lenore S. 1977. “The CES-D Scale: A Self-Report Depression Scale for Research in the
General Population.” Applied Psychological Measurement 1(3): 385-401.

Scholz, John Karl, Ananth Seshadri, and Surachai Khitatrakun. 2006. “Are Americans Saving
‘Optimally’ for Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy 114(4): 607-643.

Schwarz, Norbert, and Fritz Strack. 1991. “Evaluating One's Life: a Judgment Model of
Subjective Well-Being.” In Subjective Well-Being: An Interdisciplinary Perspective, ed. Fritz
Strack, Michael Argyle, Norbert Schwarz, 27-47. Pergamon Press.

Sloan, Frank A., W. Kip Viscusi, Harrell W. Chesson, Christopher J. Conover, and Kathryn
Whetten-Goldstein. 1998. “Alternative approaches to valuing intangible health losses: the
evidence for multiple sclerosis.” Journal of Health Economics 17(4): 475-497.

Smith, James. 1999. “Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between Health and
Economic Status.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2): 145-166.

Smith, James. 2005. “Consequences and Predictors of New Health Events.” in Analyses in the
Economics of Aging, ed. David Wise, 213-237. University of Chicago Press.

Smith, Dylan M., Kenneth M. Langa, Mohammed U. Kabeto, and Peter A. Ubel. 2005. “Health,
Wealth, and Happiness: Financial Resources Buffer Subjective Well-Being After the Onset of a
Disability.” Psychological Science 16(9): 663-666.

Viscusi, W. Kip, and William N. Evans. 1990. “Utility Functions That Depend on Health Status:
Estimates and Economic Implications.” American Economic Review 80(3): 353-374.

Zeckhauser, Richard. 1970. “Medical Insurance: A Case Study of the Tradeoff Between Risk
Spreading and Appropriate Incentives.” Journal of Economic Theory 2(1): 10-26.




                                                                                                47
                                                                                          TABLE 3
                                                                                   DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
                                      Sample: Age > 50 & Not in labor force & Has health insurance
                                                                                               Std. dev.
                                                                 5th                  95th     (within-
                                   Obs    Mean      Std. dev. percentile Median percentile indiv.)
Demographics
NUM_WAVE                          45447       4.52        1.50         2           4           7            0      ─ Number of waves that respondent was interviewed.
Ȳ (Permanent income, $)          45447      29224       33297        6236       20667       77285          0      ─ Permanent income constructed by taking the average across all waves of
FEMALE                            45447       0.63        0.48         0           1           1            0        total household income plus a 5 percent annual draw down of current
NON_WHITE                         45447       0.13        0.33         0           0           1            0        financial wealth. The average is then adjusted using an OECD-style
SINGLE                            45447       0.40        0.49         0           0           1          0.21       adjustment (divide by 1.0 if single, and divide by 1.7 if married and living
AGE                               45447      72.39        9.00         57          73          87         3.28       with spouse).
HOUSEHOLD_SIZE                    45447       1.99        1.00         1           2           4          0.56     ─ Household size includes all residents of household (including spouse).
Measures of Health
NUM_DISEASE                       45447       1.95        1.30          0           2          4          0.63     ─   Sum of Yes/No "Has a doctor ever told you have D ?" (0-7)
SPOUSE_NUM_DISEASE                45447       1.03        1.30          0           0          4          0.71     ─   Sum of spouse's Yes/No "Has a doctor ever told you have D ?" (0-7)
ADL_TOTAL                         45447       0.44        1.05          0           0          3          0.74     ─   Sum of Yes/No "Does anyone help you A ?" (0-6)
IADL_TOTAL                        45384       0.41        0.89          0           0          2          0.67     ─   Sum of Yes/No "Are you able to I ?" (0-6)
OFL_TOTAL                         45446       2.75        2.70          0           2          8          1.69     ─   Sum of "How difficult is O ?" (1 = Very or somewhat difficult) (0-10)
HEALTH_INDEX                      45334       4.21        4.50          0           3          14         2.67     ─   Sum of severity of pain (0-2), ADL, IADL, and OFL (1-24)
Measures of Utility
HAPPY                             45447       0.87        0.34          0           1           1         0.28     ─ Yes/No "Much of the time the past week I felt happy?"
CESD-8                            45447       6.32        2.01          2           7           8         1.38     ─ Sum of Yes/No "Much of the time the past week I felt/was C ?"
CESD-4                            45447       3.38        1.05          1           4           4         0.79     ─ Subset of 4 out of 8 CESD-8 questions (enjoy life, happy, sad, lonely).

Notes: Set of diseases: D = {hypertension, diabetes, cancer, heart disease, chronic lung disease, stroke, arthritis}. Set of Activities of Daily Living (ADLs): A = {dress, bathe or shower, walk across a
room, eat (such as cutting up your food), get in and out of bed, use the toilet (including getting up and down)}. Set of Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs): I = {prepare hot meals, shop for
groceries, make telephone calls, take medications, use a map, use a calculator}. Set of Other Functional Limitations (OFLs): O = {walk several blocks, walk one block, sit up for about 2 hours, get up
from a chair, climb several flights of stairs, climb one flight of stairs, stoop/kneel/crouch, pick up a dime, extend your arms above shoulder level, push large objects like a living room chair}. Set of
medications taken for disease: M = {hypertension, diabetes, chronic lung disease, heart disease, arhtritis, stroke}. Set of CESD items: C = {depressed, everything I did was an effort, my sleep was
restless, happy, lonely, enjoyed life, sad, could not 'get going'}. Spouse diseases set to 0 if the respondent is single.




                                                                                                                                                                                                   48
                                               TABLE 4
                             ESTIMATED MAGNITUDE OF STATE-DEPENDENT UTILITY
                                                   Dependent Variable: HAPPY

                                                        Panel A: Estimates
NUM_DISEASE it × log(Ȳi) ( β 1)                                                                                        -0.009
                                                                                                                       (0.004)
                                                                                                                       [0.018]
NUM_DISEASE it (β 3)                                                                                                    -0.011
                                                                                                                       (0.003)
                                                                                                                       [0.001]
log(Ȳi)   ( β 4)                                                                                                       0.048
                                                                                                                       (0.003)
                                                                                                                       [0.000]

R2                                                                                                                      0.474
N                                                                                                                       45447
Number of individuals                                                                                                   11514

                                                  Panel B: Interpretation
% change in marginal utility for a 1 unit increase in NUM_DISEASE it (β 1/β 4)                                         -17.9%
(bootstrapped standard error)                                                                                          (5.8%)
(bootstrapped 95% CI)                                                                                             (-4.2%, -26.9%)
[bootstrapped p-value]                                                                                                 [0.018]
% change in marginal utility for a 1 standard deviation increase in NUM_DISEASE              it   (σβ 1/β 4)           -11.2%
(bootstrapped standard error)                                                                                          (3.6%)
(bootstrapped 95% CI)                                                                                             (-2.7%, -16.8%)
[bootstrapped p-value]                                                                                                 [0.018]
Marginal utility with 0 diseases (14.2% of sample)                                                                      0.048
Marginal utility with 1 disease (27.3% of sample)                                                                       0.039
Marginal utility with 2 diseases (28.4% of sample)                                                                      0.030
Marginal utility with 3 diseases (18.4% of sample)                                                                      0.021
Marginal utility with 4 diseases (8.9% of sample)                                                                       0.012
(3.2% of sample has 5+ diseases)

Notes:
Panel A reports coefficients β1 and β3 from estimating equation (6) and coefficient β4 from estimating equation (7). The dependent
variable in equation (6) is a dummy variable that equals 1 if the respondent agrees with the following statement: "Much of the time
during the past week I was happy;” the mean of the dependent variable is 0.87. The dependent variable in equation (7) is the
individual fixed effect estimated in equation (6). NUM_DISEASEit is a composite health measure which is the total number of
reported diseases. log(Ȳi) is the average across all waves of the individual’s total annual household income, adjusted for household
composition and a 5 percent annual draw down of current financial wealth; we have demeaned log(Ȳi). In addition to the covariates
shown in the table, the estimates of equation (6) include individual fixed effects, wave fixed effects, and controls for Age, Age2,
Household size, and a dummy for whether the individual is single; estimates of equation (7) include wave fixed effects and a dummy
for Non-white, a dummy for Female, Age, Age2, Household size, and a dummy for weather the individual is single. Standard errors
for β1, β3, and β4 are in parentheses and are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each individual over
time; p-values are in brackets. Appendix B contains more detail on data and variable definitions; summary statistics are in Table 3.
Panel B reports several ways of interpreting the estimates in Panel A. In Panel B we report bootstrapped standard errors, 95%
confidence intervals, and p-values for β1/β4 and σβ1/β4 based on 10,000 bootstrap iterations, resampling individuals with replacement.
The within-person standard deviation change in NUM_DISEASEit (σ) is 0.625.




                                                                                                                                         49
                                                                          TABLE 5
                                                                INDIVIDUAL DISEASE RESULTS
                                                          (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)                (8)
                                                                                                                                             Prevalence-weighted
                                                        Blood                                Lung         Heart                              linear combination of
                                                       pressure    Diabetes     Cancer      Disease      Disease      Stroke     Arthritis           (1)-(7)
DISEASE it × log(Ȳi) ( β 1)                              -0.020      -0.013       -0.003      -0.045       0.001       -0.019       0.007           -0.008 1.000
                                                         (0.010)     (0.017)      (0.013)     (0.019)     (0.011)      (0.018)     (0.008)          (0.004)
                                                         [0.045]     [0.425]      [0.802]     [0.017]     [0.906]      [0.280]     [0.350]          [0.032]
DISEASE it (β 3)                                           0.008       0.004       -0.025      -0.042      -0.016       -0.001      -0.017
                                                         (0.008)     (0.011)      (0.011)     (0.014)     (0.009)      (0.012)     (0.006)
                                                         [0.293]     [0.694]      [0.020]     [0.003]     [0.072]      [0.904]     [0.009]
log(Ȳi)   ( β 4)                                                                                                                                     0.047
                                                                                                                                                    (0.003)
                                                                                                                                                    [0.000]

R2                                                                                                                                                   0.474
N                                                                                                                                                    45447
Number of individuals                                                                                                                                11514
% change in marginal utility for a 1 std. dev.                                                                                                      -10.5%
change in NUM_DISEASE it          (σβ 1/β 4)                                                                                                        [0.029]
F-statistic that all interaction terms are equal                                                                                                       1.64
p-value of F-test, F(6,11513)                                                                                                                         0.131

Notes: This table shows results from estimating a modified version of equations (6) and (7) in which seven disease dummies (DISEASEit) indicating whether the
respondent has the particular disease listed in the column heading are separately interacted with log permanent income in a single regression. See notes to Table 4
(Panel A) for more details on the estimating equations. The prevalence-weighted linear combination of the interaction terms (shown in column 8) gives an estimate of
state-dependent utility that is comparable to the baseline specification (see Table 4). Standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary
variance-covariance matrix for each individual over time. P-values are in brackets; the p-value for σβ1/β4 is bootstrapped based on 10,000 iterations, resampling
individuals with replacement.




                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                                 TABLE 6
                                         ALTERNATIVE SPECIFICATIONS
                                                            (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)

                                                                                                 Own and
                                                                         No          Always      spousal
                                                         Baseline     covariates     single       health       Habituation
NUM_DISEASE it × log(Ȳi) ( β 1)                             -0.009       -0.008        -0.003       -0.008         -0.011
                                                            (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.007)      (0.004)        (0.006)
                                                            [0.018]      [0.023]       [0.632]      [0.022]        [0.062]
NUM_DISEASE it (β 3)                                         -0.011       -0.012        -0.010       -0.010         -0.010
                                                            (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.007)      (0.003)        (0.004)
                                                            [0.001]      [0.000]       [0.142]      [0.002]        [0.029]
SPOUSE_NUM_DISEASE it × log(Ȳi)                                                                      0.005
                                                                                                    (0.004)
                                                                                                    [0.156]
SPOUSE_NUM_DISEASE it                                                                                -0.011
                                                                                                    (0.003)
                                                                                                    [0.001]
NUM_DISEASE i,(t-1) × log(Ȳi)                                                                                      -0.001
                                                                                                                   (0.006)
                                                                                                                   [0.815]
NUM_DISEASE i,(t-1)                                                                                                 -0.002
                                                                                                                   (0.005)
                                                                                                                   [0.629]
log(Ȳi)   ( β 4)                                             0.048        0.052         0.049        0.041          0.048
                                                            (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.006)      (0.003)        (0.003)
                                                            [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]

R2                                                            0.47          0.47         0.48          0.47           0.55
N                                                            45447         45447        13437         45447          33910
Number of individuals                                        11514         11514         3411         11514           9032
Within-person std dev of NUM_DISEASE it (σ )                 0.625         0.626        0.634         0.625          0.555
% change in marginal utility for a 1 std. dev.              -11.2%         -9.9%        -4.2%        -12.7%        -12.3%
change in NUM_DISEASE it          (σβ 1/β 4)                [0.018]       [0.022]      [0.638]       [0.022]       [0.063]

Notes: Column (1) reports the results from the baseline specification in Table 4; see notes to Table 4 (Panel A) for more
details. Subsequent columns report results from a single change relative to the baseline specification. Column (2) omits the
covariates Age, Age2, Household size, and Single from equation (6). Column (3) restricts the sample to individuals who are
always single. Column (4) includes the total number of reported diseases of the spouse. Column (5) includes one-wave
lags to test for adaptation/habituation. Standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary
variance-covariance matrix for each individual over time. P-values are in brackets; the p-value for σβ1/β4 is bootstrapped
based on 10,000 iterations, resampling individuals with replacement.




                                                                                                                               51
                                                                                TABLE 7
                                                                  ALTERNATIVE MEASURES OF KEY VARIABLES
                                                            (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)             (8)           (9)         (10)
                                                                         Permanent Income                     NUM_DISEASE it replaced by:                           HAPPY it replaced by:
                                                                            replaced by:              ADL          IADL         OFL        HEALTH                                    LIFE_SAT
                                                         Baseline       Education Wealth             TOTAL        TOTAL        TOTAL        INDEX          CESD-8        CESD-4       (BHPS)
NUM_DISEASE it × log(Ȳi) ( β 1)                            -0.009          -0.002       -0.004         -0.005       -0.010       -0.002       -0.002         -0.038        -0.016        -0.032
                                                           (0.004)         (0.001)      (0.002)        (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.018)       (0.010)       (0.033)
                                                           [0.018]         [0.016]      [0.052]        [0.201]      [0.020]      [0.086]      [0.060]        [0.040]       [0.107]       [0.323]
NUM_DISEASE it (β 3)                                        -0.011          -0.011        0.029         -0.022       -0.022       -0.010       -0.009         -0.150        -0.050        -0.053
                                                           (0.003)         (0.003)      (0.020)        (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.017)       (0.009)       (0.016)
                                                           [0.001]         [0.001]      [0.139]        [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.001]
log(Ȳi)   ( β 4)                                            0.048           0.010        0.013          0.031        0.034        0.033        0.028          0.613         0.200         0.143
                                                           (0.003)         (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)        (0.020)       (0.010)       (0.035)
                                                           [0.000]         [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]

R2                                                            0.47           0.47         0.45            0.48        0.48         0.48         0.48           0.66          0.60            0.64
N                                                            45447          45404        35698           45447       45384        45446        45334          45447         45447           19586
Number of individuals                                        11514          11501         8911           11514       11504        11513        11498          11514         11514            4676
Within-person std dev of NUM_DISEASE it (σ )                 0.625          0.626        0.631           0.738       0.669        1.686        2.673          0.625         0.625           0.620
% change in marginal utility for a 1 std. dev.              -11.2%         -13.0%       -16.8%         -12.2%       -19.2%       -12.6%       -17.4%          -3.8%         -5.1%        -14.0%
change in NUM_DISEASE it          (σβ 1/β 4)                [0.018]        [0.011]      [0.057]        [0.204]      [0.021]      [0.081]      [0.065]        [0.045]       [0.119]       [0.329]

Notes: Column (1) reports the results from the baseline specification in Table 4; see notes to Table 4 (Panel A) for more details. Subsequent columns report results from alternative measures
of key variables. Column (2) uses years of education (top-coded at 17 years) instead of permanent income. Column (3) uses log net worth excluding net housing wealth and net automobile
wealth (see Appendix B and accompanying text) instead of permanent income. Columns (4) through (7) use other composite health measures described in Table 3 instead of total number of
diseases. Columns (8) and (9) use other subjective well-being measures from the HRS. Column (10) uses a different data set (the British Household Panel Survey) and a 7-point measure of
overall life satisfaction as the dependent variable; see Appendix B for more details. Standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for
each individual over time. P-values are in brackets; the p-value for σβ1/β4 is bootstrapped based on 10,000 iterations, resampling individuals with replacement.




                                                                                                                                                                                                     52
                                          TABLE 8
                          NONPARAMETRIC T ESTS OF STATE DEPENDENCE
                                                             (1)            (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)
Bin width for mean happiness                                 0.1           0.05          0.2             0.1         0.1
Bin width for mean number of diseases                        0.5            0.5          0.5             0.2         1.0
Number of cells                                             140            280           70             350          70
Number of usuable cells                                      85            118           56             155          47
Number of individuals in usable cells                       3250           3227         3256            3147        3254
Average number of individuals per used cell                  38             27           58              20          69

Results for interaction term, NUM_DISEASE it × log(Ȳi)
Mean of CDFs of t-statistics, F                0.402                       0.420        0.383          0.420       0.393
p-value of test that F = 0.5                  [0.003]                     [0.003]      [0.004]        [0.001]     [0.022]
Fraction of estimated interaction terms < 0    0.624                       0.576        0.661          0.600       0.660

Results for direct effect of NUM_DISEASE it
Mean of CDFs of t-statistics, F                            0.335           0.363        0.340          0.383       0.313
p-value of test that F = 0.5                              [0.000]         [0.000]      [0.000]        [0.000]     [0.000]
Fraction of estimated direct terms < 0                     0.718           0.669        0.696          0.606       0.723

Notes: This table reports results of nonparametric tests as described in Section 6.1. The sample includes all individuals
with variation in the variable HAPPY; we drop all individuals with mean values of HAPPY of either 0 or 1. Individual
mean values of HAPPY and mean values of NUM_DISEASE are used to group individuals into bins. Bins for mean
happiness and for mean number of diseases are defined to be inclusive below and exclusive above. The maximum number
of diseases is 7, so the number of cells is 7/(hd ), where h is bin width for happiness and d is bin width for number of
diseases. The number of usable cells is the total number of cells with more than one individual. For each bin, we run a
regression of HAPPY on log of permanent income, NUM_DISEASE , and their interaction. The cumulative distribution
of the t-statistic on the interaction term is recorded, and we report the p-value from a two-sidedtest of whether the average
of these recorded values is equal to 0.5 to test for state dependence. We do the same for the t-statistic on the number of
diseases.




                                                                                                                                53
                                                               TABLE 9
                              ROBUSTNESS TO ALTERNATIVE MAPPINGS FROM CARDINAL UTILITY TO THE UTILITY PROXY
                                                           (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
Coefficient of relative risk aversion, α :                α =1           α =1           α =1             α estimated               α=1            α=3            α=5
                                                                                        OLS
                                                                                    (drop all 0s     OLS         FE Probit                  Semiparametric
Specification:                                            OLS         FE Probit      and all 1s)   w/ NLLS       w/ NLLS                  Fixed Effects Probit
                               1−α
NUM_DISEASE it × Yi                  /(1 − α )   ( β 1)     -0.009         -0.027        -0.027         -0.225       -22.097         -0.016       -14.787      -535.557
                                                           (0.004)        (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.071)      (11.043)        (0.006)       (6.096)     (171.173)
                                                           [0.018]        [0.008]       [0.011]        [0.002]        [0.045]       [0.005]       [0.015]        [0.002]
NUM_DISEASE it (β 3)                                        -0.011         -0.038        -0.036         -0.010         -0.111        -0.115        -0.132         -0.143
                                                           (0.003)        (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.003)       (0.027)        (0.024)       (0.050)        (0.046)
                                                           [0.001]        [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.001]        [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.008]        [0.002]
     1−α
Yi         /(1 − α ) ( β 4)                                  0.048          0.059         0.056          1.253        57.940          0.051        34.856      1301.534
                                                           (0.003)        (0.005)       (0.005)        (0.032)       (2.559)        (0.016)      (10.701)     (386.552)
                                                           [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.001]       [0.001]        [0.001]
Coefficient of relative risk aversion (α )                                                               2.100          3.464
                                                                                                       (0.148)       (0.467)
                                                                                                       [0.000]       [0.000]

R2                                                           0.474                         0.17          0.47
N                                                            45447         14040          14040         45447          14040         14040         14040          14040
Number of individuals                                        11514          3260           3260         11514           3260          3260          3260           3260
Within-person std dev of NUM_DISEASE it (σ )                 0.625         0.638          0.638         0.625          0.638         0.638         0.638          0.638
% change in marginal utility for a 1 std. dev.             -11.2%         -28.7%        -30.7%         -11.2%        -24.3%         -20.3%        -28.7%         -26.3%
change in NUM_DISEASE it          (σβ 1/β 4)               [0.018]        [0.012]       [0.016]        [0.007]       [0.002]        [0.118]       [0.011]        [0.078]

Notes: Column (1) reports the results from the baseline specification in Table 4; see notes to Table 4 (Panel A) for more details. Subsequenct columns report results
using different specifications and estimation methods. Column (2) reports marginal effects (at the mean) from a fixed effects probit specification. Column (3) reports
the results from the baseline specification with sample used in column (2). Column (4) iteratively estimates the coefficient of relative risk aversion (CRRA) using a
cross-sectional, non-linear least squares (NLLS) regression using the estimated fixed effects from the baseline specification. The estimated CRRA coefficient is
plugged back into the baseline specification to generate a new set of estimated fixed effects; this procedure is iterated until convergence. Column (5) does the same
iterative estimation procedure but uses a fixed effects probit specification instead our baseline (linear probability model) specification. Columns (6) through (8) report
results from a semiparametric approach; see Appendix C for more details. Columns (6) through (8) drop the Age, Age2, Household Size, and Single control variables,
which are included in all other columns. Standard errors are in parentheses and are adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each individual
over time; p-values are in brackets. In columns (1) through (5), the p-value for σβ1/β4 is bootstrapped base on 10,000 iterations, resampling individuals with
replacement. Because of computational complexity, in columns (6) through (8) the p-value for σβ1/β4 is based on an asymptotic t-test using the t-statistic derived from
the point estimate of σβ1/β4 divided by the bootstrapped standard error of this ratio, using 100 bootstrap iterations. In columns (6) through (8), all standard errors are
bootstrapped standard errors based on 100 bootstrap iterations, resampling individuals with replacement.




                                                                                                                                                                             54
                                         TABLE 10
                     DISEASE NUMBER AND SEVERITY BY PERMANENT INCOME
                                                   (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                                                                  Sample: has {lung disease, diabetes, stroke}

                                                         Taking
                                                        oxygen for Severe                Severe        Severe       Severe
                                              Number of   lung     diabetes,            diabetes       stroke,       stroke
Dependent Variable:                            diseases  disease     (1-2)              dummy           (1-7)       dummy

log(Ȳi)                                           -0.231       -0.037        -0.028        -0.025       -0.194        -0.037
                                                  (0.016)      (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.050)       (0.014)
                                                  [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.031]       [0.047]      [0.000]       [0.010]
  2
R                                                   0.04          0.02          0.03          0.03         0.02          0.01
N                                                  45447          4864          7927          7927         4387          4387
Mean of dependent variable                          1.510         0.009        0.036         0.034         0.076        0.034
Within-individual std. dev. of dep. var.            0.625         0.275        0.281         0.257         1.370        0.433

Notes: Table reports results from a regression of the dependent variable shown in the column heading on , wave fixed effects
Age, Age2, Household size, and a dummy for whether the individual is single. In column (3), severe diabetes is defined as the
sum of two dummy variables for whether the respondenttakes insulin and whether the respondenthas ever been hospitalized for
kidney problems; in column (4), severe diabetes is defined if either dummy equals 1. In column (5), severe stroke is defined as
the sum of 7 dummy variables for whether the respondent has vision problems, memory problems, speech problems, has seen a
doctor recently, has general weakness from stroke, has therapy from stroke, or whether the respondent has other long-lasting
problems from stroke; in column (6), severe stroke is defined if any of the 7 dummy variables equals 1. Standard errors,
adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each individual over time, are in parentheses and p-values are
in brackets.




                                                                                                                                   55
                                                         TABLE 11
                                         INCOME AND CONSUMPTION RESPONSE TO DISEASE
                                                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
                                                                                                                                          Non-durable
                                                                                     Current income          Total consumption            consumption
Household Fraction of Diseasesit                                                      0.109        0.106        0.217        0.227        0.242        0.255
                                                                                    (0.056)      (0.059)      (0.228)      (0.227)      (0.245)      (0.244)
                                                                                    [0.052]      [0.069]      [0.343]      [0.319]      [0.324]      [0.297]
Household Fraction of Diseasesit × log(Ȳi)                                                       -0.021                     0.286                     0.373
                                                                                                 (0.083)                   (0.243)                   (0.257)
                                                                                                 [0.803]                   [0.239]                   [0.147]

R2                                                                                     0.79         0.79          0.79         0.79         0.79         0.79
N                                                                                     36577        36577          4997         4997         4997         4997
Within-HH std. dev. change in Household Fraction of Diseasesit                        0.080        0.080         0.061        0.061        0.061        0.061

Notes: Table reports results from a regression of the dependent variable on the covariates shown in the table, household fixed effects, wave fixed effects, and
controls for a quadratic in average household age, household size, and a dummy for whether the household is single. The Household Fraction of Diseases is the
total number of diseases in the household divided by the maximum number possible (7 if single, 14 if married). The dependent variable in columns (1) and (2)
is the current household income. The dependent variables in columns (3) through (6) are household consumption measures. All dependent variables are in
logs. Standard errors, adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each household over time, are in parentheses and p-values are in
brackets.




                                                                                                                                                         56
                                                           TABLE 12
                                                ALTERNATIVE S AMPLE RESTRICTIONS
                                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)       (4)                  (5)            (6)
                                                                                                          Add in
                                                                             X = Fraction of perm. income
                                                                              from SSI, SSDI, pensions,    those
                                                                                    and annuities         without              Add in
                                                                                                          health              those in
                                                               Baseline       X > 50%        X > 75% insurance              labor force      Age > 65
NUM_DISEASE it × log(Ȳi) ( β 1)                                    -0.009         -0.013          -0.013         -0.010          -0.004         -0.007
                                                                   (0.004)        (0.005)         (0.008)        (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.003)
                                                                   [0.018]        [0.012]         [0.090]        [0.004]         [0.118]        [0.034]
NUM_DISEASE it (β 3)                                                -0.011         -0.013          -0.014         -0.011          -0.008         -0.012
                                                                   (0.003)        (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.003)
                                                                   [0.001]        [0.002]         [0.014]        [0.000]         [0.002]        [0.000]
log(Ȳi)   ( β 4)                                                    0.048          0.074           0.080          0.049           0.036          0.033
                                                                   (0.003)        (0.005)         (0.007)        (0.003)         (0.002)        (0.003)
                                                                   [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.000]        [0.000]         [0.000]        [0.000]

R2                                                                   0.47            0.46           0.46            0.47           0.43            0.46
N                                                                   45447           28064          16450           52645          90405           48081
Number of individuals                                               11514            6814           4041           13189          19352           12380
Within-person std dev of NUM_DISEASE it (σ )                        0.625           0.643          0.649           0.633          0.628           0.633
% change in marginal utility for a 1 std. dev.                     -11.2%         -11.7%          -10.8%         -12.4%           -6.8%         -13.7%
change in NUM_DISEASE it          (σβ 1/β 4)                       [0.018]        [0.013]         [0.092]        [0.003]         [0.119]        [0.035]

Notes: Column 1 reports the results from the baseline specificationin Tabe 4; see notes to Tabe 4 (Panel A) for more details. Subsequent columns report
results from re-estimatingthe baseline specification on different samples, as indicated in the column headings. Standard errors are in parentheses and are
adjusted to allow for an arbitrary variance-covariance matrix for each individual over time. P-values are in brackets; the p-value for σβ 1/β 4 is
bootstrapped based on 10,000 iterations, resampling individuals with replacement.




                                                                                                                                                          57
