NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UTILISATION OF PHYSICIAN SERVICES IN THE 50+ POPULATION. THE RELATIVE
IMPORTANCE OF INDIVIDUAL VERSUS INSTITUTIONAL FACTORS IN 10
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
Kristian Bolin
Anna Lindgren
Bjorn Lindgren
Petter Lundborg
Working Paper 14096
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14096

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008
This paper used data from the early release 1 of SHARE 2004. This release is preliminary and may
contain errors that will be corrected in later releases. The SHARE data collection was preliminary
funded by the European Commission through the 5th framework programme (project QLK6-CT-2001-00360
in the thematic programme Quality of Life programme area). Additional funding came from the US
National Institute on Aging (U01 AG09740-13S2, P01 AG005842, P01 AG08291, P30 AG12815,
Y1-AG- 4553-01 and OGHA 04-064). Data collection in Austria (through the Austrian Science Foundation,
FWF), Belgium (through the Belgian Science Policy Administration) and Switzerland (through BBW/OFES/UFES)
was nationally funded. Additional funding for data collection in Sweden was granted by the Swedish
Council for Working Life and Social Research, the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation, and
the Swedish National Board of Social Insurance. The research reported in this paper was supported
by a grant from the Swedish Council for Working Life and Social Research, which is gratefully acknowledged.
We are indebted to Soren Hojgard for critical remarks and helpful comments on previous drafts and
to Rose-Marie Lindkvist for diligent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Kristian Bolin, Anna Lindgren, Bjorn Lindgren, and Petter Lundborg. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Utilisation of Physician Services in the 50+ Population. The Relative Importance of Individual
versus Institutional Factors in 10 European Countries
Kristian Bolin, Anna Lindgren, Bjorn Lindgren, and Petter Lundborg
NBER Working Paper No. 14096
June 2008
JEL No. I11
ABSTRACT
We analysed the relative importance of individual versus institutional factors in explaining variations
in the utilisation of physician services among the 50+ in ten European countries. The importance of
the latter was investigated, distinguishing between organisational (explicit) and cultural (implicit)
institutional factors, by analysing the influence of supply side factors, such as physician density and
physician reimbursement, and demand side factors, such as co-payment and gate-keeping, while controlling
for a number of individual characteristics, using cross-national individual-level data from SHARE.
Individual differences in health status accounted for about 50 percent of the between-country variation
in physician visits, while the organisational and cultural factors considered each account for about
15 percent of the variation. The organisational variables showed the expected signs, with higher physician
density being associated with more visits and higher co-payment, gate-keeping, and salary reimbursement
being associated with less visits. When analysing specialist visits separately, however, organisational
and cultural factors played a greater role, each accounting for about 30 percent of the between-country
variation, whereas individual health differences only accounted for 1 percent of the variation.

Kristian Bolin
Lund University Centre for Health Economics
P.O.Box 705
SE-220 07 Lund
SWEDEN
Kristian.Bolin@luche.lu.se
Anna Lindgren
Centre for Mathematical Sciences
P.O.Box 118
SE- 221 00 Lund
SWEDEN
Anna.Lindgren@matstat.lu.se

Bjorn Lindgren
Lund University Centre for Health Economics
P.O. Box 705
SE-220 07 Lund
SWEDEN
and NBER
bjorn.lindgren@luche.lu.se
Petter Lundborg
Department of Economics
Free University Amsterdam
De Boelelaan 1105
NL-1081 HV Amsterdam
THE NETHERLANDS
plundborg@feweb.vu.nl

INTRODUCTION
Healthcare utilisation rates vary considerably among the European countries
(OECD 2004). The fundamental reasons for these variations still remain largely
unexplored or are not yet well understood. A thorough knowledge about the
determinants of healthcare utilisation seems to be crucial, though, for our ability
to fruitfully confront future challenges to healthcare finance and delivery in
Europe.

The utilisation of healthcare is determined by both demand and supply factors.
Differences among countries might, hence, be explained both by differences in
the socio-economic and demographic composition of the populations (individual
factors), by differences in regulation, financing and delivery (organisational or
explicit institutional factors), and by differences in traditions, norms and culture
(implicit institutional factors), some affecting demand, some supply, some both
demand and supply.

Due to the lack of comparable cross-national individual data, most previous
comparative research on health care utilisation has been based on macro-level
data. Thus, the importance of the institutional framework has certainly to some
degree been illuminated, but aggregate studies are by their very nature limited in
that they cannot really distinguish between the impact of individual
characteristics and the impact of the institutional framework. Moreover, often
these studies have analysed healthcare expenditures, whose relation to utilisation
presumably differs across countries (for an overview, see Gerdtham and Jönsson,
2000).

Furthermore, the results from previous comparative macro-level research on the
role of organisational factors are non-conclusive. While significant effects on
healthcare expenditure have been shown for the fraction of public financing ( Leu
1986; Gerdtham et al. 1992a;) and physician supply (Gerdtham et al. 1998), no
effect has apparently been shown for co-payment (Gerdtham and Jönsson 2000).
Significantly lower expenditures have been reported in countries where patients

3

have to pay in advance and then apply for reimbursement (Gerdtham et al. 1998).
In van Doorslaer et al. (2000) and van Doorslaer et al. (2004a), physician supply or
the use of a gatekeeper to specialist care did not explain country differences in
healthcare utilisation at the macro level.

The purpose of this study was to analyse the relative importance of individual
factors versus institutional factors in explaining variations in European outpatient
healthcare utilisation, among the 50+ populations, employing comparable crossnational individual data. There are no previous studies which focus on this
particular age group. Previous related evidence is limited to one study using data
from the European Household Panel for 12 countries and covering the period
1994-1996 (Jiménez-Martin et al. 2002, 2004).1 Our study contributes to the limited
evidence by using more recent and rich information from SHARE (Survey of
Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe).2

The two studies had seven

countries in common. While the previous study included Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands,
Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom, the present study did not include
Belgium, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal and the United Kingdom, but France,
Sweden and Switzerland instead.

The objective of this study and, hence, the methods applied differ from those of
Jiménez-Martin et al. In this study, we compared the countries as regards to what
share of the outpatient care that can be explained by different categories of
variables, using estimates from a pooled sample of all countries. Thus, we
implicitly assumed that the estimated coefficients were the same between
countries and exploited differences in the distribution of the characteristics
between the populations in order to explain differences in outpatient care
utilisation. Jiménez-Martin et al., on the other hand, focused on differences
between countries in the way individuals respond to the explanatory variables,
and, moreover, estimated different sets of equations for men and women,
respectively. The studies provide comparable estimates as regards the signs of the
effects of certain explanatory variables on the utilisation of outpatient care,
though.

4

In order to determine the relative importance of individual-level and institutionallevel factors, we estimated the individual’s healthcare utilisation assuming that it
depends directly on the combination of the individual’s health state and other
individual characteristics, the organisational features of the healthcare systems,
and implicit institutional (“cultural”) factors, following a north-south gradient.
We also considered GP visits and specialist visits separately, since the role of
individual- and institutional factors may differ between the two types.

Several of our individual-level factors are similar to those of Jiménez-Martin et al.
(2002, 2004) – health status, marital status, age, gender, education and
employment, for instance – but the exact representation differs. Our study also
included some life-style variables – exercise, smoking, and drinking – which were
absent in their study.

In our analyses of the role of explicit institutional factors, we investigated the
combined influence of four organisational characteristics of the healthcare system
that may affect the utilisation of physician services. These characteristics are (1)
physicians per capita, (2) gate-keeping, (3) co-payment, and (4) physician
reimbursement. Jiménez-Martin et al. (2002, 2004) did not include co-payment
but added healthcare expenditures per capita and the contribution of public
expenditures to total health expenditure. First, high physician supply, indicating
high access to healthcare and low transaction costs, is expected to lead to high
levels of utilisation. Second, co-payment is expected to lower the level of
healthcare utilisation. Third, gate-keeping is expected to reduce specialist visits
and have a positive impact on GP visits. Finally, physician reimbursement by feefor-service is expected to increase the risk of over-providing, since physician
incomes increase with the number of services provided. Salary payment, on the
other hand, provides no such incentives.

There are other regulatory differences than the ones mentioned above among the
ten countries; see Table 1. Furthermore, institutions are not only manifested in

5

formal, explicit, regulatory frameworks, but also embedded in traditions, norms
and culture. There are substantial differences in these respects across Europe,
which may have an impact on healthcare utilisation rates in addition to
individual-level and formal organisational factors. Thus, we also considered the
impact of differences in implicit country-specific institutions by adding region
(north, central, and south) as a marker for differences in traditions, norms and
culture.3 A corresponding factor was not included in the Jiménez-Martin et al.
(2002, 2004) studies.

The paper proceeds as follows. Next, the data is presented, followed by a
description of the specific empirical model used in the paper. Then, the results
are presented and, finally, discussed.

--TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE –

data AND DESCRIPTIVES
The SHARE database
The Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE)4 is a
multidisciplinary and cross-national micro database, presently containing data on
approximately 22 000 Europeans from eleven countries. In SHARE, interviews
were restricted to people aged fifty and above and their respective household
members. The first wave of data was collected in 2004, containing representative
samples from the non-institutionalised population in each participating country.
The countries represent Northern Europe (Denmark and Sweden), Central
Europe (Austria, France, Germany, Switzerland, Belgium and the Netherlands)
and Southern Europe (Spain, Italy and Greece). In this paper, data from Belgium
was not included, since it was not yet available. The database comprises
information on health-related variables (e.g. self-reported health, physical and
cognitive functioning, psychological health, well-being and life satisfaction),
utilisation of healthcare (e.g. GP visits and visits to specialists), labour market
variables (e.g. current work activity, job characteristics and opportunities to work
past retirement age) and economic variables (e.g. sources and composition of

6

current income, wealth and consumption). Additional variables include
education, housing, social support variables (e.g. informal care, transfers of
income and assets and social networks).

Response rates
The response rates in SHARE vary to a substantial extent between countries. The
rate is lowest in Switzerland, 38 percent, and highest in France, 74 percent
(Börsch-Supan and Jürges 2005). Besides France, five countries reached the 60
percent target; Germany (63%), Denmark (63%), Netherlands (61%), and Greece
(61%). In addition to Switzerland, five countries failed to meet this target; Austria
(58%), Italy (55%), Spain (53%), and Sweden (50%). The overall response rate in
SHARE is 62 percent. This rate is comparable to the response rates obtained in
two earlier European Surveys, conducted by Eurostat (the European Community
Household Panel, ECHP and the European Labour Force Survey, EU-LFP). The
most common reason for household non-response was refusal to participate.
Whether or not there are any systematic differences between countries in the nonresponse behaviour is yet to be analysed (Börsch-Supan and Jürges 2005).

-- FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE--

Descriptives
Figure 1 shows the average number of reported outpatient healthcare visits per
person during the past twelve months for the individuals under study, divided
into GP visits and visits to specialists. According to the figure, the average
amount of physician visits in the SHARE samples ranged from 3 in Sweden to 9.6
in Spain.

--TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE –

Table 2 presents the variables used for the analyses, for the sample as a whole as
well as for each country separately. The dependent variables measure outpatient

7

healthcare utilisation (OPU), defined as the number of physician visits (total
amount, GP visits and visits to specialists). The independent health variables
measure the individual’s health state in four dimensions. Additional, individuallevel, explanatory variables include indicators of life style, marital status, sex, age
and education, among others.5 Organisational variables include physician
density, gate-keeping, out-of-pocket payments, and physician reimbursement,
measured at country level6. A general overview of the healthcare systems of the
ten countries is given in Table 1.

As can be seen in Table 2, there were substantial differences across a number of
important dimensions among individuals in the ten countries under study, which
make it important to control for individual factors, when analysing the impact of
differences in institutions. Regarding health, the proportion reporting bad or very
bad health varied from 10 percent in Switzerland to 34 percent in Spain. These
countries also had the lowest and highest mean number of chronic conditions and
number of symptoms, respectively. As to education, there were wide variations. In
Spain, for instance, the mean number of years of education was 5.3, whereas the
corresponding figure for Germany was 13.5. Labour market participation ranged
from 17 percent in Italy and Austria to 39 percent in Sweden.

Regarding life-style factors, the proportion of smokers varied from 13 percent in
France to 32 percent in Denmark. The proportion of daily or almost daily alcohol
consumption varied from 7 percent in Sweden to 45 percent in Italy. Similarly
large variations existed in physical activity; in Spain only 36 percent engaged in
some weekly sport activity, whereas the corresponding figure in Denmark and
Switzerland was 60.

EMPIRICAL MODEL
In order to determine the relative importance of individual and institutional
factors, we estimated the individual’s healthcare utilisation assuming that it
depends directly on the combination of the individual’s health state and other
individual characteristics, the organisation of healthcare, and the implicit

8

institutional factors embodied in the traditions, norms and culture of each
country. In doing so, we made the simplifying assumption that health might be
regarded as an exogenous variable.7

We assumed that outpatient healthcare utilisation (OPU) follows a Poisson distribution
with each individual having a separate, gamma distributed mean, giving rise to a negative
binomial specification. Thus, for person j residing in country i, we have:
OPU ij ~ Poisson( μij* ) ,

where

μij* = exp( Xij β X + HEALTHij β Health + INSTi β Inst + ν ij ) ,

(1)

and

exp(ν ij ) ~ Gamma(1 / α ,α ) .

The matrix Xij comprises socio-economic and demographic factors, HEALTH ij
consists of variables capturing the individual’s health level and INSTi consists of
variables capturing the institutional setting in which the individual is residing.
Equation (1) was estimated in STATA employing negative binomial regression. First,
estimations were made with no explanatory variables (Model 0). Second, individual
characteristics were included in order to see to what extent country-specific differences in
healthcare utilisation remained or changed in magnitude, first only adding health
variables (Model 1), then also adding socio-economic and demographic variables (Model
2), and finally also adding life-style characteristics (Model 3). Third, institutional variables
were added, first only explicit organisational features (Model 4) and then also region as a
marker for implicit institutional factors (Model 5).
The unexplained between-country variation was assessed as the mean squared error
(MSE) of the averaged country residuals. Thus, the average residual for country i is

ri* =

1 Ni
⋅ ∑ (OPU ij − μˆ ij* ) ,
N i j =1

where N i is the number of respondents in country i, and

μˆ ij* = exp(Xij βˆ X + HEALTHij βˆHealth + INSTi βˆInst )
9

is the predicted number of visits, giving the MSE between countries as

MSE =
where r =

1 10 *
∑ (ri − r ) 2 .
10 i =1

1 10 *
∑ ri is the average of the country residuals. The MSE for Model 0 is thus
10 i =1

a measure of the total differences between countries, while the MSEs for Models 1–5 are
measures of the remaining unexplained differences, when taking account of an increasing
number of individual and institutional characteristics.
The rational behind using (the change in) the mean squared error for the country mean
residuals is the following: If the difference in utilisation between countries is due only to
differences in the distribution of the characteristics, the average residual in each country
should be zero, provided that the predictions are unbiased. If, on the other hand, there
are systematic differences due to some characteristics that are not in the model, the
average residuals will differ between countries. The MSE is a convenient way of
quantifying this difference, since it is the sum of the variance and the square of the bias,
both of which indicate a sense of miss-prediction in this context.
The relative decrease in the MSE as more characteristics are added to the model hence
indicates the model’s increasing ability to explain difference between the countries.
RESULTS
Regression results are presented below. For each of the outpatient care variables (total
number of physician visits, total number of GP visits, total number of specialist visits)
and for each of the six regression models, we present two tables, one showing mean
residuals (Tables 3 – 5), the other estimated coefficients (Tables 6 – 8). Mean square
errors of country mean residuals for each of the three outpatient care variables and for
each of the six regression models are presented in Figure 2 and explained portions in
Figure 3. For each of the six regression models, mean country residuals for all physician
visits are shown in Figure 4, for GP visits in Figure 5, and for specialist visits in Figure 6.

--TABLES 3 - 5 ABOUT HERE –
-- FIGURES 2 – 6 ABOUT HERE –

10

Regressions with no explanatory variables (Model 0)
First, regressions including only a constant term were run, determining the average
number of total physician visits, GP visits, and specialist visits, respectively, in the
material. Individual residuals were calculated, giving the mean residual for each country
as well as bootstrap confidence intervals; see Tables 3 – 5. The mean squared error
(MSE) of these country residuals represents the between-country variation (Figure 2).
As Table 3 and Figure 4 reveal, the differences in total physician visits between countries
were large, with Sweden and Spain as the two opposite extremes. A Swede had, on
average, 3.3 physician visits less than expected, while a Spaniard had 3.3 visits more than
expected.
Regarding GP visits, similar patterns were obtained (Table 4 and Figure 5). The
difference is that Denmark had proportionally more GP visits and Germany less than
expected from the total number of visits. As to specialist visits (Table 5 and Figure 6),
fewer of the differences were statistically significant and only Sweden, Denmark,
Germany, and Spain were significantly different from the average country.
Regressions with individual characteristics as the only explanatory variables (Models 1-3)
Model 1. Next, the regressions were re-estimated, controlling for individual health
variables. It was then possible to determine to what extent differences between countries
were due to differences in health status. The differences in health status explained 51
percent of the between-country variation in number of total physician visits (Table 3), 48
percent of the variation in number of GP visits (Table 4), but only 11 percent of the
variation in number of specialist visits (Table 5). The large number of GP visits in Italy
and Greece could, to some extent, be explained by health status but not the low number
in Sweden (Table 3 and Figure 5).
Model 2. Next, we added socio-economic and demographic characteristics, which
explained an additional 6 percent of the between-country variation in total physician
visits (Table 3), an additional 13 percent of the variation in GP visits (Table 4), and an
additional 18 percent of the variation in specialist visits (Table 5).

11

Model 3. The further addition of life-style characteristics gave only marginal
improvements, 3 percent, 4 percent, and 1 percent, respectively (Tables 3 – 5).
Regressions with both individual and institutional characteristics as explanatory variables (Models 4 and
5)
Model 4. Country-specific organisational characteristics were then added. They explained
an additional 15 percent of the between-country variation in physician visits (Table 3), an
additional 17 percent of the variation in GP visits (Table 4), and an additional 30 percent
of the variation in specialist visits (Table 5).
Model 5. Finally, region was added as a marker for unspecified, “implicit” institutional
differences due to differences in traditions, norms, and culture between northern, central,
and southern Europe. This made it possible to explain 91 percent of the betweencountry variation in all three variables (Tables 3 – 5).
-- TABLES 6 – 8 ABOUT HERE -Impact of individual versus institutional factors on outpatient healthcare utilisation
Tables 6 - 8 show the effects of individual and institutional factors in the
regressions of the number of total physician visits, GP visits, and specialist visits,
respectively. As the models were expanded, the coefficients remained quite stable
- with exceptions, though, for some life-style and institutional characteristics,
when region was added in the last model. Figure 2 shows the mean squared error
of the country mean residuals, decreasing as the models were expanded and more
of the between-country differences were explained. Figure 3 shows the explained
proportion of the MSE as the models were expanded.

Health status. Health had a large impact. As seen in Figure 3, the differences in
health distribution between countries account for 50 percent of the betweencountry differences in physician and GP visits, and 10 percent of the variation in
specalist visits. Being in bad or very bad health, as opposed to being in good or
rather good health, increased the number of physician visits by 49 percent

12

(e

0.40

= 1.49 ). Out of these, two thirds would be GP visits and one third specialist

0.40
1.84
1.84
0.38
1.50
1.50
visits ( e ⋅ e − e = 3.1 extra visits in total, where e ⋅ e − e = 2.1 came

0.40
0.62
0.62
from GP visits and e ⋅ e − e = 1.2 from specialist visits). An increase in the

number of chronic conditions by one was associated with a 20 percent increase in
both GP and specialist visits. An increase by one activity limitation was
associated with an 8 percent increase in number of GP visits and a 5 percent
increase in specialist visits while the percentages were reversed for an increase of
one additional symptom.

Socio-economic and demographic characteristics. When taking the effect of health differences into
account, the socio-economic and demographic differences between countries had a
smaller impact on the between-country differences in physician visits (less than 10
percent), somewhat larger on the GP visits (more than 10 percent), while explaining an
additional 20 percent of the differences in specialist visits. Women had significantly more
physician and GP visits and considerably more specialist visits than men. The increase in
number of visits with age is, however, significantly smaller for women than for men.
Being widowed increased the number of GP visits, especially for women, but decreased
the number of specialist visits for men and increased it for women. The net effect on
total physician visits was a significant increase for widowed women, but not for men.
Education had a significant negative effect on GP visits, but a significant positive effect
on specialist visits. These effects were rather small, however. The effect of education on
the total amount of physician visits was insignificant, suggesting that the effects on GP
and specialist visits cancelled each other out. Being employed decreased the amount of
visits by 15-25 percent, while being born in the country had a small or non-significant
negative effect on the number of visits.
Life style. As to life-style factors, they made a very small contribution towards explaining
the between-country differences, explaining, at most, an additional 5 percent. It can be
noted that both smoking and drinking alcohol daily were associated with a significantly
lower amount of physician visits. Being a former smoker, however, was associated with a
significantly higher number of specialist visits. Physical activity was associated with a
smaller number of GP visits but had very little effect on specialist visits.

13

Organisational features. Differences in organisational features between countries were the
most important factor for the variation in specialist visits, explaining an additional 30
percent of the between-country differences. It also explained 20 percent of the
differences in GP visits and 15 percent of the differences in total physician visits. A
larger physician supply had a large positive effect on the number of both GP and
specialist visits. Access restriction to specialists had a positive effect on the number of
GP visits and a smaller and negative effect on the number of specialist visits. Out-ofpocket payment was associated with fewer visits of both kinds, while salary-based
provider payment decreased the number of GP visits, but not the number of specialist
visits.
Region. Organisational features are highly associated with the traditions, norms and
culture of a country. The region dummies explained another 30 percent of the
differences in specialist visits, less than 10 percent of the GP visits and 15 percent of the
physician visits. Thus, when region was added, only the effect of access restriction
remained unchanged, while the effects of physician supply and out-of-pocket payment
were substantially reduced. The effect of salary-based payment became non-significant
for GP visits but increased for specialist visits. Denmark and Sweden still had a
significantly lower number of visits of all kinds than the other countries, while Greece,
Italy, and Spain had a somewhat lower number of specialist visits.
In sum. Health status was by far the most important individual-level determinant,
explaining half of the between-country variation in GP visits. Factors such as education
and employment status were certainly significant, but they did not contribute much in
explaining country differences in healthcare utilisation. Organisational differences
contributed less than health but somewhat more than other individual characteristics in
explaining country differences in total physician and GP visits. Organisational differences
explained as much of the differences in specialist visits as the individual characteristics
did. All the characteristics together managed to explain nearly all (90 percent) of the
differences between countries.

14

DISCUSSION
The objective of this study was to analyse the relative importance of individual
versus institutional factors in explaining differences in the utilisation of physician
services among the 50+ in Europe. Previous cross-country macro-level
comparisons have in general been concerned with determinants for healthcare
expenditures, while healthcare utilisation for the most part has been handled in
single-country individual-level studies, where the effects of institutional factors
cannot be identified. The exception is the comparative study by Jiménez-Martin
et al. (2002, 2004), using data from the European Community Household Panel.

The recently developed SHARE data offers another and an exceptionally good
basis for comparative analyses of healthcare utilisation. We used the first wave of
the collection of SHARE data for our analyses. The main differences between the
European Community Household Panel and the SHARE survey are (1) that the
SHARE survey was developed especially for the purpose of analysing those 50
years of age and older, and (2) that the SHARE survey contains more elaborate
health-related information. Obviously, it is also the case that the SHARE data
contains more recent information and, hence, reflects recent-date facts and
circumstances not covered by the European Community Household Panel.

According to our results, individual differences in health were the main driver of
between-country variation in physician visits, explaining about 50 percent of the
variation. Our organisational variables, i.e., physician density, co-payment, gatekeeping, and physician reimbursement, explained an additional 15 percent of the
between-country variation. Interestingly, demographic, socio-economic, and
lifestyle factors added only little, about 10 percent, in explaining the country
differences in physician visits.

A somewhat different picture emerged, when GP visits and specialist visits were
analysed separately. While individual differences in health accounted for 51
percent of between-country variation in GP visits, they only accounted for 11
percent of the variation in specialist visits. In the latter case, institutional factors

15

played a greater role, accounting for 30 percent of the between-country variation
in specialist visits. Moreover, socio-economic, demographic, and lifestyle factors
played a more important role here, explaining an additional 19 percent of the
between-country variation.
Our organisational variables showed the expected signs, with higher physician density
being associated with more visits, whereas co-payment, gate-keeping, and salary
reimbursement were associated with less visits. It should be noted that certain
institutional factors are highly associated with certain regions. The lowest physician
density, for instance, was found in Denmark and Sweden, meaning that this variable may
pick up other unobserved characteristics of this region as well. If these unobserved
factors, for instance, traditions, norms and culture were associated with both a low
physician density and a low number of visits, the former variable would be endogenous
and the result should be interpreted with care. For other organisational variables
considered, there seemed to be less of an association with a certain region.

In order to be able to incorporate organisational variables into the empirical
analysis, certain simplifications were necessary. Mixed systems, large variations
and numerous exemptions within a country are all circumstances that aggravate
the possibilities for specifying the effects on utilisation more precisely. This may
also explain why our categorisation differs from that used by Jiménez-Martin et
al. (2002, 2004). Based on Stepan and Sommersguter-Reichmann (2005), we
concluded that there was a gate-keeper function in Austria, while Jiménez-Martin
et al. (2002, 2004) did not identify such a restriction of access to specialist care.
On the other hand, Jiménez-Martin et al. (2002, 2004) identified a gate-keeper
function in the Netherlands, while we did not, based on Schut and van de Ven
(2005). Based on Mossialos et al. (2005), we concluded that the provision of
physician visits in Greece was mainly non-salaried, while Jiménez-Martin et al.
(2002, 2004) reported salary as the major form of payment for physician visits. It
should be observed that in most of the ten countries, hospital specialists are paid
by salary, whereas GPs, primary-care physicians, and specialists in outpatient
care are paid by capitation and/or on a fee-for-service basis (Table 1).
Furthermore, the mix between salaried and non-salaried payments may have
changed between the study years, 1994-1996 for Jiménez-Martin et al. (2002, 2004)

16

and 2004 for the present study, since reforms have been going on in Europe for
quite some time Oliver et al. (2005).

The results obtained in this study pertains to individual healthcare utilisation of
those 50 years of age and older, while the results presented by Jiménez-Martin et
al. (2002, 2004) were obtained using data on a population that was on average
about 40 years of age. The demand for health and health investments differs
between age groups, suggesting that our results are principally different from
those obtained by Jiménez-Martin et al. There are no theoretical reasons,
however, for believing that the effects of the included explanatory variables would
be qualitatively different between age groups, only that the quantitative effects
are. Thus, both studies found (1) that chronic illness was associated with more
GP visits; (2) education with less GP visits; and (3) being employed with less GP
visits (none of the Jiménz-Martin estimates were significant, however,and in one
of the equations, the reverse effect was obtained for women). Age was linearly
associated with more GP visits in this study, while Jiménez-Martin et al. found
that age was associated with less visits, but this association diminished with age.

The comparisons between the studies as regards the results from the specialistvisits regressions yielded the same conclusions as with GP visits, regarding
chronic illness, and being employed, respectively. Further, we found a positive
association between education and specialist visits, as did the results from the
female sample in the Jiménez-Martin study, whereas the male sample showed the
reverse association. While Jiménez-Martin et al. found a diminishing negative
association between age and the number of specialist visits for the female sample
and no significant results for men, this study found a positive association.

The most noteworthy difference between the results above is the difference as
regards the association between age and GP and specialist visits, respectively.
One plausible explanation for these differences is the difference in age
composition of the two samples employed. More specifically, a possible
mechanism that can explain why the utilisation of specialist visits decreases with

17

age in the Jiménez-Martin et al. studies is that specialist visits related to child
bearing were present in their sample but not in ours.

Among the organisational variables, both studies found a positive association
between access restrictions to specialists and GP visits and a negative association
between access restrictions and specialist visits, i.e. results which are in
accordance with expectations. However, whereas we found the expected positive
associations between physician supply and GP- and specialist visits, respectively,
the Jiménez-Martin et al. study obtained a negative association between
physician supply and specialist visits. Finally, there was a negative association
between salary payment and GP visits, which is in accordance with expectations,
and a positive association between salary payment and specialist visits in our
study, opposite to the findings of Jiménez-Martin et al. Other organisational
variables were not comparable between the two studies.

Even though the signs of parameter values were the same for some organisational
variables, there are also some important differences. Overall, the results of this
study seem to be more in accordance with predictions or expectations than those
of Jiménez-Martin et al. study. There might certainly be real explanations due to
differences in health and health-related behaviour, for instance,making GP- and
specialist visits complements for older individuals, and substitutes for the
younger individuals. This is a mere speculation, though, since differences in
results also might be due to differences in definitions or measurement of
variables. This is rather obvious, when one looks at the results regarding the
effect of salary payment. Since specialists as a rule are salaried in all the countries
in our study, the organisational variable salary payment reflects variations in
payment system for the GPs only. It is also a variable where our categorisation
differs from Jiménez-Martin et al.’s.

A few more caveats may be in order. First, even though the SHARE data is
certainly unique in content and scope, many simplifications had to be made in
order to produce a workable survey questionnaire. This fact also had
consequences for this study, the most important one being that the physician visit

18

was treated as a homogeneous service, even though its content, length and
quality may differ both within and across countries. SHARE data certainly
distinguishes between GP visits and specialist visits, but the degree to which a
GP is “specialised” may differ. In the Netherlands, for instance, GPs are
specialised in some common diseases in order to keep the referral rate low (Exter
et al. 2004). Consequently, some of what in most countries would be denoted
‘specialist services’ are in the Dutch case provided by GPs.

The quality of a physician visit appears to depend largely on the organisational
structure (Potter and McKinlay 2005). Patient satisfaction is one element in the
concept of quality. One study (Larsson et al. 2005) found that patients in France
and England were generally more satisfied with healthcare than patients in
Norway and Sweden, possibly because of higher levels of information and the
existence of family physicians, signifying a closer relationship between patient
and practitioner. Higher quality in terms of less prescriptions of drugs, more
health promotion and better outcomes has been found to be positively related to
the length of the consultation (Freeman et al. 2002; Wilson and Childs 2002). A
study on consultation length in six European countries showed that longer visits
tended to include more information to the patient and a higher degree of
psychosocial talk (Deveugele et al. 2004).

The average length of a physician visit differs widely across countries. While
Germany and Spain have quite short visits of around seven to eight minutes, visits
in Switzerland tend to last longer than fifteen minutes. (Deveugele et al. 2002)
Interestingly, the number of visits and the average consultation length appear to
match. Spain, which had most visits per person after controlling for individual
characteristics, has, as already mentioned, very short visits, while visits in
Sweden, which had the lowest number of visits per person, are of at least the
double length (Andersson and Mattsson 1989).

19

In the face of former research on healthcare utilisation, the absence of at least two
independent variables in our estimations requires justification. Although income
has been shown to affect healthcare utilisation (Kephart et al. 1998; Rohrer and
Culica 1999; van Doorslaer et al. 2000), it was not included here. In the survey,
only gross income was asked for. Since the tax and welfare systems of the
participating countries vary to a great extent, as is evident from table 9, it was not
possible to calculate net income in the present context. Income is, however, to
some extent captured in the variables indicating education and employment
status. Nor was the patient’s time and travel costs when visiting a physician
included, even though these appear to affect healthcare utilisation (Chiappori et
al. 1998; Riphahn et al. 2003). In SHARE, no satisfactory indicator of these costs
was available. The degree of urbanisation, as a possible indicator8, was reported
in SHARE but has shown little effect on healthcare utilisation (van Doorslaer et
al. 2004a). Moreover, the frequency of, for instance, physician home visits, which
give rise to particularly low time and travel costs and which differ widely across
countries, depend more on institutional factors.9

The above mentioned limitations and special circumstances are caveats that need
to be considered, while interpreting the estimation results. However, the
shortcomings should be redeemed by the high quality of the data in general, one
of its strong points being the numerous dimensions of health, measured
objectively as well as subjectively. This was the more important, since the
variables measuring health proved to be the most determining for utilisation
among the individual factors.

The main finding of this paper was that individual differences in health
accounted for the major part of the between-country variation in physician visits.
Organisational factors played a less important role, accounting for about 15
percent of the variation. This suggests that changes in the organisational
framework might affect utilisation patterns, but only to a limited extent. However,
the complexity of healthcare systems and the heterogeneous nature of physician
visits call for deeper analysis before tangible policy recommendations to increase
efficiency and quality of healthcare can be produced.

20

NOTES

21

REFERENCES

Andersson, SO and B Mattsson (1989), "Length of consultations in general practice in
Sweden: views of doctors and patients.," Family Practice, 6, 130-34.

Anell, A. (2005), "Swedish healthcare under pressure," Health Economics, 14, 237-54.

Bago d’Uva, T. (2005). "Latent class models for utilisation of primary care: evidence from
a British panel," Health Economics, 14, 873-892.

Becker, Gary (1964), Human Capital. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Bellanger, M. M. and P. R. Mossé (2005), "The search for the Holy Grail: combining
decentralised planning and contracting mechanisms in the French health care system.,"
Health Economics, 14, 119-32.

Bergeron, R., A. Laberge, and L. Vezina (1999), "Which physicians make home visits and
why? A survey.," Canadian Medical Association Journal, 161 (4), 369-74.

Bolin, K., B. Lindgren, and P. Lundborg (2008), "Informal and formal care among singleliving elderly in Europe", Health Economics, 17 (3), 393-410.

Bolin, K., B. Lindgren, and P. Lundborg (2008), " Your next of kin or your own career?
Caring and working among the 50+ of Europe", Journal of Health Economics. (in press).
Available on Publisher's Website.

Börsch-Supan, A., A. Brugiavini, H. Jürges, J. Mackenbach, J. Siegrist, and G. Weber
Eds. (2005), Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe. First results from the Survey of

22

Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe. Mannheim: Research Institute for the
Economics of Aging..

Börsch-Supan, A. and H. Jürges Eds. (2005), The Survey of Health, Ageing and
Retirement in Europe - Methodology. Mannheim: MEA.

Chiappori, P-A., F. Durand, and P-Y. Geoffard (1998), "Moral hazard and the demand
for physician services: first lessons from a French natural experiment.," European
Economic Review, 42, 499-511.

Daatland, S.O. and K. Herlofson (2003), “Lost solidarity“ or “changed solidarity“: a
comparative European view of normative family solidarity, Ageing and Society 23, 537560.

Deveugele, M, A Derese, D De Bacquer, A van den Brink-Muinen, and J De Maeseneer
(2004), "Consultation in general practice: a standard operating procedure?," Patient
Education and Counseling, 54 (2), 227-33.

Deveugele, M, A Derese, A van den Brink-Muinen, J Bensing, and J De Maeseneer
(2002), "Consultation length in general practice: cross sectional study in six European
countries.," British Medical Journal, 325, 472.

Exter, A., H. Hermans, M. Dosljak, and R. Busse (2004), Health care systems in
transition: Netherlands. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe on behalf of the
European Observatory on Health systems and Policies.

France, G., F. Taroni, and A. Donatini (2005), "The Italian health-care system.," Health
Economics, 14, 187-202.

23

Freeman, G.K., J.P. Horder, J.G.R. Howie, A.P. Hungin, A.P. Hill, N.C. Shah, and A.
Wilson (2002), "Evolving general practice consultation in Britain: issues of length and
context.," British Medical Journal, 324, 880-82.

Freeman, R. (2000), The Politics of Health in Europe. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.

Gerdtham, U-G. and B. Jönsson (2000), "International comparisons of health
expenditure". In Culyer, A.J. and J.P Newhouse (eds), Handbook of Health Economics.
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 11-54.

Gerdtham, U-G., B. Jönsson, M. MacFarlan, and H. Oxley (1998), "The determinants of
health expenditure in the OECD countries.," in Health, The Medical Profession, and
Regulation., P. Zweifel, Ed. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Gerdtham, U-G., J. Sögaard, F. Andersson, and B. Jönsson (1992a), "Econometric
analysis of health care expenditures: a cross-section study of the OECD countries.,"
Journal of Health Economics, 11, 63-84.

Grossman, M. (1972a), The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical
Investigation. New York: Columbia University Press for the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

---- (1972b), "On the concept of health capital and the demand for health.," Journal of
Political Economy, 80, 223-55.

Jiménez-Martin S, Labeaga JM, Martínez-Granado M. (2002). Latent class versus twopart models in the demand for physician services across the European Union. Health
Economics 11, 301-321.

24

Jiménez-Martin S, Labeaga JM, Martínez-Granado M. (2004). An empirical analysis of
the demand for physician services across the European Union. European Journal of
Health Economics 5, 150-165.

Kephart, G., V. S. Thomas, and D. R. MacLean (1998), "Socioeconomic differences in
the use of physician services in Nova Scotia.," American Journal of Public Health, 88,
800-04.

Kohli, M., H. Künemund, J. Lüdicke (2005), "Family structure, proximity and contact",
In Börsch- Supan A., A. Brugiviani, H. Jürges, J. Mackenbach, J. Siegrist, and G. Weber
(eds) Health, Ageing, and Retirement in Europe. First results from the Survey of Health,
Ageing and Retirement in Europe. Mannheim: Research Institute for the Economics of
Aging.

Lancaster, Kelvin J. (1966), "A new approach to consumer theory," The Journal of
Political Economy, 74 (2), 132-57.

Larsson, Bodil Wilde, Gerry Larsson, Marie Wickman Chantereau, and Karin Stael von
Holstein (2005), "International comparisons of patients' views on quality of care.,"
International Journal of Health Care Quality Assurance, 18 (1), 62-73.

Leu, R. E. (1986), "The public-private mix and international health care costs.," in Public
and Private Health Services, A. J. Culyer and B. Jönsson, Eds. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Lopez-Casanovas, G., J. Costa-Font, and I. Planas (2005), "Diversity and regional
inequalities in the Spanish 'system of health care services'." Health Economics, 14, 22135.

Mossialos, E., S. Allin, and K. Davaki (2005), "Analysing the Greek health system: a tale
of fragmentation and inertia.," Health Economics, 14, 151-68.

25

OECD (2004), "OECD Health Data 2004. A comparative analysis of 30 countries.,"
OECD Health Data.

---- (2003), "OECD Health Data: Statistics and indicators for 30 countries.," See the web
page: http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/59/47/35529872.xls. (29.11.2005).

Potter, S. J. and J. B. McKinlay (2005), "From a relationship to encounter: an
examination of longitudinal and lateral dimensions in the doctor-patient relationship.,"
Social Science and Medicine, 61 (2), 465-79.

Reher, DS. (1998), "Family ties in western Europe: persistent contrasts", Population and
Development Review, 24, 203-234.

Riphahn, R. T., A. Wamback, and A. Million (2003), "Incentive effects in the demand for
health care: a bivariate panel count data estimation.," Journal of Applied Econometrics,
18, 387-405.

Rohrer, J. E. and D. V. Culica (1999), "Identifying high-users of medical care in a
farming-dependant county.," Health Care Management Review, 24, 28-34.

SHO (2003), "Panorama Gesundheit - die Schweiz im europäischen Vergleich.," Swiss
Health Observatory, WHO.

Stepan, A. and M. Sommersguter-Reichmann (2005), "Monitoring political decisionmaking and its impact in Austria.," Health Economics, 14, 7-23.

26

van Doorslaer, E., C. Masseria, and the OECD health Equity Research Group Members
(2004a), "Income-related inequality in the use of medical care in 21 OECD countries.," in
OECD Health Working Papers No. 14.

van Doorslaer, E., A. Wagstaff, H. van der Burg, T. Christiansen, D. De Graeve, I.
Duchesne, U-G. Gerdtham, M. Gerfin, J. Geurts, U. Hakkinen, J. John, J. Klavus, R. E.
Leu, B. Nolan, O. O'Donnell, C. Propper, F. Puffer, M. Schellhorn, G. Sundberg, and O.
Winkelhake (2000), "Equity in the delivery of health care in Europe and the US.," Journal
of Health Economics, 19, 553-83.

van Doorslaer, E., Koolman, X., Jones, A. (2004b). Explaining income-related
inequalities in doctor utilisation in Europe. Health Economics, 13, 629-647.
van Doorslaer, E., Koolman, X., Puffer, F. Equity in the Use of Physician Visits in
OECD Countries: has equal treatment for equal need been achieved?. Measuring Up:
Improving Health Systems Performance in OECD Countries. OECD, Paris, 2002, pp.
25-248.

Wilson, A and S Childs (2002), "The relationship between consultation length, process
and outcomes in general practice: a systematic review.," British Journal of General
Practice, 52 (485), 1012-20.

Wörz, M. and R. Busse (2005), "Analysing the impact of health care system change in the
EU member states - Germany.," Health Economics, 14, 133-49.

Zweifel, P. and F. Breyer (1997), Health Economics. New York: Oxford University
Press.
*

Corresponding author. Address for correspondence: Lund University Centre for

Health Economics (LUCHE), P.O. Box 705, SE-220 07 Lund, Sweden. Tel: +46
46 222 06 56. Fax: +46 46 222 06 51. E-mail: Kristian.Bolin@nek.lu.se;
Kristian.Bolin@luche.lu.se. This paper used data from the early release 1 of

27

SHARE 2004. This release is preliminary and may contain errors that will be
corrected in later releases. The SHARE data collection was preliminary funded by
the European Commission through the 5th framework programme (project QLK6CT-2001-00360 in the thematic programme Quality of Life programme area).
Additional funding came from the US National Institute on Aging (U01 AG0974013S2, P01 AG005842, P01 AG08291, P30 AG12815, Y1-AG- 4553-01 and OGHA 04064). Data collection in Austria (through the Austrian Science Foundation, FWF),
Belgium (through the Belgian Science Policy Administration) and Switzerland
(through BBW/OFES/UFES) was nationally funded. Additional funding for data
collection in Sweden was granted by the Swedish Council for Working Life and
Social Research, the Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation, and the Swedish
National Board of Social Insurance. The research reported in this paper was
supported by a grant from the Swedish Council for Working Life and Social
Research, which is gratefully acknowledged. We are indebted to Sören Höjgård
for critical remarks and helpful comments on previous drafts and to Rose-Marie
Lindkvist for diligent research assistance.
1

An additional number of papers use the same data to study the demand for physician
visits in Europe, but do not explicitly consider the role of institutional factors (Bago
d’Uva 2006); van Doorslaer et al. 2002; van Doorslaer et al. 2004b).
2
See the web page: http://www.share-project.org/ , and the next section
regarding data.
3

The north-south gradient in traditions, norms and culture has been emphasized by
several authors, for instance, Reher (1998), Freeman (2000), Daatland and Herlofson
(2003), Kohli et al. (2005), and Bolin et al. (2008a,b).

4

SHARE follows the design of the US Health and Retirement Study (HRS, web

page: http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/) and the English Longitudinal Study of
Ageing (ELSA, web page: http://www.ifs.org.uk/elsa/). The SHARE data set is
introduced in Börsch-Supan, Brugiavini et al (2005). Methodological details can
be found in Börsch-Supan and Jürges (2005).

5

We note that the lifestyle variables are potentially endogenous. Their coefficients should
therefore be interpreted with some caution.

28

6 Since specialists as a rule are salaried in all the countries in our study (Table 1), the
organisational variable salary payment, measured at country level, here reflects variations in
payment system for the GPs only.

7

According to neoclassical theory before the beginning of the 1960s, the

individual derives utility directly from market goods and services. Lancaster
(1966), in his new approach to consumer theory, asserted that consumers utilise
market goods and services in a process of production and consumption, and that
the outcomes of such processes (commodities) are the fundamental objects of
choice. It follows from Lancaster’s approach that the demand for market goods
and services is derived from (1) the individual’s demand for commodities
(preferences), and (2) the individual’s capability of transforming market goods
and services into commodities (technology). Building on human capital theory
(Becker 1964), and Lancaster’s insights Grossman (1972a, b) emphasised that
health is a durable capital stock and that it differs from, for instance, educational
capital in that its main influence is on the individual’s time-budget constraint –
better health means more time available that can be freely allocated to various
purposes by the individual. Grossman showed that this approach has important
implications for understanding individual health-related behaviour. For our
purposes, however, it suffices to assume that health is exogenously given..
8

People living in urban areas would generally have higher access to physicians

and consequently lower time and travel costs compared to people living in rural
areas.
9

Private practicing physicians tend to have a much higher level of physician

home visits compared to publicly employed physicians (Bergeron et al. 1999).
Thus, in countries where most physicians are publicly employed, the amount of
home visits ought to be comparatively lower.
6

Sources: AT: (Stepan and Sommersguter-Reichmann 2005) CH: (SHO 2003)

DE: (Wörz and Busse 2005) DK: ES: (Lopez-Casanovas et al. 2005) FR:
(Bellanger and Mossé 2005) GR: (Mossialos et al. 2005) IT: (France et al. 2005)
NL: (Exter et al. 2004) SE: (Anell 2005) Figures on physician supply: (OECD
2003).

29

Table 1. Overview of the organisational structure of outpatient healthcare in ten European countries6
Healthcare
System
AT Social insurance
decentralized
CH Privately
financed
decentralized
DE Social insurance
DK Tax financed
decentralized
ES
FR

Tax financed
decentralized

Patient contributions
Indirect
Compulsory on
income
Compulsory, same
level for all

Direct
Only to non-contracted
physicians: 20 %
230 CHF + 10 %, capped at 600
CHF per year

Provider payment
Flat rate per basic treatment + FFS
Hospital specialists: salary
FFS.
Hospital specialists: salary

Physician
supply/1000
3.4 (2003)
3.6 (2003)

Physician
distribution
Regulated, also
in number
Regulation in
number

Access restrictions
to specialist care.
Yes
No

Compulsory on
income under a
certain level
Tax on income and
property

€10 per quarter/at least 2 % of
gross income per year

Limited 2-step FFS, set ex post

3.4 (2004)

Regulated, also
in number

No

No

Capitation (1/3) + FFS (2/3).
Hospital specialists: salary

2.8 (2003)

No regulation

Yes

Tax: income,
consumption

No

Salary + variable part
Some services: capitation

3.2 (2003)

No regulation

Yes

€1 per service + 30 %, 86 %
have insurance for the 30 %
First contact is free.
(Informal payments?)
Cap of €35 per service category
(many exemptions)
No

I: fixed FFS. II: FFS, unfixed, 15/38 % of the cost
per GP/specialist visit
Capitation, FFS, and informal payments .
Hospital specialists: Salary
Unadjusted capitation, salary

3.4 (2003)

Around €11 per visit, capped at
€100 per year

Social insurance Compulsory on
income
GR Tax financed
Compulsory for
employed
IT Tax financed
Taxes; income,
decentralized
business, VAT
NL Social insurance Tax rate + flat rate
decentralized
(compulsory under a
certain income level)
SE Tax financed
Tax on income
decentralized

Yes
(weak)
No

Capitation or FFS
Hospital specialists: Salary

Regulated in
number only
4.4 (2003) (98 % No regulation
specialists)
4.1 (2003)
Regulated, also
in number
3.1 (2003)
Regulated in
number

Salary

3.3 (2003)

No

30

Regulated in
number

Yes
(weak)
No

Table 2: Descriptive statistics
Variables

Variable description

All

AT

CH

DE

DK

ES

FR

GR

IT

NL

SE

Number of persons

19072

1882

892

2898

1505

1755

1421

1903

2311

2611

1894

Endogenous
OPU

timesdoctor

Number of visits to a physician past 12 months (dentist visits and
hospital stays excluded, but emergency room or outpatient clinic
visits included)

6.35

6.51

4.67

7.70

4.34

9.63

7.36

5.54

8.78

4.56

3.00

timesGP

Number of GP visits past 12 months

4.49

4.81

3.14

4.97

3.28

7.48

5.49

3.71

6.85

2.73

1.80

timesspec

Number of specialist visits past 12 months

1.86

1.70

1.53

2.73

1.06

2.14

1.87

1.84

1.93

1.83

1.20

chronic

Number of chronic conditions out of 14 listed

1.51

1.27

1.08

1.46

1.60

1.92

1.63

1.46

1.71

1.29

1.57

badhealth

Bad or very bad self-reported health

22%

20%

10%

27%

19%

34%

24%

21%

29%

17%

13%
1.30

Exogenous
Health status

Marital status

Other socio-economic
characteristics

Life style

Organisational features

Region

mobility

Number of activity limitations out of 10 listed

1.48

1.55

0.88

1.41

1.22

2.23

1.49

1.72

1.62

1.18

symptoms

Number of symptoms out of 11 listed

1.48

1.34

1.01

1.50

1.49

2.02

1.61

1.36

1.60

1.18

1.61

marriedsep

Married but living separately

1.2%

2.1%

2.2%

1.0%

1.6%

1.7%

1.3%

1.1%

0.6%

0.8%

0.6%
4.3%

nevermarried

Never married

widow

Widow

5.9%

8.8%

5.5%

5.2%

6.6%

7.1%

7.0%

4.6%

6.4%

4.1%

15.4%

22.1%

15.2%

12.4%

17.5%

17.1%

16.8%

23.6%

13.8%

10.6%

divorced

Divorced

9.8%

6.0%

8.7%

8.9%

6.1%

13.1%

1.6%

8.7%

3.8%

1.6%

4.3%

7.7%

age

Age in years

64.6

64.9

65.0

64.0

64.4

66.5

65.0

64.6

64.4

63.4

65.2

female

Female

54.6%

57.5%

53.4%

53.2%

53.8%

58.3%

55.1%

54.4%

54.9%

52.8%

53.1%

countrybirthyes

Born in interview country

92.2%

91.0%

84.2%

81.6%

96.5%

97.9%

86.8%

97.7%

98.6%

94.1%

93.0%

yedu

Total years of education

10.0

11.3

11.6

13.5

12.6

5.3

7.9

8.5

7.0

11.1

10.3

employed

Employed

26.7%

16.8%

37.0%

28.9%

35.9%

18.2%

25.3%

25.6%

17.3%

29.0%

38.9%

weeksports
weekactivity

Participating in weekly sports activities
Engaged in weekly activities that require a low or moderate level of
energy, such as gardening, cleaning the car, or doing a walk

50.2%
83.2%

42.5%
79.1%

59.8%
86.9%

56.9%
87.3%

60.1%
88.4%

35.6%
79.6%

42.1%
79.0%

52.8%
83.1%

40.6%
71.6%

57.6%
87.1%

54.3%
90.4%

smokestill

A smoker

19.9%

18.3%

18.8%

17.4%

31.9%

15.7%

13.1%

24.5%

18.0%

23.6%

17.8%

formersmoker

A former smoker

27.6%

18.0%

25.0%

26.7%

33.0%

21.1%

26.1%

18.9%

25.4%

38.8%

38.6%

alcodaily

Daily or almost daily alcohol consumption

26.0%

17.3%

27.4%

19.2%

31.4%

27.0%

37.4%

13.8%

44.7%

35.2%

7.4%

physsup

Physician supply/1000

3.4

3.6

3.4

2.8

3.2

3.4

4.4

4.1

3.1

3.3

accspec

Access restriction to specialists

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

No

No

outofpocket

Out-of-pocket payment

No

Yes

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

Yes

salary

Salary based provider payment

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

Yes

North

Denmark, Sweden

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

South

Greece, Italy, Spain

0

0

0

0

1

0

1

1

0

0

Central

Austria, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland

1

1

1

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

31

Table 3: Country mean residuals after regression on the total number of physicians visits
Austria (AT)
Switzerland (CH)
Germany (DE)
Denmark (DK)
Spain (ES)
France (FR)
Greece (GR)
Italy (IT)
the Netherlands
(NL)
Sweden (SE)
MSE
Explained MSE

Model 0: no covars
Mean
95% CI
0.15 (-0.26 0.64)
-1.67 (-2.13 -1.17)*
1.36
(0.98 1.78)*
-2.01 (-2.40 -1.62)*
3.26
(2.62 3.86)*
1.01
(0.62 1.42)*
-0.80 (-1.15 -0.45)*
2.47
(1.96 3.04)*
-1.79
-3.34
4.13
0%

(-2.07 -1.48)*
(-3.54 -3.11)*

Model 1: health
Mean
95% CI
0.52
(0.14 0.94)*
-0.30 (-0.74 0.19)
1.12
(0.75 1.50)*
-2.06 (-2.45 -1.62)*
0.85
(0.23 1.47)*
0.49
(0.10 0.90)*
-1.03 (-1.34 -0.69)*
1.39
(0.89 1.89)*
-1.18
-3.21
2.03
51%

(-1.46 -0.88)*
(-3.47 -2.94)*

Model 2: health+social
Mean
95% CI
0.42
(0.02 0.86)*
-0.20 (-0.65 0.28)
1.23
(0.87 1.57)*
-1.79 (-2.17 -1.41)*
0.84
(0.22 1.50)*
0.45
(0.04 0.87)*
-1.07 (-1.38 -0.75)
1.23
(0.73 1.76)*
-1.11
-2.98

(-1.38 -0.81)*
(-3.24 -2.70)*

1.77
57%

Model 3: individual
Mean
95% CI
0.26 (-0.15 0.69)
-0.17 (-0.62 0.32)
1.18
(0.81 1.53)*
-1.63 (-2.00 -1.21)*
0.91
(0.33 1.57)*
0.33 (-0.07 0.77)
-1.00 (-1.33 -0.69)*
1.09
(0.61 1.59)*
-1.04
-2.91
1.59
61%

95% Bootstrap confidence intervals; * significant at 5%; MSE = Mean Squared Error between countries

32

(-1.31 -0.76)*
(-3.16 -2.65)*

Model 4: ind+institutional
Mean
95% CI
-1.31 (-1.72 -0.88)*
0.85
(0.39 1.33)*
1.14
(0.81 1.50)*
-1.72 (-2.11 -1.33)*
0.49 (-0.09 1.14)
1.01
(0.61 1.39)*
-1.33 (-1.65 -0.99)*
-0.15 (-0.61 0.34)
-0.41
-0.82
1.01
76%

(-0.69 -0.11)*
(-1.04 -0.59)*

Mean
-1.23
0.06
1.04
0.15
-0.79
-0.42
-0.64
0.12

Model 5: all
95% CI
(-1.65 -0.79)*
(-0.40 0.54)
(0.71 1.41)*
(-0.22 0.53)
(-1.43 -0.16)*
(-0.82 0.01)
(-0.96 -0.34)*
(-0.38 0.58)

-0.90
-0.26

(-1.17 -0.62)*
(-0.47 -0.05)*

0.39
91%

Table 4: Country mean residuals after regression on the number of GP visits
Austria (AT)
Switzerland (CH)
Germany (DE)
Denmark (DK)
Spain (ES)
France (FR)
Greece (GR)
Italy (IT)
the Netherlands
(NL)
Sweden (SE)

Model 0: no covars
0.31 (-0.02 0.63)
-1.34 (-1.68 -1.00)*
0.49
(0.22 0.78)*
-1.21 (-1.48 -0.94)*
2.98
(2.48 3.52)*
1.01
(0.74 1.34)*
-0.78 (-1.05 -0.49)*
2.39
(1.94 2.86)*

Model 1: health
0.57
(0.27 0.87)*
-0.36 (-0.68 -0.02)*
0.33
(0.08 0.61)*
-1.23 (-1.50 -0.96)*
1.24
(0.73 1.81)*
0.64
(0.35 0.94)*
-0.95 (-1.23 -0.66)*
1.61
(1.20 2.07)*

Model 2: health+social
0.63
(0.34 0.94)*
-0.20 (-0.52 0.15)
0.80
(0.56 1.07)*
-0.84 (-1.09 -0.55)*
0.73
(0.22 1.31)*
0.39
(0.11 0.69)*
-1.20 (-1.49 -0.89)*
1.25
(0.85 1.68)*

Model 3: individual
0.50
(0.19 0.82)*
-0.17 (-0.49 0.18)
0.78
(0.53 1.06)*
-0.69 (-0.94 -0.43)*
0.74
(0.21 1.27)*
0.28 (-0.02 0.59)
-1.16 (-1.45 -0.88)*
1.11
(0.68 1.59)*

-1.75
-2.68

-1.32
-2.58

-1.13
-2.34

-1.06
-2.26

(-1.92 -1.57)*
(-2.82 -2.55)*

(-1.49 -1.15)*
(-2.76 -2.41)*

(-1.29 -0.97)*
(-2.51 -2.15)*

MSE
3.01
1.55
1.19
Explained MSE
0%
48%
61%
95% Bootstrap confidence intervals; * significant at 5%; MSE = Mean Squared Error between countries

33

1.04
65%

(-1.21 -0.88)*
(-2.42 -2.08)*

Model 4: ind+institutional
-1.02 (-1.32 -0.69)*
0.71
(0.39 1.02)*
0.91
(0.65 1.17)*
-1.05 (-1.32 -0.81)*
0.39 (-0.13 0.93)
0.67
(0.39 0.98)*
-1.00 (-1.27 -0.71)*
-0.12 (-0.55 0.29)
-0.43
-0.54
0.53
82%

(-0.58 -0.26)*
(-0.66 -0.40)*

-0.97
0.29
0.86
0.17
-0.54
-0.26
-0.56
0.10

Model 5: all
(-1.28 -0.64)*
(-0.03 0.61)
(0.59 1.13)*
(-0.08 0.44)
(-1.10 0.02)
(-0.55 0.02)
(-0.85 -0.27)*
(-0.34 0.52)

-0.69
-0.23

(-0.85 -0.53)*
(-0.35 -0.09)*

0.27
91%

Table 5: Country mean residuals after regression on the number of specialist visits
Austria (AT)
Switzerland (CH)
Germany (DE)
Denmark (DK)
Spain (ES)
France (FR)
Greece (GR)
Italy (IT)
the Netherlands
(NL)
Sweden (SE)
MSE
Explained MSE

Model 0: no covars
-0.17 (-0.40 0.10)
-0.33 (-0.65 0.01)
0.87
(0.65 1.09)*
-0.80 (-1.07 -0.49)*
0.28
(0.04 0.53)*
0.01 (-0.23 0.25)
-0.03 (-0.21 0.17)
0.08 (-0.14 0.30)

Model 1: health
-0.05 (-0.28 0.20)
0.06 (-0.23 0.43)
0.80
(0.59 1.02)*
-0.83 (-1.09 -0.55)*
-0.38 (-0.64 -0.11)*
-0.14 (-0.37 0.16)
-0.07 (-0.27 0.14)
-0.22 (-0.42 0.00)

Model 2: health+social
-0.18 (-0.42 0.08)
0.03 (-0.27 0.37)
0.40
(0.20 0.64)*
-0.99 (-1.24 -0.70)*
0.05 (-0.18 0.32)
0.02 (-0.22 0.27)
0.10 (-0.08 0.29)
-0.04 (-0.27 0.17)

Model 3: individual
-0.21 (-0.44 0.07)
0.04 (-0.25 0.38)
0.39
(0.17 0.61)*
-0.94 (-1.20 -0.65)*
0.07 (-0.16 0.32)
0.03 (-0.20 0.30)
0.09 (-0.08 0.28)
-0.02 (-0.23 0.20)

-0.03
-0.66

0.15
-0.62

0.03
-0.61

0.03
-0.66

0.20
0%

(-0.24 0.20)
(-0.81 -0.50)*

0.18
11%

(-0.07 0.38)
(-0.78 -0.44)*

(-0.19 0.26)
(-0.78 -0.44)*

0.14
29%

0.14
30%

95% Bootstrap confidence intervals; * significant at 5%; MSE = Mean Squared Error between countries

34

(-0.18 0.27)
(-0.83 -0.50)*

Model 4: ind+institutional
-0.26 (-0.49 -0.01)*
0.17 (-0.11 0.53)
0.11 (-0.11 0.34)
-0.61 (-0.87 -0.32)*
0.10 (-0.13 0.35)
0.42
(0.19 0.68)*
-0.28 (-0.46 -0.09)*
-0.05 (-0.26 0.18)
0.00
-0.34
0.08
60%

(-0.20 0.23)
(-0.50 -0.16)*

Model 5: all
-0.33 (-0.56 -0.06)*
-0.23 (-0.52 0.12)
0.03 (-0.17 0.26)
0.10 (-0.15 0.39)
-0.27 (-0.50 0.01)
-0.08 (-0.32 0.16)
-0.03 (-0.21 0.16)
0.04 (-0.15 0.24)
-0.20
-0.11
0.02
91%

(-0.42 0.06)
(-0.27 0.05)

Table 6: Regressions on the total number of physician visits
Model 0: no covars
Health

Social

Model 1: health

Model 2: health+social

0.20)**

0.18

(0.16

0.19)**

0.18

(0.16

0.19)**

0.18

(0.17

0.19)**

0.19

(0.17

0.20)**

badhealth

0.47

(0.43

0.51)**

0.45

(0.41

0.49)**

0.43

(0.39

0.47)**

0.40

(0.36

0.44)**

0.40

(0.36

0.44)**

mobility

0.07

(0.06

0.08)**

0.07

(0.06

0.08)**

0.06

(0.05

0.07)**

0.05

(0.04

0.06)**

0.05

(0.04

0.06)**

symptoms

0.06

(0.05

0.07)**

0.06

(0.05

0.07)**

0.06

(0.05

0.07)**

0.07

(0.05

0.08)**

0.07

(0.06

0.08)**

0.03

(0.01

0.05)**

0.03

(0.01

0.05)**

0.03

(0.01

0.05)**

0.04

(0.02

0.06)**

agesquare

0.00

(-0.00

-0.00)**

0.00

(-0.00

-0.00)**

0.00

(-0.00

-0.00)*

0.00

(-0.00

-0.00)**

female

1.04

(0.83

1.26)**

1.05

(0.84

1.27)**

1.02

(0.80

1.23)**

1.00

(0.79

1.21)**

female*age

-0.02

(-0.02

-0.01)**

-0.02

(-0.02

-0.01)**

-0.02

(-0.02

-0.01)**

-0.02

(-0.02

-0.01)**

0.20

(0.13

0.27)**

0.18

(0.11

0.25)**

age

ns

ns

0.16

(0.09

0.24)**

0.17

(0.09

0.24)**

0.07

(-0.01

0.15)

0.08

(0.01

0.16)*
0.16)*

female*married

0.08

(0.02

0.15)*

0.06

(-0.00

0.13)

0.08

(0.00

0.16)*

0.08

(0.00

female*widow

0.21

(0.14

0.29)**

0.20

(0.13

0.28)**

0.17

(0.08

0.26)**

0.18

(0.09

0.27)**

employed

-0.27

(-0.31

-0.22)**

-0.27

(-0.31

-0.22)**

-0.19

(-0.24

-0.15)**

-0.18

(-0.23

-0.14)**

countrybirthyes

-0.06

(-0.11

-0.00)*

-0.05

(-0.11

0.00)

-0.10

(-0.16

-0.05)**

-0.06

(-0.12

-0.01)*

0.00

(-0.01

0.00)

0.01

(0.01

0.01)**
0.09)*

yedu

ns

ns

formersmoker

-0.04

(-0.07

0.00)

0.05

(0.01

smokestill

-0.18

(-0.22

-0.14)**

-0.16

(-0.20

-0.12)**

-0.10

(-0.15

-0.06)**

weekactivity

-0.14

(-0.19 -0.10)**

-0.10

(-0.15

-0.06)**

-0.09

(-0.14

-0.05)**

-0.09

(-0.12 -0.05)**

weeksports

ns

-0.07

(-0.11

-0.04)**

-0.05

(-0.09

-0.02)**

-0.06

(-0.09

-0.02)**

-0.10

(-0.13

-0.06)**

physician supply/1000

0.39

(0.34

0.44)**

0.06

(-0.00

0.12)

access restriction to specialists

0.24

(0.21

0.27)**

0.24

(0.21

outofpocket

-0.33

(-0.37

-0.29)**

-0.07

(-0.12

-0.02)**

salary based

-0.09

(-0.14

-0.05)**

0.04

(-0.01

0.08)

-0.59

(-0.65

-0.53)**

-0.42)**

-0.49

(-1.18

0.20)

alcodaily

Region

Model 5: all

(0.18

nevermarried

Institution

Model 4: ind+institutional

0.19

divorced

Lifestyle

Model 3: individual

chronic

ns

North=Denmark, Sweden
Constant

1.85

(1.83

1.86)**

lnalpha

0.23

(0.21

alpha

1.26

(1.24

Pseudo R2

0%

0.27)**

1.10

(1.08

1.13)**

0.03

(-0.64

0.71)

0.36

(-0.31

1.04)

-1.10

(-1.79

0.26)

-0.08

(-0.10

-0.05)

-0.10

(-0.12

-0.08)

-0.11

(-0.14

-0.09)

-0.14

(-0.17

-0.12)

-0.17

(-0.20

-0.14)

1.29)

0.93

(0.90

0.95)

0.90

(0.88

0.93)

0.90

(0.87

0.92)

0.87

(0.84

0.89)

0.84

(0.82

0.87)

4.43%

4.78%

4.92%

5.38%

95% Confidence intervals; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; Variables not significant in any model: marriedsep, widow, female*agesquare, female*divorced, South=Spain, Italy, Greece

35

5.76%

Table 7: Regressions on the number of GP visits
Model 0: no covars
Health

Social

Model 1: health

Intitutional

Region

Model 3: individual

Model 4: ind+institutional

Model 5: all

0.19

(0.18 0.21)**

0.17

(0.16 0.18)**

0.17

(0.16 0.19)**

0.17

(0.16 0.19)**

0.18

(0.17 0.19)**

Badhealth

0.45

(0.41 0.50)**

0.42

(0.38 0.47)**

0.40

(0.36 0.44)**

0.37

(0.33 0.42)**

0.38

(0.33 0.42)**

Mobility

0.08

(0.07 0.09)**

0.06

(0.05 0.07)**

0.05

(0.04 0.06)**

0.05

(0.04 0.06)**

0.05

(0.04 0.06)**

Symptoms

0.05

(0.04 0.07)**

0.05

(0.04 0.07)**

0.05

(0.04 0.07)**

0.06

(0.05 0.07)**

0.06

(0.05 0.08)**

Age

0.04

(0.02 0.06)**

0.04

(0.02 0.06)**

0.04

(0.02 0.06)**

0.04

(0.02 0.06)**

Agesquare

0.00

(-0.00 -0.00)**

0.00

(-0.00 -0.00)**

0.00

(-0.00 -0.00)**

0.00

(-0.00 -0.00)**

Female

Lifestyle

Model 2: health+social

Chronic

0.66

(0.41 0.91)**

0.67

(0.41 0.92)**

0.75

(0.52 0.98)**

0.77

(0.54 0.99)**

female*age

-0.01

(-0.02 -0.01)**

-0.01

(-0.02 -0.01)**

-0.01

(-0.02 -0.01)**

-0.01

(-0.02 -0.01)**

Marriedsep

0.16

0.17

(0.01 0.34)*

Nevermarried

0.26

(0.17 0.35)**

0.24

(0.14 0.33)**

0.13

(0.05 0.20)**

0.12

(0.05 0.20)**

Widow

0.19

(0.09 0.29)**

0.18

(0.08 0.28)**

0.17

(0.11 0.23)**

0.18

female*married

0.20

(0.08 0.31)**

0.19

(0.07 0.30)**

0.06

(-0.01 0.32)

female*divorced

0.12

female*widow

0.17

(-0.02 0.26)
(0.02 0.33)*

Employed

-0.27

(-0.32 -0.22)**

Countrybirthyes

ns

Yedu

-0.02

ns

(-0.03 -0.02)**

0.06

0.14

(0.00 0.28)*

ns

ns

0.17

(0.02 0.33)*

ns

ns

-0.26

(-0.31 -0.21)**

ns

Formersmoker

(-0.00 0.12)

(0.11 0.24)**
(-0.01 0.12)

-0.18

(-0.23 -0.13)**

-0.17

(-0.22 -0.12)**

-0.11

(-0.17 -0.05)**

-0.07

(-0.13 -0.01)*

(-0.02 -0.01)**

0.00

(-0.01 -0.00)*

-0.02

(-0.02 -0.02)**

-0.01

-0.09

(-0.13 -0.05)**

ns

ns

Smokestill

-0.20

(-0.25 -0.16)**

-0.16

(-0.20 -0.11)**

-0.12

(-0.16 -0.08)**

Weekactivity

-0.16

(-0.21 -0.11)**

-0.11

(-0.16 -0.07)**

-0.10

(-0.15 -0.06)**

Weeksports

-0.11

(-0.14 -0.07)**

Alcodaily

ns

-0.08

(-0.12 -0.05)**

-0.06

(-0.10 -0.03)**

-0.04

(-0.08 -0.01)*

-0.08

(-0.11 -0.04)**

physician supply/1000

0.43

(0.37 0.48)**

0.13

(0.07 0.20)**

access restriction to specialists

0.39

(0.35 0.42)**

0.38

(0.35 0.42)**

Outofpocket

-0.36

(-0.40 -0.31)**

-0.13

(-0.18 -0.08)**

salary based

-0.12

(-0.17 -0.07)**

ns

North=Denmark, Sweden

-0.52

(-0.58 -0.46)**

Constant

1.50

(1.48 1.52)**

0.74

(0.72 0.77)**

-0.44

(-1.17 0.29)

-0.07

(-0.80 0.66)

-1.75

(-2.49 -1.01)**

-1.15

(-1.89 -0.40)**

Lnalpha

0.36

(0.33 0.38)

0.05

(0.03 0.08)

0.01

(-0.02 0.04)

0.00

(-0.03 0.02)

-0.06

(-0.08 -0.03)

-0.08

(-0.10 -0.05)

Alpha

1.43

(1.39 1.46)

1.05

(1.03 1.08)

1.01

(0.98 1.04)

1.00

(0.97 1.02)

0.94

(0.92 0.97)

0.93

(0.90 0.95)

Pseudo R2

0%

4.43%

5.06%

5.24%

5.98%

95% Confidence intervals; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; Variables not significant in any model: divorced, female*agesquare, South=Spain, Italy, Greece

36

6.25%

Table 8: Regressions on the number of specialist visits
Model 0: no covars
Health

Social

Model 1: health
(0.15 0.20)**

0.20

(0.17 0.22)**

0.20

(0.17 0.22)**

0.20

(0.17 0.23)**

0.21

(0.19 0.24)**

Badhealth

0.49

(0.42 0.57)**

0.52

(0.45 0.60)**

0.51

(0.43 0.59)**

0.48

(0.41 0.56)**

0.50

(0.42 0.57)**

Mobility

0.05

(0.03 0.06)**

0.07

(0.06 0.09)**

0.07

(0.05 0.09)**

0.06

(0.04 0.08)**

0.06

(0.04 0.08)**

Symptoms

0.08

(0.06 0.11)**

0.08

(0.05 0.10)**

0.08

(0.05 0.10)**

0.08

(0.06 0.11)**

0.08

(0.06 0.11)**

0.08

(0.02 0.13)**

0.07

(0.02 0.13)**

0.07

(0.02 0.13)**

0.09

(0.04 0.15)**
(-0.00 -0.00)**

Age
Agesquare

0.00

(-0.00 -0.00)**

0.00

(-0.00 -0.00)**

0.00

(-0.00 -0.00)**

0.00

Female

4.03

(1.74 6.32)**

4.04

(1.75 6.32)**

4.05

(1.77 6.33)**

4.53

(2.26 6.80)**

female*age

-0.10

(-0.17 -0.03)**

-0.10

(-0.17 -0.03)**

-0.10

(-0.17 -0.03)**

-0.12

(-0.18 -0.05)**

Nevermarried
Widow

0.00

(0.00 0.00)*

0.00

(0.00 0.00)*

0.00

(0.00 0.00)*

0.00

(0.00 0.00)**

-0.45

(-0.72 -0.18)**

-0.43

(-0.70 -0.16)**

-0.44

(-0.71 -0.17)**

-0.48

(-0.75 -0.21)**

0.13

(0.01 0.25)*

0.13

(0.01 0.26)*

0.16

(0.03 0.28)*

0.16

(0.04 (0.28)**

-0.48

(-0.67 -0.29)**

-0.47

(-0.66 -0.28)**

-0.48

(-0.66 -0.29)**

-0.44

(-0.63 -0.25)**

female*widow

0.54

(0.32 0.75)**

0.52

(0.31 0.74)**

0.50

(0.28 0.72)**

0.45

(0.24 0.67)**

Employed

-0.28

(-0.37 -0.20)**

-0.30

(-0.38 -0.22)**

-0.26

(-0.34 -0.17)**

-0.24

(-0.33 -0.16)**

Countrybirthyes

-0.09

(-0.20 0.01)

-0.09

(-0.19 0.02)

-0.10

(-0.20 0.01)

Yedu

0.05

(0.04 0.05)**

0.05

Formersmoker
Smokestill
Weekactivity
Weeksports

(0.04 0.05)**

0.04

0.10

(0.03 0.17)**

0.12

(0.04 0.19)**

(-0.19 -0.03)**

-0.11

(-0.19 -0.03)**

-0.09

(-0.17 -0.01)*

-0.14

(-0.20 -0.07)**

physician supply/1000

(-0.18 -0.04)**

-0.15

(-0.22 -0.08)**

(0.27 0.45)**

0.11

(-0.01 0.23)

-0.07

(-0.14 0.00)

ns

North=Denmark, Sweden
South= Greece , Italy, Spain
-3.04

(-4.87 -1.20)**

-2.80

(-4.64 -0.97)**

(-0.17 -0.00)*

0.36

(-0.15 -0.03)**

(-0.13 -0.04)**

-0.08

-0.11

(-0.37 -0.21)**

-0.09

(0.11 0.24)**

(-0.16 0.01)

-0.29

(0.59 0.65)**

0.18
ns

(-0.13 0.00)

-0.09

0.62

(0.04 0.06)**

-0.08

Outofpocket

Constant

0.05

-0.06

access restriction to specialists
salary based

ns

(0.03 0.05)**

-0.11
ns

Alcodaily

Region

Model 5: all

0.17

female*agesquare

Institutional

Model 4:
ind+institutional

Model 3: individual

Chronic

Marriedsep

Lifestyle

Model 2: health+social

ns

ns
0.28

(0.18 0.39)**

-0.79

(-0.89 -0.70)**

-0.18

(-0.30 -0.05)**

-3.76

(-5.62 -1.90)**

-3.81

(-5.67 -1.96)**

Lnalpha

1.38

(1.35 1.41)

1.24

(1.20 1.27)

1.19

(1.16 1.22)

1.19

(1.16 1.22)

1.18

(1.15 1.21)

1.16

(1.13 1.19)

Alpha

3.98

(3.86 4.11)

3.44

(3.33 3.55)

3.29

(3.19 3.40)

3.28

(3.18 3.39)

3.25

(3.15 3.36)

3.19

(3.09 3.30)

Pseudo R2

0%

2.11%

2.73%

2.79%

95% Confidence intervals; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%; Variables not significant in any model: divorced, female*divorced, female*married

37

2.93%

3.22%

Figure 1. Average number of physician visits during the past 12 months by
country. Individuals aged 50 and above.

AT
CH
DE
DK
ES

GPs

FR

Specialists

GR
IT
NL
SE
0

2

4

6

38

8

Figure 2: Amount of differences in total number of visits between countries
expressed as the Mean Squared Error of the country mean residuals.
4.50
4.00
3.50

MSE

3.00
2.50

Physician
GP
Specialist

2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
0: no covars

1: Health

2: +Social

3: +Lifestyle

4: +Institutional

5: +Region

Model

Figure 3: Explained portion of the differences in total number of visits between
countries expressed as the relative Mean Squared Error of the country mean residuals.
100%
90%
80%

Explained MSE

70%
60%
Physician
GP
Specialist

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
0: no covars

1: Health

2: +Social

3: +Lifestyle

Model

39

4: +Institutional

5: +Region

Figure 4: Mean country residual number of physician visits with 95% bootstrap
confidence intervals (* = significantly different from the average level, o = not sign.).

40

Figure 5: Mean country residual number of GP visits with 95% bootstrap confidence
intervals (* = significantly different from the average level, o = not sign.).

41

Figure 6: Mean country residual number of specialist visits with 95% bootstrap
confidence intervals (* = significantly different from the average level, o = not sign.).

42

