NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INSTITUTIONS, COMPETITION, AND CAPITAL MARKET INTEGRATION IN
JAPAN
Kris J. Mitchener
Mari Ohnuki
Working Paper 14090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14090

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

A version of this paper is forthcoming in the Journal of Economic History. We gratefully acknowledge
the assistance of Ronald Choi, Jennifer Combs, Noriko Furuya, Keiko Suzuki, and Genna Tan for
help in assembling the data. Mitchener would also like to thank the Institute for Monetary and Economic
Studies at the Bank of Japan for its hospitality and generous research support while serving as a visiting
scholar at the Institute in 2006, and the Dean Witter Foundation for additional financial support. We
also thank conference participants at the BETA Workshop in Strasbourg, France and seminar participants
at the Bank of Japan for comments and suggestions. The views presented in this paper are solely those
of the authors, and do not necessarily represent those of the Bank of Japan, its staff, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Kris J. Mitchener and Mari Ohnuki. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Institutions, Competition, and Capital Market Integration in Japan
Kris J. Mitchener and Mari Ohnuki
NBER Working Paper No. 14090
June 2008
JEL No. F15,G21,N15,O16
ABSTRACT
Using a newly-constructed panel data set which includes annual estimates of lending rates for 47 Japanese
prefectures, we analyze why interest rates converged over the period 1884-1925. We find evidence
that technological innovations and institutional changes played an important role in creating a national
capital market in Japan. In particular, the diffusion in the use of the telegraph, the growth in commercial
branch banking networks, and the development of Bank of Japan's branches reduced interest-rate differentials.
Bank regulation appears to have played little role in impeding financial market integration.

Kris J. Mitchener
Department of Economics
Leavey School of Business
Santa Clara University
Santa Clara, CA 95053
and NBER
kmitchener@scu.edu
Mari Ohnuki
Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies
Bank of Japan
Tokyo 103-8660
Japan
marioonuki@boj.or.jp

Institutions, Competition, and Capital Market Integration in Japan
I. Introduction

Financial historians have long been interested in explaining and analyzing the
development of capital markets, and understanding the extent to which their development
has a broader impact on growth rates for national economies. Recently, economists have
been drawing on the insights of Schumpeter and earlier generations of scholars to reexamine the relationship between financial sector development and economic growth,
and to test it using new long-run, cross-country data sets.1 This newer literature argues
that a causal relationship between finance and growth exists: well-functioning capital
markets make it easier to channel savings to investment projects with high rates of return,
which in turn enable modern economic growth to occur. Hence, understanding the factors
that encourage capital market development is a key question.
The geographical mobility of capital is critical to allocative efficiency. Legal or
regulatory barriers, underdeveloped banking systems or financial markets, and
technological hurdles can impede the flow of capital from borrowers to lenders across
regions, while institutional innovations can accelerate the development of national capital
markets. To better understand how national capital markets are forged, this article
examines the process of capital market integration in Japan during the late-nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries.
Japan’s experience is particularly illuminating for several reasons. First, although
previous studies have examined the slow emergence of a national capital market in the
U.S. during nineteenth century, comparatively little is known about the formation of
national capital markets in other parts of the world.2 Japan’s status as the second largest
economy in the world economy and its location in Asia (where many of the fastest
growing developing nations are presently located) make it a particularly interesting
historical case for assessing how capital market integration takes place. Second, because
the institutional development of the Japanese banking system during the late-nineteenth
1

See Levine (2005) for a review of the large literature on financial development and growth. For evidence
on Japan, see Rousseau (1999).
2
One exception is the case of Austria. See Good (1977).

1

century differed considerably from the process taking place in the United States at that
time, Japan’s experience may shed light on factors that influence the formation of
national capital markets but were non-existent or unimportant in the case of the U.S. In
particular, since Meiji-era policymakers were explicitly attempting to modernize the
Japanese economy and break from Japan’s feudal past, they experimented with new
institutions, including the creation of a central bank in 1882 and its regional branches
shortly thereafter and the development of commercial branch-banking networks.3 Third,
although existing (Japanese-language) studies by historians provide some suggestive
evidence that a national capital market likely emerged in the late-nineteenth and earlytwentieth centuries, our study is the first to analyze how convergence was influenced by
competition, institutional developments, and a better flow of information (induced by
both technological change and innovations in the banking industry such as branch
banking).4
One significant impediment to understanding capital market integration in
countries other than the U.S. has been the lack of regional data on capital flows, interest
rates, or other series that would permit the testing of this process. Hence, to analyze
capital market integration in Japan, we collected a new data set on lending rates of
commercial banks from 1884 to 1925 for 47 Japanese prefectures. We combined these
data with other characteristics of Japanese prefectures, including the competitiveness of
the banking environment, access to information networks, and the existence of branches
of the Bank of Japan.5 Unlike many previous studies on interest rate convergence, our
data set permits us to use panel econometrics to test explicitly the relative importance of
competing hypotheses and show how a national market became increasingly integrated
over a 40-year period.
We first review the literature on capital market convergence and consider theories
that may help explain the process of capital market integration in Japan. We then use
3

A number of studies have noted that the Meiji period represents a watershed for understanding how
institutions contribute to economic growth and development and in forging a modern, open Japanese
economy (Rousseau, 1999; Sussman and Yafeh, 1999; Bernhofen and Brown, 2004, 2005).
4
For previous studies on Japanese financial markets and suggestive evidence of convergence during our
sample period, see Lewis and Yamamura (1971), Okada (1966), Sugiyama (1965), Teranishi (2003, 2005),
Tsurumi (1981, 1991), and Yamamura (1970).
5
Using time-series techniques, Mitchener and Ohnuki (2007) show that the Japanese capital market
exhibited considerable integration in the late nineteenth century.

2

fixed-effects and random-effects models to show that the establishment of branches of the
Bank of Japan and the development of commercial branch-banking networks lowered the
barriers to capital mobility in Japan during the Meiji and Taisho periods. These two
findings suggest that institutional innovations can play a central role in forging national
capital markets. Our findings also highlight the role played by information networks: the
growing telegraphic transmissions of financial information appear to have accelerated
capital market integration in Japan.

II. Accounting for Capital Market Integration in Japan

Studies of capital market integration have employed a wide range of data series
(prices, capital flows, and differences in savings and investment) and statistical
techniques to assess the pace and timing of national integration. Although there is no
single agreed upon approach for studying integration, many researchers have used the
movements in asset prices (for example, interest rates) to assess capital market
integration, in part because these data are often available for longer periods of time and
for a variety of locations. Economic theory suggests that asset prices ought to obey the
law of one price because if capital markets are perfectly competitive and no market
frictions exist, arbitrage opportunities should not persist across time and space. Otherwise
the arbitrage opportunities could be exploited by market participants. Much of the
existing literature on capital market integration has thus analyzed the extent to which
actual capital markets meet the idealized criteria of frictionless, perfectly competitive
markets. For example, studies on the process of national capital market formation in the
United States have emphasized a variety of regulatory and institutional characteristics
that may have impeded the development of a national capital market in the nineteenth
century.6

6

For the development of the commercial paper market, see Davis (1965) and Smiley (1975); for the stock
market’s role see Sushka and Barrett (1984); for legal restrictions and banking market structure see Sylla
(1969) and James (1976a, 1976b); for bank failures see Rockoff (1977); and for differential risk and
transportation and information costs, see Stigler (1967), Eichengreen (1984), Snowden (1987), and
Bodenhorn (1995). For a more extensive review of the literature on the U.S., see Bodenhorn and Rockoff
(1992).

3

In this light, we begin our analysis of Japan’s market for loanable funds by
presenting evidence of the convergence in interest rates across Japanese prefectures.
Figure 1 plots the coefficient of variation, on a quarterly basis, for the 47 Japanese
prefectures from the mid-1880s to the early 1920s.7 The graph suggests that interest rate
differentials were narrowing over this period. By the middle of the 1890s, the Ministry of
Finance’s annual report on banking stopped commenting on regional gaps in interest
rates, and suggested that capital market integration had taken place: “interest-rate trends
in different regions are virtually the same.” 8 In the rest of this section, we suggest several
hypotheses that might help account for the apparent convergence in lending rates, which
we then test in the next section of the paper. The experience of the U.S. provides some
guidance on what hypotheses we consider; however, the pattern and pace of convergence
among Japanese prefectures is sufficiently different from what U.S. regions experienced
at that time that we cast our net more broadly in order to consider additional factors. That
is, although there are some surface level similarities between the development of the U.S.
banking system and Japan’s in the late nineteenth century, the Meiji period in Japanese
history (1868-1913) ushered in a variety of institutional innovations in banking that may
have figured prominently in the development of a national market for loanable funds.

A. Competition in the Loanable Funds Market & Financial Innovation

All else equal, more competitive banking systems ought to exhibit lower rates on
borrowing and greater loan volume than monopolistic banking systems. One explanation,
then, for the persistence of high lending rates in some regions is that banks were able to
take advantage of market power, and charged local customers higher prices. They
effectively exploited their locational advantage to derive monopoly rents.
In underdeveloped markets, banks are often able to retain significant pricing
power. Distance from a central financial market therefore can often act as a barrier to
entry by making it more costly for a larger, out-of-area bank to establish a branch or
purchase an existing bank. For example, the Ministry of Finance reported in 1889 that

7
8

See Mitchener and Ohnuki (2007) for a time-series analysis of the convergence in rates during this period.
“21st Annual Report of the Banking Bureau of the Ministry of Finance” (1896), p. 29.

4

“interest rates are always lower in the urban areas where there are highly developed
financial institutions and higher in outlying areas that lack these institutions; this is a
generally accepted economic principle.” 9 Hence, the threat of entry may have been
weaker in markets located further from financial centers like Tokyo and Osaka, a
hypothesis we consider in the next section of the paper. Banks may have also been able to
exploit informational advantages to obtain pricing power. For example, before the
telegraph was widely used, it may have been difficult for customers to have complete
information about competitive lending rates.
Another potential explanation for local market power is the role of regulation,
which we will test by examining the competitive environment for banks in a given
prefecture. Scholars examining the United States have noted that high initial capital
requirements, restrictions on branch banking, and limitations on bank mergers or on the
chartering of new banks may have impeded competition in regional banking markets.
These regulations may have fostered local geographic monopolies and impeded the
development of a national banking market in the U.S. (James, 1976a, 1976b; Sylla,
1969).
Circumstantial evidence might suggest a similar environment in Japan. After all,
shortly after the Meiji restoration, the Japanese government passed a law in 1872
authorizing the creation of national banks that were closely modeled on the United States
national banking system (which had been created in 1863). But, the Japanese experiment
with national banks was much smaller in scale than in the U.S. The Japanese national
banking system grew more slowly than the U.S. system, it had fewer relationships with
other banks in the economy, and it was abandoned soon after its creation (in 1885) in
favor of other types of banking institutions (Miyajima and Weber, 2001). Summary
statistics on the Japanese banking system confirm the view that national banks were not
an important source of banking growth during the Meiji-Taisho period. As Figure 2
shows, the growth in savings banks, ordinary banks, and other commercial banking
institutions was quantitatively more important than national banks for our sample period.

9

“12th Annual Report of the Banking Bureau of the Ministry of Finance” (1889), p. 61. As examples,
interest rates in commercial areas like Tokyo, Osaka, Kyoto and Kanagawa were the lowest in the country.

5

The regulatory legacy of this Japanese national banking system also turned out to
be quite limited. As in the U.S. in the nineteenth century, the original authorizing
legislation in Japan established minimum capital requirements for national banks in
Japan. These requirements specified the capital that banks were required to have on hand
in order to receive a charter from the Ministry of Finance Shiheino-kami (Chief Officer
of the Paper Currency Bureau). In particular, banks in large cities (greater than 100,000
in population) needed more than 500,000 yen (roughly $453,000 at 1880 exchange rates)
to receive a charter.10 Banks in medium-sized cities (between 10,000 and 100,000 people)
needed a minimum of 200,000 yen. However, banks in small cities (between 3,000 and
10,000 people) could receive the approval of the Ministry of Finance to operate even if
they had less than 50,000 yen in charter capital, so it is likely that capital requirements
were not binding in smaller towns and cities. The original law was then amended in 1876,
significantly lowering the capital requirements for national banks. The amended act
basically required that national banks were required to have capital of more than 100,000
yen; national banks in larger cities (with a population greater than 100,000) were required
to have 200,000 yen in minimum charter capital. However, these requirements were still
not restrictive, since banks with capital between 50,000 and 100,000 yen could operate
given the approval of the Ministry of Finance.
Since the Ministry of Finance wanted better control of bank note issuance, it
stopped chartering national banks in 1878 and redirected its attention to establishing other
types of commercial banks without note issuing privileges. The Bank Act of 1890, which
was created to regulate these non-national, commercial banks, established minimum
capital requirements similar to those in the National Bank Act. 11 It did require nonnational banks to get charter approval from the Ministry of Finance, but this restriction
does not appear to have limited the growth of these banks. The number of the nonnational commercial banks grew rapidly, with their numbers quickly exceeding those of
the national banking system at its peak (Figure 2). By the 1880s, the capital requirements
10

The yen was introduced in 1867 and was initially set at par with the dollar. In the 1880s, the exchange
rate fluctuated between 1.1 to 1.3 yen per dollar (Global Financial Data, www.globalfinancialdata.com). As
an alternative benchmark for understanding these capital requirements, the average capital of all firms
(including those in the manufacturing sector) in 1896 (the earliest year for which there are data) was 87,386
yen (Nihon Tokei Kyokai, 1987).
11
The act was put into effect in 1893.

6

were quantitatively unimportant for commercial banks and did not serve as a meaningful
barrier to entry (Tamaki, 1994; Goto, 1973). In an attempt to stabilize the banking system
after a financial crisis in 1901, the Ministry of Finance began to encourage mergers and
consolidation in the banking industry and raised the minimum charter capital
requirements for new banks to 500,000 yen. 12 Although the higher minimum capital
requirement and the Ministry’s policy slowed growth of the banking system (Figure 2),
the number of banks had already expanded by nearly tenfold in sixteen years (from 477
to 4141). Historians have concluded that entry regulations were fairly lax through the
beginning of the twentieth century (Okazaki and Sawada 2006).
The Meiji-Taisho period was relatively unfettered in terms of entry regulations,
with relatively free banking. Moreover, in contrast to the U.S. banking system of the latenineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, branch banking flourished in Japan, since
governments (either national or prefectural) imposed no restrictions on the formation of
branching networks. Okada (2001) suggests that inter-bank transactions in the early
Meiji Period and the development of the branch bank system were important in the
development of a national capital market in the middle and late Meiji periods.13 From
1884 to 1925, the number of branches jumped from 122 to 6287 and the number of
branches per head office increased from 0.87 to 3.77 in order to service an expanding
customer base and the growing Japanese economy. Okazaki (2002) suggests that the
development of branching in Japan spurred competition in the banking sector, and that
growth in branching was especially strong after 1905. Asai (1978) also suggests that
branching led to competition in lending rates and deposits. Figure 3 shows the overall
growth in branching, which was not uniform across Japan. From 1884 to 1925, Tokyo
and Hyogo saw the greatest increase in branch offices – from 16 to 487 and 5 to 398,
respectively. On the other hand, Miyazaki and Okinawa saw branching expand the least
over the same period – from 1 to 53 and 2 to 8, respectively. Some research also suggests
that competition from branching may have been largely confined to major cities.14 When
we analyze the process of capital market integration in the next section of the paper, we

12

See Okazaki and Sawada (2006).
For research into the significance of the development of the branch bank system, see Asai (1978).
14
Nikkei Kin’yu Shinbunsha and Chihou Kinyushi Kenkyukai (2003, pp.368-9).
13

7

will therefore have to take into account differences in commercial branch banking across
prefectures.
Commercial banks also extended their correspondent relationships during this
period, and used their networks to transfer funds across regions. 15 Looking at the
domestic funds transfer market in more detail, we find that, between 1877 and 1880,
branch office networks and correspondent networks were built between the major urban
banks and the large regional banks, and these networks were used to provide funds
transfer services. 16 In Tokyo, Osaka and other centers, transfer clearinghouses arose
spontaneously by 1880, and served as a venue for trading transfers between banks. 17
However, because Tokyo-Osaka transfers were the focus of the correspondent network
and only a few of the largest regional banks were able to participate in the network at all,
it may not have mattered much.
In short, the lack of restrictions on entry and the innovations in Japanese banking
during the Meiji period suggest that the banking system may have been more competitive
than the U.S. banking system, at least through the end of the nineteenth century. In
Section III, we test how differences in competition in the loanable funds market at the
prefectural level may have influenced interest rate differentials.

B. Information Networks

Another factor that we wish to test in our statistical analysis is the role of
information networks. As Bordo, Eichengreen, and Irwin (1999) have noted
informational barriers can impede financial market integration as well, like a lack of
competition. Technological improvements that lower the cost of gathering information
can increase the quantity of financial services and lower their prices. Improved

15

Unfortunately, detailed prefectural data are not available on commercial bank correspondent networks, so
we are not able to include this variable in our econometric model.
16
See Tsurumi (1991, pp. 117-118).
17
Little is known about transfer clearinghouses because of the paucity of documents remaining, but it is
assumed that the Osaka transfer clearinghouse provided “trading in Tokyo transfers” and “inter-bank funds
lending/borrowing” (see Tsurumi, 1991, pp. 130-143). Tsurumi (1991) focuses on the fact that domestic
transfers were “traded” rather than “exchanged” to hypothesize that while the offsetting of transfers was the
primary function of transfer clearinghouses, they also served as a means of investing short-term surpluses
(see Tsurumi, 1991, p. 135).

8

information networks also let financial institutions gather better quality information on
regional tastes and differences in risk. With lower-cost access to information, bank
customers can also more easily gather information about market conditions that prevail
elsewhere, allowing them to seek out competitive rates.
The Meiji period witnessed a dramatic improvement in transportation and
communication networks beginning in the 1870s when the telegraph, railroads, and a
modern postal system were established. Fujii (1998) suggests that the growth in these
networks was important for economic development; it seems plausible that the
development of information networks in Japan may therefore have influenced the market
for loanable funds, particularly because the expansion in communication networks was
uneven. Teranishi (1982) suggests that better transportation and communications
networks enhanced the development of private correspondent networks among banks.
Sugiyama (1990) also suggests that these developments may have been important in
driving the integration in commodity and goods markets within Japan. For example,
although use of the telegraph began in 1870 in Tokyo and Osaka, the process of
developing the network to cover a broader geographical area took 10-15 years (Ishii,
1994). According to Fujii (1990) and Sugiyama (1990), that two-thirds of the private
usage of the telegraph involved the transfer of information for business activities, such as
commodity prices or interest rates; in 1885, the number of telegraph offices per capita
varied considerably from prefecture to prefecture (Figure 4). We include a measure of the
use of telegraphs at the prefectural level in our analysis to assess whether the diffusion of
this information network contributed to the reduction of interest rate differentials.
One final advantage of branch-banking networks is that they may have allowed
banks to price loans more efficiently. Branch banking networks enable head offices to
obtain more detailed information on local economic conditions and local borrowers; as a
result, they may be willing to extend loans over a wider geographical area (Carlson and
Mitchener, 2007). Although costly for banks to build, it may enable them to also obtain
more customers as well as to diversify away from idiosyncratic risk associated with local
lending markets. The comparative advantage that branching networks have in gathering
specific information about borrowers and their investment projects may have also
hastened the development of formalized lending markets in Japan by making it more

9

difficult for informal money lenders to compete with banks, which had greater economies
of scope and scale.

C. Bank of Japan

One final institutional change may have fostered the development of a national
capital market – the Japanese government’s creation of a central bank (modeled after the
Bank of Belgium). The early founding date of the Bank of Japan (1882), in comparison to
the establishment of the U.S. Federal Reserve System in 1913, may have facilitated interregional payments and alleviated existing regional biases in the funding of loans during
our sample period.
Promoting the nationwide integration of financial markets was one of the Bank of
Japan’s goals. 18 According to the “Proposal to Establish the Bank of Japan” and a
supporting document entitled, “Explanation of the Establishment of the Bank of Japan,”19
the Bank was founded with five objectives in mind: (1) facilitate finance; (2) enhance
funding of the national banks; (3) reduce of interest rates; (4) offer treasury receipt and
disbursement services; and (5) discount of foreign bills. Of these goals, the first three
sought to improve domestic financial intermediation functions, and the first is particularly
relevant to our discussion of the Bank of Japan’s network. According to the “Explanation
of the Establishment of the Bank of Japan,” the first goal, “facilitate finance,” was based
on a judgment that networks of private-sector financial institutions were insufficient to
adjust funding surpluses and shortfalls between regions.20 It was therefore suggested that
the central bank sign correspondent contracts with national banks throughout the country

18

Matsukata, Masayoshi, “Explanation of the Establishment of the Bank of Japan”, Bank of Japan,
Research Department (1958a, pp. 991-1007).
19
Submitted to Prime Minister Sanjo, requesting “a speedy decision on the proposal to establish the Bank
of Japan and promulgation of the ordinance.” (See Bank of Japan, Research Department (1958a, p. 990);
Bank of Japan (1982, p. 120.)
20
The “Explanation of the Establishment of the Bank of Japan” says, “Regarding the present status of
national banks, they stand in geographical confrontation to one another and have little desire to
communicate or coordinate. Indeed, they move in opposition to one another and check one another. Should
one bank have a surplus, it is not able to use that surplus to cover shortfalls in another bank.” (See Bank of
Japan, Research Department (1958a, p. 993.)

10

so that it could unify local financial markets into a single, nationwide market.21 The use
of correspondent transactions to build a network between the Bank of Japan and privatesector financial institutions was considered to be a powerful tool for the achievement of
the initial objectives behind the Bank’s establishment.
According to Tsurumi (1991), “spontaneous private financial markets” had
existed prior to the establishment of the Bank of Japan, but domestic Japanese financial
markets were not sufficiently tied together: the Bank of Japan transformed these
“spontaneous private financial markets” into a single market with the Bank of Japan at its
core.22 Private-sector banks that signed correspondent transactions could use the Bank of
Japan to transfer funds and collect bills from remote locations, and they could borrow
short-term from the BOJ provided that they put up collateral.23 The Bank of Japan began
to sign correspondent transactions with private-sector banks in June 1883, opening up a
means of transferring funds through the Bank of Japan in addition to private payment
systems. The number of correspondent contracts grew considerably after the BOJ signed
its first correspondent contracts in 1883, reaching around 150 in 1890, and peaking at
21

The “Explanation of the Establishment of the Bank of Japan” says, “The establishment of a central bank
at this time would enable the sound national banks in various regions to be treated as Bank of Japan’s
branch offices, with ‘correspondence’ contracts signed so as to open the first nationwide channels for the
circulation of money... A central bank would play a key role in providing financial channels, observing the
degree of activity of nationwide commerce and money transfers so that money surplus in one region could
be transferred to the financial needs of another region, and the money surplus of that region could be lent
for the financial needs of the first region. This movement and circulation would be akin to the heart
pumping blood through the arteries to the limbs to enable them to move. Doing this would, for the first
time, enable the volume of money to be smoothed out so that the national finances would no longer suffer
from clogging and blockage.” (See Bank of Japan, Research Department (1958a, p. 994.)
22
As discussed in the previous section, although correspondent networks existed in Japan prior to the
founding of the BOJ, these were limited in scope and function in comparison to the clearinghouses that
existed in the United States (Bodenhorn, 2003; James and Weiman, 2005). The slower development of
clearinghouse arrangements in Japan resulted from an initially underdeveloped banking system at the start
of our sample period (there were few private banks prior to the Meiji restoration) and product and labor
markets that were still integrating during the 1870s, which blunted the need for interregional movements of
capital. Tsurumi (1991) says, “The Bank of Japan...served as the nationwide monetary regulator and
therefore established a broad domestic correspondent transaction network. The Bank of Japan’s domestic
funds transfer transactions were unique because of its position as a central bank. The domestic funds
transfer market expanded and changed rapidly after the opening of the Bank, and the Bank came to serve
literally as its backbone. The funds transfer clearinghouses in the three major cities had emerged as
spontaneous organizations to provide adjustments on the back of the rapid expansion of domestic funds
transfer transactions, but they were replaced by Bank of Japan correspondent transactions.” (p. 152)
23
Correspondent contracts were signed on a branch-office basis, not on a financial institution basis. For
example, in 1883 the Mitsui Bank had seven branch offices in Hachioji, Odawara, Nagoya, Aomori and
other locations that signed contracts with the Bank of Japan head office, while its Otsu office signed a
contract with the Bank of Japan Osaka Branch. In other words, at this point in time, the Mitsui Bank had
eight correspondent contracts with the Bank of Japan (1982, p. 329).

11

over 200 in 1900 (Figure 5).24 Kasuya (2000) comments that “going through the Bank of
Japan helped to smooth out the movement of funds between remote locations.”25 On the
other hand, the rising volume of correspondent transactions handled by the Bank of Japan
had the effect of reducing the volume handled by private-sector transfer clearinghouses.
According to Tsurumi (1991, p.136), the BOJ eventually completely took over this
business by around 1890.
The branch offices of the Bank of Japan were supposed to “facilitate finance.”
The Osaka Branch was established in December 1882, opening almost simultaneous to
the head office in Tokyo, because of Osaka’s position as a “center of commerce.” No
other branches were established immediately thereafter, however.26 At the time of the
Bank’s establishment, the Ministry of Finance was concerned that “the establishment of
local Bank of Japan offices may ‘impair the operations of local ordinary banks,’ and the
Bank of Japan should therefore ‘initially’ sign correspondent contracts rather than
establishing branch offices.”27 This was presumably why the Bank of Japan began by
developing a nationwide correspondent network as a channel for circulating funds and
delayed its expansion of a branching network.28 The Ministry of Finance’s policy appears
to have changed its position, however, in the latter half of the 1880s. On July 30, 1889,
seven years after the drafting of “Explanation of the Establishment of the Bank of Japan”
by Masayoshi Matsukata, a Ministry of Finance memorandum acknowledged the need to
expand the Bank of Japan’s branching network. According to the memorandum, the
primary duty of the Bank of Japan was “to provide a means of funds transfers throughout
24

The importance of correspondent relationships between the Bank of Japan and commercial banks
declined after 1900, as shown in the Figure 5. After this date, commercial banks once again resumed an
important role in establishing correspondent networks (Kamiyama, 2000 pp.102-104).
25
Kasuya (2000, p. 136).
26
On October 20, 1882, Vice Governor Tetsunosuke Tomita, acting on behalf of the governor of the Bank
of Japan, submitted an “Application to Establish an Osaka Branch” to Minister of Finance Masayoshi
Matsukata (Bank of Japan Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies Archives, Document A3681). His
reasons for needing a branch office in Osaka were: “Osaka is the center of commerce and a major channel
for finance in western Japan as Tokyo is in eastern Japan. Maintaining close contact with it is a key point in
the operations of the Bank, and it is considered urgent that the Bank of Japan establish a branch office
there.” This application was approved on October 23.
27
Tsurumi (1991, p. 96). “Bank of Japan Ordinance” (Bill No. 330) first reading; see “Minutes of the
Upper House” Volume 12, p. 526.
28
“The Bank of Japan did not have a branch office network where there was fear of encroaching upon the
base of operations for national banks. Instead, it signed correspondent contracts with powerful local banks,
enabling it to overcome the isolation of the national banks and achieve nationwide control.” (Tsurumi,
1991, p. 114)

12

the country and to facilitate market finance.” 29 This emphasis on promoting funds
transfers 30 was more or less the same as Masayoshi Matsukata had argued for in the
“Proposal to Establish the Bank of Japan,” but the Ministry of Finance placed additional
emphasis on the need to establish branch offices and agencies in order to achieve these
objectives.31
According to documents in the Bank of Japan, Institute for Monetary and
Economic Studies Archives, Bank of Japan Governor Shigetoshi Yoshihara applied to
Minister of Finance Masayoshi Matsukata to establish new branches on June 16, 1886.32
The application begins by noting the need to closely monitor conditions in local areas:
“There has been a significant increase in the Bank’s operations with respect to its duties
of handling treasury receipts and disbursements, issuing convertible banknotes and
providing ‘correspondence’ services, and these services now extend throughout the
country. We therefore believe it is necessary and urgent to more closely monitor local
conditions and circumstances.” Governor Yoshihara went on to note that the BOJ, in its
present configuration, had little scope for carrying out these aims. “The Bank only has
one branch office in Osaka and engages in ‘correspondence’ financial transactions with
national and private banks in other parts of the country and must rely on their
communications through correspondent transactions to confirm the ebbs and flows of
local commerce and finance to report to the Bank of Japan’s head office.” Governor
Yoshihara thus viewed the Bank of Japan’s correspondent transactions with private29

Shigeyoshi Matsuo papers. (Writer unknown. Uses Ministry of Finance stationery). The document
explains the functions of the Yokohama Specie Bank and Bank of Japan and is entitled “Proposal for the
Bank of Japan to Use the Specie Bank as a Liable Agency to Perform Foreign Exchange Services” (Bank
of Japan, Research Department, 1958a, pp. 1441-1453).
30
Below are the other duties it lists: “Rediscounting and purchasing of commercial bills and promissory
notes so as to enhance the funding of banks, etc.,” “regulating the ebbs and flows of finance and
maintaining converged interest rates,” “discounting foreign funds transfer bills so as to enhance the
convenience of domestic and foreign trade” and “planning the recovery of specie.”
31
At the bottom of the page on “providing a means of funds transfers throughout the country and
facilitating market finance,” the Ministry of Finance notes, “The Bank of Japan is the central bank of Japan
and at the center of monetary circulation in the Japanese financial economy. It should open a series of
branch offices and agencies around the country so as to communicate and coordinate with financial
companies around the country, providing a significant means of funds transfers so as to alleviate the
congestion and clogging in finance by averaging the relative demand for money, for example, allowing
money surplus in one region to be transferred to serve the financial needs of another region, and a money
surplus in that region to be lent for the financial needs of the first region.
32
“Application to the Minister of Finance to Increase Branches” (Bank of Japan Institute for Monetary and
Economic Studies Archives, Document A3681).

13

sector financial institutions as inadequate to respond to changes in local financial and
economic circumstances, and he therefore argued for the establishment of “branch offices
in local centers” that would “facilitate finance and balance interest rates.”33 Seven days
after the application was made, the Minister of Finance, Masayoshi Matsukata, approved
it.
Table 1 traces the establishment of branch and liaison offices between 1882 and
1909. In contrast to the U.S. Federal Reserve System, the BOJ’s branches were instead
rolled out during the extended period of our sample. 34 The regional variation in the
establishment of BOJ branches is particularly useful for testing whether they had any
impact on reducing interest-rate differentials. For the first decade after its establishment,
the Bank of Japan had only two branch offices, in Tokyo and Osaka, but by 1910, it had
10 offices in nine prefectures (Figure 6). The first two liaison offices were in Gifu and
Wakayama in 1891; three more were established in Hokkaido in 1893. 35 The second
branch office to be established after Osaka was the Saibu (Kyushu) Branch, in 1893.
Branch and liaison offices were established at a steady pace thereafter.36 In 1909, there
were branch and liaison offices in most of the major financial centers of Japan and in
Hokkaido: Osaka (1882), Saibu, Sapporo, Hakodate, Nemuro (1893), Kyoto (1894),

33

When the Bank of Japan was established, Masayoshi Matsukata commented in “Explanation of the
Establishment of the Bank of Japan” on both the alleviation of regional disparities in interest rates and the
alleviation of seasonal fluctuations, but there is no clear reference to “balancing interest rates.” Other
important purposes for branch offices were funds payments and settlement, treasury receipts and
disbursements, and banknote issuance.
34
The first application was made on April 19, 1886, but due to inadequate content (lack of branch bylaws)
the Bank of Japan reapplied on June 16. The draft application of April 19 (the actual application is not in
the Bank of Japan archives, only the draft) lists eight centers for the establishment of branch offices:
Nagasaki, Hakodate, Niigata, Kobe, Yokohama, Akamagaseki (now Shimonoseki), Nagoya and Sendai.
The application notes that they “will not be established all at the same time” but does not comment
specifically on the order of establishment. The application of June 16 (which remains in the Bank of Japan
archives) contains Masayoshi Matsukata’s signature and a note that says, “Quickly investigate the locations
of branch offices and their operational bylaws and re-apply.”
35
These liaison offices were established as an emergency measure because the Mitsui Bank, which had
served as the local treasury agent, resigned that position. The liaison offices were closed after a short period
of time.
36
The speech given by Bank of Japan a board member Morito Yokura at the opening of the Saibu Branch
remains in the Bank of Japan Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies Archives (“Speech at the
Opening of the Saibu Branch” Document A3681). He says, “... the Bank... has a responsibility to facilitate
the finance around Japan and enhance the convenience of private enterprise,” but in spite of this, “the
circumstances were not right and the times were not ripe” for the establishment of branch offices after the
opening of the Osaka Branch, but “we have begun to reform the Bank’s organization and reorganize its
operations so that branches can gradually be established around the country.”

14

Nagoya, Otaru (1897), Fukushima (1899), Hiroshima (1905), and Kanazawa (1909).37
For capital market integration, the key is whether branch and liaison offices provided
funds transfer services. Documentary evidence collected from the “Manuals and Rules of
the Bank of Japan’s Operations,” (Collection 1 Volume 1), demonstrates that they did,
from the moment they were established, along with the other services they provided, such
as banknotes, treasury receipt and disbursement services, and government-bond
services.38

III. Empirical Assessment of Market Integration

A. Data and Estimation

Our aim is to characterize the process of long-run integration and understand the
factors that are leading to or inhibiting capital market integration. We do so by estimating
the relative importance for market integration of institutions, competition, geography, and
prefecture-specific factors by estimating:

(1) RATEit = β0 + β1BNKFAILit + β2RICELANDPit + β3CROPFIELDPit + β4RESIDPit
+ β5AVGLOANit + β6TELEGRAPHit + β7DISTANCEi + β8BRANCHit +
β9BOJOFFICEit + β10BOJCORRit + β11BNKMERGERit + β12BNKLQDit
+ β13BNKENTRYit + εit.
To relate the process of financial market integration to the law of one price, we consider
each prefecture’s interest rate relative to a benchmark rate, so that the dependent variable
37

When local banks requested the establishment of a Bank of Japan branch or liaison office, it was
common for them to emphasize the facilitation of funds transfers with other regions. A slightly later
example comes from the application for the establishment of a branch in Asahikawa, Hokkaido filed on
November 22, 1921 and submitted to Governor Junnosuke Inoue as a resolution of the 21st Hokkaido
Bankers Conference. The application says that the establishment of a Bank of Japan branch office in
Asahikawa would “contribute to the steady growth of Hokkaido, the development and progress of industry
and in particular the development of modern funds transfers...it is most urgent for funds transfers to be
facilitated so as to promote the development of industry.” (Bank of Japan Institute for Monetary and
Economic Studies Archives, Document A3682).
38
This collection describes the operations of the Osaka Branch (opened 1882), the Gifu Liaison Office, and
the Wakayama Liaison Office (opened 1891). See Ohnuki (2007) for more details on the different types of
BOJ offices.

15

RATEit is defined as the difference between the annual average lending rate in prefecture
i and year t and the average across all prefectures in year t. In order to test whether our
results our sensitive to this definition, we also consider two other ways of defining the
depending variable – the prefecture’s interest rate minus the rate in either Tokyo or Osaka
– the two financial centers of Japan during our sample period.39
The independent variables are defined as:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

BNKFAILit is the percentage of existing banks (at time t-1) that failed in
prefecture i at time t;
RICELANDPit is the log price (measured in tan) of land dedicated to rice
production in prefecture i at time t;
CROPFIELDit is the log price (measured in tan) of agricultural crops other than
rice in prefecture i at time t;
RESIDPit is the log price (measured in tan) of residential land (outside of city
centers) in prefecture i at time t;
AVGLOANit is the (log) value of loans of all commercial banks divided by the
number of commercial banks in prefecture i at time t;
TELEGRAPHit is the number of domestic telegraph transmissions per capita in
prefecture i at time t;
DISTANCEi is the distance between the capital city in prefecture i and either
Osaka or Tokyo (whichever is closest);
BRANCHit is bank branches divided by total head offices in prefecture i at time t;
BOJOFFICEit denotes the number of branch offices established by Bank of Japan
in prefecture i at time t;
BOJCORRit is the number of correspondent relationships with commercial banks
that the Bank of Japan had in prefecture i at time t;
BNKMERGERit is the percentage of existing banks at t-1 that merged at time t in
prefecture i;
BNKLQDit is the percentage of existing banks at t-1 that voluntarily liquidated at
time t in prefecture i;
BNKENTRY it is the number of banks that entered prefecture i at time t as a
percentage of existing banks at t-1;
β are estimated coefficients;
and ε is a white noise error term capturing other influences on lending rates.

39

We examined the stationarity of the dependent variable in order to avoid spurious regression results.
Levin and Lin and Im, Pesarin, and Shin panel unit root tests reject the null hypothesis of a unit root (either
a common unit root process or individual unit root process) at the 1% or 5% level for all three definitions of
the dependent variable. We also considered ADF tests, where the number of lags used in the test was
determined by the AIC criteria. More details are available upon request from the authors. For the most of
the individual prefectures, we can reject the null hypothesis of a unit root for most prefectures once the
series are differenced relative to Osaka, Tokyo, or the mean. Results are available from the authors upon
request.

16

The dependent variable, RATEit, is constructed using annual lending rates,
collected from the Ministry of Finance’s Ginkokyoku Nempo.40 According to Asakura
(1961), the type of loans reported in this publication were often taken out by farmers with
business interests in sericulture, silk reeling, tea, and rice, and who used the loans to
cover the cost of variable inputs into production (such as seeds and fertilizer), capital
equipment (farm machinery), land, tax payments, and living expenses.41 To create the
variable RATEit, we first averaged monthly high and low values, and then averaged these
monthly values over the 12 months of year t.42
We gathered data from a variety of sources to construct information on regional
banking markets (loan volume and loan size) as well as characteristics of bank market
competition (bank branches, mergers, voluntary liquidations, and bank entry). Data on
the numbers of commercial banks, number of branches of commercial banks, loans,
capital, and deposits in each prefecture came from the Annual Report of the Banking
Bureau of the Ministry of Finance (Ginko kyoku Nempo),” Imperial Statistics (Teikoku
Tokei Nenkan), Japanese Monetary Statistics (Nihon no Kinyu Tokei), Goto (1973), and
Banker’s Directory (Ginko Soran). Our sample of commercial banks included kokuritsu
ginko (“national banks”), shiritsu ginko (“private banks”), and chochiku ginko (“savings
banks”). All three types of banks made loans, although they differed somewhat in the size
of loans they offered to customers. Kokuritsu ginko also had note issuing privileges until
1883, at which point these were revoked by the government. Beginning in the 1890s,
kokuritsu ginko and shiritsu ginko were converted to futsu ginko (“ordinary banks”). We
computed data on bank entry, mergers, and voluntary liquidations for each prefecture
using information contained in from Hompo Ginko Hensenshi (the Tokyo Bankers
Association, 1998).

40

The interest rates are described in further detail in Mitchener and Ohnuki (2007).
During our sample period, the tax applied to farmers was a land tax, and was payable even in the event
of a bad harvest.
42
There may have been some seasonality in money demand, which in turn affected regional interest rates.
For example, the demand for money may have been strong in the autumn due to the rice harvest and in the
spring, summer, and autumn due to the sericulture industry. Although Finance Minister Matsukata
mentioned seasonality in the “Explanation of the Establishment of the Bank of Japan,” it does not appear to
have been a major reason for the founding. Moreover, when we regressed each prefecture’s interest rate on
monthly dummy variables, all the dummies were statistically insignificant at conventional levels of
significance. We found no evidence of seasonality when we instead used quarterly dummies. Correlograms
of each prefecture also showed no evidence of seasonal patterns.
41

17

For our institutional variables, the source for the number of correspondent
relationships between the Bank of Japan and commercial banks was the “Manuals and
Rules of the Bank of Japan’s Operations” in Enkaku-shi, Collection 1, Volume 2 and
Collection 2, Volume 3. The number of Bank of Japan offices in each prefecture came
from The Bank of Japan: The First Hundred Years.
Equation 1 also includes measures for the size of informational networks. Data on
the number of telegraph transmissions are from Imperial Statistics and Teishinsho
Nempo. We computed the distance between the capital city of a prefecture and either
Osaka or Tokyo using information on road transportation networks that existed at that
time, using http///www.mapfan.com/routemap/routeset.cgi. In regressions where RATE is
defined relative to the mean across prefectures, we use either Tokyo or Osaka, whichever
is closest. When RATE is defined relative to Osaka or Tokyo, we use the distance
measure with respect to Osaka or Tokyo, respectively.
We included two additional covariates to control for differences in default risk
across prefectures. The first measure of risk that we compute is differences in land prices
across prefectures. If land is a form of borrower’s collateral, then all else equal, higher
land prices ought to be associated with lower default risk. Given the historical importance
of rice in the Japanese economy and the substantial amount of land dedicated to rice
cultivation, we constructed a time series for the price of land dedicated to its production.
However, because not all borrowers were rice farmers or owned fields dedicated to rice
production, we also constructed two other land price series: one for other types of
agricultural crops and one for residential land prices. Data for all three series are taken
from Shuzeikyoku Tokei Nemposho and Imperial Statistics. Although land prices have
been used to proxy risk in other studies (Eichengreen, 1984) the association between
default risk (for borrowers) and land prices in Japan may be more tenuous in the Japanese
case. A borrowers’ personal credit history was the most important determinant of lending,
and the most common form of collateral was government bonds. Some evidence from the
case of Mitsui Bank (Mitsui Bunko, 1980) suggests that land was the last form of
collateral that banks were willing to accept, so it is not clear, a priori, how important the
land proxies are in the Japanese case.

18

Given the limitations of land prices, we constructed a second measure of risk
based on commercial bank failures. The source of the data was Hompo Ginko Hensenshi
(the Tokyo Bankers Association, 1998), which included information about commercial
bank entry and exit during our sample period. We adjust the bank failure series using
population figures from Imperial Statistics. Other things being equal, prefectures with
more bank failures per capita might have had greater underlying risks in lending.

B. Empirical Results from Panel Models

Table 2 provides summary statistics for the variables used in our empirical
analysis. Our sample covers all 47 prefectures and the years 1884 to 1925. We chose to
end our study at this date since there were substantial banking reforms that began in 1926
and gained momentum after the severe Showa Financial Crisis of 1927.43 Most of our
specifications use fixed-effects panel models since there are likely unobserved
differences across prefectures that may influence interest-rate behavior. In these, the
distance measure (which remains constant over our sample period) is dropped from the
reported regressions. Since Figure 1 suggests that there is a clear downward trend in rates
over our sample period, we include year dummies in the regressions. Robust standard
errors are reported to correct for heteroskedasticity.
Column 1 of Table 3 reports results from an OLS specification where we subtract
the mean rate for all prefectures from each individual prefecture’s rate. The R-squared
suggests that our model accounts for roughly 31% of the prefectural variation in interestrate deviations from the mean rate across all prefectures. Moreover, the statistically and
economically significant coefficients reported in Table 3 suggest that there are several
factors that may likely helped integrate the capital market during our sample period.
When we include fixed effects at the prefectural level (column 2), the evidence for these
factors is still there.
Specifically, prefectures with above average commercial branch banking and
telegraph usage as well as BOJ branches converged more quickly. The build out of
43

Given the significant shakeout in the banking industry and the regulatory reforms that occurred (Okazaki
and Sawada, 2006), it is likely the case that rates thereafter evolve for reasons altogether different from the
earlier period.

19

information networks during our sample period appears to have helped a national capital
market emerge. As shown in column 2, the diffusion of information helped to link
regional lending markets. A one-standard-deviation increase in the volume of telegraph
transfers per person lowered a prefecture’s lending rate by roughly 17 basis points (using
the standard deviation shown in Table 2). In addition to facilitating the development of
correspondent networks the telegraph, as we noted above, conveyed information to banks
and borrowers about rates prevailing in other parts of the country thereby driving rates
down in more distant markets.44
Financial innovation also played a role in the convergence of interest rates; in
particular, the dissemination of branch offices appears to have lowered rates for
borrowers. The coefficient shown in column 2 suggests that a one-standard deviation
increase in the ratio of branch offices to head offices decreased lending rates by around
eight basis points. As we suggested earlier, there are several channels through which
branch banking may have accelerated convergence, by introducing more competition, by
facilitating the spread of information on local economic conditions, and by helping banks
allocate capital more efficiently. To provide a more direct test of the first channel, we
interacted our branching variable with merger rates, voluntary liquidations, and bank
entry rates to examine whether branching reduced lending by introducing more
competition into local markets. The interactions were not statistically significant and the
magnitude and statistical significance of the branching variable itself does not change
(results not reported). It thus appears that a more likely explanation for the impact of
branching on lending rates was that it encouraged the spread of transparent information
and improved the efficiency of the lending market.
One of the more interesting empirical findings relates to the unique role the Bank
of Japan played in forging a national capital market. According to our estimated model,
adding a branch of the BOJ lowered rates in a prefecture by roughly 21 basis points. This
result is consistent with the stated goal of the Bank of Japan at that time – to provide a
means of funds transfers throughout the country and to facilitate market finance. The
44

Because the government created a special plan to promote the development of the telegraph in Hokkaido,
we test whether this effect on interest rates is sensitive to Hokkaido’s inclusion in the sample.44 When
equation 1 is re-estimated with Hokkaido omitted from the sample, the effect of the telegraph on lending
rates changes very little; indeed, the size of the effect is approximately 29% larger when Hokkaido is
excluded.

20

Osaka branch nicely illustrates how BOJ branch offices played a role in integrating
financial markets. Both the head office and the Osaka Branch discounted and purchased
bills between Tokyo and Osaka, which Tsurumi (1991) suggests “virtually alleviated the
remaining separations between the Tokyo and Osaka financial markets.”45 Imuta (1980)
examined a slightly later period of branch expansion, but he also emphasizes the merits to
local banks when there was a Bank of Japan branch in the same prefecture. He suggests
that the opening of a Bank of Japan branch in the same prefecture enabled local banks to
deal directly with the Bank of Japan and thus eased the movement of funds to and from
other regions. A BOJ branch also made it more convenient for local banks to accept Bank
of Japan credits.46
There is some evidence that local characteristics such as default risk affected
lending rates, even when we condition on other variables. For example, a one-percent
change in the price of land for other agricultural crops prices lowered lending rates by
roughly 85 basis points relative to the mean. However, we find little evidence that the
variables we used to characterize the competitive environment – merger rates, voluntary
liquidation rates, and bank entry rates – shaped lending rates. Although the coefficients
have the correct predicted signs (negative for bank entry and positive for voluntary
liquidations and mergers), they are not statistically significant at conventional levels
(column 2), and bank mergers is the only one of them that is statistically significant in the
OLS specification (column 1). Their lack of statistical significance may not be surprising
since entry regulations were non-binding in the Meiji-Taisho era. If we had found these
variables to be statistically significant, it might have suggested that differences in
regulation mattered; however, as Okazaki and Sawada (2006) and others have suggested,
greater involvement in entry regulation did not occur until the time of the Showa
financial crisis – after our sample period ends. This evidence also suggests that the
Japanese capital market at the start of our period is better characterized by
underdevelopment rather than lack of competition. That is, once other factors such as
45

Tsurumi (1991, pp. 238-239).
Imuta (1980) says that “the switch from correspondent transactions to current account overdrafts that
resulted from the opening of a Bank of Japan office in the same prefecture presumably increased the
convenience with which Bank of Japan credits could be accepted.” (p. 52) He also emphasizes the
importance to private banks of transactions with the Bank of Japan not only for funds transfers but also to
take advantage of the convenience of current account overdrafts. See Imuta (1980, pp. 50-52).

46

21

financial market innovation (branch banking) and institutional development are
accounted for, competition is not of primary importance in explaining movements of
interest rates.
If we are willing to assume that the random error associated with each prefecture
is uncorrelated with the independent variables, we can also estimate a random effects
model (column 3). The results are robust to this specification test. The signs on the
estimated coefficients for our measures of commercial bank branching, BOJ branches,
and telegraph transmissions do not change, and the results are still statistically significant
at conventional levels. In addition, there are additional signs that differences in risk may
have been important, since two of our proxies are now statistically significant and
negative (rice field land prices and farm field land prices).
As an alternative way of specifying the movement of interest rates over time, the
last two columns of Table 3 define a prefecture’s interest rate relative to either Tokyo
(column 4) or Osaka’s rate (column 5). Since these were the two major financial centers
in Japan in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, these regressions test which
factors accelerated or hindered the movement towards the rate that prevailed in the
largest and most liquid financial markets of the nation.47 The results relative to either
Tokyo or Osaka are quite similar to those shown for the regressions relative to the mean,
and the explanatory variables explain a considerable amount of the variation in either of
the dependent variables.

48

Growth in commercial bank branches, telegraphic

transmissions, and the BOJ branches all reduced a prefecture’s lending rate relative to the
rate prevailing in the financial center. Moreover, all these variables are statistically
significant at conventional levels.49

C. Corroborative Archival Evidence

47

We also considered alternative specifications to take into account the possibility of endogeneity. When
we re-estimated the three fixed-effects models shown in Table 3 with lagged values of land prices, average
loan size, and bank entry, the results were quite similar to those shown in the table.
48
The (within) R-squared is 0.61 when the rate is defined relative to Tokyo and 0.47 when the rate is
relative to Osaka. The signs and statistical significance of the estimated coefficients is quite similar to those
shown in columns 4 and 5 if a random effects model is employed (not reported).
49
In an OLS regression without fixed effects, distance is positive and statistically significant when the
dependent variable is defined with respect to the rate in Osaka or Tokyo.

22

Let us now take a closer look at the funds transfer services provided by a Bank of
Japan branch. 50 Specifically, let us examine the Bank of Japan Saibu Branch, which
opened in 1893. The Saibu Branch was the second branch office after Osaka. It was
initially established in Akamagaseki (now Shimonoseki) in Yamaguchi Prefecture, but in
1898, it moved to Moji (now Kitakyushu) in Fukuoka Prefecture. The major industries in
this region were coal mining and rice production, and it had active financial dealings with
Osaka, which served as the trade center.51
The Saibu Branch’s first manager described the local financial situation before the
branch opened as “about ¥10 million a year in rice, coal and other industrial sales outside
of Kyushu, with very few commodities other than these being sold. In other words, it was
always a one-sided funds transfer. Even offsetting payments to the treasury in Kyushu, it
was still necessary to send ¥4-5 million in cash every year from Osaka. Therefore,
interest rates were ¥0.02-0.03 per day higher than Osaka.”52 The movement of funds to
the region was not necessarily sufficient to cover local demand, and higher interest rates
may have reflected the risk of cash transfers or arbitrage opportunities. With the opening
of the Saibu Branch, funds transfers could be made over the secure Bank of Japan
network. This likely facilitated the movement of funds and drove down rates.
The details of funds transfers can be found in the “Bank of Japan Business
Report.” 53 While there were changes over time in the direction of funds inflows and
outflows,54 the volume of funds transferred over the Bank of Japan network increased
each year after a branch was established. Kasuya (1991, p.178) says that by 1902 the
Moji Branch of the Mitsui Bank was “transferring enormous sums of funds over the Bank
50

In this section, we draw on archival work found in Ohnuki (2007). For Bank of Japan funds transfers,
Tsurumi (1991) uses the period from the latter half of 1883 to the first half of 1888, during which time the
activities of the transfer clearinghouses declined. His analysis distinguishes between government transfers
and civil transfers for transfers between Bank of Japan offices and between the Bank of Japan and privatesector banks. See Tsurumi (1991, pp. 144-151).
51
Tokyo and Osaka account for the large majority of the total funds transfers of all Bank of Japan offices.
52
Takahashi (1976, p. 35).
53
In Bank of Japan, Research Department (1957b, 1958b). The first “Bank of Japan Business Report” was
issued in 1888.
54
Looking at the regional breakdown of the Saibu Branch’s flow of funds, in most years the Saibu Branch
had a small net inflow of funds vis–a-vis the head office, while Kyoto, Nagoya and Fukushima (listed in
aggregate as “others” in the table) had fairly consistent net outflows. By contrast, vis-a-vis the Osaka
Branch there were net inflows until 1895, but this reversed in 1896 and there were large, consistent net
outflows thereafter.

23

of Japan telegraphic transfers network from the head office and its Osaka branch. 55
Mukai (2000) says that “during the Meiji Period, even the zaibatsu-affiliated city banks...
used the Bank of Japan branch office network for transfers of funds from the head
office.”56
There is also evidence that the Bank of Japan network helped to alleviate the
regional funding bias through payments-side funds transfers between remote regions. The
“Osaka Bank Report” of 1907 argued that the flow of funds was substantially smoother in
regions with Bank of Japan offices.57 As the report notes, “The benefits to be enjoyed by
banks when transferring funds depend entirely upon whether they or the counterparty
bank are located in areas where there are Bank of Japan offices.” In other words, having a
Bank of Japan office facilitated the transfers of funds between local financial institutions.

IV. Conclusion

After the Meiji restoration, Japanese policymakers began to experiment with
western institutions and technologies in order to modernize their economy, but the
process was one of trial and error. Shortly after Emperor Meiji assumed the thrown, the
Japanese banking system was transformed by the creation of national banks, which were
modeled after institutions that went by the same name in the United States. However,
recognizing the weaknesses of a banking system centered on these banks, Japanese
policymakers continued their process of institutional adoption and innovation, creating a
banking system that by the end of the nineteenth century looked noticeably different from
the U.S. system. In particular, policymakers had replaced national banks with alternative
55

According to the minutes of a branch managers meeting of the Mitsui Bank held in November 1905,
Senshiro Kanezuka, the Manager of the Moji Branch spoke on “the reason for the recent sharp falls in
interest rates in Shimonoseki and Moji and the prospects for the future.” He noted that “money is not
flowing in to Kyushu from other regions but flowing out recently to other regions through the Bank of
Japan so that the decline in interest rates is not unreasonable” In other words, he believed that declining
interest rates for the Kyushu region were related to the relaxation of finance so that funds could be sent to
other regions. This statement is also an indication that the Bank of Japan branch office network provided an
important vehicle for the transfer of funds between regions at this time (Japan Business History Institute,
1977, p. 153).
56
Mukai (2000, p. 966).
57
The Osaka Bank Report of 1907 was published under the name of Midori Kobayashi, and is contained in
the section of Bank of Japan (1957a, pp. 21-24) entitled, of “The Bank of Japan and Funds Transfers,” and
published by the Research Department.

24

types of commercial banks. They had encouraged these commercial banks to form
branching networks, as in Canada and England. In 1882, the government created a central
bank whose network of branches spread over the country by 1900.
Along with a telegraph network, these institutional innovations had important
implications for the creation of a national capital market in Japan. Using a new data set of
annual lending rates for 47 Japanese prefectures, we show that differences in interest
rates across Japanese prefectures declined between 1884 and 1925. The reduction in
interest rate differentials between outlying prefectures and financial centers was
influenced by both technology and institutions. The development of information
networks used for lending, such as the telegraph, played an important role in capital
market integration, while branch offices allowed commercial banks to gather better
information about customers and market conditions and helped banks shift funds to
where they could be most efficiently employed. Meanwhile, the establishment of satellite
offices of the Bank of Japan reduced lending rates by facilitating funds transfers between
regions. And in contrast to the U.S., regulation played an insignificant role in impeding
capital market integration.
The technological innovations and institutional developments that occurred during
the Meiji and Taisho periods helped to transform Japan’s underdeveloped capital market
into a more efficient, national market for lending and borrowing. This more efficient,
national capital market likely proved important for Japan’s economic growth since there
was relatively little foreign borrowing. However, it is still unclear whether capital market
integration and the development of Japan’s banking system were necessary conditions for
modern economic growth in Japan, and that remains as an important topic for future
research.

25

References
Asai, Yoshio. (1978). 1910-20 Nendai ni Okeru Shiten Ginko Seido no Tenkai to Toshi
Kinyu Shijou [Development of Branch Banking and Financial Markets in Cities, 19101920.] Seijo University, Economic Research Paper 59/60 (Japanese):307-340.
Asakura, Kokichi. (1961). Meiji Zenki Nihon Kin'yu Kozo shi [History of Japanese
Monetary Structure in Early Meiji Period]. Tokyo. Iwanami Shoten (Japanese).
Bank of Japan. (1986). NihonGinko Hyakunen-shi Shiryo-hen [Bank of Japan: The First
Hundred Years-Materials]. Tokyo: Bank of Japan (Japanese).
Bank of Japan. (1982). Nihon Ginko Hyakunen-shi dai 1 kan [Bank of Japan : The First
Hundred Years] vol.1. Tokyo: Bank of Japan (Japanese).
Bank of Japan, Research Department. (1958a). Nihon Kin’yu-shi Shiryo Meiji Taishohen
dai 4 kan [Materials on Japanese Monetary History, Meiji and Taisho Periods]. Vol. 4.
Tokyo: Bank of Japan (Japanese).
Bank of Japan, Research Department. (1958b). Nihon Kin’yu-shi Shiryo Meiji Taishohen
dai 11 kan [Materials on Japanese Monetary History, Meiji and Taisho Periods]. Vol.11.
Tokyo: Bank of Japan (Japanese).
Bank of Japan, Research Department. (1957a). Nihon Kin’yu-shi Shiryo Meiji Taishohen
dai 6 kan [Materials on Japanese Monetary History, Meiji and Taisho Periods]. Vol. 6.
Tokyo: Bank of Japan (Japanese).
Bank of Japan, Research Department. (1957b). Nihon Kin’yu-shi Shiryo Meiji Taishohen
dai 10 kan [Materials on Japanese Monetary History, Meiji and Taisho Periods]. Vol. 10.
Tokyo: Bank of Japan (Japanese).
Bernhofen, Daniel M. and John C. Brown. (2005). “An Empirical Assessment of the
Comparative Advantage Gains from Trade: Evidence from Japan.” American Economic
Review 95(1): 208-25.
Bernhofen, Daniel M. and John C. Brown. (2004). “A Direct Test of the Theory of
Comparative Advantage: The Case of Japan.” Journal of Political Economy 112(1): 4867.
Bodenhorn, Howard. (2003). State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Bodenhorn, Howard. (1995). “A More Perfect Union: Regional Interest Rates in the
United States, 1880 – 1960,” in Michael D. Bordo and Richard Sylla (eds.) AngloAmerican Financial Systems: Institutions and Markets in the Twentieth Century. Burr
Ridge, IL: Irwin Professional Publishing, 415-54.

26

Bodenhorn, Howard and Hugh Rockoff. (1992). “Regional Interest Rates in Antebellum
America,” in Claudia Goldin and Hugh Rockoff (eds.) Strategic Factors in Nineteenth
Century Economic History: A Volume to Honor Robert Fogel. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Bordo, Michael D., Eichengreen, Barry and Douglas A. Irwin. (1999). “Is Globalization
really Different than Globalization a hundred years ago?” NBER Working Paper 7195
(June).
Carlson, Mark and Kris James Mitchener. (2007). “Branch Banking as a Device for
Discipline: Competition and Bank Survivorship During the Great Depression.” NBER
Working Paper 12938 (February).
Davis, Lance. (1965). “The Investment Market: the Evolution of a National Market.”
Journal of Economic History 25(3): 355-99.
Eichengreen, Barry. (1984). “Mortgage Interest Rates in the Populist Era,” American
Economic Review 74(5): 995-1015.
Fujii, Nobuyuki. (1990). “Meijizenki niokeru Dempo no Chiikiteki Riyou Joukyou” [Use
of Telegraph by Region in the Early Meiji Era]. In Kindai Nihon Kenkyu Kai (ed.),
Kindai Nihon to Jouhou [Modern Japan and Information]. Tokyo: Yamakawa
Shuppansha, 138-56 (Japanese).
Fujii, Nobuyuki. (1998). Terekomu no Keizaishi [History of Telecommunications from an
Economic Viewpoint]. Tokyo: Keiso Shobo (Japanese).
Fujii, Nobuyuki (2005). Tsushin to Chiikishakai [Communications and Regions]. Tokyo:
Nihonkeizai Hyoronsha (Japanese).
Good, David F. (1977). “Financial Integration in Late Nineteenth-Century Austria,”
Journal of Economic History 37(4): 890-910.
Goto, Shinichi. (1973). Hompo Ginko Godoshi Zoho Kaiteiban [History of Consolidation
of Japanese Banks]. Tokyo: Kinyuzaiseijijou Kenkyukai (Japanese).
Imuta, Toshimitsu. (1980). “Nihon Kin’yu Kozo no Saihensei to Chiho Ginko”
[Reformation of the Japanese Financial Structure and Regional Banks]. In Kokichi
Asakura (ed.) Ryo Taisenkan ni okeru Kin’yu Kozo [Financial Structure during the
Interwar Period. Tokyo: Ochanomizu Shobo, 3-114 (Japanese).
Ishii, Kanji. (1994). Jouhou Tsuushin no Shakaishi [Social History of Information and
Communication].Tokyo: Yuhikaku (Japanese).

27

James, John A. and David F. Weiman, (2005). “The Political Economy of the US
Monetary Union: The Civil War Era as a Watershed.” American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings 97(2): 271-5.
James, John A. (1976a). “The Development of the National Money Market.” Journal of
Economic History 36(4): 878-97.
James, John A. (1976b). “Banking Market Structure, Risk, and the Pattern of Local
Interest Rates in the United States, 1893-1911.” Review of Economics and Statistics:
58(4): 453-62.
Japan Business History Institute. (1977). Mitsui Ginko Shiryo 2 Shitencho Kaigi Kiroku
(Mitsui Bank Materials 2: Records of Branch Managers Meetings). Tokyo: Zaidan Hojin
Nihon Keieishi Kenkyusho (Japanese).
Kamiyama, Tsuneo. (2000). “Zaisei Seisaku to Kinyu Kouzou”[Financial Policy and
Financial Structure]. In Kanji Ishii, Akira Hara, and Haruhito Takeda (eds.) Nihon
Keizaishi 2 Sangyo Kakumeiki [Japanese Economic History 2: Industrial Revolution
Period]. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press (Japanese).
Kasuya, Makoto. (2000). “Kinyuseido no Keisei to Ginko Jourei/ Chochikuginko Jourei”
[Formation of Monetary system and Bank Law/Savings bank Law]. In Masanao Ito,
Masayoshi Tsurumi, and Yoshio Asai (eds.) “Kinyu Kiki to Kakushin [Financial Crisis
and Innovation]. Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Hyoronsha, 1-35 (Japanese).
Kasuya, Makoto. (1991). “Nihon ni okeru Yokin Ginko no Keisei Katei – Shiharai Junbi
wo Chushin toshite” [Process of Establishing Deposit Banks in Japan – Focus on Cash
Reserves]. Shakai Kagaku Kenkyu [Socio-scientific Research] 43(4): 85-244 (Japanese).
Levine, Ross. (2005). “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence.” in Philippe Aghion
and Steven Durlauf Handbook of Economic Growth (eds.), New York: Elsevier.
Lewis, Kenneth A. and Kozo Yamamura. (1971). “Industrialization and Interregional
Interest Rate Structure: The Japanese Case, 1889 – 1925. Explorations in Economic
History 8(4): 473-99.
Mitchener, Kris James and Mari Ohnuki. (2007). “Capital Market Integration in Japan.”
Monetary and Economic Studies 25(2): 129-53.
Mitsui Bunko. (1980). Mitsui Jigyoushi Hompen dai 2 kan. [History of Mitsui business].
Vol.2. Tokyo: Mitsui Bunko (Japanese).
Miyamoto, Matarou. (1988). Kinsei Nihon no Shijo Keizai [The Market Economy in
Tokugawa Japan]. Tokyo: Yuhikaku (Japanese).

28

Miyajima, Shigeki and Warren E. Weber. (2001). “A Comparison of National Banks in
Japan and the United States between 1872 and 1885.” Monetary and Economic Studies
19(1): 31-48.
Mukai, Yurio. (2000). “Kin’yu Gyo no Tenkai” [Development of the Financial Business]
In Nishi Nihon Bunka Kyokai (ed.) “Fukuokaken-shi Tsushi-hen Kindai Sangyo Keizai 2
[Chronological History of Fukuoka Prefecture, Modern Industry and Economy]. Vol. 2.
Fukuoka: Nishi Nihon Bunka Kyokai, 933-1070 (Japanese)..
Nihon Tokei Kyokai. (1987). Nihon Choki Tokei Soran Dai Yon-kan [Historical Statistics
of Japan] vol.4. Tokyo:Nihon Tokei Kyokai (Japanese).
Ohnuki, Mari. (2007). “The Bank of Japan Network and Financial Market Integration:
From the Establishment of the Bank of Japan until the Early 20th Century.” Monetary
and Economic Studies 25(1): 95-125.
Okada, Kazunobu. (1966). “Futsuu Ginko Seido no Kakuritsu” [Development of the
Commercial Banks System]. In Kinyu Keizai Kenkyusho (ed.) Nihon no Ginko Seido
Kakuritsu Shi-Nihon Kin’yu Shijou Hattatsu Shi II [History of the development of the
Banking System in Japan – History of the Development of Market in Japan]. Tokyo:
Toyokeizai Shinposha (Japanese), 45-191 (Japanese).
Okada, Kazunobu. (2001).“Chiho Ginko Shiron [History of Regional Banks].” Tokyo:
Nihon Keizai Hyoronsha. (Japanese).
Okazaki, Tetsuji.(2002). “Branch banking and money flow of Mitsubishi bank-19281942.” Bulletin of Mitsubishi Research Institute of Historical Materials 3:1-29.
Okazaki, Tetsuji and Michiru Sawada (2006). “Effects of a Bank Consolidation
Promotion Policy: Evaluating Bank Law in 1927 Japan.” CIRJE Discussion Paper F-400
(February).
Nikkei Kin’yu Shinbunsha and Chihou Kinyushi Kenkyukai (2003). Nihon Chihou Kinyu
Shi [Local Monetary History in Japan]. Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha (Japanese).
Rockoff, Hugh. (1977). “Regional Interest Rates and Bank Failures.” Explorations in
Economic History. 14(1): 90-95.
Rousseau, Peter L. (1999) “Finance, Investment, and Growth in Meiji-era Japan,” Japan
and the World Economy 11(2):185-98.
Smiley, Gene. (1975). “Interest Rate Movements in the United States, 1888-1913.”
Journal of Economic History 35(3): 591-620.
Snowden, Kenneth. (1987). "Mortgage Rates and American Capital Market Development
in the Late Nineteenth Century," Journal of Economic History 47(3): 671-91.

29

Stigler, George. (1967) “Imperfections in the Capital Market,” Journal of Political
Economy 75(3): 113-22.
Stigler, George and Robert A. Sherwin. (1985). “The Extent of the Market.” Journal of
Law and Economics 28(3): 555-85.
Sugiyama, Shinya. (1990). “Jouhou Kakumei” [Information Revolution].” In Shunsaku
Nishikawa and Yuzo Yamamoto (eds.) Sangyouka no Jidai Ge- Nihonkeizaishi 5
[Industrialization Age-Japanese Economic History 5]. Tokyo: Iwanamishoten, 134-165
(Japanese).
Sugiyama, Kazuo. (1965). “Kokuritsu Ginko no Tokeiteki Kosatsu” [Statistical Views on
the national banks], Tohata Seiichi and Takahashi Taizo ed. “Meiji zenki no Ginko
seido” [Banking system in early Meiji period], Toyo Keizai Shinpo sha.
Sushka, Mary E. and Brian W. Barrett. (1984). “Banking Structure and the National
Capital Market 1869-1914.” Journal of Economic History 44(2):463-77.
Sussman, Nathan and Yisheh Yafeh. (1999). Institutions, Reforms, and Country Risk:
Lessons from Japanese Government Debt in the Meiji Period.” Journal of Economic
History 60(2): 442-67.
Sylla, Richard. (1969). “Federal Policy, Banking Market Structure, and Capital
Mobilization in the United States 1863-1913.” Journal of Economic History 29(4): 65786.
Takahashi, Korekiyo. (1976). Takahashi Korekiyo Jiden Gekan [Memoirs of Takahashi
Korekiyo]. Vol. 2. Tokyo: Chuo Koronsha (Japanese).
Teranishi, Juro. (1982). Nihon no Keizaihatten to Kinyuu [Japanese Economic
Development and Finance]. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten (Japanese).
Teranishi, Juro. (2005). The Evolution of Economic Systems in Japan. Cheltenham, U.K.:
Edward Elgar.
Teranishi, Juro. (2003). Nihon no Keizai Shisutemu [The Japanese Economic System].
Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten (Japanese).
Tsurumi, Masayoshi. (1981). Daiichiji Taisen Kinri Kyoutei to Toshi Kin’yu Shijou
[Interest Rate Agreements during World War I and Its Impact on the Financial Market in
the City] Kin’yu Keizai 1: 1-50 (Japanese).
Tsurumi, Masayoshi. (1991). Nihon Shin’yo kikou no Kakuritsu [Establishment of Credit
System in Japan]. Tokyo:Yuhikaku (Japanese).

30

Williamson, Jeffrey G, (1974). Late Nineteenth Century Economic Development: A
General Equilibrium History London: Cambridge University Press.
Yamamura, Kozo. (1970). “Nihon ni okeru Touitsuteki Shihon Shijou no Seiritsu, 18891925.” [Integration of the capital market in Japan]. Shakai Keizaishi Gaku 35(5-6): 58-85
(Japanese).

31

Figure 1. Narrowing of Interest Rate Differentials across Japanese Prefectures
0.20

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0.00
1922q3

1921q3

1920q3

1919q3

1918q3

1917q3

1916q3

1915q3

1914q3

1913q3

1912q3

1911q3

1910q3

1909q3

1908q3

1907q3

1906q3

1905q3

1904q3

1903q3

1902q3

1901q3

1900q3

1899q3

1898q3

1897q3

1896q3

1895q3

1894q3

1893q3

1892q3

1891q3

1890q3

1889q3

1888q3

1887q3

1886q3

Coefficient of Variation of Average Quarterly Interest Rates for Japanese Prefectures

Notes and Sources: This graph shows the coefficient of variation of lending rates for 47
Japanese prefectures. Quarterly interest rates are three-month averages of monthly
lending rates for individual prefectures based on data from the Ministry of Finance’s
Ginkokyoku Nempo, and described further in the text.

32

Figure 2 Growth in banks (head office + branch)

National banks
Total-National banks

9000
8000
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000

Year

33

1924

1922

1920

1918

1916

1914

1912

1910

1908

1906

1904

1902

1900

1898

1896

1894

1892

1890

1888

1886

0

1884

1000

0

Hokkaido
Aomori
Iwate
Akita
Miyagi
Yamagata
Fukushima
Niigata
Ishikawa
Fukui
Toyama
Ibaraki
Gumma
Tochigi
Saitama
Chiba
Tokyo
Kanagawa
Yamanashi
Nagano
Shizuoka
Aichi
Gifu
Shiga
Mie
Kyoto
Osaka
Hyogo
Wakayama
Okayama
Hiroshima
Yamaguchi
Tottori
Shimane
Tokushima
Kochi
Ehime
Fukuoka
Nagasaki
Oita
Kumamoto
Kagoshima
Saga
Miyazaki

Prefecture

34
19
23

19
20

19
17

19
14

19
11

19
08

19
05

19
02

18
99

18
96

18
93

18
90

18
87

18
84

Figure 3. Branch Offices in Japan

7000

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

year

Figure 4. Telegraph offices per 100,000 people, 1885

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Figure 5. The number of Correspondent Contracts between BOJ and
Private Banks
300

250

200

150

100

Year

35

1925

1923

1921

1919

1917

1915

1913

1911

1909

1907

1905

1903

1901

1899

1897

1895

1893

1891

1889

1887

1885

0

1883

50

Figure 6. Bank of Japan’s Branches in 1909
(Colored prefecture indicates Bank of Japan office)

1

2
5
6
17
32

41
40

42
46

35

43 44
45

31

18

16

15

4

7

20 10 9
33 28 26
25 21
11 8
19
37
23
38 39 36
22
24
12
30
27
29
14 13
34

3

47

List of Prefectures:
1.Hokkaido 2.Aomori 3.Iwate 4.Miyagi 5.Akita 6.Yamagata
7.Fukushima 8.Ibaraki 9.Tochigi 10.Gunma 11.Saitama
12.Chiba 13.Tokyo 14.Kanagawa 15.Niigata 16.Toyama
17.Ishikawa 18.Fukui 19.Yamanashi 20.Nagano 21.Gifu
22.Shizuoka 23.Aichi 24.Mie 25.Shiga 26.Kyoto 27.Osaka
28.Hyogo 29.Nara 30.Wakayama 31.Tottori 32.Shimane
33.Okayama 34.Hiroshima 35.Yamaguchi 36.Tokushima
37.kagawa 38.Ehime 39.Kochi 40.Fukuoka 41.Saga 42.Nagasaki
43.Kumamoto 44.Oita 45.Miyazaki 46.kagoshima 47.Okinawa

36

Table 1. Opening of the Bank of Japan’s Branches and
Offices
End of
year

Total

Head
office

Location of Bank of Japan Branches
and Offices outside of Tokyo

Local
Offices

Branches

1882
1883
1884
1885
1886
1887
1888
1889
1890
1891
1892

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
3

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
1

Osaka, Gifu, Wakayama
Osaka, Wakayama

1893

7

1

2

4

Osaka, Saibu, Sapporo, Hakodate,
Nemuro, Wakayama

1894

8

1

2

5

1895
1896

6
6

1
1

3
3

2
2

1897
1898

8
8

1
1

4
4

3
3

1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904

9
9
9
9
9
9

1
1
1
1
1
1

4
4
4
4
4
4

4
4
4
4
4
4

1905

10

1

4

5

1906
1907
1908

9
9
9

1
1
1

4
4
4

4
4
4

1909

10

1

4

5

Osaka

Osaka, Saibu, Sapporo, Hakodate,
Nemuro, Kyoto, Wakayama
Osaka, Saibu, Hokkaido, Sapporo,
Kyoto
Osaka, Saibu, Hokkaido, Nagoya,
Sapporo, Kyoto, Otaru
Osaka, Saibu, Hokkaido, Nagoya,
Sapporo, Kyoto, Otaru, Fukushima

Osaka, Saibu, Hokkaido, Nagoya,
Sapporo, Kyoto, Otaru, Fukushima,
Hiroshima
Osaka, Saibu, Nagoya, Sapporo,
Kyoto, Otaru, Fukushima, Hiroshima

Osaka, Saibu, Nagoya, Otaru, Kyoto,
Hakodate, Fukushima, Hiroshima,
Kanazawa

Source: The Bank of Japan: First Hundred Years-Materials (1986).

37

Table 2. Characteristics of Banking Markets in Japanese Prefectures

Variable
Average Annual Lending Rate
Bank Failures
Log Price of Land for Rice
Log Price of Land for other Agricultural Crops
Log Residential Land Price
Log Average Loan Size
Telegraph Transmissions per capita
Commercial Bank Branches
BOJ Bank Branches
BOJ Correspondent Relationships
Bank Merger Rate
Voluntary Liquidation Rate for Banks
Bank Entry Rate
Distance (kilometers from Tokyo or Osaka)

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

10.69
0.71
3.60
2.34
4.17
12.61
0.89
1.75
0.19
3.30
1.28
0.69
10.60
330.333

1.62
4.61
0.31
0.51
0.80
1.41
0.89
1.83
0.46
3.04
5.59
4.10
31.22
316.4232

6.33
0.00
2.40
0.90
2.36
7.56
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0

Sources: See the text for a detailed description of data sources.

Maximum
18.00
100.00
4.36
3.85
6.83
17.28
5.50
15.00
3.00
22.00
100.00
100.00
575.00
1602.5

Table 3. Regressions Explaining the Convergence in Interest Rates, 1884-1925

Independent Variable

Relative to
Prefectural

Relative to
Prefectural

Relative to
Prefectural

Relative to

Relative to

Average

Average

Average

Tokyo's Rate

Osaka's Rate

0.0014
0.0069

0.0026
0.0068
0.0374
0.5687

Bank Failures
(standard error)

0.0117
0.0077

0.0011
0.0069

Price of Land for Rice

-1.2428 ***
0.1549

-0.0429
0.5717

-0.8496 ***
0.3594

0.2783
0.5799

Price of Land for other
agricultural crops

-0.2620 ***
0.0677

-0.8491 *
0.4477

-0.4410 ***
0.1690

-0.8243 *
0.4489

-0.9872 **
0.4719

Residential Land Price

-0.1589 **
0.0815

-0.0468
0.1037

-0.0535
0.0921

-0.1200
0.1061

-0.1020
0.1079

Average Loan Size

-0.2237 ***
0.0418

0.0215
0.0616

-0.0241
0.0573

0.0626
0.0638

0.0146
0.0631

Telegraph Transmissions
per capita

0.0116
0.0696

-0.1906 **
0.0854

-0.1704 **
0.0780

-0.2930 ***
0.0838

-0.2033 **
0.0956

Commercial Bank Branches

-0.0958 ***
0.0179

-0.0450 *
0.0256

-0.0497 **
0.0228

-0.0418 *
0.0256

-0.0471 *
0.0259

BOJ Bank Branches

-0.1093 *
0.0633

-0.2066 ***
0.0890

-0.1772 **
0.0867

-0.1924 ***
0.0888

-0.2011 **
0.0898

BOJ Correspondent
Relationships

0.0113
0.0079

0.0074
0.0105

0.0083
0.0095

0.0066
0.0106

0.0067
0.0106

Bank Merger Rate

0.0097 **
0.0041

0.0038
0.0034

0.0038
0.0035

0.0032
0.0034

0.0040
0.0035

Voluntary Liquidation Rate
for Banks

0.0067
0.0066

0.0059
0.0047

0.0059
0.0049

0.0053
0.0046

0.0072
0.0046

Bank Entry Rate

-0.0006
0.0011

-0.0005
0.0010

-0.0006
0.0010

-0.0005
0.0010

-0.0005
0.0010

Distance

0.0005 ***
0.0001

Year Dummies
Number of Observations
Estimation Method

Yes
1806
Pooled OLS

0.0019
0.0070

0.0008 **
0.0004
Yes
1806
Fixed
Effects

Yes
1806
Random
Effects

Yes
1766
Fixed
Effects

Yes
1766
Fixed
Effects

Notes and Sources: Column 1 estimates pooled OLS and columns 2-5 estimates panel regressions based on
equation 1 in the text. In columns 1-3 the dependent variable is the annual average lending rate in prefecture i,
year t, minus the the mean across all prefectures. In columns 4 and 5, the dependent variable is the annual average
lending rate in prefecture i, year t, minus the rate in Tokyo or Osaka, respectively. A constant term (not reported)
was also included. See the text for variable definitions and sources. Stars indicate significance at 1(***), 5(**),
and 10(*) percent levels, respectively. Robust standard errors are reported below the estimated regression coefficients.

