                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DISSAVING AFTER RETIREMENT:
              TESTING THE PURE LIFE CYCLE HYPOTHESIS


                       B. Douglas Bernheim



                      Working Paper No. 11409




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                            July 19814




This paper was presented at the NBER Pensions Conference in San
Diego, April 13—114, 19814. Financial support from CEPR and the NBER
pensions project is gratefully acknowledged. I am indebted to
Lawrence Levin for able research assistance and to Debbie Olson
for technical preparation of this manuscript. I would also like to
thank Martin Feldstein, Franklin Fisher, Victor Fuchs, Michael
Hurd, Mervyn King, Daniel McFadden, and Lawrence Summers for
helpful comments and discussions. The views expressed here are imj
own and should not be attributed to any other individual or
organization. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Pensions and project in Government Budget. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #1)409
                                                  July 198)4




                        Dissaving After Retirement:
                   Testing the Pure Life Cycle Hypothesis



                                 ABSTRACT



        In this paper, we examine several aspects of saving and dissaving

after retirement. First, we argue that existing evidence on bequeathable

age—wealth profiles is suspect, and provide new evidence based on

longitudinal data indicating that significant dissaving may occur,

particularly among single individuals and early retirees. Second, we argue

that, in the presence of annuities, estimates of dissaving should be

adjusted by including the simple discounted value of benefits in total

wealth. Such adjustments reveal relatively little dissaving among any group

of retirees. Finally, we test the pure life cycle hypothesis by observing

the behavioral response of rates of accumulation to involuntary

annuitization, and find empirical refutation of life cycle implications.




                                                 B. Douglas Bernheim
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 Stanford University
                                                 )452 Encina Hall
                                                 Stanford, CA 9)4305
                                      —1—



I. Introduction

      Does wealth typically decline after retirement? Despite imich

recent research, this deceptively simple question has remained contro-

versial. Previous investigators seem evenly divided on the issue of

whether elderly individuals save or dissave, and no consensus about

magnitudes has emerged even among those who agree on the direction of

change.

      There is as well widespread disagreement about the reasons for

asking this question. Some (notably Mirer 119791) have argued that the

life cycle hrpothesis is inconsistent with rising or slowly declining

wealth after retirement. Others (such as Davies [19811) have recognized

that, in view of uncertainty concerning lifespans, one cannot base a

formal test of the life cycle hypothesis on this information alone.

Such authors have, however, suggested that one could conduct an informal

"test" by comparing empirical data with the results of simulations based

upon plausible parameters values. Finally, one might altogether abandon

the hope of inferring motives from information about the age—wealth

profile, and instead simply treat such information as valuable per Se.

If, for example, wealth fails to decline rapidly after retirement,

intergenerational transfers are likely to be significant. Regardless of

motives, this will have strong implications concerning the long run

distribution of wealth (see, for example, Loury [1981] and Stiglitz

[19781)
                                        —2—




      The appropriate definition of "wealth" will depend critically upon

which of these purposes one has in mind. Information on bequeathable

wealth—age   profiles is by itself sufficient for drawing inferences about
the magnitude of bequests. However, tests of the life cycle hypothesis
must necessarily consider all forms of resources, including annuities
(Social Security and pensions). It is therefore somewhat surprising

that, with few exceptions (King and Dicks—Mireaux [1982, 19831, Hurd and

Shoven [19831), studies of the age—wealth profile ignore annuities. Nor

have any of these authors provided a theoretical discussion of how

calculated rates of dissaving should be adjusted in the presence of

annuities.

      Accordingly, this paper has three objectives. First, we present

new evidence on the relationship between age and bequeathable wealth

holdings after retirement. While previous studies employ either cross—

sectional survey or estate data, our approach is to follow a sample of

retired individuals over time. We argue that this methodology is likely

to produce superior estimates of dissaving after retirement. We find

that bequeathable wealth declines relatively rapidly for single indivi-

duals (roughly 3 to It% per year), while for couples, the evidence is

mixed (slight declines, on the order of 1 to 2% per year, are observed

for early retirees; otherwise, bequeathable wealth remains relatively

constant after retirement). Changes in the composition of bequeathable

wealth (specifically, the fraction held as residential housing) are also

analyzed.
                                       —3—




      Our second objective is to develop and implement a technique for

calculating meaningful rates of resource depletion when some positive

fraction of wealth is held as annuities. Since survival probabilities

decline with age, the use of actuarial values (as in King and Dicks—

Mireaux l982, 1983]) builds in a tendency for total wealth to decline

quite rapidly after retirement. However, we argue that actuarial

discounting is inappropriate for calculating meaningful rates of deple-

tion. Instead, we show that simple discounting of benefit streams is

(approximately) appropriate whenever behavior is governed by traditional

life cycle concerns. Thus we find, contrary to King and Dicks—Mireaux,

that, after adjusting for annuities, neither single individuals nor

couples dissave significant fractions of their total resources after

retirement.

      Of course, this is not a formal test of the life cycle maximiza-

tion principal. Our third objective is to construct such a test using

information on the age—wealth profile. We show that the life cycle

model has strong implications about how rates of accumulation and deple-

tion will respond to the imposition of non—discretionary annuities..!.'

Implementation of these tests produces results which are unfavorable to

the pure life cycle bpothesis.

      The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we

describe the data source which is employed throughout. A discussion of

the existing literature on bequeathable wealth—age profiles appears in

section 3, along with our new estimates. Theoretical foundations for

the valuation of annuity wealth are discussed in section I, and adjusted
                                      —'4—




estimates of accumulation and depletion are presented. Section 5
describes and implements a test of the life cycle hypothesis based on

the behavioral response of changes in wealth to involuntary annuitiza—

tion. The paper closes with a brief conclusion.



2. The Data

      This study employs data from the Longitudinal Retirement History

Survey (LRHS), which followed a sample of over 11,000 retirement—aged

individuals (58 to 63 in 1968) for a period of ten years, starting in

1969. Some information was also obtained from matching administrative

records.

      The LRHS collected extensive information on the net worth of

respondents. Our measure of bequeathable wealth includes the value of

owner occupied housing (net of mortgage liabilities), equity in a

business or farm, the net value of other property holdings, cash, and

financial assets (including stocks, bonds, bank accounts, checking

accounts, and money loaned to other), minus total household debt

(excluding mortgage items already counted)..V

      While extensive in coverage, there is reason to believe that

wealth data contained in the LRHS are not of high quality. In general,

it is difficult to elicit accurate information about net worth in inter—

view SUVy5. A casual inspection of LRHS records indicates sub—

stantial misreporting of assets.J Deleting observations for which any

component of wealth was incorrectly reported would drastically reduce

the sample size, as well as induce a bias of unknown direction. Due to
                                      —5—



the relative magnitude of housing in the portfolios of most elderly

individuals, we did insist that the completion code associated with this

item indicated an unambiguous value. This probably biases our sample

somewhat towards renters,.J although the statistics presented in section

3 suggest that this bias is not large. Throughout the paper, it is

important to bear in mind that wealth is poorly reported; we will return

to this issue at various points.

      Our study also requires extensive information on pensions and

annuities. Private and government pension benefits are inferred from

income data reported during the sample period. Fortunately, it is

possible to distinguish one—shot, lump sum payments from annuities on

the basis of recorded responses. For individuals retiring late, bene-

fits from such pensions may commence after 1979 (the youngest respondent

is 68 in that year), in which case no income is reported. For such

individuals, we supplement income data with survey responses to ques-

tions concerning expected levels of future benefits. However, one

should bear in mind that private pensions in particular are probably

under—reported for late retirees.

      Social Security benefits for each year were calculated on the

basis of prevailing legislation in that year, using data on covered

earnings obtained through matching administrative records. Benefits

were calculated on the basis of actual retirement dates for respondent

and spouse. For the purpose of this calculation, we assumed that all

individuals still working in 1979 retired at the end of that year.
                                        —6—




      The matching administrative records were also used to calculate a

measure of lifetime resources for each respondent. Unfortunately, this

information is incomplete, since yearly earnings are only reported up to

the taxable maximum. Since the records also indicate the quarter in

which the taxable maximum was reached, we were able to extrapolate

yearly earnings using the method described by Fox [19161. The resulting

income stream was then accumulated at a 3% rate to a standard age, pro-

ducing a mesure of lifetime earnings.

      Much of our analysis also requires us to know whether a particular

individual is retired. Defining retirement is problematic. To reduce

contamination arising from the presence of earned income, we created a

relatively pristine sample of retirees. Thus, "retirees" report them-

selves as fully retired in both the retirement year and all successive

years, and they report negligible earned income during this period..i

A retired couple consists of two retired members, while a working couple

need only have one worker.

      In the following sections, our analysis focuses on the behavior of

four samples. To minimize the effects of short run fluctuations, it

seemed desirable to look at changes in wealth over relatively long

periods. Since the 1973 wave of the LRHS collected very incomplete data

on asset holdings, we chose to compare the behavior of retirees and

workers over the periods 1969 to 1975, and 1975 to 1979. For the first

period, we constructed a sample of households who were retired as of

1969, and deleted all observations which had either dissappeared by 1975

(due to death or attrition), or for which household composition had
changed (due to divorce, separation, or death). Similarly, we con—

structed a sample of households which still included working members as

of 1975, and used these as a basis of comparison.i' Note that our

households are pre—selected on the basis of "survival", and presumably

over—represent healthy individuals. This probably biases our estimate

of asset decumulation down a bit relative to the correct number for the

entire population, but should not affect the comparison of workers and

retirees. The second period (1915 to 1979) received identical treat—

ment. Our basic samples consisted of 574 households retired by 1969

(270 single individuals, 5014 couples), 1360 households still working in

1975 (2140 single individuals, 1120 couples), 10147 households retired by

1975 (173 single individuals, 8614 couples), and 1497 households still

working in 1979 (96 singles, 411 couples).

      Finally, all variables have been deflated to 1975 dollars. This,

of course, affects the interpretation of magnitudes reported in the

following sections.


3. Bequeathable Wealth

     Although information about the bequeathable wealth-age profile

does not by itself allow us to discuss the plausibility of life cycle

motives, it is nevertheless of significant independent interest. In

this section, we review the existing literature on dissaving among the

elderly, arguing that previous studies suffer from significant biases.

New estimates of dissaving from bequeathable wealth are then presented.
                                      —8—




      A.   Previous Studies

      Three different types of data sources have been used to estimate

the extent of dissavirig during retirement. These are:    (1) interview

surveys of saving among the aged, (2) cross—section interview surveys of

net worth, and (3) estate data. We consider these in turn.

      Typically, data from interview surveys of saving among   the   aged

(Lydall 119551, Projector [1968], and Mulanaphy [197141) have found posi-

tive, or only slightly negative rates of accumulation. These findings

can be criticized on several grounds. First, savings are defined by-

observable transactions. Thus, all capital gains and losses (including

those induced by inflation) are ommitted. Second, the data are highly

aggregated. Both Projector and Lrdall group all aged individuals (those

over 65) together in a single category. Undoubtably, many of these are

still working, perhaps saving at a rapid rate in anticipation of retire—

inent. This problem is compounded by the fact that mean   values   are

reported——a small (perhaps wealthy) fraction of the sample saving large

amounts may, in such as a calculation, dominate the dissaving of a much

larger fraction. Thus, the percentage of retirees dissaving at reason-

ably rapid rates may be much larger than these numbers would suggest.

      A number of investigators, including Lydall [19551, Projector and

Weiss [19661, Smith [1975], Mirer [1979], and King and Dicks—Mireaux

[1982] have attempted to infer the bequeathable wealth—age profile from

cross—section interview surveys of net worth. With the exception of

King and Dicks—Mireaux, these studies confirm the findings reported

above. However, this approach encounters a variety of difficulties.
                                       —9—



      First, none of these studies distinguish between workers and

retirees. Physical assets understate the total wealth (human and non-

human) available to non—retired individuals. Since the proportion of

fully retired individuals in a cohort rises with the age of that cohort,

this builds in a spurious positive correlation between observed wealth

and age..J

      To illustrate the potential significance of this affect, we

regressed total bequeathable wealth on age and lifetime resources for

four subsamples (all single individuals, retired single individuals, all

couples, and retired couples), using cross—section data from the 1975

wave of the LRHS. We chose the 1975 wave for two reasons: (1) in 1975,

aged of respondent ranges from 61 to 69, which facilitates comparison

with other studies,.2J and (2) in 1969, there was very little spread in

age of retirement due to the comparative youth of the sampie..12J Our

results are presented in Table i.!!J Point estimates for the entire

sample are roughly consistent with previous studies. However, when

current workers are excluded, significant dissaving is observed for both

single individuals and couples (note, however, that the coefficient is

not statistically significant for couples).

      Unfortunately, restricting attention to retired individuals within

a cross—section induces a sample selection bias. Suppose we know that

an individual of age A is retired, but we have not observed his date

of retirement. It is straightforward to show that his expected age of

retirement is increasing in A.!V Thus, all else equal, we would expect

older members of a cross—section to have retired later. Differences in
                                     —10—



age therefore overstate differences in years of retirement (time spent

dissaving). This suggests that our estimates understate the true magni-

tude of dissaving.

      A second difficulty encountered by studies employing cross—section

interview surveys of net worth is that such surveys implicitly incor-

porate an important sample selection criterion: only surviving members

of a particular cohort are represented. Ex ante, survivors are, on a

average, healthier. Thus, as a cohort ages, the survivors will repre-

sent an increasingly healthy (in a lifetime sense) fraction of the

original sampie.iJ This induces a correlation between age and lifetime

health in cross—sections..i!i Healthier individuals in turn tend to

accumulate more wealth to provide for longer retirement periods. As a

result, a spurious positive correlation between wealth and age may be

observed.

      Third, with the exception of King and Dicks—Mireaux, studies

employing cross—section surveys of net worth fail to control for life-

time resources. Since wealthier people tend to live longer, older

members of any cross—section will, on average, have higher lifetime

resources. This problem is compounded by the secular decline in retire-

ment age (older individuals spent more years in the labor force). Rising

productivity generates an offsetting "cohort effect"——on average, older

members of any cross—section will have worked during periods of lower

wages. The net effect is ambiguous; age may be positively or negatively

correlated with age in cross_section..iJ
                                          —11—




      King and Dicks—Mireaux recognize the importance of controlling for

lifetime earnings, and employ the ratio of net worth to "permanent

income" as their dependent variable. While an improvement over previous

techniques, this fails to correct properly for the first two sources of

bias mentioned in the preceeding paragraph. Most obviously, since

permanent income is a yearly figure, no adjustment is made for length of

working life. In addition, this variable.is constructed in a manner

which fails to adjust for the correlation between wealth and survival

probabilities. Specifically, permanent income is inferred from a cross—

section regression explaining current earnings. Since retired individ-

uals have no current earnings, the estimates are driven by the earnings

of younger (and therefore, since the cohort efrect is corrected for,

lifetime poorer) individuals. This builds in a tendency to underpredict

the permanent income of elderly individuals, or equivalently to under-

state the extent of dissaving.

      Finally, we consider studies based on estate data. Since Atkinson

[19111, Atkinson and Harrison [1978], and l3rittain [1978] use this data

to generate cross—section estimates of the age—wealth relation, their

analyses suffer from the problems described above. In fact, different

sample selection criteria imply that, in some cases, the bias will be

much worse. For example, information on young individuals is observed

only if those individuals die young. Since early death is highly

correlated with poor health, there will be a strong correlation between

age and lifetime   health in   such samples. In addition,   estate data is
heavily   truncated, providing no information on a very large number of
                                        —12—




individuals who die with relatively little net worth. In effect, any

individual who dissaves too rapidly is automatically excluded from these

samples.

        Shorrocks [197'5] used a somewhat different approach, estimating

the age—wealth relationship from estate data by following a particular

cohort over time. While he corrects for potential biases based upon the

correlation between wealth and survival probabilities, he does not

adjust for the effects of attrition (individuals who dissave suffic-

iently never show up in estate data), and therefore understates the rate

of resource depletion.

        While most of these studies have focused on the relationship

between total bequeathable wealth and age, some have also investigated

changes in portfolio composition among the elderly. One question of

particular interest is how the percentage of net worth held as owner

occupied housing changes with age. Attempts to infer an answer to this

question based upon cross—section data are fraught with the difficulties

mentioned above. Portfolio composition may, for example, be related to

total lifetime resources, which is correlated with age in cross—sections

(see above). It is therefore not surprising that various studies, such

as Mirer and King and Dicks—Mireaux, have reached very different conclu-

sions


        B. New Estimates

        Since most objections to analyses of cross—section data are based

on the premise that individuals at one age are systematically different

from individuals at another age, one possible solution is to follow the
                                         —13—



same individuals over time, observing changes in their net worth. Thus,

Mirer concludes that   longitudinal   data from retirement to death would be

"ideal" for determining wealth holding profiles.!L' Diamond and Hausman

[1980] have previously employed the National Longitudinal Survey (NLS,

or Fames data) to study individual savings behavior, in part generating

an estimate of asset decumulation after retirement. Like the LRHS, the

NLS followed a sample of households for a.period of ten years; however,

NLS respondents are, on average, much younger.-iJ Thus, Diamond and

Hausman's estimates of decumulation are based on a relatively small,!2J

and perhaps atypicaJ.J sample of retirees. With the completion and

availability of the LRHS, it is now possible to supplement the existing

literature with new estimates based on more complete longitudinal data

for the early retirement period. Our first objective is to provide this

evidence.

      While the use of panel data does allow us to overcome a variety of

dit'ficulities encountered by other approaches, it also raises a new set

of problems. First, estimates are very sensitive to macroeconomic events.

For example, in a period of supra (sub) normal stock market returns,

respondents may experience significant unanticipated accumulation

(depletion) of net worth (more on this below). The data, however,

provide no way of distinguishing motives. It is worth noting that

analyses of cross—section data encounter a similar difficulty, since

different cohorts have encountered systematically different patterns of

unanticipated gains and losses over the life cycle. Within the current

context, we can partially correct for this effect by examining evidence
                                       —1 1—




based upon macroeconomically distinct time periods (specifically, we use

1969 through 1975, and 1975 through 1979). In addition, we can, for

each period, isolate the net effect of retirement on accumulation by

contrasting the behavior of retirees and workers.

      A second problem concerns sample selection. For each period, our

analysis is confined to households who "survived" the entire period.

Presumably, this implies that our data over—represent healthy, wealthy,

and domestically stable households. In addition, our requirement that

households be retired at the beginning of the period, combined with the

relative youth of respondents, implies that the sample is skewed towards

early retirees..J It is critical to realize, however, that although our

sample may be somewhat atypical relative to the entire population,.?.J

there is no reason to believe that our selection criteria bias estimates

of dissaving for this group. The great advantage of panel data is that,

by following the same households over time, we can hold exogenous

factors (however selected) constant. In contrast, for cross—sections,

dissaving is inferred from differences in the net worth of households of

different ages, who are implicitly selected according to different cri-

teria. We conclude that panel data, while not perfect, provides a

superior source of evidence on asset accumulation.

     We begin by inspecting the time pattern of mean bequeathable

wealth for each of our subgroups. Results are presented in Table 2...J

Between 1969 and 1975, net worth declines by 21.1% ($3176) for retired

individuals, and 22.8% ($7923) for retired couples. In the later period

(1975 to 1979), it declines by 6.8%   ($1393) for retired individuals, and
                                         —15—



rises by 14.1% ($21466) for retired couples. These figures are consistent

with a 3   to   14% yearly decline during the first period, and either a 2%

yearly decline or 1% yearly rise in the second period. It is difficult

to determine whether differences between periods are attributable to

sample differences (early vs late retirees), or to changing macro-

economic circumstances.

      It is noteworthy that, for each subgroup of working households,

net worth always moves in the same direction as it does for the corres-

ponding retired subgroup. In fact, it falls for all groups, except for

couples between 1975 and l99. This by itself is not surprising; hump—

shaped income profiles may cause wealth to begin its decline prior to

retirement. King and Dicks—Mireaux also find some evidence of dissaving

within the pre—retirement group. However, since income falls discontin-

uously at retirement, the life cycle hypothesis at minimum predicts that

the rate of accumulation (depletion) should fall (rise) at that time..J

Is this prediction consistent with the data?

      For single individuals, there is very little difference in either

period between the absolute dollar value dissaved by retirees and

workers. However, since early retirees tend to be relatively poor, dif-

ferences between rates of dissaving are substantial (mean net worth of

workers fell 9.14% between 1969 and 1915, and 2.3% between 1915 and

1919). For couples, differences between both rates of change and abso-

lute dollar values dissaved were siibstantial..J In interpreting these
numbers, it is important to recall that the subgroups are based on dif-

ferent sample selection criteria, and differences may therefore reflect

heterogenous behavioral propensities.

      One puzzling aspect of Table 2 is the precipitous decline between

1969 and 1975 in the net worth of both single individuals and couples

still working in 1979. During this period, mean dissaving of households

retiring in the more distant future exceeded that of any other groups.

This observation seems inconsistent with life—cycle behavior; we will

return to it at various point.

      For a number of reasons, we are dissatisfied with estimates of

accumulation and depletion based on mean values of net worth. Most

importantly, these estimates will be heavily influenced by the poten-

tially atypical behavior of households with high initial wealth.

Suppose, for example, that the behavior of households i is given byEJ


                      =
               wt,i

where W is bequeathable wealth in period t. Our estimate of the

population dissaving rate, ,     is:

(i)
                      wt-l

                      NW
                  =   ' t—l,i
                      1
                          NWt1
                                                            —11—



That is,             is a weighted average of the                     i's, where the largest

weights are accorded to individuals with high initial wealth. Such

indis,iduals may, for example, be atypically acquisitive, leading to a

high estimated value of .

           A related problem concerns measurement error. Suppose that

has a common value, ,                      for   all households, so that true wealth

evolves according to


(2)                             =



Assume as well that wealth is observed with error:


(3)                  wt,i.=W*.c
                            t,i t,].
where E(e .)          =    1,       and              is   independent of W .
                                                                              t,i   and             for
              t,].                          t,i
                                                 .                                        c
                                                                                              t,j
all CT,      j)      Ct,    i). Then our             estimate         can be written as


                      a
                              NW
                            — ' t—l,i
                                       —
                                1 NW
                                          t—l,i

where


                            =
                                     Ct i/Ct_i

      is   a consistent estimator of .                      However, since it is a ratio of

stochastic terms, its small sample properties are suspect. In particular,

observations with a high value of c11 (and therefore a lower value

of .)
    1
      will           receive greater weight (w
                                                              t— ,1      —1
                                                                                will be
                                              —18—




higher). We would therefore expect our estimate of             to be biased

downwards, towards high dissaving.

      These considerations suggest that we should accord equal weight to

the dissaving rate of each household. One alternative is to calculate

the nan rate, 2:

                     1       tl,i
                2    N
                         1
                             W
                              t,i
(where N is the number of observations). When wealth is observed with
error, this technique will produce inconsistent estimates of .             In
particular, it is straightforward to verify that, under the appropriate

regularity conditions ,.i"



               plim 2 =      E(   t,i


which generally exceeds .        The difficulty again arises from the

appearance of a stochastic term in the denominator.

      We suggest the following procedure. Equation (1) can be written

as


               log                  =   log

Substituting (2), we see that


               log Wt,1/Wt_i,1 =        log    +   log c_1, — log   6t,i


If the nasurement error terms are, for example, independentJ and log

normal, then the mean observed log rate of accumulation is an unbiased
                                         —19—



estimator of the log of 3. With population heterogeneity, this proce-

dure produces an unbiased estimate of the mean of log .,       but   it is

not possible to recover the population mean of         itself. However, if

the 's are reasonably close together (we might expect them to be

near unity), the mean of the logs will not be far from the log of the

mean.

        The problem with the procedure is that it requires us to drop all

households for which measured wealth was non—positive in either period

t or period t — 1.       It is important to examine the resulting sample

selection bias. If the sample is heterogeneous, the procedure excludes

all obserrations for whom        = 0   or . In   addition, if the probabil-

ity of falsely reporting 0 falls with wealth, then our estimate of the

mean of log .     will   be biased upwards..2J

        To determine the potential significance of this effect, we exam-

ined the frequency of movements to and from non—positive levels of

bequeathable wealth. Our findings are summarized in the second part of

Table 2. For most groups (especially couples), the percentage reporting

zero wealth was relatively low. Moreover, net movements between posi-

tive and non—positive wealth levels are typically quite small (on the

order of 1 or 2%), with three exceptions. 6% (net) of retired single

individuals moved from positive to nonpositive wealth between 1969 and

1975, and did 15% of retired couples. During the same period, 8% of

single individuals who would retire by 1975 moved in the opposite direc-

tion. Thus, we observe some tendency for early retirees to completely

exhaust their accumulated resources quickly after retirement. We also
                                      —20—




observe a significant fraction of single individuals accumulating appre-

ciable resources only immeditely prior to retirement.

      There is, however, much noise in this data. While net movements

between positive and non—positive wealth levels are typically small, the

total fraction of households moving in one direction or the other is

quite large. To see this, note (in Table 2) that the percentage of

households reporting positive resources in two consecutive sample years

is substantially smaller than the fraction reporting positive resources

in either of those two years alone.

      Table 3 presents sample statistics on log W75/W69 and log WT9/W75

for each of our subgroups. Recognizing the conceptual difficulties

generated by the sample selection bias described above, we have listed

medians, as well as the fraction of each subsample for which bequeath—

able wealth declines during the period of observation. If inclusion of

observations with zero wealth is desired, it is possible to adjust

fractile statistics using the percentage movements to and from zero

wealth reorted in Table 2.

      The results are quite striking, and differ enormously from those

based on wealth levels. The mean log rates of accumulation indicate

statistically significant dissaving for every retired group, except

couples from 19T5 to 1979. Positive saving among this group may be an

artifact of the precipitous, and probably unanticipated rise in housing

prices during the late seventies, combined with relatively widespread

home ownership (see statistics below). In contrast, no dissaving is

indicated in any currently working group, and in many such cases the
                                         —21—




estimated   saving rates are   statistically   significant. Note that the

"puzzl&' of significant dissaving before retirement among late retirees

no longer appears. Medians reveal a similar pattern, the only

discrepancy in sign arising cdth respect to single individuals still

working    in 1919, during the first sample period. Adjustment of medians
for   movement to and from non-positive wealth would not alter this

pattern.

        Rates   of dissaving for retired single individuals are evidently

quite high. Calculated means indicated a yearly decline of between 3

and 6%; medians confirm the lower end of this range. In contrast,

couples dissave very little—-perhps 1 or 2% per year in the first period

(early retirees), and not at all in the second period (although medians

indicate that wealth may have risen by as much as 2% per year, the

reader should bear in mind the above qualification concerning housing

price inflation). The discrepancy between the behavior of single

individuals and couples should not be surprising, since couples must

provide for the possibility that either member survives for a long

time. In addition, it may account for the diversity of previous

estimates: Mirer studies couples, while King and Dicks—Mireaux include

single individuals.

       It is worth noting that saving is observed for a significant

fraction (over )-o%) of all retired samples, and that dissaving is

observed for a significant fraction (over one third) of all non—retired

samples. While this phenomenon may reflect heterogeneity of behavior,
                                          —22—



we are inclined to attribute it primarily to the aparent extent of

measurement error.

      Only our highest estimates of depletion rates are roughly

consistent with the 6.8%    figure   obtained by Diamond and Hausman. We

attribute the magnitude of their estimate to the unrepresentative

characteristics of their sample. As mentioned earlier, NLS households

are, on average, substantially younger than LRHS households.

Individuals retiring during the NLS sample period will, by and large, be

early retirees; our results indicate that early retirees tend to over—

represent single individua1s,.2J and we have seen that single individuals

deplete resources more rapidly than couples. In light of our findings,

it would seem unwise to conclude on the basis of their study that

typical married retirees dissave significant portions of their wealth.

      We now examine the evolution of portfolio composition after

retirement. Table 4 decomposes bequeathable wealth into four

categories: owner occupied housing, business and property, financial

assets, and debt (other than mortgages). The last of these categories

is insignificant. The extent of homeownership (fraction owner—occu-

pants) is also indicated.

      For both single individuals and couples retired by 1969, there is

a decline in every significant asset category except housing. The data

indicate a slight increase in homeownership for retired individuals

during this period, and a slight decline for retired couples.

      The behavior of households which were retired by l9T5 is more

interesting. More or less simultaneously with retirement (1969 to
                                      —23—



1975), both single individuals and couples liquidated large amounts of

business and property wealth. At the same time, holdings of financial

assets rose slightly, while large gains in housing wealth (especially in

frequency of home ownership) were registered. This raises the possibil-

ity that households liquidated business and property holdings to finance

purchases of homesJJj During the post—retirement period, there is a

slight dip in homeowriership for both groups. Evidently, while many

households purchase homes at retirement, a smaller but significant

number sells homes within a few years subsequent to retirement.

       The evidence also appears to indicate that a reasonably stable

(perhaps slightly increasing) fraction of bequeathable wealth is held as

o\mer—occuppied housing during retirement. This confirms the finding of

King and Dicks—Mireaux, contradicting that of Mirer. However, we should

emphasize that these data only concern the early retirement period.


4•   Annuities
      A very large fraction of the total resources available to many

retired individuals is locked into annuities (government and priv-ate

pensions, Social Security). Studies which ignore this important corn—

ponent of wealth fail to provide sufficient information for judging the

plausibility of life cycle motives.

      It has frequently been argued that the inclusion of annuities

would vindicate the hump—shaped wealth—age profile, since the actuarial

value of survival contingent claims falls with age (single year survival

probabilities decline). Thus, Mirer [1979] concedes that, "to some

extent, perhaps a great one for many people, pension and Social Security
programs tend to institutiohalize the tenets of the life cycle theory."

Likewise, King and Dicks—Mireaux [1983] find evidence of "a clear life—

cycle pattern" when the actuarial value of annuity claims are included

in measures of net worth.

      In this section, we argue that actuarial valuation is inappro-

priate if one wishes to infer an age—wealth profile in order to judge

the plausibility of life cycle motives. Elsewhere (Bernheim [1981th]),

we have shown that the simple discounted value of future benefits

(ignoring the possibility of death) is ordinarily a good approximation

to the value (in terms of compensating variation) of an annuity. Here,

we establish that simple discounting is also appropriate within the

current context. Since this measure changes very little with age, our

analysis reverses the conclusions of King and Dicks—Mireaux: the

inclusion of annuities reinforces earlier findings that resources

decline only slightly, if at all, after retirement.


      A. Theoretical Considerations

      Actuarial valuation of annuities is appropriate under either of

two conditions:   (1) households are risk neutral, or (2) households have

access to competitive annuity markets. The first of these conditions is

unreasonably restrictive, and generates absurd behavioral predictions.-i

Under the second condition, there is a very simple test of pure life

cycle motives: do households hold positive levels of bequeathable

wealth at all? In fact, if annuities yeld any return in excess of the

interest rate, pure life cycle consumers will annuitize 100% of their

resources,-' and the notion of dissaving will be vaccuous. Thus, if we
                                         —25—




wish   to use evidence on rates of dissaving to test the pure life cycle

hypothesis, we must assume a complete absence of annuity markets.IJ

       Under the assumptions of missing annuity markets and risk aver-

sion, the value of an annuity will exceed its actuarial value by a risk

premium. Our    current   task is to determine what this observation implies

about the appropriate computation of age—wealth profiles.

       We will assume the constant elasticity, intertemporally separable

form of lifetime utility,



                 —J e—At Ctdt
                         c*
                 l
(3)



where A captures the effects of discounting both through the pure rate

of time preference and survival probabilities.J At time 0, the

individual is endowed with some level of bequeathable wealth           and

receives some annuity payment A0. Annuity payments grow geometrically

at the rate g; the interest rate is r. Thus, the individuals choice

is constrained as follows:



()              f 0 (C    —
                              At)e_rt   dt <



and



(5)                  = ertW0 —   f      (C   — A )er(t_T) dt >   0.


       Ignoring constraint (5) and maximizing (3) subject to (4), we

obtain the following first order conditions:
                                                      —26—




(6)                Ct=e1tCO

where y       Cr —              — c) <   r.             Suppose y > g.       Then, continuing to

ignore (5), it is easy to see that the optimal program is given by (6),

along with



(7)                Ct = Cr -      g)(W
                                              +
                                                  r    _tg)


and



(8)                  (w +   r   _tg) =                +r      g)eYt•


Since this program never violates (5), it is optimal.

      The interpretation of (7) and (8) is straightforward: consumption

in each period is a constant fraction of total wealth, and total wealth

grows at the geometric rate y. Note, however, that the annuity wealth

term, At/Cr —     g),   is equal to the siniple discounted value of future

benefits (ignoring death). Thus, to make inferences about y (the life

cycle parameter of interest) from data on the age—wealth profiles, we

should define total wealth to include the simple discounted value of

annuities, not the actuarial value. Intuitively, unless an individual

plans to consume his principal at some point in the future, he will be

indifferent an annuity paying $1 per year, and an asset worth $l/r (both

generate   the same survival contingent income stream).
      If      <   g, the problem is more complex. Ignoring (5),                      one   again
obtains (7)   and    (8),   but    in this case (5)             will   be violated for t
                                            —27—



sufficiently large (the individual will wish to borrow on future annuity

benefits). Along the true optimal program, consumption will obey the

first order condition (6) as long as wealth is positive; however, once

(5) binds, we will simply have C. =                      Let T denote the age at
                                                 At.
which (5) first binds. Then the first order conditions imply that



                Cte?tCO                     t<T

(9)



                Ct=At                       tT
From the resource constraint, we have



(10)                 =
                          f   (C   —
                                        At)e_rt    dt.



Finally, it is easy to see that despite the binding constraint,

consumption must be continuous in time, so that



(ii)            e    c0
                          = gT
                                  A0.


Equations (9), (10), and (ii) together determine C0 and T, from which

the optimal program can be constructed.

       In Bernheim [l9814b, we calculated the compensating variation

associated with the marginal annuity for the case of y <               g   (using

equations (9) through (ii)),


               dW0            —         1
                                            [1
                 0 =*r-g
                                              —28—



where

                  —    IiI   —
                                  r —   g(g—r)T
                                 A — c*g


and established that 0              <   1.    Intuitively, since (5) may bind at

some point, the annuity is worth less than an asset which yields the

same yearly survival contingent income. As T goes to infinity (or y

to g), this event becomes more remote, so naturally the value of

annuitization approaches A0/(r —             g).
        Hypothetical   values of the proportional adjustment factor (ct)
are given in Bernheim [l98Ib]. For completeness, we reproduce two
sample calculations here. We assume that r = 0.03, g = 0, a = 0                    (the

logarithmic case), and A0/(r — g)W0 = 2                 (i.e., two thirds of total

resources are held as annuities).i' Since A depends on the rate at

which individuals discount future utility, it is the most difficult

parameter to gauge. We employ values of 0.05 and 0.07.iJ The formula

for y is given above. Substituting (9) into (10), one finds that T

is given by the implicit solution to

                                                                W (r — g)
                                                     — (g—r)T) = 0
                  —                 r — g —
                       e(Y_r)T)
                                    r—y                              A0


        Calculated values of y, T, and                  are pesented in Table 5.

Ignoring non—negativity constraints, wealth would decline by 2 and 14%

per year, for A equal to 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. The associated

unconstrained intervals are 142 and 27 years. The marginal annuity is

worth 89%, and 75% of its simple discounted value, respectively.
                                        —29—




Employing a "triangle approximation" for the value of inframarginal

units, we find that the associated compensating variations for all

annuity holdings are 914%, and 81% of their simple discounted values. In

contrast, for these parameter values the actuarial discounted value of a

benefit   stream is only 31. 5% of its simple discounted vaiue.2J
      There is, of course, no reason to believe that it   is appropriate

to use the compensating variation as a measure of annuity valuation when

calculating wealth trajectories (except in the limiting case where the

non—negativity constraints never bind). For this reason, we pose the

question somewhat differently. Suppose we employ simple valuation;

i.e., define total resources,


                                   —   g)
                Rt W + At/Cr

and calculate rates of dissaving from Rt/Ro (i.e., pretend the non—

negativity constraints never bind). How well will our estimated

dissaving parameter,


                       t&n(Rt/R0)

approximate the parameter of interest Ci)?

      Using our characterization of the optimal (constrained) program,

it is possible to calculate that


                       ert[W0 —   A0{e_T(l — eC1_t),(r    —   y)

                   -   (1 -   et)/(r        -
                                                g)}]
                                                —30—



Substituting this into the expression for                       one can show (after some

tedious manipulations) that

                    R
(12)
                     0
                          =   e[l   +   p]


where


                         — e (r—y)t1 i —  e(1_')t           A0/(r —   g)
 -'-
       /                                               1
                                                                           e (g—r)T — e (y—r)T]
                                                                R
                                        1—e (y—r)T     -
                                   L
                                                                 0

                                                           r
           Table 5 presents values of 4i and                   calculated for our sets of

hypothetical parameter values (where t =                   6). When A = 0.05, p is
0.027, which indicates that                   understates the "true" rate of dissav—

ing by approximately -/2% per year. Thus, rather than observing a

decline of 2% per year, we should observe "total wealth" falling by

11/2% per year. When A = 0.07, g = 0.090, which indicates that

understates the true rate of dissaving by 11/2% per year. Thus, "total

wealth" would fall by 2 1/2%, rather than by lt% per year.

           These calculations suggest that y' will, for y < g, understate

the rate of dissaving, y. We now prove that this inequality always

holds.


                                                r                          r
           Proposition 1: For y              g, y = y.     For y < g, y > y.


           Proof: The first statement follows trivially from equation (8).

We prove the second claim by showing that p > 0.                     Straightforward cal-

culations reveal that, for y <               g, dCO/dAOIR < 0        P] (intuitively,
annuities have a negative income effect since the non—negativity con—
                                       —31—



straint binds; consumption is therefore depressed). Thus, Rt > R0e1t

 (since the right hand side indicates remaining resources in period t

if non—negativity constraints are ignored). Taking t = T            and rear-

ranging, we see that A0e/(r — g) > R0e1T. From equation (13), this

is easily seen to imply that    4'    is positive. II

         Given this result, one possible approach is to adjust l' given an

assumed value of 4', corresponding to some set of reasonable parameter

values. Unfortunately, 4'     depends on y, so we cannot estimate y from

       without knowing y itself. Another alternative is to obtain a

lower bound on y, in addition to this upper bound.

        How might we obtain a lower bound? One suggestion is to calculate

rates of dissaving from W./W0 (as in the preceeding section):

                  w
                      tn(Wt/Wü)

To motivate this suggestion, ignore (for the moment) non—negativity con-

straints (equation (5)). Equation (8) will then describe the evolution

of total wealth. Simple manipulations reveal that


                                     At/Cr — g)
(i1)
                 —i(y—g)
                 t       w                t


Equation (iIi) has an important interpretation. If the individual holds

no annuities, his bequeathable wealth grows at exactly the rate -'.

Supposing as before that 'r   < g, as annuities increase, the rate at

which bequeathable wealth declines will acce1erate.I The reason is

straightforward: annuity wealth (At/Cr —          g))   declines at the rage g;

to preserve a total rate of decline of y, bequeathable wealth niist fall
                                                  —32—



at an accelerated rate. Thus, as long as                     -r < g, •1W will overstate the

extent of dissaving. Note that this is completely contrary to the

assertions of earlier authors, who had argued that                           would under-

state dissaving due to the actuarial decline in annuity wealth.

       Of course, the preceeding analysis ignores the non—negativity con-

straints. It is important to verify that our lower bound on y is

valid even when these constraints are considered explicitly. In

particular, we prove:


       Proposition 2: Jhen y < g, d(%t/W)/dAo < 0.


       Proof: Using the accounting identity


           =    r   + At_ Ct



we see that


            d(*/W)
              t t —              ciA
                                       t
                                             dC                     dW
                             tL dA,                  ' t     C\
        t dA                                                  t /   dA


Appropriate substitution from equations (7) through (10) reveals that

this


       = A          (g—r)(T—t)
          t


                (r—y)(T—t)                               r—
           [e        r—y     —_l {rt + (1 —              r—g

       +
                             -
                                 1         [e(r :        -    - ert(l    -
                                             —33—



where




                  1 —   e_T
Using the fact that


            e (r—y)(T—t)    1        (r—g)(T—t)     1
                                >e                      >0
                   r—y                   r—g

it is then possible to show that._i


            d(t/W) <0
                 dA0


which is the desired result. II


        Of course, if A0 = 0,                =    , so   for ' > g, A0 > 0 implies
   <   y.       It is convenient to summarize this conclusion, as well as much

of the preceeding analysis, in the following proposition.


        Proposition 3:

        (i)
            •
                   If yg or A0=O,y r =1 w=1.
        (ii)       If y>g and A0>O,y r     w
                                         <y•
        (iii)      If 'y<g and A0>O,yw <y<y.r
        Case (iii) is the most interesting, since (for g = 0)              it con-

cerns a dissaver who holds positive annuities. For such an individual,

depletion of bequeathable wealth will overstate dissaving, while deple-

tion of total wealth (including the simple discounted value of annuity

benefits) will understate it.
                                               —3k--




        Which of our two measure,                or     will be closer to y? In

general, the answer depends upon particular parameter values. We can

obtain some feel for magnitudes by using (12), along with the definition

of        to obtain



(15)
                      Wt   -   e'[l +      -
                                      1—
where


                             A0/(r — g)
                                 R
                                  0


Suppose g = 0.          What happens as           rises? Ignoring the effect on

p, we see that W./W0 falls; in fact, it is equal to zero when

  = eytril    +
                  i   < 1.                               W
                               Thus, we would expect y        to significantly

understate y when the degree of annuitization is high.

        The data presented below indicate that                 is quite high——roughly

on the order of 2/3 (while others have found mich lower levels of annui—

tization relative to bequeathable wealth, this is due to the use of

actuarial valuation). It is therefore not very surprising that

significantly outperforms y for our hypothetical parameter values.

In Table 5, we calculate values of y, using equation (15). Increasing

annuitization from zero to two—thirds of total resources accelerates the

rate of bequeathable wealth depletion from 2% to 5.2% per year for

A =   0.05,   and from )4      % to 9.3% for A = 0.07.       In both cases, the true

value of y is much closer to our upper bound, y r. By                  .
                                                                       incorporating

date on annuuities, we might therefore hope to learn much more about the

implied behavioral rate of dissaving.
                                   —35—




      B.   Analysis of the Data

      In implementing the ideas described above, we encounter two con-

ceptual difficulties. The first concerns expectations about future

annuity benefits. In particular, substantial changes in Social Security

legislation took place during the sample period. Should we assume that

these were properly anticipated? If we assume myopic expectations at

each point in time (constant real benefits from that point forward),

Social Security wealth will be quite volatile. However, since by

assumption this volatility is unanticipated, resulting changes in wealth

should not be counted as saving or dissaving. in such a world, planned

dissaving from Social Security is necessarily zero by definition.

      In practice, we assume that all changes in Social Security

legislation during the sample period were correctly anticipated, and

that constant real benefits were expected after 1919. This tends to

minimize changes in Social Security wealth induced by legislative

action. We also assume that government and private pensions were

expected to provide constant real and nominal benefits, respectivelyJ±.1!J

      A second difficulty concerns the proper treatment of couples. The

model described above is out of its depth when household members can die

at distinct points in time. If, however, annuities have full assumption

of benefits by a surviving spouse, then our conclusion is essentially

unchanged: if the household has no bequest motive, and if its members

would never want to consume the principal of an asset, then it must be

indifferent between that asset and an annuity which pays the same income

stream. Thus, simple discounting is still appropriate, If the desire
                                   —36—




to   consume the principal will arise only far in the future, then simple

discounting must be a good approximation.

       For government and private pensions, we assume full transfer of

benefits, so the difficulty dissappears. However, we know that this is

counterfactual in the case of Social Security. We resolve this dillen,ma

by decomposing Social Security into two streams: a certain stream

(equal to the minimum benefit under any survival contingency), and a

contingent stream (equal to the residual). By the preceeding argument,

simple discounting is approximately appropriate for the certain stream.

In the following analysis, we simply ignore the contingent stream. We

suspect that the insurance value associated with this contingent stream

does not change enough over time to alter any of our qualitative con-

clusions.

       In Table 6, we present calculation of annuity wealth for the

samples described in section 2. The presentation of these numbers is

designed to facilitate comparison with the results on bequeathable

wealth.

       Note that between 1969 and 1975, annuity wealth rises steeply for

most pre—retirement groups. Since pensions pay little or no income to

such individuals during this period, pension assets effectively earn

interest as the date of benefit eligibility approaches (the rise in

pension wealth is due solely to this effect; in these calculations,

continuing to work does not per se contribute to the value of

benefits). Note that this effect is not very significant for working

households between 1975 and 1979; evidently, most of these households

began to receive benefits prior to full retirement.
                                   —37—



      For retired groups, annuity wealth changes very little, as

expected. During the sample period there are two countervailing

effects: legislation increases the real value of Social Security, while

inflation erodes the value of private pensions. The first effect is not

as large as one might expect, since we assume that future legislative

changes are correctly anticipated. Thus, the Social Security wealth

stream is relatively flat. Since private pensions are discounted at a

much higher rate, Social Security dominates these calculations. Never-

theless, the erosion of private pension values contributes to a slight

decline in total annuity wealth.

      In Table 7, we combine data on bequeathable wealth and annuities.

Due to the size of annuities relative to bequeathable asset, the total

wealth—age profile is relatively flat. For retired single individuals,

total wealth appears to decline by at most 1% per year. In fact,

between 1969 and 1975, total wealth increased for more than half of

these households. Retired couples exhibit a slight decline (1 to 1 1/2%

annual) in total wealth during the early sample period, but show

virtually no change during the later period. In contrast, working

households show slight increases (0 to 2%) in total wealth for almost

every period and subsample. Note that the "puzzle" concerning the

precipitous decline between 1969 and 1975 in the bequeathable wealth of

late retirees now acquires a new interpretation: this dissaving simply

offset the implicit saving accompanying the approach of pension

eligibility.
                                      —38—



        Contrary to King and Dicks-Mireaux, we have found that evidence of

rapid dissaving among the elderly dissapears when annuities are consid-

ered. Our    calculations   based on hypothetical parameter valies in a

simple life cycle model (Table 5) suggest that the data on bequeathable

and total wealth profiles (Table 3 and 7) together are consistent with a

behavioral dissaving rate of less than 2% per yearJi However, as noted

before, this does not constitute a formal test of the life cycle hypo-

thesis. In the next section, we investigate the possibility of basing a

formal test on information about the age—wealth profile.


5.      Testing the Pure Life Cycle Hypothesis

        While rates of dissaving may not, by themselves, confirm or refute

the life cycle hypothesis, the observed response of these rates to

involuntary annuitization may provide a basis for doing so. This

suggestion motivates the following analysis.

        Returning to our formal model, let us assume that, as an approxi—

mation, we can ignore the effect of non—negativity constraints (equation

(5)). Equation (iIi) will than describe the evolution of bequeathable

wealth. It is useful to rewrite this as

                                A
(16)            -y+(g)y-
where


                 (g)
                                     —39—



        Notice first that the sign of (g) is the same as that of y —g.

This simply reflects the phenomenon noted earlier: annuitiation will

accelerate (decelerate) the growth of bequeathable wealth if and only if

y > g (y <   g).   We illustrate this pattern in Figure 1. Suppose that

two individuals have different behavioral dissaving parameters          and

       but that their annuity benefit profiles have a common growth rate,

g. If        >   g > y2, annuitization will accelerate bequeathable wealth

accumulation for individual I, and slow it for individual 2. Proposi-

tion 2 confirms that explicit consideration of the non—negativity con-

straints does not change this conclusion.

       A test based on the behavioral response of accumulation rates to

involuntary annuitization should have substantial power against IIE.jor

alternatives. The existence of an operative bequest motive would, for

example, imply that annuitization always causes bequeathable wealth to

accumulate more rapidly (decline more slowly)Ji A similar implication

is generated by more simple minded models, in which households save some

constant fraction of current income.

       Next, observe that, to a first order aproximation (expanding

around g =   0),

(11)



The transversality condition guarantees that the coefficient of g is

unambiguously negative (in fact, for all g <     r,   '(g) < 0;    falls as

the growth rate of annuity benefits rises). Intuitively, increasing the

value of g may shift an individual from the regime in which annuitiza—
                                            140

tion   accelerates the growth      of   bequeathable wealth (y >    g)   to the

regime in which the effect of annuitization is reversed (y <              g).   This

is illustrated in figure 1: for g' >                 > g,   individual 1 belongs to

the class of consumers who respond to annuitizat ion by accumulating

wealth at a slower rate (dashed lines indicate behavioral responses

associated with an annuity benefit growth rate of g'). This implica-.

tion is, as well, presumably testable.

       Our   data   on bequeathable wealth profiles, of course, only allow us

to measure discrete changes, rather than continuous rates of change. In

moving to our empirical irxp1ementation, we niist therefore begin by con-

verting (16) into its discrete analog:



                           (1 +   y)   +   (g)

For reasons discussed in section 3, we prefer to use the log rate of

accumulation as our dependent variable. Since the rate is presumed

close to unity for most observations, we can employ the following

approximation:



                    £n
                         W1/W          +   (g)   .
Finally,   using our first order approximation of (g) (equation (iT))

and adding a stochastic error term (representing among other things, the

effects of the preceeding approximations), we produce our basic

specification:
                                         —4l—




(18)            Zn wt+i/W   =y   +   I     +    r)g ._. +



       Given cross—sectional data on bequeathable wealth and annuities

(including the growth rate of benefits), one could estimate equation

(18), alternatively- ignoring and imposing (through a NLLS procedure) the

implicit constraints on the coefficients. The model could then be

tested by evaluating (statistically) the plausibility of these

constraints, and by examining the sign of y —      r   in the constrained

version. We eschew this approach for two reasons.

       First, measurement error in W introduces significant spurious

correlation between the dependent and independent variables. A nxre

sophisticated estimation technique is therefore required. One could

employ a two stage procedure, instrumenting for At/Wt with

(where 't is lifetime resources). In the results reported here, we

simply substitute At/Yt for At/Wt in the basic specification.

Estimates based on instrumenting for A.t/Wt (not reported) differed

very little from these results.

       Second, data on g is extremely poor. Inference of g from

successive observation of benefits received by the same individual is

subject to enormous measurement error (due to variance in reporting).

Alternatively, one might attempt to form an estimate of g based on the

proportion of benefits which are unindexed. Presumably, this is closely

related to the proprotion of benefits received from private sources

(PROP), since government pensions (including Social Security) are

indexed, while most private pensions are not. However, the accuracy of
this estimate would be questionable, particularly since many apparently

unindexed private pensions are de facto indexed by "good will" increases

in benefits. Although one would nevertheless expect PROP and g to be

negatively correlated (due to the lack of ubiquitous indexing), the

magnitude of this correlation is unknown. The use of PROP to proxy

for g would only allow us to judge the directions of various effects,

rather than their magnitudes.

         These considerations lead us to estimate the following modified

version of equation (l8):-J_1



(19) n                    =   +        +2   PROPtI
                                                           +



where i indexes household. Rather than attempt to recover y and
r and to test parameter restrictions, we simply inspect the pattern of

coefficients. For a sample dominated by dissavers (savers),         should

be negative (positive). Since PROP is negatively correlated with g,

    should be positive. We will, in addition, estimate a version of

                                               t,i 1
(19) where £n A •/Y. is substituted for A ./Y.. Since several
                  t,i 1
levels   of approximation have been used in deriving equation (19), we

have no great attachment to any particular functional relationship; it

is therefore important to determine whether or not the signs of

estimated coefficients are sensitive to such alternative specifications.

      Unfortunately, estimation of equation (19) may be contaminated by

spurious correlation between PROP and c. Individuals with large

private pensions may, for example, be atypical (wealthier, less

impatient). Alternatively, large values of PROP may reflect greater
                                    _143_




exposure to inflation risk, which would in turn have behavioral iniplica—

tions. We remedy these problems by including PROP as a separate right

hand side variable in the estimating equation:


                    =    +     A. + 2 PROPt."        +               +
                                                         83PROPt j


Our expectation is that the spurious effects described above will be

captured in the estimated value of 3:       although there are many reasons
to believe that PROP is systematically related to e, it is inich nre

difficult to explain why the partial correlation (controlling for PROP)

between   the interaction and error terms would be nonzero.

      We estimated these specifications separately for single individuals

and couples, using t = 1975     and t + 1 = 1979.   The second period was

chosen so that the samples would be nre representative of typical

retirees. Results are presented in Table 8 and 9.

      Consider first the regressions for single individuals (Table 8).

Specification 1 corresponds to equation (19). Referring to equation

(18), we see that the estimated intercept measures the four—year (non—

annuitized) dissaving rate. The particular value presented in Table 1

implies a yearly dissaving rate of about 6%, which is on the high end of

the estimates presented in Section 3. Since those estimates were not

corrected for annuities, this leads one to suspect that annuitization

increased the rate of accumulation for this group, contrary to our

theoretical predictions. The point estimate of the coefficient on A/Y

confirms this suspicion; however, it is estimated very imprecisely, and

a range of magnitudes entirely consistent with the theory are well
                                     _)4 it—




within    a single standard deviation. Finally, we see that the coef-

ficient of PROP.A/Y is negative, and statistically significant at a high

level of confidence. This is, of course, inconsistent with the

theoretical implications outlined above.

         Adding PROP to this regression (specification 2) changes none of

the qualitative conclusions, and in fact increases both the magnitude

and statistical significance of the estimated coefficient on PROP.A/Y.

Evidently, spurious correlation between PROP and c have the effect of

biasing this coefficient upwards. Notice also that the coefficient of

PROP is statistically significant——its inclusion in the regression is

warranted.

         The pattern of estimates using log A/Y is only slightly different.

Although this alternative specification obscures the interpretation of

the intercept, the signs of the remaining coefficients may again be

revealing. As before, the separate effect of annuitization is estimated

very imprecisely. Furthermore, when PROP is omitted (specification 3),

the estimated coefficient of PROP.A/Y is positive, though statistically

insignificant. However, the inclusion of PROP drives this coefficient

significantly negative as before; furthermore, the inclusion of PROP

seems warranted on statistical grounds (its t—statistic is approxi—

mately   ii).
     We turn now to the regressions for couples (Table 9).     The inter-

cepts in specification 1 and 2 suggest a small positive saving rate,

roughly consistent with that estimated in Section 3. While one cannot

reject the hypothesis that this term is negative, values lying within
                                      —1t5 —




 two standard deviations are consistent with, at most, a dissaving rate

 of 2% per year. We remarked earlier that couples may nevertheless have

 intended to dissave——the observed accumulation nay have been due

 entirely to unanticipated housing price inflation during this period.

 If this is so, annuitization should depress the rate of accumulation for

this group. The coefficients of A/Y reveal that exactly the opposite is

the case. While these coefficients are not statistically significant at

conventional levels, notice that these levels are surpassed by the

estimated coefficients of log A/Y in specifications 3 and   14•   Together,

these estimates strongly suggest that annuitization increased accuniula—

tion rates for this groupJ±..J If so, there are two possibilities: either

couples are intentional net savers after retirment (which requires us to

accept somewhat implausible behavioral parameters to rescue the life

cycle model), or the response among couples of saving to annuitization

is inconsistent with life cycle motives.

      Further evidence against the life cycle hypothesis is again gener-

ated by the estimated coefficients of PROP.A/Y and PROP.log A/Y. The

pattern here closely resembles that for single individuals. In three of

four specifications, the estimated parameter is negative; in two of

these it is statistically significant at conventional levels. Once

again, only specification 3 yields a point estimate consistent with

theory. However, specification 4 reveals that the omission of PROP is

unwarranted on statistical grounds.

      Although we have reported relatively few regressions in this

section, our estimates were quite robust with respect to the inclusion
of other potentially inortant variables. Adding age of respondent,
health,   and number of living children did not, for example, substan-

tively alter any   of   the results discussed above.


6.    Conclusions

      If, as suggested here, the pure life cycle hypothesis fails to

account   for savings behavior after retirement, then it   is important to

determine   whether this behavior is consistent with other theories. One
possibility   is to maintain life cycle motives, while posing the problem

of wealth accumulation within a different institutional setting. in

particular, the models of Kotlikoff and Spivak [19811, and Bernheim,

Shleifer and Summers [l98] portray intergenerational transfers as a

mechanism for facilitating intrafamily exchange. Alternatively, one can

supplement the life cycle model with a traditional bequest motive.

Fortunately, these alternatives generate testable empirical iniplica—

tions. Bernheiin, Summers and Shleifer present econometric and other

evidence to support a strategic bequest motive. My own work in progress

(preliminary results are presented in Bernheim [19814]) considers whether

or not the data are also consistent with a model of household prefer-

ences augmented with intergenerational altruism.
           —17—




1t
wt



     g'           —————S


     g




                      At
                      wt
          Figure 1
                                Footnotes


      These tests should not be confused with those of Feldstein [l9uIL,
      1977], Feldstein and Pellechio [1979], Kotlikoff [1979], and
      others who examine the effect of involuntary annuitization on
      levels of bequeathable wealth holdings.

      Notice that this definition does not include the value of durable
      goods. It is quite likely that, as a result, the data understate
      the true rate of dissaving (elderly individuals probably engage in
      few purchases of new durable goods, while old goods depreciate).
      The resulting bias is, however, likely to be small.

1/    Ferber et al. [1969] documents a tendency for misreporting of
      assets to be related to the respondent's level of wealth.

      This can often be inferred from the corresponding completion
      codes, or from the implausibility of recorded values.

      Presumably, if an individual does not own a home, it is
      straightforward to report 0.

      Earned income does not exceed $1000 per year in any   year   after
      retirement.

.1!   Note that this group is not contaminated by any households which
      retired in the interim.

      Aware of this difficulty, Mirer re—estimates his regressions for
      the subsample of individuals who are over 75 years old. Although
      this does not completely eliminate the bias (in particular, many
      members of this subgroup may perform significant part—time work),
      and although this subsample may be dominated by outliers in the
      age spectrum, the robustness of Mirer's original estimates is
      suggestive.

.21   Lydall and Projector and Weiss simply group together all
      individuals over 65. Mirer reports that 37% of his sample is
      between 65 and 67 years old.

      Estimation using the 1969 wave yielded very imprecise estimates.
      However, it should be noted that the coefficient on age was
      slightly positive in all cases.

      Note that the samples sizes here are larger than those reported in
      Section 2. Since we employ cross—sectional data here, we do not
      insist that the households survive to a later sample year.
.2?_1   Suppose    A1 > A2.   Then, if B is age of retirement,


                   E(R!R < A1) =       prob(R AR         <
                                                             A1) E(R!R < A2)

                                   +             < R <                                B
                                       prob(A2           A1IR     A1) E(R!A2 <            A1)

                                   >   [prob(R < A2R < A1) + prob(A2 <               B AJR      <
                                                                                                    A)1

                                                   E(RIR <    A)
                                   = E(R!R   <
                                                 Az).

        To put it another way,         the
                                   probability of living to 70 conditional
        upon surviving to 69 is higher for the average 60 year old who
        actually survives to 69 than it is for the average 60 year old in
        general since the latter sample includes relatively unhealthy
        people with low conditional survival probabilities who are likely
        to die before they reach 69.

        The   secular rise in life expectancies nay partially or completely
        offset this effect.
        Mirer attempts to correct only for the "cohort effect," and finds,
        not surprisingly, more striking evidence of positive saving during
        retirement.

        Mirer's procedure, in particular, seems seriously flawed: he
        regresses the ratio of net value in owner occupied housing to
        total net worth on age and total net worth. Elsewhere, he
        concedes that there is likely to be substantial measurement error
        in net worth. This builds in a strong, spurious negative
        correlation between the dependent variable and observed total net
        worth (as reflected by its negative coefficient and enormous t—
        statistic). Presumably, all coefficients in this regression are
        then estimated inconsistently.

2J1     Mirer   [1979], p. 1439.

        In the first sample year, NLS        respondents        are 145   to   59,   as opposed
        to 58 to 63 for the LRHS.
                            —50—




Unfortunately, Diamond and Hausman do not report the total number
of individuals retiring during their sample period. Their regres-
sions were, however, based on approximately 1200 observations.
Assuming a uniform distribution of age, only 1400 would have
reached 65 by the end of the sample period. This may in part
account for the large standard error of their estimate. In con-
trast, the youngest LRHS respondent was 68 in 1979.

Diamond and Hausman's sample will overrepresent early retirees.
This may explain stich of their findings; see the comments at the
end of this section.

Since early retirees are typically poorer and less healthy, this
somewhat offsets the other effects.

It would in any case be quite difficult to produce a "typical"
sample, since the LRHS oversamples certain groups to begin with.

Note that for the "retired in 1969" and "not retired in 1975"
samples, no value is reported for bequeathable wealth in 1979,
since we do not require household survival past 1975.

This follows from smoothing of consumption.

The net worth of workers fell by 3.14% ($2299) between 1969 and
1975, and rose by 11.6% ($8771) between 1975 and 1979.

In a world without annuities, wealth would evolve in this way as
long as preferences were homothetic.

The law of large numbers requires the existence of certain
moments.

The assumption of independence deserves some attention. One might
object that an individual who underreports assets in one year is
likely to do so in the next as well. This creates no problems, as
long as the fraction underreported by individual i does not
change systematically with his wealth.

Observations with larger 's will (given the same level of
initial wealth) be more likely to remain in the sample.

For example, over one—third of LIHS households retired in 1969
were single individuals; in 1975, this figure fell to one—sixth.

Thomas Gustafson has pointed out that the data presented here are
too aggregated to test this hypothesis——we cannot tell if the same
households which sell businesses and property also become new
homeowners during this period. In fact, this pattern might seem
somewhat unlikely, since households which do not own homes often
                                 —51—



     have virtually no other assets. Alternatively, the rise in
     average housing wealth may be primarily attributable to the
     purchase of more expensive houses by those liquidating business
     and other property holdings (new homeowners may have virtually no
     equity). Another possibility is that individuals who move at
     retirement typically discover that their current house is worth
     more than expected; the decline in other assets should then be
     counted as dissaving. By disaggregating the data, it should be
     possible to distinguish between these possibilities. This is left
     for future work.

     If the rate of time preference exceeds the discount rate,
     households will consume all resources immediately. If the
     inequality goes the other way, the transversality condition is
     violated, and no optimum exists. For equality, the household is
     completely indifferent between all consutmpt ion programs that
     exhaust his resources.

     See Yaari [19651.

2J   Households may still hold some bequeathable wealth if annuiti—
     zation occurs through the family, as suggested by Kotlikoff and
     Spivak [1981]. It is, however, unclear whether one can infer
     anything from rates of dissaving in the context of their model.

     Implicitly, we assume that single year conditional survival
     probabilities are constant over time. In such a world, the
     actuarial value of an annuity does not change with age. In what
     follows, it should be clear that our central results do not depend
     upon this assumption. In particular, the argument which
     establishes that simple discounting is approximately appropriate
     depends only upon there being a relatively long interval before
     the nonnegativity constraint on bequeathable wealth binds. To
     take an extreme alternative, suppose death will occur at date T,
     with certainty. If an annuity contract promises to pay benefits
     past this date, those benefits are irrelevant. The appropriate
     value of an annuity (assuming either that the individual can
     borrow on benefits paid prior to T or that terminal benefits are
     not too large) is then just the simple discounted value of
     benefits, up to age T. In this very special case, actuarial
     valuation is exactly appropriate, and our technique (which
     includes benefits promised after T) is clearly in error.
     However, we have added the qualification that there must be a
     relatively long interval before the constraint on bequeathable
     wealth binds. Here, it binds as T, so if T is large, our
     method is, again, approximately appropriate. In general, however,
     if there is some maximum age, one could always improve our measure
     by excluding benefits promised after the maximum age.

     The transversality condition guarantees this inequality.
                                       —52—



         This is consistent with the calculations in the next section.
         Previous studies have obtained lower estimates of annuitization
         (A0/(r — g)W0) specifically because they have employed actuarial
         valuation.

         For elderly individuals, single year survival probabilities are
         approximately 95%, so one can think of A = 0.05 as representing
         the case where all discounting Is due to uncertain length of life.

         While these calculations appear to confirm the superiority of
         simple discounting as a measure of value, the reader should bear
         in mind that any sample of elderly individuals may exhibit great
         behavioral heterogeneity. Thus, even if simple discounting is
         appropriate for the median household, it may be highly inaccurate
         when applied to rapid dissavers, who will reach a binding
         constraint quickly.

.2±9_I   Details   are available from the author.

         If y > g,   the growth of bequeathable assets accelerates with
         annuitization. For this case, the non—negativity constraints
         never bind, and (17) is exactly appropriate.

2±?—!    This requires an exceptionaly large amount of tedious algebraic
         manipulation. Details are avaliable from the author.

         Again, details are available from the author.

         We assumed inflation rates of 6% prior to 1969, rising to 9% by
         1975, and 12% by 1979, remaining constant thereafter.

         While this conclusion appears warranted for the median household,
         we have ignored sample heterogeneity. This is particularly
         important, since rapid dissavers will reach a binding constraint
         on bequeathable wealth quickly, thereby rendering the use of
         simple discounting perhaps very inaccurate. Unfortunately, we
         cannot distinguish behavioral heterogeneity from measurement
         error.

M/'      See Bernheim [198I1 for a discussion.

         Note that since PROPtI =     Pt1/At1       (where     is private
         pension benefits), PROPtI .     A/Y                 (i.e., the

         ktj terms     cancell).

2±!!     This finding is confirmed by Diamond and Hausman [1980].
                                     —53—



                                 References


Atkinson, A.B. (1971). "The Distribution of Wealth and the Individual
      Life Cycle." Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 23, pp. 239—5lt.

Atkinson, A.B. and Harrison, A.J. (1978). The Distribution of Wealth in
      Britain. Cambridge University Press.

Bernheim, B.D. (l981a). "Annuities, Bequests, and Private Wealth."
      Stanford University (mimeo).

Bernheim, B.D. (198Lb). "Life Cycle Annuity Valuation," Stanford
      University (mimeo).

Bernheim, B.D., Shleifer, A., and Summers, L. (1981). "Bequests as a
      Means of Payment," NBER Working Paper No. 1303.

Brittain, J. (1978). Inheritance and the Inequality of Material
      Wealth. Brookings Institution.

Davies, J.B. (1980). "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in
      Retirement." Journal of Political Econoir, vol. 89, pp. 561—78.

Diamond, P.A. and Hausrnan, J.A. (1980). "Individual Savings
      Behavior." MIT (mimeo).

Feldstein, M.S. (1971-i)."Social Security, Induced Retirement, and
      Aggregate Capital Accumulation." Journal of Political Economy,
      vol. 82, pp. 905—926.

Feldstein, M.S. (1977). "Social Security and Private Savings: Inter-
      national Evidence in an Extended Life—Cycle Model," in The
      Economics of Public Services. International Economics Association
      Conference Volume, M. Feldstein and R. Innn (eds.).

Feldstein, M.S. and Pellechio, A. (1979). "Social Security and
      Household Wealth Accumulation: New Microeconomic Evidence."
      Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 61.

Ferber, R. et. al. (1969). "Validation of a National Survey of Consumer
      Financial Characteristics: Savings Accounts." Review of
      Economics and Statistics, vol. 51, pp. 1i36_IiIi.

Fox, A. (1976). "Alternative Measures of Earnings Replacement for
      Social Security," in Reaching Retirement Age, Research Report
      No. 147, Office of Research and Statistics, Social Security
      Administration, Government Printing Office.

King, M. A. and Dicks—Mireaux, L. (1982). "Asset Holding and the Life
      Cycle." Economic Journal, vol. 92, pp. 2147—67.
                                  —54—



King, M.A. and Dicks—Mireaux, L. (1983). "Pension Wealth and Household
      Savings: Tests of Robustness." Journal of Public Economics,
      forthcoming.

Kotlikoff, L. (1979). "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life
      Cycle Accumulation." American Economic Review, vol. 69, pp. 396—
      4 10.


Kotlikoff, L. and Spivak, A. (1981). "The Family as an Incomplete
      Annuities Market." Journal of Political Economy, vol. 89,
      pp. 372—91.

Lydall, H. (1955). "The Life Cycle in Income, Saving, and Asset
      Ownership." Econometrica, vol. 46, pp. 985—1012.

Loury, G. (1981). "Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of
      Earnings." Econometrica, vol. 49, pp. 843—867.

Mirer, T.W. (1979), "The Wealth—Age Relationship Among the Aged."
      American Economic Review, vol. 69, pp. 435—43.

Mulanaphy, J. (1974). Statistical Report: 1972—73 Survey of Retired
      TIM - CREF Annuitants. New York.

Projector, D. (1968). Survey of Changes in Family   Finances.   Federal
      Reserve Board of Governors.

Projector, D. and Weiss, G. (1966). Survey of Financial Characteristics
      of Consumers. Federal Reserve Board of Governors.

Shorrocks, A.F. (1975). "The Age—Wealth Relationship: A Cross—Section
      and Cohort Analysis." Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
      57', 155—63.

Smith, J.D. (1975). "White Wealth and Black People: The Distribution
      of Wealth in Washington, D.C. in 1967," in his The Personal
      Distribution of Income and Wealth, New York.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1978). "Equality, Taxation, and Inheritance," in
      Personal Income Distribution, W. Krelle and A.F. Shorrocks
      (eds.). North—Holland, Amsterdam.

Yaari, M.E. (1965). "Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory
      of the Consumer." Review of Economic Studies, vol. 32, pp. 137—50.
                                         —55—




                                        Table 1


                 Wealth Level Regressions for 1975 Cross—Section




                            Singles                            Couples

 Variable           All               Retired         All                Retired


 Constant       _109314                168757        31527                170171
                (36359)               (831L08)      (37321)              (118587)

   Age           379                  —21142         65.6                —1925
                (593)                 (1351)        (608.9)              (1930)

    Y           O.0231                 0.00892       0.0133               0.0196
                (0.00514)             (0.01314)     (0.0035)             (0.0102)

Sample   Size   1605                  213            5960                9614
                                                                           Table 2



                                                      Begueathable Wealth by Year and Retirement     Status




                                            Single Individuals                                                              Couples

  Variable          Retired by   Not Retired             Retired by     Not Retired          Retired by       Not Retired             Retired by   Not Retired
                        1969       by 1975                  1975           by 1919                 1969         by 1975                  1975        by 1979


Bequeathable
 Wealth in
    1969                15008       30003                   217143         148768                  314818        66719                   613014       873714

    1975                11832       27183                   20601          379143                  26895         6141420                 6oi1414      75709

                                    ———
    1979                                                    19209          37071                                 ———                     62610        8141480




Fraction of sample with
positive bequeathable
wealth in
    1969                0.685       0.858                   0.821          0.896                   0.915         0.938                   0.957        0.9149

    1975                0.626       o.8146                  0.902          0.885                   0.768         0.932                   0.962        0.961

                        ———         ———                                                            ———           ———
    1979                                                    0.879          0.885                                                         0.9514       0.951

1969 & 1975             0.1415      0.675                   0.671          0.719                   0.621         0.818                   0.855.       0.827

       &                ———         ———                                                            ———           ———
1975       1979                                             o.688          0.750                                                        0.861         0.81414




Sample Size               270        21i0                   173              96                     5014         1120                     8614         14ii
                                                                                    —57—



                                                                                  Table 3



                                                         Changes in Beueathable Wealth by Year and   Retirement   Status




                                                    Single Individuals                                                                   Couples

  Variable                Retired by      Not Retired            Retired by     Not Retired                                Not Retired
                                                                                                     Retired by                                    Retired by   Not Retired
                             1969           by 1975                 1975          by   1979             1969                 by 1975                  1975        by 1979


log
   W75/W6
Mean                         —0.198           0.113                  0.256          0.025               —0.125                 0.171                   0.123        0.071
                             (0.108)         (0.131)                (0.llm3)       (0.180)              (0.066)               (0.038)                 (o.0m3)      (0.063)

Median                       —0.186           0.152                 0.131           0.009               —0.086                 0.181                   0.119       0.170

Fraction   <   0              0.580           0.114I4               0.t457          0.50T                0.527                 0.381                   0.O7        o.i8


log W79/W75

Mean*                         ———             ——-                                                        ———                   ———
                                                                    —0.285          0.021                                                              0.028        0.095
                                                                    (0.120)        (o.16h)                                                            (o.oOi)      (0.055)

Median                        ———             ———                                                        ———
                                                                    —0.lOb          0.176                                      ———                     0.07km      0.133

Fraction < 0                  -——             ———
                                                                     0.5t16         0.375                                                              0.1415




* Estimated        standard errors In parentheses.
                                                                 —58—




                                                                Table   14




                                     Breakdown   of   Bequeathable Wealth for Retirees



     Type of                           Single Individuals                                 Couples
 Wealth and Year           Retired by 1969        Retired       by 1975      Retired by 1969   Retired by 1975


  House *

       1969                    6122                     14175                    13700             15013
                              (0.301)                  (0.260)                  (0.688)            (0.627)
       1975                    614214                   9893                     1391414           251481
                              (0.322)                  (0.1468)                 (0.581)            (0.791)

       1979                   ———                       8268                   ———
                                                                                                   289314
                                                       (0.1416)                                    (0.775)

  Business and Property

       1969                   1312                     120142                  6172               29625

       1915                   9114                     14srs                    31401             114013

                              ———                                              ———                114966
       1979                                            141143




  Financial Wealth

       1969                   7718                     5790                     156514            17635

       1975                   146146                   6509                    10119              21509
       1979                   ———
                                                       69149                   ———
                                                                                                  19076


  Non-Mortgage Debt
       1969                   1143                     263                     709                969

       1975                   153                      3714                     567               861

       1979                   ———                      192                     ———                366

' Percent    owning a home is given in parentheses.
                                      —59—




                                    Table    5



             Wealth Trajectories for Hypothetical Parameter Values*



   Calculated                                    Assumed Value of A
   Parameter
                                   0.05


        y                        —0.020


        T                            142                                 27'


        4                         0.1114                              0.2514



        *                         0.027'                              0.090


        1r                      —0.016                            —0.026


        1W                      —0.052                            —0.093


* For these calculations, we assumed r = 0.03, g = 0, a = 0
  (i.e., the logarithmic case), A0/(r — g)W0 = 2, and t = 6.
                                                                                   —6o—




                                                                                  Table     6



                                                              Changes in Annuity Wealth by Retirement Status




                                                  Single Individuals                                                         Couples                     .

    Variable            Retired by       Not Retired           Retired by       Not Retired       Retired by   Not Retired             Retired by   Not Retired
                           1969            by 1975                1975            by 1979            1969        by 1975                  1975        by 1979


Annuity Wealth

       1969                  75002          8001*9                 69885           61*722            105699       951*29                 8931*0        91*1452


       1975                  7361*14        90580                  77507           730148            100012       103500                 95061         99762

                             ———            ———                                                      ———          ———
       1979                                                        77131           72971*                                                93910         100112



log
      A75/A69
      Mean*                  —0.0095         0.115                     0.093        0.102            —O.01O        0.076                   0.065        0.051
                             (0.00142)      (0.0036)               (0.005)         (0.007)           (0.005)      (0.003)                 (0.003)      (0.006)

      Median                  0.006          0.1147                    0.1114       0.1147            0.002        0.080                   0.067        0.068

Fraction < 0                  0.311          0.032                     0.019        0.023             0.1042       0.090                   0.11*1       0.1614




log
      A79/A75
                             ———            —-—                                                      ———          ———
      Mean*                                                        —0.0014         —0.005                                                —0.011        —0.007
                                                                   (0.001)         (0.005)                                                (0.002)      (0.003)

                             ———            ———                                                      ———          ———
    Median                                                         —0.001          —0.001                                                —0.001        —0.001

Fraction < 0                 ———            ———                                                      ———          ———
                                                                       0.963        0.91*3                                                 0.9014       0.802


*     Estimated   standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                                                  —6i—



                                                                                Table 7


                                                         Changes    in Total   Wealth    by Retirement Status




                                            Single Individuals                                                                  Couples

 Variable          Retired by      Not Retired           Retired by        Not Retired              Retired by    Not Retired             Retired by   Not Retired
                      1969           by 1975                1975             by 1979                   1969         by 1975                  1975        by 1979


Total Wealth

   1969                90009          110051                 91600               1131491               i14oi6        1621148                 1506143      181826

   1975                851175         117763                 98108               110989                126906        167920                  155205       1751471

                                                                                                       ———           ———
   1979                                                      963140              1100145                                                     156520       1831141




log   1W75/TW69
  Mean5                —0.067          0.0611                    0.071           —0.021                               0.062                   0.055        0.029
                       (0.027)        (0.028)                (0.052)             (0.065)               (0.0114)      (0.012)                 (0.012)      (0.019)
  Median                0.005          0.1314                    0.087           0.076                 —0.01414       0.097                   0.071        0.065

  Fraction < 0          0.1450         0.228                     0.237           0.337                  0.6214        0.302                   0.328        0.370


log N79/T475

                       ———            ———                                                              ———           ———
  Mean5                                                      —0.0146             0.011                                                        0.013        0.023
                                                             (0.025)             (0.0149)                                                    (0.011)      (0.020)

                       ———            ——-                                                              ———           ———
  Median                                                     —0.003              0.0014                                                       0.005        0.027
  Fraction   < 0       -——            ———                                                              ———           ———
                                                                 0.586           0.1467                                                       0.1479       0.14214


* Estimated standard errors are in parentheses.
                                —62—




                              Table    8


                Single  Individuals, Retired by 1975
                 Dependent Variable:    log W79/W75


  Variable                            Specification
                 1              2                 3        1

constant       —0.235         0.2714          —0.609     —0.192
               (0.133)        (0.131)         (O.71i6)   (0.706)

                0.031          0.227            ———        ———
A/Y
               (2.01)         (1.96)

Log A/Y          ———            ———
                                                —0.076    0.017
                                              (0.172)    (0.163)
                 ———           8.t7             ———
                                                         —52.2
                              (3.22)                     (13.3)

                                                ———        ———
PROP.A/Y       —315           —735
               (95.2)         (i8')
PROPelog A/Y     ———            ———            0.1425    —11.14
                                              (0.397)    (3.014)
                                 —63—




                               Table     9

                        Couples, Retired by 1975
                  Dependent Variable:    log W79/W75

 Variable                               Specification
                  1              2                  3           14



constant        0.011414       0.0360            0.531         0.763
               (0.0529)        (0.0559)         (0.262)       (0.273)

A/Y             1.146          1.27               ———     .     ———

               (1.20)          (1.21)

                 ———             ———             0.113
Log A/Y                                                        0.165
                                                (0.061)       (0.0614)

PROP             ———          —0.1403             ———
                                                              —3.55
                               (0.339)                        (1.26)

PROP.A/Y       —25.7           —13.7              ———           ———

               (io.14)         (114.3)

                 ———             ———
PROP"log A/Y                                     0.105        —0.665
                                                (o.o14)       (0.279)
