                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE COST OF UNCERTAIN LIFE SPAN

                                         Ryan D. Edwards

                                       Working Paper 14093
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14093


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2008




I thank Deborah Balk, Neil Bennett, David Canning, Victor Fuchs, Ronald Lee, Shripad Tuljapurkar,
David Weil, seminar participants at Queens College, CUNY, and at the Harvard Initiative for Global
Health, and several anonymous referees for helpful comments. This research was partially supported
by NICHD grant T32 HD 07329. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ryan D. Edwards. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The Cost of Uncertain Life Span
Ryan D. Edwards
NBER Working Paper No. 14093
June 2008, Revised August 2010
JEL No. I10,J11,J17,O11

                                              ABSTRACT

A considerable amount of uncertainty surrounds life expectancy, the average length of life. The standard
deviation in adult life span is about 15 years in the U.S., and theory and evidence suggest it is costly.
I calibrate a utility-theoretic model of preferences over length of life and show that one less year in
standard deviation is worth about half a mean life year. Differences in the standard deviation exacerbate
cross-sectional differences in life expectancy between the U.S. and other industrialized countries, between
rich and poor countries, and among poor countries. But accounting for the cost of life-span variance
also appears to amplify recently discovered patterns of convergence in world average human well-being.
This is partly for methodological reasons and partly because unconditional variance in human length
of life, primarily the component due to infant mortality, has exhibited even more convergence than
life expectancy. Sustained reductions in the standard deviation of adult life span, which have largely
ceased among advanced nations, accounted for about 15 percent of the total economic value of gains
against mortality in the U.S. prior to 1950 but only about 5 percent since.


Ryan D. Edwards
Department of Economics
Queens College - CUNY
Powdermaker Hall 300-S
Flushing, NY 11367
and NBER
redwards@qc.cuny.edu
1        Introduction

Suppose that for a price, individuals could choose among several industrialized countries which

would be their life-long home starting from birth. Infant mortality is negligible, and the only

socioeconomic element that differs across regions is adult survivorship, which depends only on

physical location.1 If the choice is between living in country A, where life expectancy at birth,

e0 , is 80 years, or country B, where e0 = 78 years, how much would an individual be willing to

pay to be born and live in country A instead of B? Economists have developed an answer to this

question based on how people respond to varying degrees of mortality risk. According to the review

by Tolley, Kenkel and Fabian (1994), the average individual should value an extra year of life at

about $200,000 today after adjusting for inflation. Then we might expect that he or she might be

willing to pay about $40,000 today, or the present discounted value of those two extra year of life

expectancy at birth, to live in country A rather than B.

        In this paper, I argue that one needs to know more than just the average length of life to make

this comparison. Suppose length of life is also more uncertain in country B, where there is a 20

percent chance of death before age 65, as opposed to only a 12 percent chance in country A. Put

differently, suppose the standard deviation of length of adult life is 15 years in country B but only

13 in country B. How much would an individual pay to live in country A now? As I will show,

lowering the standard deviation by two years should be worth about the same as attaining one

additional year in mean length of life. So a reasonable answer is about $60,000 in total to live in A

rather than B, or an extra $20,000 to avoid the heightened uncertainty in life span.

        Valuing the spread in length of life to arrive at an answer like this could be done in three

different ways. One could directly ask individuals about their preferences over volatility in life

span. Alternatively, if there were a natural experiment that shifted the variance in length of life,

one could examine revealed preferences. Finally, one can produce an estimate by calibrating a

model and measuring the spread in a tractable way. Part of the problem with both of the first two

options is that it is hard to conceive of a shock to length of life that shifts only the variance and
    1
    In reality, survivorship and socioeconomic status are closely interrelated. As I discuss in section 4.2, members
of higher socioeconomic strata enjoy life spans that are longer on average and also less variable. But no amount of
income or wealth can prolong life indefinitely or remove uncertainty altogether; all strata are subject to the cost of
uncertain life span, albeit to varying degree.




                                                          2
not the mean.2 Previous attempts at the first option have thus been limited in scope and results,

and I know of no studies that follow the second. In this paper, I perform the last option, recovering

a purely theoretical value for uncertainty in life span that is fully consistent with current economic

thinking. It is similar in spirit to the ambitious theoretical work of Bommier (2006) but differs

in that its focus is on empirical calibration. By revealing a large baseline estimate of the cost of

uncertain life span, this paper sets the table for future studies of individuals’ revealed preferences.

       Choosing a convenient measure of the uncertainty is a key step. We can quantify uncertainty

in human life span by interpreting the deaths in a life table as probability densities. Each panel in

Figure 1 displays a column of the 1900 and 2000 U.S. life tables for both sexes combined presented

by Bell and Miller (2005).3 The solid line in panel A displays the density function of life spans for

the U.S. in 2000, which is a skew-left distribution around a mode of 85 years with a small spike

at infant mortality. The unconditional mean of this distribution, also called period life expectancy

at birth, or e0 , is about 77 years.4 As is plainly visible in panel A, there is considerable variation

around the mean even if we omit infant mortality, which is fixed at age 0. Edwards and Tuljapurkar

(2005) argue that the standard deviation in life span after age 10, S10 , is a good measure of this

dispersion in adult life span.5 It will also turn out to be conveniently tractable in the model I

introduce in this paper. In 2000, S10 was about 15 years in the U.S.

       Panel A in Figure 1 also reveals massive temporal change in this distribution. In 1900, life was

much shorter on average, with e0 = 48, and infant mortality was considerably higher. We can also
   2
      The estimates of the value of a life year examined by Tolley, Kenkel and Fabian (1994) and others typically derive
from economic responses to mortality shocks that change both the mean and the variance simultaneously, usually an
on-the-job risk of death that is compensated with a market wage. If these shocks are small, they reveal the expected
discounted value of a life year conditional on both the mean and variance inherent in the typical survivorship schedule.
    3
      Data prior to 1933, the first year when all 48 states were included in the official Death Registration Area (Haines,
2001), are less representative but still suggestive of early patterns.
    4
      The mean length of life conditional on survival to any early age past infancy, say age 10, is not much different at
M10 = e10 + 10 = 78. This is because infant mortality is relatively low.
    5
      As Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005) explain, the standard deviation conditional on reaching practically any age
greater than or equal to 1 but less than say 25 is a stable measure of adult inequality in advanced countries today. Age
10 is a convenient cutoff because it facilitates the examination of longer historical series or wider cross sections in which
premature mortality is more prevalent. When high, childhood mortality strongly affects S1 and S5 , while young adult
mortality can be missed entirely by S25 . To be sure, opinions vary regarding the ideal type of measure of variability
in length of life. Wilmoth and Horiuchi (1999) and Fuchs and Ersner-Hershfield (2008) prefer the interquartile range,
while Shkolnikov, Andreev and Begun (2003) favor the Gini. Preferable qualities of S10 and the IQR over the Gini
are that they are relatively invariant to trends in infant mortality, which is etiologically distinct from adult mortality,
and that they are invariant over additive translations of length of life. In a related paper, Edwards (2008) argues
that the latter characteristic is desirable given the standard utility-theoretic model of preferences used in this paper.
Trends in the IQR and S10 among industrialized countries over the last several centuries, as examined by Wilmoth
and Horiuchi (1999) and Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005), are essentially the same. As will become apparent in this
paper, a considerable advantage of S10 is its analytical tractability.


                                                             3
see that adult life spans were much more uncertain than they are today, with S10 = 24, almost 10

years or some two-thirds higher. Figure 2 charts progress against uncertainty in adult life span, S10 ,

beneath gains in average life span, e0 , over the last 150 years in Sweden, where historical statistics

are of high quality.6 Wilmoth and Horiuchi (1999) and Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005) investigate

in greater detail the long-term trends in variability among advanced countries. Monumental declines

in variance were achieved prior to the 1950s during the demographic and epidemiological transitions.

Reductions have largely stalled since then, even as life expectancy continues to increase. Today,

industrialized nations appear to be stuck with some uncertainty in life span, part of which is surely

inherent to living creatures and thus unavoidable. But as Edwards and Tuljapurkar reveal, there

are large and persistent differences today between high-variance countries, such as the U.S. and

France with S10 around 15 years, and low-variance countries like Sweden and Japan, who enjoy

levels of S10 near 13.

       There are also large differences in S10 between rich and poor countries, although poor data

quality among the latter group reduces the precision of inferences. Table 2, to be discussed later,

shows that S10 has averaged around 20 years in Sub-Saharan Africa, where demographic and

epidemiologic transitions have not completed and infectious disease remains a leading cause of

death. In particular, the HIV/AIDS epidemic has increased variance in Africa beyond what it

would normally be at comparable stages of development. Countries still in the middle of their

demographic transitions but less hard hit by HIV/AIDS enjoy considerably lower levels of S10 ,

around 16.5 in the case of India and 14 in China, where population aging is commencing. While

infant mortality is negligible in most advanced economies, it has been and remains very high in

developing regions. As shown in Table 2, the chance of survivorship to age 10 in Sub-Saharan Africa

is estimated at only 82.7 percent today, compared with 99.2 percent in high income countries.

       Are there welfare costs associated with S10 and infant mortality? What are the implications of

this broad definition of health inequality for assessing our progress against mortality, and for gauging

the value of continued progress?7 Answering these questions requires a theoretical framework, and
   6
     As discussed by Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005), the trend toward lower variance is best characterized as a
one-time, if extended, event during the half century of epidemiological transition in industrialized countries, while
increases in life expectancy appear to be continuing apace. The decline of infectious disease as a leading cause of
death during the early part of the 20th century not only raised life expectancy but lowered the variability in adult life
spans considerably. After 1950, progress against chronic degenerative diseases like cancer and cardiovascular disease
appears to have shifted the survivorship curve outward rather than compressing it (Wilmoth, 2003).
   7
     To be sure, population S10 effectively conflates inequality as we would traditionally understand it, i.e., a difference


                                                             4
I explore the cost of life-span variance using a standard model of intertemporal choice. Both model

and exercise are similar to those of Lucas (1987) in his classic assessment of the welfare cost of

business cycles, but the nature of the uncertainty I consider here is quite different. A related paper

(Edwards, 2009a) considers an isomorphic problem that is more directly analogous to Lucas’s: the

cost of cyclical fluctuations in mortality. Here, I am concerned with the cost of temporally static

uncertainty in length of life. Economically large variation in S10 across groups also raises an entirely

different and interesting set of research questions concerning behavioral aspects. Potential causes

and consequences of uncertainty in length of life range broadly and are an interesting focus for

future efforts. I discuss extant findings in this nascent area of inquiry but leave deeper questions

to future research efforts.

    As I show in this paper, the standard model of intertemporal optimization implies that individ-

uals should be risk averse over life span, and the coefficient of absolute risk aversion in life span is

approximately the time discount rate. Since average life span seems to be increasing linearly over

time while the standard deviation around adult ages is now roughly fixed, constant absolute risk

aversion is consistent with stable risk premia and thus is an intuitive result.8 As I discuss below,

risk aversion over life span fits the relatively scant empirical evidence on stated preferences and

behavior in medical settings. Bommier (2006) presents a more detailed and general modeling of risk

aversion over life span that relaxes the assumption of additively separable preferences via another

curvature parameter, which he does not calibrate. If risk aversion is indeed greater than implied by

time discounting alone, as Bommier’s framework assumes implies, then my estimates will under-

state the true cost of life-span uncertainty. To be sure, much research on consumption and asset

pricing suggests that additive separability is too restrictive to explain many phenomena (Epstein
in mean life span between groups, with uncertainty in life span within groups or overall. While it is a measure of total
ex post inequality, labeling it as such may be misleading. As Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005) reveal, population-level
S10 masks substantial differences in both mean and variance in life span across population subgroups, which indicates
that inequality, uncertainty, and inequality in uncertainty are all at work.
    8
      The intuition derives from an analogy to the relationship between time trends in aggregate consumption, risk
premia in consumption, and preferences over consumption, a relationship described by Campbell and Viceira (2002).
Log consumption is trending linearly upward over time, while financial risk premia and the standard deviations
of asset returns and log consumption have remained roughly constant. Preferences over consumption that exhibit
constant relative risk aversion are consistent with these facts, and this is one reason why the familiar power utility
function is useful for modeling. By comparison, average length of life is trending upward at an approximately linear
rate, and the standard deviation has remained roughly constant since 1960. These facts imply that constant absolute
risk aversion over length of life would be consistent with these facts and with stable risk premia placed on length
of life. Although we technically do not observe the latter in any market, it seems reasonable to expect that they
probably are constant.



                                                           5
and Zin, 1989, 1991; Browning, 1991). But Nordhaus (2003), Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005),

Murphy and Topel (2006), Hall and Jones (2007), and others in the subfield on valuing longevity

extension all assume additive separability. My contribution follows in their footsteps and highlights

the independent and interesting cost of the variance in the widely used baseline model; it makes

no progress in answering similarly interesting questions about nonseparable preferences in theory

and practice.

   For reasonable parameter values, the standard intertemporal model suggests that variance in

adult life span is quite costly, even when wealth can be fully and costlessly annuitized. Time

discounting also makes infant mortality extremely costly, considerably more so than is implied by

the sizable effect of infant mortality on mean length of life alone. There are several implications of

my results. Each year in adult standard deviation is worth about half a year in the average; that

is, an individual would agree to give up half a year in mean life span to obtain a standard deviation

one year lower. In light of this, the value of differences in population health between low-average,

high-variance countries and high-average, low-variance countries is larger than the differences in life

expectancy alone. As I will show, the vast decreases in the standard deviation in the U.S. during

the 20th century represent roughly 15 percent of the total value of gains against mortality. Previous

estimates of the total economic value of mortality decline since 1900 (Nordhaus, 2003; Murphy and

Topel, 2006) typically account for all changes in the survivorship schedule, whether involving the

mean, variance, or higher moments, and thus are not biased downward. But my findings reveal that

a significant amount of the gains was due to declines in variance, which have now largely ceased

(Edwards and Tuljapurkar, 2005).

   In valuation studies where only life expectancy at birth is considered due to data limitations,

the omission of higher moments will bias results because variance is costly. In the final section,

I revisit the efforts of Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005), who reveal much global convergence

in world average “full income,” a measure of human well-being that incorporates the value of life

along with income per capita. Due to lack of data, their analysis accounts for the average but

not the variance in human life span. Incorporating new work by Edwards (2009b), I show that

accounting for life-span uncertainty amplifies patterns of convergence in full income since 1970

for two reasons. Methodologically speaking, accounting for the presence of any variance, adult

or otherwise, increases the measured value of a given improvement in life expectancy, and the

                                                  6
value is increasing in the variance. An observed gain in the mean length of life is thus worth

more to high-mortality countries, which also tend to be poor. In addition, there has been much

global convergence in infant mortality, more so even than in life expectancy (Moser, Shkolnikov

and Leon, 2005), although considerably less in S10 . Infant mortality can be interpreted as the

most costly type of variance in total life span, and reductions strongly increase full income even

if life expectancy were held constant. Thus while higher mortality and variance in length of life

still disproportionately penalize the poor, the value of improvements in mortality works to reduce

global inequality in average well-being.

    The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, I contextualize this research by discussing

extant work on choice under uncertain survivorship and literature on the value of life and on

bequests. Section 3 presents the utility-theoretic model of the cost of uncertain length of adult life,

compares analytic approximations of the central result to numerical simulations of the full model,

and discusses the cost of infant mortality. In Section 4, I explore the implications of these insights,

such as for decomposing the value of mortality declines and assessing convergence in average human

well-being. The final section concludes.



2    Background

A wealth of research exploring the valuation of life has produced many insights regarding the

willingness to pay for mortality reduction (Rosen, 1988; Viscusi, 1993; Johansson, 2002; Aldy and

Viscusi, 2003). Some investigators have examined the willingness to pay over historical periods

and across geographical boundaries (Viscusi and Aldy, 2003; Costa and Kahn, 2004), while others

use this evidence to value long-term increases in life span (Cutler and Richardson, 1997; Nordhaus,

2003; Becker, Philipson and Soares, 2005; Murphy and Topel, 2006). Most of these efforts model

survivorship probabilities realistically, i.e., with implicit variance around mean life span. Panel B

in Figure 1 displays the survivorship probabilities, or the cumulative of the density in panel A.

But Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005), who examine a broad cross section of 96 rich and poor

countries in 1960, 1990, and 2000, could not examine complete survivorship curves because the

data were not available. Rather, they were forced to use only life expectancy at birth, the average

of the distribution.


                                                   7
    To be sure, higher moments do not matter if there is risk neutrality over length of life, and the

degree of risk aversion is not trivially clear and could be zero. This topic is particularly salient

for the medical profession, where decisions regarding life and death and the costs, benefits, and

riskiness of procedures must be weighed by physicians and patients alike. Assessing net benefits

requires assumptions about preferences over health states in different future periods, and the med-

ical literature recognizes that the degree of risk aversion over remaining years of life will affect this

calculation (Ried, 1998; Bleichrodt and Quiggin, 1999).

    Measuring the concavity of preferences over life span is neither a common nor straightforward

activity, but the consensus view based on empirical research in the last decade seems to be that

individuals are risk averse. Bleichrodt and Johannesson (1997) report that four out of five empirical

studies directly examining this question reject risk neutrality over life years in favor of risk aversion

(McNeil, Weichselbaum and Pauker, 1978; Stiggelbout et al., 1994; Verhoef, Haan and van Daal,

1994; Maas and Wakker, 1994). These investigations typically ask respondents, sampled either

from medical treatment programs or from the community, to assess the desirability of various

probabilistic scenarios regarding survival in perfect health versus death. For many but not all

respondents, certainty equivalents are concave in life years, implying risk aversion.9 In a theoretical

contribution, Bommier (2006) models preferences over life span with an extra parameter producing

risk aversion even when the rate of time preference is zero.

    But even if individuals are inherently risk averse over life span, they may be able to diversify

life-span risk through contingent claims. Indeed, observed heterogeneity in stated preferences may

reflect differential access to or use of markets for contingent claims. Annuities and life insurance are

two examples of market instruments that diversify risks associated with uncertain life spans, while

bequests are a nonmarket instrument that could also conceivably hedge against life-span uncer-

tainty. In this paper, I show that while full annuitization removes all consumption risk associated

with uncertain life span, and therefore improves welfare, annuities cannot remove the utility risk.

Even under full annuitization, life-span uncertainty is costly. Whether life insurance helps offset

S10 is more difficult to say, since it affects individual utility only through the bequest motive. That
   9
     The shape of preferences tends to vary by subgroup characteristics and based on whether the gamble is short or
long-term in nature. Pliskin, Shepard and Weinstein (1980) reveal apparent risk neutrality and even risk preference
among 10 Harvard researchers. Verhoef, Haan and van Daal (1994) find their subjects are risk-seeking over small
gambles in life span but risk averse over large gambles, consistent with prospect theory. Miyamoto and Eraker (1985)
settle on risk neutrality over life years as an average over wide-ranging preferences they observe.


                                                         8
is, actuarially fair life insurance is like a precommitted bequest, and to assess its benefits we must

understand bequests.

   If individuals are altruistic, it is conceivable that bequests could hedge life-span risk relatively

well if the bequest motive is strong. With utility deriving solely from consumption rather than from

other aspects of living, then the disutility of early death could in theory be balanced by increased

utility among survivors under altruistic bequests. Similarly, the additional utility deriving from

late death could be offset by the impact of diminished bequests. But it is difficult to see why such

fully altruistic individuals with utility only from consumption would care about any moment of life

span, including the average. Probably for this reason, the value-of-life literature typically ignores

bequest motives altogether (Chang, 1991; Johansson, 2002).

   In any event, the literature on bequests is mixed with regard to the strength of the motive, with

some research indicating they are generally not intended (Hurd, 1987, 1989) and other research

suggesting otherwise (Kopczuk and Lupton, 2007). A prevailing view in economics is that bequests

are simply unused precautionary savings (Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes, 2004). Findings in the

medical literature of risk aversion over length of life certainly suggest that bequest motives are

either not universal or not strong enough to hedge against the risk of death. Another perspective

on bequests is that they can be strategic, a quid pro quo promised in exchange for elderly care

(Bernheim, Shleifer and Summers, 1985). Leaving aside the problem that living too long risks

depleting bequeathable wealth as well as requiring informal care, we might interpret strategic

bequests as merely another form of annuitization, if they are set aside up front.

   In the next section, I reveal the theoretical cost of uncertain life span in the standard intertem-

poral model common to economics, paying special attention to the role of annuitization. I find

that individuals who discount their future well-being in the standard way should be risk averse

over life span, even when they can fully annuitize. Consistent with the value-of-life literature, I do

not model a bequest motive explicitly, but I express the cost of variance in life span in terms of

the value of the mean. This lessens the sensitivity of my results to the assumption of no intended

bequests, because a bequest motive would work to reduce both simultaneously.




                                                  9
3     Modeling the cost of life-span uncertainty

Grossman (1972), Ehrlich and Chuma (1990), and others have modeled preferences over health

capital and life extension by adapting standard economic frameworks of intertemporal choice. Here

I continue that tradition but with a simpler model without health capital in order to enhance ana-

lytical tractability. It turns out that when future periods are discounted and additively separable,

expected utility maximization implies there is a large welfare cost associated with adult life-span

uncertainty for reasonable parameter values. There is also a very high cost attached to infant

mortality.


3.1    Setup of the model

Consider an expected utility maximizer at time t = 0 with an implicit rate of time discounting

equal to δ and no bequest motive.10 Lifetime expected utility is the sum of period utilities drawn

from consumption, u(c(t)), weighted by the force of time discounting, e−δt , and the probability

that the individual is alive, ℓ(t):

                                                Z       ∞
                                        EU =                u(c(t))e−δt ℓ(t) dt.                                      (1)
                                                    0


The survivorship function, ℓ(t), shown in Panel B of Figure 1, is one minus the cumulative density

function of life span. The decrement to ℓ(t) is the probability density function of life span, shown

in Panel A and commonly called life-table deaths. Finally, we define the life-table probability of

dying between t and t + 1 as q(t) = log [ℓ(t)] − log [ℓ(t + 1)].11 Panel C of Figure 1 shows how

mortality tends to increase exponentially with age, as originally revealed by Gompertz (1825). For

simplicity, I do not explicitly model health status. To the extent that younger, healthier life-years

are probably more valuable than older, sicker life-year years, my model will tend to underestimate

the true cost of a mean-preserving spread in life span.
  10
     In reality, where mortality prospects vary across types, we might posit that an individual begins life under a
“veil of ignorance,” facing the full level of population uncertainty, but then learns his or her type later, which lowers
uncertainty. This would alter behavior once the type became known. I do not model this dynamic here for two
reasons. Parents, who possess better forecasts, make most of the decisions for children. Edwards and Tuljapurkar
(2005) show that although there are interesting differences in life-span uncertainty across U.S. subgroups, they are
not enormous.
  11
     This form is more convenient for expositional purposes here, but life-table q(t) is typically defined implicitly as
ℓ(t + 1) = ℓ(t)[1 − q(t)], in order to attrit the entire cohort at a finite age. In continuous time, q(t) is the hazard or
mortality rate.


                                                                10
     Suppose the individual has a financial endowment W that can be consumed or saved at a fixed

market rate of interest, r. For simplicity, there is no labor, education, capital, or financial risk

in this model.12 In a market without annuities, the budget constraint requires the individual to

finance the present value of all future consumption out of wealth:

                                                      Z       ∞
                                             W =                  c(t)e−rt dt.                                         (2)
                                                          0


Under this budget constraint, the model will produce unintended bequests whose size varies in-

versely with length of life. This is because the individual must engage in a type of precautionary

saving against the risk of living too long, and unused savings become bequests. If instead actuarially

fair annuities are available, the budget constraint takes on a different form:

                                                  Z       ∞
                                           W =                c(t)e−rt ℓ(t) dt.                                        (3)
                                                      0


An annuity pays off in future periods only if the individual is alive. This allows the buyer to

finance future consumption more cheaply than through saving, but at the expense of unintended

bequests.13

     The individual maximizes equation (1) subject either to (2) or (3) depending on whether an-

nuities are available. I can write the resulting Euler condition that describes intertemporal choice

as


                                       u′ (c(t + 1)) = u′ (c(t))eδ−r+D·q(t) ,                                          (4)


where D is an indicator of the lack of annuities. Under full annuitization, D = 0 and mortality

cancels out of equation (4) because survivorship appears in both the objective and the constraint.
   12
      Kalemli-Ozcan, Ryder and Weil (2000) and Li and Tuljapurkar (2004) develop models that include retirement,
endogenous capital accumulation, and education alongside mortality. Each element probably increases the cost of
life-span variance. If individuals must trade their leisure time for market earnings, higher S10 erodes expected lifetime
wealth provided that the retirement age is within the support of probabilistic life span. If capital and the interest
rate were endogenous, higher S10 would likely deplete the capital stock by lowering the marginal utility of wealth,
raising the interest rate and lowering the wage rate. Effects on welfare are countervailing, but it seems likely that the
net effect would be negative. Human capital investment is riskier when S10 is higher, which should result in lower
educational attainment and a decrease in welfare. But it is also true that S10 is lower for groups with more education
(Edwards and Tuljapurkar, 2005). We might interpret this as very tangible evidence that S10 is costly.
   13
      In this model with costlessly enforced contracts, the price of the annuity is the right to leave bequests. All wealth
that is unused by those who die is redistributed to the living.



                                                                   11
Other things equal, consumption will tend to be flat through age if δ = r. But without annu-

ities, D = 1, and the mortality rate, q(t), which typically increases exponentially through age,

will pull marginal utility higher and consumption lower over age through a type of precautionary

saving (Hubbard and Judd, 1987). This will produce a consumption trajectory that looks like the

survivorship curve.

   We are interested in the expected utility cost of variance in life span, or equivalently of facing

a mortality schedule q(t) that is rising exponentially rather than staying at zero until rising to 1

at the date of death. Based on equation (4), it is tempting to assert that annuities must offset the

cost of life-span variance, since q(t) does not appear in the Euler equation under full annuitization.

In fact, annuitization reduces the cost of variance but cannot eliminate it, as I will now show.

   My analytical strategy is to assume full annuitization, normally distributed life spans, and power

utility in order to find a convenient closed-form solution for the cost of life-span variance. Later, I

use numerical simulations to relax assumptions about annuities and the distribution of life spans.

Since period utility is a function of consumption, which typically depends on time or age and thus

the distribution of life span, it is convenient to assume a specific functional form of utility in order

to proceed. Power utility is a standard assumption in economics and a reasonable baseline. Since

my qualitative results are driven by discounting and time-separability, they are likely to generalize

to other period utility functions. More fundamental questions, such as whether preferences actually

reflect time-separability and exponential discounting, and whether they are age independent, are

perfectly valid but beyond the scope of this paper to address.




                                                  12
3.2      Full annuitization and normally distributed life spans

Let u(·) take the familiar form of power utility with constant relative risk aversion over consumption

plus a constant utility shifter K.14

                                                         c(t)1−γ
                                             u(c(t)) =           + K.                                                   (5)
                                                          1−γ

Under full annuitization, survivorship weights appear both in lifetime utility and in the budget

constraint. Thus mortality cancels out of the Euler equation (4), which simplifies to


                                                c(t) = c(0)et[r−δ]/γ ,                                                  (6)


where c(0) is a function of wealth, the parameters, the annuitization indicator, D, and the moments

of life span. I will proceed by assuming that c(0) remains constant over small changes in the

moments of life span, an assumption that I later relax in numerical simulations.15

       With the simplified Euler equation, we could completely solve the model by reformulating the

budget constraint through a change in the order of integration:

                                                         Z     T              
                                                                        −rt
                                           W     = E                c(t)e     dt ,                                      (7)
                                                            0


where T is a random variable, the realization of life span, and E is the expectations operator. The

survivorship weights are now implicit in the expectation. For a given distribution of T , we could
  14
      To be sure, the use of power (isoelastic) utility raises some issues in any setting when periods of life are variable.
Here, the level of utility matters, which is usually not the case. It must be positive or else life is not a good. We
can model this with certain combinations of the utility shifter K and the coefficient of relative risk aversion, γ, as do
Ehrlich (2000), Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005), and Hall and Jones (2007), but questions may remain as to the
appropriateness of this technique. No study has attempted to test the restrictions imposed on the characteristics of u(·)
in this case, namely the implied degree of risk aversion and intertemporal substitution in consumption, and analogous
preferences over years of life. We already know power utility does not jointly satisfy the first two particularly well
(Epstein and Zin, 1989, 1991), but that has not precluded its widespread use. To what extent modeling preferences
over length of life complicate this picture is a question awaiting future research. I believe my core results hinge on
the assumptions of time separability and exponential time discounting, and not on the curvature of the period utility
function, or on the restriction that the coefficient of relative risk aversion in consumption equals the intertemporal
elasticity of substitution in consumption.
   15
      Mean life span, M , affects c(0) in obvious ways, and Rosen (1988) shows how extending life incurs a marginal
cost associated with reducing consumption in all periods, holding other things, namely liftime wealth, equal. A more
subtle point is that the variance in life span, S 2 , also affects c(0) for the same reason that variance affects lifetime
expected utility. But the direction of the effect is counterintuitive. Through Jensen’s Inequality, (expected) lifetime
discounted consumption is lower when variance in life span is higher. At any given initial wealth, c(0) can then be
higher than under less variance while still satisying the budget constraint. Numerical simulations reveal that the
effects on c(0) of changing M or S 2 are small.


                                                              13
use equation (6) to solve the integral and then find c(0) by taking the expectation.16 But we are

primarily interested in the relative price of variance in life-span in this model, which is governed

by its relative marginal utility. To proceed, I change the order of integration in lifetime expected

utility, equation (1):

                                                   Z     T                      
                                                                      −δt
                                       EU = E                 u(c(t))e         dt ,                                   (8)
                                                      0


where as before, T is a random variable. With the power utility formulation in equation (5) and

the consumption function in equation (6), expected lifetime utility under full annuitization is
                                          "                                                   #
                                              c(0)1−γ                         K          
                            EU     = E                        1 − e−δ̂T       +    1 − e−δT     ,                     (9)
                                              (1 − γ)δ̂                         δ

where K is the constant utility of being alive, and

                                                          1−γ
                                              δ̂ = δ −        (r − δ).                                              (10)
                                                           γ

When r is close to δ, we have δ̂ ≈ δ; and δ̂ = δ when either r = δ or γ → 1.


3.2.1      Risk aversion over life span

Examination of equation (9) reveals that individuals are risk averse over life span in this model if

the rate of time discounting, δ, is positive and not too different from the real interest rate, r. The

Arrow-Pratt coefficient of absolute risk aversion over T , −EUT T /EUT , is approximately equal to

the rate of time discounting, δ, and exactly equal when r = δ. That is, absolute risk aversion in

life span is roughly constant.17

       We would expect individuals who are risk averse over life span to be hurt by uncertainty in life

span, and this is exactly what we see if T ∼ N (M, S 2 ).18 When life spans are normally distributed,
  16
     Without annuities, the presence of q(t) in the consumption function precludes analytical solutions because mor-
tality increases exponentially with age.
  17
     As discussed earlier, constant absolute risk aversion over life span seems consistent with roughly linear time trends
in life expectancy and a stable S10 during the era since World War II. This is because constant relative risk aversion
over consumption risk, such as implied by power utility, fits the pattern of exponential growth in consumption and
stability in the standard deviations of log consumption and of asset returns, and in financial risk premia (Campbell
and Viceira, 2002).
  18
     As shown by Figure 1, adult life spans are technically not normal, with both leftward skewness and leptokurtosis,
or peakedness with fat tails, an indicator of different subgroup variances. Below, I show that numerical simulations


                                                                14
expected lifetime utility in this model is

                                   c(0)1−γ h                   2 S 2 /2
                                                                          i       Kh           2 2
                                                                                                    i
                      EU     =                 1 − e−δ̂M +δ̂                  +     1 − e−δM +δ S /2 ,              (11)
                                  (1 − γ)δ̂                                       δ

by virtue of the properties of lognormality. That is, expected lifetime utility is a decreasing function

of S, provided that δ > 0, r and δ are not too dissimilar, and period utility is positive.19


3.2.2    Pricing the variance in life span

It is convenient to recover the price pS of a standard deviation in life span, S, in terms of the mean,

M , by constructing the ratio of their marginal lifetime utilities:

                                                       ∂EU/∂S
                                                pS =          .                                                     (12)
                                                       ∂EU/∂M

When the utility shifter K is nonzero, this ratio is mathematically complicated.20 A first-order

Taylor expansion around K = 0 reveals

                                                    −1 
                                          c(0)1−γ
                                                                             2   2  2
                      pS ≈ −δ̂S +                           δ̂ − δ e(δ̂−δ)M +(δ −δ̂ )S /2 SK.                       (13)
                                          (1 − γ)

When K = 0 or when δ̂ = δ, this reduces exactly to a parsimonious relationship:


                                                       pS = −δ̂S.                                                   (14)


The price of a standard deviation in life span, pS , is negative when δ̂ > 0 because S is a bad. That

is, an individual who faces higher variance in life span must be compensated by a longer mean life

span. In addition, pS increases linearly with the level of S, with the magnitude of the slope equal to
show that normality reduces the cost of S as long as the discount rate is positive, so this assumption produces an
underestimate of the true cost.
  19
     It is a standard observation that period utility, which is the marginal utility of being alive in that period, should
be nonnegative when modeling dynamics of life span (Rosen, 1988; Hall and Jones, 2004; Becker, Philipson and
Soares, 2005). If it were negative or zero, a utility maximizing individual would choose to die. Becker, Philipson and
Soares (2005) calibrate the additive utility shifter K < 0. This reduces the cost of S through the second piece of
(11), but numerical simulations confirm this effect to be small and uninteresting.
  20
     The constant utility shifter does not appreciably augment the insights to be gained. Were K to describe period
utility alone, it would imply the same dynamics as when r = δ, with only δ mattering for cost. When K is combined
with flow utility from consumption, both numerator and denominator in (12) are weighted averages of the two pieces
in equation (11). When the piece including K has more weight, the coefficient on S in pS shifts closer to δ than δ̂.



                                                              15
δ̂, approximately the rate of time discounting. That is, the costliness of a standard deviation in life

span in terms of the mean rises with the level of uncertainty. Mathematically speaking, this follows

directly from the lognormality of lifetime utility. Intuitively, the willingness to bear additional risk

falls with the level of risk because its marginal disutility rises. We see the same type of behavior

in financial markets, where returns on financial assets are also approximately lognormal, and risk

premia tend to rise strongly with the riskiness of returns.21

       It is also convenient to write out the marginal utilities in the special case of K = 0:

                                                  c(0)1−γ −δ̂M +δ̂ 2 S 2 /2
                         ∂EU/∂S   −δ̂ 2 S                 e                       −δ̂ 2 S
                                                  (1−γ)δ̂
                    pS =        =                 c(0)1−γ −δ̂M +δ̂ 2 S 2 /2
                                                                              =             = −δ̂S.               (15)
                         ∂EU/∂M     δ̂                    e                         δ̂
                                                  (1−γ)δ̂


The end result is the same as in the Taylor expansion, but this formulation reveals a subtle point

that will become important in Section 4. The marginal utility of mean life years, the denominator,

is decreasing in the mean but increasing in the variance, so that improvements in life expectancy of

a given size are more valuable when variance is high. This somewhat counterintuitive result again

derives from discounting. Gaining an additional year at the mean under full certainty is not worth

as much as gaining an additional year in expectation when there are higher survivorship weights

on earlier, less heavily discounted years, and lower weights on later years.

       We could also solve for the dollar price of S by constructing the ratio of marginal lifetime

utilities of S and c(0) or wealth instead, but pricing the variance in terms of mean life span is

useful for two reasons. If bequests are intended, they should attenuate both the marginal disutility

of life-span variance and the marginal utility of mean life span, while probably amplifying the

marginal utility of consumption, since your money could buy happiness through your children’s

happiness. Although evidence suggests that bequest motives must not be very strong, the price

of S in terms of M is likely to be a more stable relationship than the price of either in terms of

money. The latter depends on assumptions about the curvature of utility in terms of consumption,

given by γ here, and thus the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption, and if they

are not separated, the coefficient of relative risk aversion in consumption. As I will discuss later,
  21
    According to data presented by Ibbotson Associates (2002), the standard deviation of the excess return on
equities was 14 percent between 1948 and 1999, which demanded a risk premium of about 9 percent. Excess returns
on corporate bonds had a standard deviation a little over half as large, 8.5 percent, but the risk premium on corporate
bonds was much lower, only 1.3 percent, or about one seventh of the equity risk premium.



                                                          16
conceptualizing the price of variance in terms of the mean rather than consumption is also useful

for interpreting current cross-national and intertemporal differences in population health.

    Is pS = −δ̂S high or low? It clearly depends on the level of the discount rate. If we choose

r = δ = 0.03, their standard values in calibration exercises (Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes, 1994;

Becker, Philipson and Soares, 2005), then at the current U.S. level of S = 15, we find that pS =

−0.45 year. That is, the average citizen would be willing to give up almost half a year in mean

life span in order to obtain a standard deviation in life span that was one year lower. For now, I

simply remark that this cost seems large, and later I provide some context for assessing the cost

relative to levels of population health across time and space.


3.3    Numerical solutions of the full model

I next examine the sensitivity of the analytical result, pS = −δ̂S, to alternative assumptions about

wealth annuitization and mortality using numerical methods. I set parameters to match those

used by Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005): r = δ = 0.03, γ = 0.8, and K = −16.2. Initial

wealth equaling $800,000 is consistent with the parameter values, U.S. life spans, and per capita

consumption of $26,650 per year. I also fully endogenize consumption. For better tractability and

for clearer comparisons, I begin by modeling life span as normally distributed.22 For now I omit

infant and child mortality and set S equal to the standard deviation in life spans above age 10,

S10 . Similarly, for M I use M10 , which is also equal to remaining life expectancy at age 10, e10 ,

plus 10. I set mean and variance equal to U.S. levels in 1994, M10 = 76.85 and S10 = 15.66 years,

and I search for the mean life span that compensates expected utility for a decrease in S10 to 15.05,

the 1999 level. It is convenient to use data from these two years because there is a relatively large

difference in S10 but a small difference in M10 , which reduces the complexity of later simulations

with fully realistic mortality.
   22
      I truncate these synthetic distributions at ages 0 and 150 and rescale so that their cdf’s sum to unity. Age 150
is an unrealistic but convenient choice when life spans are normally distributed. The Human Mortality Database
(2009) topcodes age at 110, and there are few documented individuals who have survived to that age. When life
spans are normally distributed with means around age 80, densities past age 110 are not miniscule. Truncating at
age 110 actually creates significant skewness in the distribution, and probably changes the mean and variance. Such
skewed distributions actually produce a pS locus that better resembles that under realistic survivorship because real
life spans are skew-left.




                                                         17
3.3.1   Normally distributed life spans

Figure 3 plots pS as given by equation (14), shown by the thick solid line, on the same axes with

two other loci that I obtain from numerical simulation of the model with normally distributed life

spans. I fix the rate of market interest at r = 0.03 and examine how varying δ, shown along the

horizontal axis, changes pS given S10 = 15.66. The steeper, concave line shows the locus obtained

from the numerical model with full annuitization of wealth, while the lower dashed line depicts the

schedule that results from the numerical model without annuitization.

   The two solid lines reveal relatively limited differences between the analytical and numerical

versions of the model with annuities. They cross at δ = 0.03, with the numerical model producing

a more steeply sloped pS locus that becomes concave at high δ. These differences are due to the

presence of the utility shifter K, which when negative tends to increase pS when δ is large, as shown

by equation (13). When K > 0, the numerical locus is flatter than the analytical locus, and when

K = 0, the lines overlap. Both lines show that when 0 < γ < 1 and δ is small relative to r = 0.03, δ̂

can actually become negative, which shifts pS positive. When time discounting is very low relative

to the rate of interest and intertemporal substitutability is high, it is optimal to consume more in

the future. A mean-preserving spread in life span, which trades away earlier years for later years,

could actually improve expected well-being for somebody with heavily back-loaded consumption.

   The relationship in Figure 3 between the cost of uncertainty under annuitization and the cost

without annuitization is more interesting. The dashed line, which shows pS without annuities, is

significantly lower than the other two, indicating that life-span variance is more costly at any δ

without annuities. At the baseline of r = δ = 0.03, pS without annuitization is about −0.75, more

than half again as large as pS with annuitization, which is about −0.45. This is an intuitive result

insofar as annuitization is designed to remove risks to consumption associated with uncertain life

span. That annuitization removes only a little over one third of the total cost of life-span uncertainty

under baseline parameter values is more surprising. In this model, the direct utility cost of S is

more important than the cost of consumption uncertainty.

   One can also vary r while holding δ = 0.03 fixed, which is shown in Figure 4. Here, an even

greater difference emerges between the numerical and analytical models under annuitization, which

again turns out to be linked to the utility shifter K. The numerical model reveals considerably



                                                  18
more negative pS when r < δ and K < 0. This is because when r < δ, consumption optimally

declines over time. If in addition K < 0, the benefit of living long is weakened considerably relative

to the cost of dying early, so the cost of S is higher. As before, we see that pS is more negative

when annuities are not available, regardless of the level of r. Each locus also shows that the cost

of S is declining in magnitude with r. If 0 < γ < 1, then a very large r, around 0.15 with these

parameters, can produce a negative δ̂ and thus a positive pS (not shown). As before, when r is

high relative to δ, the price of future consumption is low. Intertemporal substitutability is high

when 0 < γ < 1, and the individual will substitute toward future consumption. If r is high enough,

a mean-preserving spread in life span might actually improve expected well-being for someone so

dependent on future utility.

       The period utility curvature parameter, γ, does play a role here but is much less interesting

than one might expect.23 We are accustomed to thinking of γ as the coefficient of relative risk

aversion over gambles in consumption, since a higher γ represents a more concave period utility

function. Here, its influence is more easily understood as deriving from its other role, the inverse

of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.24 When 0 < γ < 1, the consumer likes to substitute

consumption between periods because marginal utility in any period remains high, and any differ-

ence between r and δ will be amplified and will generally affect pS . But when γ > 1, there are

weaker gains from intertemporal redistribution, and high or low interest rates do not greatly affect

δ̂ ≈ δ.
  23
      As I discussed in note 14, the tradition in the literature on valuing life extension is not to separate the coefficient
of relative risk aversion (CRRA) from the elasticity of intertemporal substitution (EIS), although researchers in asset
pricing often model preferences that way (Epstein and Zin, 1989, 1991). When longevity is endogenous and must be
purchased, as in the growth model of Hall and Jones (2007), this could be problematic because the marginal rate
of substitution between consumption and length of life ought to depend on the EIS, not the CRRA. In the present
context, the conflation of the EIS and CRRA is not important. Functionally, the MRS between average length of life
and the variance depends mostly on the time discount rate. Intuitively, it is only utility curvature over length of life,
not consumption, that matters in the cost of life-span variance. The relevant issue here is whether additively time-
separable preferences are overly confining, and I defer to established tradition in this subfield while acknowledging it
remains an open and interesting question.
   24
      An interesting parallel emerges but is left for future research. We have seen how δ, the rate of time discounting,
is also the coefficient of absolute risk aversion over life span in this model. It is an open question whether attitudes
toward time and risk as regards periods of life ought to be or even can be separated, as they have been with attitudes
regarding consumption (Epstein and Zin, 1989, 1991).




                                                             19
3.3.2    Realistic adult life spans without infant mortality

Modern distributions of human life span are skew-left and leptokurtic, not normal. The skewness

is of direct interest here, because it implies that a mean-preserving spread in life span lowers

survivorship probabilities asymmetrically. When there is leftward skewness, an increase in variance

reduces survivorship at young adult as well as adult ages, or across two age groups, while increasing

it only at old ages. Because of discounting, skewness should amplify the cost of uncertain life spans.

    It is tricky to model realistic life spans with particular means and variances because we do not

have a convenient functional form of the actual probability distribution of life spans. I proceed by

generating additive translations of the 1999 life-span distribution above age 10 in the U.S., which

originally had a mean of 77.67 and a standard deviation of 15.05, so that I have an array of realistic

distributions with varying means but fixed variances. Then I search for the distribution that

produces the same lifetime expected utility as the 1994 distribution above age 10 with M10 = 76.85

and S10 = 15.66.25

    Figure 5 is an analogue of Figure 3 with realistic adult mortality. It depicts the same three loci

of pS against δ for r = 0.03 and uses the same vertical scale for easier comparison. The thick solid

line, which shows the analytical model’s pS , is the same as before, since I cannot mathematically

model realistic life spans. The other two schedules reveal levels of pS that are more negative than

in Figure 3, especially for larger δ. That is, the cost of life-span uncertainty is indeed higher when

I model life span realistically, with leftward skewness that places a wider range of early years at

risk. The thin solid line, representing the output of the numerical model with annuities, shows

pS ≈ −0.7 when δ = 0.03, which is considerably greater in magnitude than the pS = −0.45 from

the simple model. As δ rises, both numerical models show more precipitous increases in the cost

of variance when adult life span is realistic.
  25
     I apply a cubic spline to the distribution of life spans by single years of age over age 10 in the U.S. in 1999,
and I sequentially evaluate the spline at hundredths of a year in age, spaced one year apart. I then redefine age
back to whole years, which produces a sideways translation of the distribution, changing the mean but preserving
the variance. At ages under 10, I simply duplicate the density at 10 and renormalize the entire distribution. Later I
include realistic infant mortality as explained in the text.




                                                         20
3.3.3      Fully realistic life spans with infant mortality

Some human life spans end at birth or shortly thereafter, and the variance attributable to infant

and child mortality is by far the most costly. One less infant death is one more average adult life

span, other things equal, so the value of a marginal reduction in deaths at age 0 should be equal

to the reduction times the expected utility of an entire average life span. As we have seen, the

marginal cost of adult variance is much lower, worth a fraction of an additional year of life rather

than an entire life span. Infant mortality is relatively uncommon in advanced countries today,

so ignoring it when focusing on the differences between Sweden and the U.S. in 1999 is perfectly

acceptable, as I will demonstrate. But as will become clear in Section 4, infant mortality plays a

very important role in understanding the value of mortality declines in rich countries over longer

periods of time and in poor countries, where infant mortality remains high.

       Here, I am concerned with how the presence of infant mortality may affect pS . Given a fixed

pattern of adult survivorship, higher infant mortality reduces the average length of life and raises

total variability. By making mean life scarcer and raising the marginal utility of M , the presence

of any infant mortality should lower pS . But because the marginal disutility of adult variance rises

with adult variance, infant mortality could conceivably amplify the marginal disutility of S if the

latter were also sensitive to total life-span variance. This would tend to increase pS . To ascertain

which of these countervailing effects wins out, I numerically simulate the cost of adult variance

under fully realistic survivorship with infant mortality. I treat infant mortality as a completely

separate dynamic, fixing infant deaths at their relative probability in 1999 and reestimate the

compensating change in mean adult life span that offsets the reduction in S from 15.66 to 15.05.26

       Figure 6 depicts pS as functions of δ when r = 0.03. Survivorship is now fully realistic, with

a fixed amount of infant mortality in addition to leftward skewness and leptokurtosis in the adult

hump. Including infant mortality does not change the qualitative results, but it does attenuate

pS compared to Figure 5, where adult mortality is realistic but there is no infant mortality. The

presence of infant mortality apparently increases the marginal utility of mean life more than it

raises the marginal disutility of a standard deviation in life span, if it changes the latter at all. The

magnitude of pS may be less with fully realistic mortality than without infant mortality, but the
  26
    I overlay the life span distribution under age 10 in 1999 on top of the distribution in 1994 and on top of each
translated distribution from 1999 that has a different mean. Then I renormalize so that each cdf sums to unity.



                                                        21
analytical solution remains a conservative estimate of the true cost.27


3.4      The cost of infant mortality

A separate but related question that arises with cross-country comparisons is the cost of infant

mortality. The previous section shows it does not greatly affect pS , and differences in infant

mortality between advanced countries today are minor. But infant mortality is much higher and

more volatile across longer periods of time or wider geographic space, so it could easily prove

important for assessing well-being more broadly.

       Unlike a central moment like S10 , infant mortality strongly affects the mean length of life,

especially when infant mortality is high. It is partly for this reason why model life tables and

estimates of period life expectancy at birth in developing countries are primarily based on measures

of infant mortality and often little else. Given this, one might expect differences in period life

expectancy to sufficiently encompass differences in infant mortality so that valuation studies need

only consider the former. But the question is how each affects lifetime utility, and in fact they

can operate very differently. Here, I treat infant utility as if it were simply shortened adult utility.

This is consistent with its treatment in the literature on the value of life extension, but it may

not be a valid assumption in a more realistic setting such as with parental altruism, evolving time

preference, and so on.

       Assume for simplicity that infant mortality is completely described by q(0), the probability of

death between ages zero and one, and suppose q(0) rises by some amount i ∈ (0, 1). Under these

circumstances, a decline in infant mortality of i = −0.01 raises survivorship, life expectancy at

birth e0 , and lifetime expected utility each by 1 percent.28 By comparison, proportional increases

in e0 brought about solely by reductions in adult mortality typically produce less than proportional
  27
     To assess how very high rates of infant mortality might change the marginal utility of mean life span and this
pS , I ran the same experiment using Swedish data from 1900, when deaths at age 0 were 10 percent. Results were
very similar, with the analytical result still a conservative estimate so long as δ > 0.02 when r = 0.03. If δ < 0.01,
pS became positive with such high infant mortality.
  28
     When schedule q ∗ (t) differs from q(t) only by q ∗ (0) = q(0) + i, survivorship is given by
                                          „ Z ∞             «       „               Z ∞           «
                         ℓ∗ (t) = exp −           q ∗ (t) dt = exp −[q(0) + i] −          q(t) dt
                                               0                                      1
                                              „ Z ∞            «
                                       −i                           −i
                                  = e exp −             q(t) dt = e ℓ(t).
                                                0
                                                               R∞
Life expectancy at birth is the integral of survivorship, e0 = 0 ℓ(t) dt, while lifetime expected utility is given by
equation (1). With complete annuities and r = δ, lifetime utility rises proportionally with i along with e0 and ℓ(t).


                                                         22
increases in lifetime utility.29 This is because discounting reduces the value of gains that are

centered around the average length of life relative to the value of gains derived from infant mortality,

which are broadly distributed across all ages. The implication is that declines in infant mortality

are considerably more valuable than implied by their effect on life expectancy at birth alone.

This insight will prove useful in Section 4, when I reassess global convergence in mortality after

accounting for adult variance and infant mortality in addition to mean length of life.

       For another perspective on the cost of infant mortality, I can examine pi , the cost of infant mor-

tality in terms of the mean, the analogue of pS . Assuming complete annuities, normally distributed

life spans, and K = 0 for simplicity,

                                                         2   2                  2   2 /2
                          ∂EU/∂i    (1 − e−δ̂M +δ̂ S /2 )/δ̂     eδ̂M −δ̂ S                −1
                    pi =         =−                          = −                                              (16)
                         ∂EU/∂M         e−δ̂M +δ̂2 S 2 /2                 δ̂

where I have canceled out period utility. As with pS , the price of a bad is negative. Because the

shock i multiplies survivorship and is effectively the change in the probability of living at all, the

marginal lifetime utility of a unit change in i is very large: all of lifetime expected utility. This

will always exceed the marginal utility of a mean life year, which is the discounted value of a single

year lived at the mean length of life. Equation (16) states that a unit reduction in i is preferable to

a unit increase in M , which is when pi < −1, if the compounded risk-adjusted return to investing

at the discount rate for M years, the numerator, is higher than the discount rate, the one-period

return. Whenever M is sufficiently greater than 1, of course it is more valuable to live at all than

to increase the mean length of life.

       A more interesting measure is pi /100, the price of one percentage point in the infant survival

probability in terms of the mean length of life. Recasting δ̂ in terms of percentage points in equation

(16) reveals that when δ = 0.03, pi is about one third of the risk-adjusted return to living M years.

This reaches and begins to exceed 1 in absolute value around M = 40 when there is realistic adult

variance. That is, when life expectancy exceeds 40, a decline in infant mortality of a percentage

point is more valuable than an additional year in the mean. Life expectancy at birth exceeds 40

in the majority of countries during the modern period, but notable exceptions include countries
  29
    For example, if life expectancy T = M with complete certainty, r = δ, and consumption is fully annuitized,
EU = u(c̄)(1 − e−δM )/δ. When δ = 0.03, an increase in M of one percent will raise EU by half a percent when M is
around 40, by one-third of a percent when M is near 60, and by one-quarter of a percent when M is 80. Numerical
simulation reveals that this relationship also holds when there is realistic but static variance in length of life.


                                                        23
hard-hit by HIV/AIDS.



4     Discussion and Extensions

4.1   The role of the discount rate

The key element in the model is the discount rate, δ, which is approximately the coefficient of

absolute risk aversion over gambles in life span. The main issue is measuring it, since it is a latent

preference parameter. It is standard in the literature to set it equal to 3 percent, roughly the real

rate of return on government bonds, and here I have followed suit. Viscusi and Aldy (2003) review

estimates of the discount rate in the U.S. and report a very wide range of 1–17 percent, making it

difficult to reject the hypothesis that market rates of interest and the discount rate are the same

(Picone, Sloan and Taylor Jr., 2004). The baseline of δ = 0.03 therefore certainly seems reasonable

by financial market standards. Via an evolutionary argument, Rogers (1994) suggests that the

discount rate in human populations should equal roughly 2 percent in the long run, which is in the

same ballpark.

    But discount rates appear to vary over individuals within and across countries (Barsky et al.,

1997; Becker and Mulligan, 1997), as do life spans. We must be careful about assessing the costs

of different life-span variance under different discount rates if time preferences and life spans are

related to one another. Fuchs (1982) views the discount rate as determinining health investments,

while Becker and Mulligan (1997) see wealth, uncertainty, and health or the length of life as jointly

determining the discount rate.

    If the causality runs from life span to the discount rate, then a reasonable way to deal with

the endogeneity is by treating the discount rate as a universal, unvarying parameter set at some

reasonable baseline and used to price variance, which may differ. If causality runs the other way,

the story becomes more complicated. My model shows that a higher discount rate increases the

costliness of life-span variance, which should incentivize behavior leading to lower variance. While

the net effect on pS is ambiguous, the true cost of variance will be higher than measured with

a standard discount rate. But it is also plausible that higher discount rates could produce more

life-span variance. This could occur if myopic, risky behavior carries long-term costs but yields

some short-term benefits, which I do not measure. If this were the case, we might find that the


                                                 24
costs of additional life-span uncertainty were outweighed by the benefits, clearly a problematic

but also a seemlingly far-fetched scenario. Public health campaigns certainly suggest that most

risky behaviors are socially undesirable, if they ultimately say little about net private returns. A

normative assessment remains elusive here, a point I concede but relegate to future efforts.


4.2      Uncertainty in actual life spans

Different groups and individuals face substantially different amount of life-span uncertainty, not all

of which can be due to behavioral differences. Edwards and Tuljapurkar (2005) show that S10 is

systematically lower by about 1 year among females compared with males, and that it is 2–3 years

higher among African Americans relative to whites. Individuals in the lowest quintile of household

income had 2.4 more years in standard deviation than those in the upper 80 percent, while those

without a high school degree had 2.1 years more than high school graduates. A subgroup difference

of 3 years in standard deviation implies a difference in pS of almost 0.1 year if δ = 0.03, an increase

in the costliness of life-span uncertainty of 20 percent.30

       With this much subgroup variation, one must be cautious about interpreting trends in aggre-

gate uncertainty. An increase in aggregate S10 could reflect increasing between-group inequality,

increasing within-group inequality, or both. An increase in life expectancy among a high-mean,

low-variance group would technically increase aggregate S10 but also be Pareto-improving, pro-

vided individuals knew their group. Although aggregate S10 in the U.S. has displayed little trend

(Edwards and Tuljapurkar, 2005), recent evidence on widening educational differentials in life ex-

pectancy (Meara, Richards and Cutler, 2008) suggests between-group inequality is indeed increas-

ing. The implications are unclear, especially because within-group inequality should be decreasing

if aggregate S10 is indeed stable. These patterns pose interesting questions for future research.

       What about members of different birth cohorts? Up to now, I have proxied the actual, or

cohort life spans of individuals with those based on period mortality rates; period S10 thus measures

uncertainty for a fictitious cohort of individuals living their entire lives in a single period. Although

period S10 is the appropriate variance analogue of period life expectancy, the most commonly cited
  30
      The less fortunate also bear a heavier burden if they have disproportionately less access to annuities, which we
have found to offset perhaps one third of the cost of life-span uncertainty. This characteristic may be observationally
linked to high δ, since one reason why low-SES individuals might appear to have high δ, myopia, or insufficient saving,
is if they face liquidity constraints or incomplete markets. We would expect that access to annuities markets are also
poor for liquidity constrained individuals.


                                                          25
population health statistic, we would also like to know the levels of variance faced by actual cohorts.

       Differences between cohort and period S10 do not appear to be large, as shown by Figure 7. I

plot both measures for the U.S. since 1900 using annual period life tables from the Human Mortality

Database (2009) and cohort life tables collected and forecast by the Social Security Administration

(Bell and Miller, 2005). The two series track each other relatively well, with both showing the

enormous impact of the epidemiological transition early last century. Cohorts alive today, who face

S10 = 15, face drastically less uncertainty in their life spans than those born around 1900, for whom

S10 = 21.31


4.3      Population health over time and space

By providing a new method of converting units of variance in length of life into units of mean,

equation (14) facilitates a more complete assessment of population health in a variety of settings.

More generally, the chief insight of this paper, that variance in length of life is costly under time

discounting, leads us to reassess what we know about the value of mortality improvements over

time and across countries. In particular, we can reexamine either the differences between advanced

countries such as the U.S. and Sweden at a point in time, the differences between observations of

the same advanced country at different points in time, or the differences between rich and poor

countries across time. Applied intertemporally, this new perspective also provides insights into

the nature and timing of demographic and epidemiological transitions that have occurred and are

proceeding today in various parts of the world.


4.3.1      Contemporary differences between advanced countries

In 1999, individuals in the U.S. experienced a standard deviation in life spans conditional on survival

to age 10 equal to about S10 = 15 years. At that level, each year of standard deviation is worth

about pS = −0.45 year of mean life span in this model, assuming r = δ = 0.03, the standard value
  31
     Technically, true cohort S10 should also reflect uncertainty about future mortality rates, or in other words,
uncertainty about the shape of the probability distribution itself. We can treat forecast uncertainty as independent
from what we might call life-table uncertainty, by which we mean the uncertainty in life span in a known probability
distribution, because the time-series evidence seems to support that conclusion (Lee and Carter, 1992). Using the
Lee-Carter method of forecasting mortality, I found that forecast uncertainty appears to be small, perhaps 1 year in
standard deviation for the cohort born in 2000, relative to life-table uncertainty around 15.3 years. Since these are
independent risks, this cohort’s total S10 = 15.33, or only 0.03 year higher than that implied by the median forecast
life table.



                                                         26
in calibration exercises using U.S. data. In Sweden that same year, S10 was about 13. According

to this model, individuals in the U.S. would be willing to give up almost 0.9 year in mean life span

to have the lower S10 of their Swedish counterparts.32 The mean life span conditional on survival

to age 10, M10 , was 77.7 years in the U.S. and 80.0 in Sweden in 1999. If we account for differences

in S10 , the total difference in population health between the U.S. and Sweden, as measured by

“effective” life expectancy, is more like 3.2 life years per person rather than 2.3, an increase of more

than a third.

       To be sure, the U.S. and Sweden represent two relative extremes where differences between

e0 and S10 are very large. A slightly different perspective emerges when we examine a group of

advanced economies. Among the 27 members of the OECD that are also designated as high-income

countries by the World Bank, life expectancy at birth averaged 78.4 with a standard deviation of

about 2 years in 2000, while S10 averaged 13.5 with a standard deviation of 0.5 year. Translating

the differences in S10 from the average into penalties in life expectancy using pS = −0.45 widens the

standard deviation in effective life expectancy from 2 to about 2.2 years, or by roughly 10 percent.

Measured inequality certainly increases when we account for different variances, but the effect is

moderate in size.


4.3.2      Temporal trends within a country

Because the underlying trends in mean and adult variance are so different, as shown by Edwards and

Tuljapurkar (2005), the findings in this paper suggest it is worthwhile to decompose the economic

value of historical gains against mortality into portions attributable to reductions in variance versus

improvements in mean life span. Nordhaus (2003) and Murphy and Topel (2006) measure the total

value of mortality improvement the U.S. over historical periods using estimates of the willingness

to pay for mortality reductions. They find that the value of health improvements is very large,

rivaling the value of GDP. But how much is due to increases in the mean, which show no signs

of stopping (White, 2002; Oeppen and Vaupel, 2002), and how much is due to declines in adult

variance, which have largely stalled since 1960?
  32
   For large changes in the moments, S and thus pS will change. The isoquants of lifetime expected utility for two
normally distributed life spans L1 ∼ N (M1 , S12 ) and L2 ∼ N (M2 , S22 ) are given by M1 − M2 = δ̂(S12 − S22 )/2.




                                                       27
   Murphy and Topel highlight the wide dispersion of gains across ages prior to 1950, when reduc-

tions in life-span variance were sustained and thus much more important. This pattern is evident

in the top two rows of Table 1, which list life expectancy at birth (e0 ) and the standard deviation

in life spans above age 10 (S10 ) in 1900, 1950, and 2000. Survivorship to age 10 (ℓ10 ), which acts

as an importance weight for characteristics of the life table above age 10, is shown in the third

row. Changes over time in these three life-table parameters appear in the bottom panel. Between

1900 and 1950, life expectancy rose by 20.7 years from 47.7 to 68.4, an increase of over 40 percent.

Similarly, S10 fell by 8 years, from 24 to 16, a factor of one third. While life expectancy continued

to increase steadily after 1950, rising an additional 8.3 years by 2000, at a rate of 0.166 per annum,

further reductions in S10 were slight, totaling only 1.1 years over the second half of the century.

   The bottom panel in Table 1 translates the observed declines in S10 into equivalent gains in

mean life years using the formula for pS derived earlier, assuming δ = 0.03 in all periods. The

relevant price of a discrete change in S10 is δ times the average S10 during the interval, and the

resulting value of the decline in S10 must be discounted by the average level of survivorship to age

10 in order to capture the benefit to the average individual. This latter step is especially important

when ℓ10 is relatively low, as it was in the U.S. early last century. Combining the value of decreased

S10 with the change in e0 produces a measure of the total gains against mortality in terms of mean

life years. By this accounting, 14 percent of the total gains over the century were due to reductions

in life-span variance, but but after 1950, that figure falls to 5.6 percent.


4.3.3   Convergence in “full income” across countries

In a widely cited paper, Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) reveal relatively more global con-

vergence in human well-being when it is measured by “full income,” a statistic they devise that

combines GDP per capita with the monetized value of life, than when it is measured by GDP per

capita alone. Owing to data constraints in their panel of 96 countries measured since 1960, they

can only account for changes in life expectancy at birth rather than changes in higher moments

or in entire survivorship schedules. Given the costliness of variance, has its omission biased their

results, and if so which way?

   Complete life tables are not widely available for a broad cross section of countries because the

underlying mortality data are typically of poor quality. For many developing countries where data

                                                  28
is scarce, surveillance agencies have estimated levels of life expectancy at birth (e0 ) using model

life tables, but historical databases do not include complete model life tables. Recently, Lopez

et al. (2001) and the World Bank have produced estimates of current life tables for virtually all

countries, but historical coverage has remained lacking. New work by Edwards (2009b) collects and

reconstructs historical estimates of life tables in developing countries and allows a reassessment of

convergence in the full income measure after accounting for changes in variance and the shape of

the survivorship function.33 As discussed by Edwards, these new data are of varying and often

dubious quality, but they are no worse than much of the original data on life expectancy commonly

found in databases and used by Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) and many others.

       The methodological component in Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) that captures the effects

of mortality is the value of an annuity based on the survivorship function, ℓ(t), given by

                                                       Z   ∞
                                              A(ℓ) =           e−rt ℓ(t)dt.                                 (17)
                                                       0


With full annuitization and the time discount rate δ equal to the interest rate r, indirect utility

is the product of A(ℓ) and the period utility function. When only life expectancy e0 is known,

survivorship must implicitly be rectangular, or equal to 1 at all ages until falling to 0 at e0 . Under

those conditions, equation (17) simplifies to

                                                           1 − e−r·e0
                                               A∗ (ℓ) ≈               .                                     (18)
                                                               r

As seen and discussed earlier, for example in equation (11), the presence of variance in adult length

of life will reduce the value of the annuity:

                                                                 2
                                                1 − e−r·e0 +r S10 /2
                                                             2
                                          †
                                        A (ℓ) ≈                      ,                                      (19)
                                                         r

where S10 is the standard deviation in adult length of life. If there is any adult variance, A(ℓ) and

A† (ℓ) are both less than A∗ (ℓ), so equation (19) should be a closer approximation to (17) than (18).
  33
    In their original work, Becker, Philipson and Soares (2003) examined a narrower cross section of 49 countries
in the WHO mortality database. With data on age-specific mortality rates, they constructed life tables and full
survivorship schedules. Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) measured convergence among a broader sample of 96
countries for whom only life expectancy at birth is provided by the World Bank’s World Development Indicators
database.


                                                           29
    As discussed in Section 3, high infant mortality also tends to reduce A(ℓ), holding other things

including e0 equal. Indeed, infant mortality can be conceptualized as additional variance in human

life span that is highly non-Gaussian and non-central. Living with complete certainty from birth

until death at age e0 is more valuable than facing a nonzero probability d of dying in infancy

followed by living with certainty until e0 /(1 − d) > e0 , even though life expectancy at birth is

exactly the same in either case. This is because the cost of infant mortality outweighs the benefit

of living past e0 due to discounting, the same reason why S10 is costly. Both equations (18) and

(19) will typically overestimate A(ℓ) because each formula omits infant mortality, which has been

and remains high in the developing world. If complete life tables are available, of course, it is

possible to avoid this problem by measuring A(ℓ) exactly. In order to gauge the importance of

life-span uncertainty for convergence, I estimate A(ℓ) and full income using all three methods and

then compare results.

    Tables 2 and 3 reproduce their counterparts in Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) using a

wider sample of 180 countries covering virtually all of the world’s population. Results using only

the original 96 countries examined by Becker, Philipson and Soares are similar and indicate slightly

more convergence than is shown here.34 The top panel in Table 2 shows population weighted

averages of aggregates from life tables and national income accounts for a set of world regions

as defined by the World Bank, for the poorest and richest countries in 1970, and for the world

as a whole, using mortality data from Edwards (2009b) and income data from the Penn World

Table, Maddison (2003), and the IMF. All regions gained income per capita during the interval,
   34
      In general, however, convergence results are not robust to the breadth and quality of the sample, nor to the use of
population weights, and they appear not to have been robust in the original data examined by Becker, Philipson and
Soares (2005) either. Unweighted estimates, which place much more emphasis on the experiences of small countries,
reveal greater inequality in full income than in GDP per capita in 2000. This is true in the broad sample of 180,
in the smaller sample of 96 used by Becker, Philipson and Soares, and it is also true in a subset of 35 countries
with high-quality mortality data drawn from the Human Mortality Database (2009). In the last subsample, which
is dominated by high-income countries, even population-weighted estimates show slightly increased inequality in full
income compared to GDP per capita in 2000. Two factors probably account for these patterns. First, countries that
have been hit hardest by HIV/AIDS tend to be small. Unweighted estimates are therefore likely to overestimate the
impact of the disease on convergence in average human well-being, although they correctly measure the convergence
across countries. Second, because high-quality mortality data is a luxury affordable only to high-income countries,
and income also correlates strongly with the demographic transition, it is not surprising that mortality trends based
only on high-quality data are different than those based on a much broader sample. Still, it is troubling that the
basic result, namely increased convergence in full income compared to GDP per capita, seems to hinge on the use
of mortality data of questionable quality. Recent developments in a related literature on income inequality and
population health testify to the inherent dangers (Judge, Mulligan and Benzeval, 1998). Less troubling but still
worthy of note is the finding that average well-being in small countries seems not to be converging toward that in
large countries, which bears implications for political stability and the continued spread of the demographic transition.



                                                           30
at an average annual rate of about 1.8 percent worldwide, and all but one gained in terms of life

expectancy, which rose 0.27 year per annum on average. The world standard deviation in adult life

span remained fairly steady, declining only 0.2 year from 17.0 to 16.8. Survivorship to age 10 rose 7

percentage points, from 86.7 to 93.7 percent. Although almost all regions experienced gains against

mortality, there was also clear heterogeneity. Europe and Central Asia, a World Bank category that

does not include the high income European countries, experienced only a very small 0.9 year total

gain in life expectancy and actually suffered a small increase in S10 , from 15.9 to 16.2, although ℓ10

increased somewhat. Sub-Saharan Africa gained almost 5 years in life expectancy, due to a large

increase in ℓ10 , which rose from 74.1 to 82.7 percent. But variance in adult life dropped only 0.4

to 19.4.

   The bottom panel of Table 2 translates gains in income and survivorship into gains in the “full

income” measure proposed by Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) using the three different methods

of valuing life span discussed above. When only e0 is used, the annual value of gains is an additional

$800 (in 2000 international dollars) for the world as a whole, and the growth in full income is 2.2

percent, or 0.4 faster than the growth rate of income per capita during the period. Accounting for

both e0 and S10 increases the contributions of mortality gains, to $1,159 and 0.5 percentage point

faster annual growth respectively. Using the entire survivorship schedule including infant mortality

more than doubles the gains, to $1,684 and an extra 0.7 percentage point in annual growth.

   The hefty importance these comparisons seem to attach to S10 is odd in light of the relatively

small decrease in world S10 since 1970, and it is in fact misleading. The presence of any S10 at all

raises the value of gains in e0 by increasing their marginal utility. Equation (15) shows this clearly:

the marginal utility of the mean length of life, which appears in the denominator, is a decreasing

function of the mean but an increasing function of the variance, S10 2 . When I account for S10 in

addition to e0 in Table 2, I am basically turning variance on after being off, which has a large effect

on measured trends in well-being even when the trend in variance is negligible.

   A more appropriate way to decompose growth in full income into portions attributable to

changes in individual moments is by measuring gains using counterfactual but fully realistic sur-

vivorship curves that hold one or more moments constant over time. Without any change in world

S10 , the value of total annual survivorship gains would be about 5 percent lower than the $1,685

we observe in Table 2. This share is similar to what I found in Table 1 for the U.S. after 1950.

                                                  31
Indeed, average annual declines in S10 for the U.S. since 1950 and for the world since 1970 are

both only around 0.01 to 0.02, a sobering remark on recent progress against high adult variance in

the developing world. Declines in infant and child mortality, on the other hand, have been large

and more prevalent among poor countries (Moser, Shkolnikov and Leon, 2005). To gauge their

importance, I generated a fictitious world survivorship curve for 2000 assuming there was change

since 1970 only in ℓ10 , and not in the shape of the life-span distribution above age 10. Based on

this counterfactual, the value of improvements spurred by increases in ℓ10 accounted for more than

75 percent of the total value of gains against mortality.

   Heterogeneity across regions in the progress against mortality is certainly evident in the lower

panel in Table 2, where results broadly amplify the patterns reported by Becker, Philipson and

Soares (2005). In dollar terms, the benefits of mortality reduction were felt considerably more

strongly by the richest 50 percent of countries, but growth rates of full income were faster for the

poorest 50 percent because their initial money incomes were so much lower. Sub-Saharan Africa

remains a basket case even when improvements in the entire survivorship curve are priced, raising

growth in full income to only 0.7 percent. But a similar picture emerges for Europe and Central

Asia, where the negative influence of a slight increase in S10 was more than offset by improvements

in ℓ10 , but not by enough to raise growth past 0.9 percent. Elsewhere, economic growth that

was already fairly robust is further enhanced by accounting for improvements in survivorship. In

East Asia and the Pacific, growth in full income is a stout 6.7 percent after accounting for much

improvement in all three mortality statistics, up 0.4 from the e0 -only reading. The Middle East,

North Africa, and South Asia benefit the most, about 0.6 percentage point in annual growth, from

accounting for all changes in ℓ(x) as opposed to e0 alone.

   Table 3 descends past regions to examine inequality in average human well-being using countries

weighted by population as the unit of observation. By any one of several measures, inequality across

individuals in full income in 2000 is less than inequality in income per capita in 2000 or in 1970.

The Gini coefficient, a widely cited statistic, registers 0.4781 when measured using full income in

2000 derived with countries’ entire ℓ(x) schedules. By comparison, the Gini on per capita income in

2000 was 0.4999. Accounting for successively higher moments of the life-span distribution reinforces

this basic convergence result, as it did among regions in Table 2. Another upshot of the math in

equation (15) is that the value of a given increase in mean life span will be larger when S10 is

                                                 32
higher, such as in a poor country. Part of what we see here is thus surely the mechanical effect of

S10 and infant mortality raising the measured value of gains in e0 disproportionately more among

poor countries with high variance. But continued global convergence in infant mortality even as

convergence in e0 turned to divergence after 1980 (Moser, Shkolnikov and Leon, 2005), as well as

some limited convergence in S10 , are surely also at work.

   These results mirror and amplify those of Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) on convergence in

average human well-being, but some circumspection is in order. Considerably less progress against

mortality in poor but more sparsely populated areas like Sub-Saharan Africa, parts of Europe,

and Central Asia, was not sufficient to reduce overall convergence in average human full income

due to considerable progress in larger countries. Still, population-weighted estimates suggest more

convergence in average human well-being since 1970 than in average income alone. Accounting for

gains against life-span variance, either in the form of S10 or infant mortality, strengthens the findings

of Becker, Philipson and Soares for two reasons. Mechanically speaking, correctly accounting for

even a stable level of variance raises the value of increases in life expectancy, and that effect increases

with the level of variance, which is higher in poor countries. In addition, total variance was also

strongly declining over this period, primarily due to robust declines in infant mortality but also

due to moderate declines in S10 . The gains against variance, broadly defined, directly contributed

a large amount to the value of progress against mortality.


4.3.4   A new perspective on the demographic transition

The insights of this paper also suggest a new interpretation of the historical timing of age-specific

gains against disease and mortality during the demographic and epidemiologic transitions. As

summarized by Wilmoth (2003), the classic transition begins with a decline in infant mortality

and early death, brought about by progress against infectious disease. That is, the first stage

of progress drastically lessens the unconditional variance in life spans. The second stage of the

transition is characterized by a shift in focus away from infectious disease and toward treating

chronic degenerative diseases afflicting the elderly. This works to lengthen the average adult life

span but probably does not reduce the variance much if at all.

   The current framework suggests this sequence was probably optimal, if it were not practically



                                                    33
required.35 High levels of variance inflate its cost considerably. Combating infectious disease re-

duces unconditional variance directly by reducing infant and child mortality, and it also reduces

uncertainty in adult life. Certainly in the context of the modern developing world, in which life

expectancy is short, variance is high, both infectious and chronic diseases claim lives, and tech-

nologies and practices to combat either one are readily available via the developed world, revealed

preference seems to indicate that public health priorities largely center on the unconditional vari-

ance first, i.e., infant and premature adult mortality. A possible outlier based on this perspective,

HIV/AIDS is something of a hybrid disease afflicting old and young alike.

       Historically, these two very different stages of the transition produced a seamless pattern of

steady increases in life expectancy at birth over time (Oeppen and Vaupel, 2002), which fits well

with steady growth in per capita incomes (Hall and Jones, 2007) and shows that average health

outcomes were rising consistently. But the technologies, cost structures, and incidence of benefits

during each phase were entirely different. How societies set priorities in achieving mortality decline

is a major question. A key insight of this paper, that variance in life span is costlier relative to

mean life span when variance is higher, suggests that declines in variance should precede sustained

progress in the adult mean or mode.36


4.4      Uncertain life span and economic behavior

This paper, like others in the literature on the value of gains against mortality, explores only one

economic perspective on the cost of uncertainty in life span: the willingness to pay. Although

willingness to pay should in principle encompass or account for all expected behavioral responses

to changes in uncertainty, my simple theoretical model only captures the response of consumption

and saving and not other behavioral responses that we think might be very interesting.
  35
     A recent paper posits that contemporary declines in adult mortality are due to earlier declines in childhood
disease and mortality (Finch and Crimmins, 2004), owing to a reduced accumulation of inflammatory exposure from
infectious disease. One might infer that sustained mortality decline could happen in no other way. But in many
modern developing countries, infant mortality remains high even though imported medical technologies can reduce
adult mortality. Life expectancy in many such countries has increased (Becker, Philipson and Soares, 2005), although
perhaps not as robustly as in the developed world.
  36
     To be sure, the story must also involve marginal costs, since the socially optimal allocation of resources occurs
where the ratio of marginal utilities is equal to the ratio of marginal costs. Reducing variance through improved
sanitation or other public health initiatives is likely to be much less costly than increasing the adult mean, which
involves treating degenerative diseases.




                                                         34
    Kalemli-Ozcan and Weil (2002) examine the effects of uncertain life span in a model with

endogenous labor supply. Their results suggest that an optimal policy under high uncertainty might

be low saving and working until death, or what macroeconomists might consider extreme rule-of-

thumb as opposed to life-cycle behavior. Patterns in retirement behavior early in the 20th Century

seem to support this view. In contrast, Hurd, Smith and Zissimopoulos (2004) find very small

effects of low subjective survivorship probabilities on retirement behavior among older Americans

in the Health and Retirement Study. Education, another form of saving, is also endogenous and

may react to uncertainty in length of life. Building on earlier work by Kalemli-Ozcan, Ryder and

Weil (2000) that focuses primarily on average length of life, Li and Tuljapurkar (2004) show that

uncertainty has an effect on educational attainment in a general equilibrium setting.

    These and other directions are promising avenues for further research. While not a new subfield,

the study of interactions between health, mortality, and economic decision making is likely to pro-

duce results that are of great interest to researchers and policymakers in many fields, in particular

those of development and health inequality where mortality conditions vary the most.



5    Conclusion

In a standard model of time-separable utility with no bequest motive, uncertainty in life span is

costly when the force of time discounting, δ, which is also approximately the coefficient of absolute

risk aversion in life span, is positive. Even when wealth is fully annuitized, hypothetical individuals

with these preferences are hurt by uncertainty in life span and would be willing to trade away

pS = −δS years of mean life span in return for one less year in standard deviation.

    If δ = r = 0.03, the average American would be willing to give up 0.45 life year in return for one

year less in the standard deviation at ages over 10, which is currently about S10 = 15. This is large,

implying that differences in population health between the U.S. and Sweden are more like 3.2 life

years, or 40 percent higher than the difference of 2.3 years we find in life expectancy alone. In the

thought experiment I posed in the introduction, country A enjoyed M10 = 80 and S10 = 13, while

country B experienced M10 = 78 and S10 = 15, roughly like Sweden and the U.S. today. If the 2

year difference in average life span were worth $40,000, my results suggest the 2 year difference in

S10 should be worth about one additional life year, or another $20,000. An unborn baby engaged


                                                  35
in birthplace arbitrage would be willing to pay $60,000 more to live in Sweden. To be sure, my

approximation of the price of uncertainty, pS = −0.45, is just that, an approximation. Results vary

with different assumptions regarding the relative levels of the real interest rate and the rate of time

discounting, and with the characteristics of mortality. But as a rule of thumb, it is a useful and

parsimonious representation of the key idea.

   Babies choosing birthplaces would also be remiss not to consider infant mortality, to put it

mildly. Although infant mortality is low in advanced countries today, it was very high during

historical periods and is high in many modern developing countries. Discounting places a very high

cost on infant mortality indeed, making it two to three times more costly than the reduction in

mean length of life it represents. This is because all of the probability weight at play occurs so

early in life, during extremely valuable years. Without accounting for the unconditional variance in

length of life represented by infant deaths, valuing gains in life expectancy at birth will significantly

understate the benefit of declining infant mortality.

   This framework allows me to assess the contribution of reductions in adult life-span variance and

infant deaths to the overall value of progress against mortality. This decomposition is interesting

because gains against adult variance and infant mortality have largely plateaued in developed

countries, while increases in the mean continue apace. In the U.S., reductions in S10 prior to 1950

were relatively large, falling from 24 in 1900 to 16 by 1950, and they accounted for more than 15

percent of the total value of mortality declines. Since 1950, S10 has declined by only more year,

contributing only about 5 percent to the total value of all progress, which is dominated by increases

in the mean, albeit much decelerated themselves.

   This paper also implies that health inequality is typically larger between countries than is

implied by life expectancy alone, because the level of life-span uncertainty is often different as well.

In particular, poor countries typically experience much higher levels of adult variance in length of

life than do rich countries, in addition to their lower life expectancies. If we account for variance,

global health inequality must be higher than we would perceive it based on the inequality in life

expectancy alone. But in a dynamic setting, the importance of variance in length of life manifests

itself somewhat differently. Purely methodological insights are that the presence of some variance

increases the measured value of a given improvement in life expectancy, the value is increasing

in the variance, and poor countries experience higher variance and thus larger gains from a given

                                                   36
change in life expectancy. Worldwide, moderate declines in adult variance combined with broad-

based reductions in infant mortality, the larger source of unconditional variance in human life span,

have produced much global convergence in average human well-being. These findings amplify those

in the pioneering work of Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005), who due to data limitations could

only consider life expectancy.

   Several limitations constrain the scope of this paper. I do not account for education or for

physical capital, both of which are considered in a general equilibrium setting by Li and Tuljapurkar

(2004). I also do not consider the cost of variation in morbidity, or the quality of life. Bequests

are a potentially key omission, because they could significantly reduce the marginal disutility of

life-span uncertainty. But even if bequests were intended, which is unclear, they would also reduce

the marginal utility of mean life span, leaving an ambiguous effect on the price of life-span variance

relative to the mean. I also make no allowance for the special psychology that we know surrounds

death (Slemrod, 2003). One could argue that knowing the precise date of death is actually not a

good, at least in terms of emotional benefit, and rather that some uncertainty is preferable. Still,

the economic cost of uncertain length of life in terms of retirement and estate planning is real and

plausibly much larger. I leave issues of the emotional costs of uncertain life span to future research

in this nascent subfield. Many questions remain about time discounting and its relationship to

risk preferences over periods of life, and I have made no attempt to investigate these issues here.

Bommier (2006) posits a model of preferences over consumption and life span with a free parameter

governing risk aversion over life span. In their study of 30 women in perfect health asked to rank

lotteries over life span, Verhoef, Haan and van Daal (1994) report evidence supporting prospect

theory: risk-seeking behavior over small gambles and risk aversion over large. I intend my estimate

of the cost of uncertain life span to be a provocative motivation for further research into this topic.

   The implication for policy is that uncertainty in length of life is costly and should be targeted

when it is high, whether in entire countries or among specific subgroups. Since its cost rises with

its level, and since the level of uncertainty also diminishes the value of gains in life expectancy,

policies that reduce uncertainty should be favored over those that increase average length of life

when uncertainty is high. A provocative interpretation of this bottom line is that a high-variance

country like the U.S. may stand to gain by focusing more on spreading the existing benefits of

health treatments and technology more broadly across its citizens, at the expense of investing in

                                                  37
discovery of new treatments and technology that extend life. Given the key role attached to U.S.

pharmaceutical innovation in driving old-age mortality decline worldwide (Lichtenberg, 2007), a

refocusing would not come without cost. A somewhat less provocative implication is that developing

countries are better served by attacking the causes of high uncertainty first, infectious diseases and

infant mortality, before extending assistance that extends life for adults. In large part, development

assistance is already configured to do this.



References

Aldy, Joseph E. and W. Kip Viscusi. 2003. “Age Variations in Workers’ Value of Statistical Life.”

  NBER Working Paper 10199.

Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997. “Prefer-

  ence Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and

  Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 537–579.

Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. 1997. “The Endogenous Determination of Time Prefer-

  ence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(3):729–758.

Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2003. “The Quantity and Quality of

  Life and the Evolution of World Inequality.” NBER Working Paper 9765.

Becker, Gary S., Tomas J. Philipson and Rodrigo R. Soares. 2005. “The Quantity and Quality of

  Life and the Evolution of World Inequality.” American Economic Review 95(1):277–291.

Bell, Felicitie C. and Michael L. Miller. 2005. “Life Tables for the United States Social Security Area,

  1900-2100.” Actuarial Study No. 120, Office of the Chief Actuary, Social Security Administration.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer and Lawrence H. Summers. 1985. “The Strategic Bequest

  Motive.” Journal of Political Economy 93(6):1045–1076.

Bleichrodt, Han and John Quiggin. 1999. “Life-cycle preferences over consumption and health:

  When is cost-effectiveness analysis equivalent to cost-benefit analysis?” Journal of Health Eco-

  nomics 18(6):681–708.



                                                  38
Bleichrodt, Han and Magnus Johannesson. 1997. “The Validity of QALYs: An Experimental Test of

  Constant Proportional Tradeoff and Utility Independence.” Medical Decision Making 17(1):21–

  32.

Bommier, Antoine. 2006. “Uncertain Lifetime and Intertemporal Choice: Risk Aversion as a

  Rationale for Time Discounting.” International Economic Review 47(4):1223–1246.

Browning, Martin. 1991. “A Simple Nonadditive Preference Structure for Models of Household

  Behavior Over Time.” Journal of Political Economy 99(3):607–637.

Campbell, John Y. and Luis M. Viceira. 2002. Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for

  Long-Term Investors. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Chang, Fwu-Ranq. 1991. “Uncertain Lifetimes, Retirement and Economic Welfare.” Economica

  58(230):215–232.

Costa, Dora L. and Matthew E. Kahn. 2004. “Changes in the Value of Life, 1940–1980.” Journal

  of Risk and Uncertainty 29(2):159–180.

Cutler, David M. and Elizabeth Richardson. 1997. “Measuring the Health of the U.S. Population.”

  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics pp. 217–271.

Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2004. “Do the Rich Save More?”

  Journal of Political Economy 112(2):397–444.

Edwards, Ryan D. 2008.      “Measuring Socioeconomic Differentials in Mortality.” Unpublished

  manuscript.

Edwards, Ryan D. 2009a. “The Cost of Cyclical Mortality.” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics,

  9(1):Contributions, Article 7.

Edwards, Ryan D. 2009b. “Trends in World Inequality in Life Span Since 1970.” Unpublished

  manuscript, May.

Edwards, Ryan D. and Shripad Tuljapurkar. 2005. “Inequality in Life Spans and a New Perspective

  on Mortality Convergence Across Industrialized Countries.” Population and Development Review

  31(4):645–675.

                                                 39
Ehrlich, Isaac. 2000. “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Protection, and the Value of Life Saving.” Journal

  of Health Economics 19:341–367.

Ehrlich, Isaac and Hiroyuki Chuma. 1990. “A Model of the Demand for Longevity and the Value

  of Life Extension.” Journal of Political Economy 98(4):761–782.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin. 1989. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal

  Behavior of Consumption Growth and Asset Returns I: A Theoretical Framework.” Econometrica

  57(4):937–969.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin. 1991. “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the Temporal Behav-

  ior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Political Economy

  99(2):263–286.

Finch, Caleb E. and Eileen M. Crimmins. 2004. “Inflammatory Exposure and Historical Changes

  in Human Life-Spans.” Science 305(5691):1736–1739.

Fuchs, Victor R. 1982. Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study. In Economic Aspects

  of Health, ed. Victor R. Fuchs. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Chapter 3.

Fuchs, Victor R. and Hal Ersner-Hershfield. 2008. “Inequality in Length of Life.” SIEPR Policy

  Brief October 1.

Gompertz, Benjamin. 1825. “On the nature of the function expressive of the law of human mortality

  and on a new mode of determining life contingencies.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal

  Society of London 115:513–585.

Grossman, Michael. 1972. “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health.” Journal

  of Political Economy 80(2):223–255.

Haines, Michael R. 2001. “The Urban Mortality Transition in the United States, 1800-1940.”

  Annales de Démographie Historique 1:33–64.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. 2004. “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending.”

  NBER Working Paper 10737.



                                                40
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. 2007. “The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending.”

  Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1):39–72.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner and Stephen P. Zeldes. 1994. “The importance of precau-

  tionary motives in explaining individual and aggregate saving.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference

  Series on Public Policy 40:59–125.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Kenneth L. Judd. 1987. “Social Security and Individual Welfare: Pre-

  cautionary Saving, Borrowing Constraints, and the Payroll Tax.” American Economic Review

  77(4):630–646.

Human Mortality Database. 2009. University of California, Berkeley (USA) and Max Planck In-

  stitute for Demographic Research (Germany). Available at www.mortality.org.

Hurd, Michael D. 1987. “Savings of the Elderly and Desired Bequests.” American Economic Review

  77(3):298–312.

Hurd, Michael D. 1989. “Mortality Risks and Bequests.” Econometrica 57(4):779–813.

Hurd, Michael D., James P. Smith and Julie Zissimopoulos. 2004. “The Effects of Subjective Sur-

  vival on Retirement and Social Security Claiming.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 19(6):761–

  775.

Ibbotson Associates. 2002. Stocks, Bonds, Bills, and Inflation Yearbook. Chicago: Ibbotson Asso-

  ciates.

Johansson, Per-Olov. 2002. “On the Definition and Age-Dependency of the Value of a Statistical

  Life.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 25(3):251–263.

Judge, Ken, Jo-ann Mulligan and Michaela Benzeval. 1998. “Income Inequality and Population

  Health.” Social Science & Medicine 46(4–5):567–579.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem and David N. Weil. 2002. “Mortality Change, the Uncertainty Effect, and

  Retirement.” NBER Working Paper 8742.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, Harl E. Ryder and David N. Weil. 2000. “Mortality decline, human capital

  investment, and economic growth.” Journal of Development Economics 62(1):1–23.

                                              41
Kopczuk, Wojciech and Joseph P. Lupton. 2007. “To Leave or Not To Leave: The Distribution of

  Bequest Motives.” Review of Economic Studies 74(1):207–235.

Lee, Ronald D. and Lawrence R. Carter. 1992. “Modeling and Forecasting U.S. Mortality.” Journal

  of the American Statistical Association 87(419):659–671.

Li, Qi and Shripad Tuljapurkar. 2004. “Life, Death, and the Economy: Mortality Change in

  Overlapping-Generations Models.” Michigan Retirement Research Center Working Paper WP

  2004-072.

Lichtenberg, Frank R. 2007. “The Impact of New Drugs on US Longevity and Medical Expendi-

  ture, 1990–2003: Evidence from Longitudinal, Disease-Level Data.” American Economic Review

  97(2):438–443.

Lopez, Alan D., Joshua Salomon, Omar Ahmed, Christopher J. L. Murray and Doris Mafat. 2001.

  “Life Tables for 191 Countries for 2000: Data, Methods and Results.” GPE Discussion Paper

  Series 9. Geneva: World Health Organization.

Lucas, Robert E. 1987. Models of Business Cycles. New York: Blackwell.

Maas, A. and P. P. Wakker. 1994. “Additive conjoint measurement for multiattribute utility.”

  Journal of Mathematical Psychology 38(1):86–101.

Maddison, Angus. 2003. The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD Development

  Cenre.

McNeil, B. J., R. Weichselbaum and S. G. Pauker. 1978. “Fallacy of the five-year survival in lung

  cancer.” New England Journal of Medicine 299(25):1397–1401.

Meara, Ellen R., Seth Richards and David M. Cutler. 2008. “The Gap Gets Bigger: Changes in

  Mortality and Life Expectancy, By Education, 1981–2000.” Health Affairs 27(2):350–360.

Miyamoto, John. M. and Stephen A. Eraker. 1985. “Parameter Estimates for a QALY Utility

  Model.” Medical Decision Making 5(2):191–213.




                                               42
Moser, Kath, Vladimir Shkolnikov and David A. Leon. 2005. “World mortality 1950–2000: di-

  vergence replaces convergence from the late 1980s.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization

  83(3):202–209.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. 2006. “The Value of Health and Longevity.” Journal of

  Political Economy 114(5):871–904.

Nordhaus, William D. 2003. The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to

  Living Standards. In Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach, ed.

  Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Oeppen, Jim and James W. Vaupel. 2002. “Broken Limits to Life Expectancy.” Science 296:1029–

  1031.

Picone, Gabriel, Frank Sloan and Donald Taylor Jr. 2004. “Effects of Risk and Time Preference and

  Expected Longevity on Demand for Medical Tests.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 28(1):39–53.

Pliskin, Joseph S., Donald S. Shepard and Milton C. Weinstein. 1980. “Utility Functions for Life

  Years and Health Status.” Operations Research 28(1):206–224.

Ried, Walter. 1998. “QALYs versus HYEs — what’s right and what’s wrong. A review of the

  controversy.” Journal of Health Economics 17(5):607–625.

Rogers, Alan R. 1994. “Evolution of Time Preference by Natural Selection.” American Economic

  Review 84(3):460–481.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1988. “The Value of Changes in Life Expectancy.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty

  1(3):285–304.

Shkolnikov, Vladimir M., Evgueni E. Andreev and Alexander Z. Begun. 2003. “Gini coefficient as

  a life table function: computation from discrete data, decomposition of differences and empirical

  examples.” Demographic Research 8(11).

Slemrod, Joel. 2003. “Thanatology and Economics: The Behavioral Economics of Death.” American

  Economic Review 93(2):371–375.



                                                43
Stiggelbout, A. M., G. M. Kiebert, J. Kievit, J. W. H. Leer, G Stoter and J. C. J. M. de Haes.

  1994. “Utility Assessment in Cancer Patients: Adjustment of Time Tradeoff Scores for the

  Utility of Life Years and Comparison with Standard Gamble Scores.” Medical Decision Making

  14(1):82–87.

Tolley, George S., Donald Scott Kenkel and Robert G. Fabian, eds. 1994. Valuing Health for Policy:

  An Economic Approach. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Verhoef, Lia C. G., Anton F. J. De Haan and Willem A. J. van Daal. 1994. “Risk Attitude in

  Gambles with Years of Life: Empirical Support for Prospect Theory.” Medical Decision Making

  14(2):194–200.

Viscusi, W. Kip. 1993. “The Value of Risks to Life and Health.” Journal of Economic Literature

  31(4):1912–1946.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy. 2003. “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of

  Market Estimates throughout the World.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 27(1):5–76.

White, Kevin M. 2002. “Longevity Advances in High-Income Countries.” Population and Develop-

  ment Review 28(1):59–76.

Wilmoth, John R. 2003. Human Longevity in Historical Perspective. In Physiological Basis of Aging

  and Geriatrics, ed. Paola S. Timiras. New York: CRC Press pp. 11–24.

Wilmoth, John R. and Shiro Horiuchi. 1999. “Rectangularization Revisited: Variability of Age at

  Death within Human Populations.” Demography 36(4):475–495.




                                               44
  Table 1: Changes in U.S. life expectancy, adult life-span variance, and survivorship since 1900
                                                                         1900          1950          2000
             Life expectancy, e0                                          47.7          68.4         76.7
             Std. dev. in adult life span, S10                            24.0          16.0         14.9
             Survivorship to age 10, ℓ10                                 0.782         0.963         0.991

                                                                       1900-2000     1900-1950     1950-2000
       [1]   Average S10                                                  19.5          20.0          15.4
       [2]   Average pS                                                   0.58          0.60          0.46
       [3]   Change in S10 , ∆S10                                          9.1          8.0           1.1
       [4]   Life year benefit of ∆S10 , [2] × [3]                         5.3          4.8           0.5
       [5]   Average ℓ10                                                 0.886         0.872         0.977
       [6]   Life year benefit weighted by average ℓ10 , [4] × [5]         4.7           4.2           0.5
       [7]   Change in life expectancy, ∆e0                               29.0          20.7           8.3
       [8]   Total improvement in life years, [6] + [7]                   33.7          24.9           8.8
       [9]   Share due to ∆S10 , [6] ÷ [8]                               0.140         0.169         0.056

Notes: Demographic data are simple averages of sex-specific period life tables presented by Bell and Miller (2005)
and are based on age-specific mortality rates measured in the given year. Life expectancy at birth, e0 , is the average
number of years lived. S10 is the standard deviation of length of life conditional on survivorship to age 10. The price
of S10 in terms of mean life years is given by pS = −δS10 , as described in the text, where it is assumed that δ = 0.03
in all periods.




                                                          45
 Table 2: Value of survivorship gains by region of the world and groups of countries, 1970–2000
                                                     1970                                      2000
                                      Life      Life    Survi-        GDP      Life       Life    Survi-        GDP
                                      exp.   std. dev. vorship          per    exp.    std. dev. vorship          per
                                       e0       S10       ℓ10        capita     e0        S10       ℓ10        capita
 East Asia & Pacific                  58.3     16.4      0.871          695    69.7      15.1      0.959        3,908
 Europe & Central Asia                67.3     15.9      0.947        5,498    68.2      16.2      0.970        6,838
 High income                          70.6     15.0      0.971       12,951    77.7      14.4      0.992       25,954
 Latin America & Caribbean            60.4     16.8      0.881        4,839    71.5      16.7      0.965        7,085
 Middle East & North Africa           53.7     17.9      0.822        3,202    67.7      15.2      0.947        4,569
 South Asia                           47.8     17.7      0.757        1,183    60.9      17.1      0.898        2,510
 Sub-Saharan Africa                   45.8     19.8      0.741        1,565    50.7      19.4      0.827        1,667
 Poorest 50% countries in 1970        53.6     17.4      0.820        1,098    64.1      16.8      0.919        3,326
 Richest 50% countries in 1970        67.9     15.6      0.948       10,105    73.4      16.0      0.978       17,024
 World                                58.8     17.0      0.867        4,360    66.9      16.8      0.937        7,505

                                        Value of survivorship gains in             Yearly growth rate of full
                                       annual income calculated with:            income (%) calculated with:
                                      only e0 e0 and S10 entire ℓ(x)          only e0 e0 and S10 entire ℓ(x)
 East Asia & Pacific                      477          720           987        6.3         6.5           6.7
 Europe & Central Asia                     60           54           281        0.8         0.8           0.9
 High income                            2,035        2,766        3,343         2.6         2.7           2.8
 Latin America & Caribbean                926        1,299        2,009         1.7         1.8           2.1
 Middle East & North Africa               838        1,474        1,903         1.8         2.1           2.4
 South Asia                               438          699           877        3.1         3.4           3.6
 Sub-Saharan Africa                       105          197           235        0.4         0.6           0.7
 Poorest 50% countries in 1970            425          651           865        4.2         4.4           4.6
 Richest 50% countries in 1970          1,067        1,290        2,020         2.0         2.0           2.1
 World                                    800        1,159        1,684         2.2         2.3           2.5

Notes: The sample is comprised of 180 countries including Taiwan, which is placed in the high income group.
Regions are otherwise as defined by the World Bank, and regional averages are weighted by population. GDP per
capita is measured in 2000 international prices, adjusted for terms of trade. Measures are collected from the Penn
World Table, Maddison (2003), and the IMF. Life expectancy at birth, e0 , the standard deviation of length of life
above age 10, S10 , survivorship to age 10, ℓ10 , and the entire ℓ(x) distributions are derived from official data and
estimates collected by Edwards (2009b). The value of life expectancy gains and full income are based on the author’s
calculations using the methodology and parameter values of Becker, Philipson and Soares (2005) and 1970 as the
base year, and they are calculated three ways. When only e0 is used, survivorship is assumed to be 1 until dropping
to zero at age e0 . When e0 and S10 are used, deaths are assumed to be distributed normally around a mean of e0 .
When the entire ℓ(x) curve is used, the survivorship schedule is fully realistic and reflects everything: the mean, the
spike in deaths due to infant and child mortality, the old-age hump, and all its skewness and kurtosis.




                                                          46
               Table 3: Evolution of cross-country inequality in full income, 1970–2000
                                                                               Full income in 2000
                                                Income per capita               calculated with:
                                                 1970     2000          e0 only e0 and S10 entire ℓ(x)
       Relative mean deviation                  0.4816    0.4227         0.4117      0.4038      0.3970
       Coefficient of variation                 1.2041    1.1801         1.1524      1.1342      1.1076
       Std. dev. of logs                        1.2216    0.9910         0.9874      0.9791      0.9819
       Gini coefficient                         0.5439    0.4999         0.4904      0.4836      0.4781
       Regression to the mean since 1970                −0.3507         −0.3681 −0.3805        −0.3872

Notes: See notes to Table 2. Inequality measures are weighted by country population. Regression to the mean is
the coefficient from a weighted OLS regression of the change in the natural log of income over the period on its initial
logged level, with 1970 populations as weights. All four regression coefficients are statistically significant at the 1%
level.




                                                          47
Figure 1: The distribution of life spans, survivorship, and log mortality in the U.S. in 1900 and
2000

                                                                                                Panel A
                                             0.035

                                                           0.03
              Density of life spans




                                             0.025

                                                           0.02

                                             0.015

                                                           0.01

                                             0.005

                                                                   0
                                                                       0   10   20   30   40   50         60   70   80   90   100      110



                                                                                                Panel B
                                                                   1


                                                                 0.8
                                      Survivorship probability




                                                                 0.6


                                                                 0.4


                                                                 0.2


                                                                   0
                                                                       0   10   20   30   40   50         60   70   80   90   100      110



                                                                                                Panel C
                                                                   0


                                                                 −2
                                Log mortality rate




                                                                 −4


                                                                 −6


                                                                 −8
                                                                                                                                1900
                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                 −10
                                                                       0   10   20   30   40   50         60   70   80   90   100      110
                                                                                                    Age

Source: Bell and Miller (2005) and author’s calculations. These data are unweighted averages of sex-specific life-table
entries. In panel A, the density of deaths at age 0 was 0.1328.




                                                                                               48
Figure 2: Average life span, e0 , and the standard deviation of adult life span, S10 in Sweden since
1750

                                                          80


                                                          75


                                                          70
             Life expectancy at birth, e0




                                                          65


                                                          60


                                                          55


                                                          50


                                                          45


                                                          40
                                                           1860   1880   1900   1920        1940   1960   1980   2000




                                                          24
             Standard deviation in adult life span, S10




                                                          22



                                                          20



                                                          18



                                                          16



                                                          14



                                                          12
                                                           1860   1880   1900   1920        1940   1960   1980   2000
Source: Author’s calculations and Human Mortality Database (2009).




                                                                                       49
Figure 3: The price of S, a standard deviation in life span, in terms of mean life span as a function
of δ when r = 0.03 and life span is normally distributed

                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                                   Analytical model, annuities, r = 0.03
                                                                                                                                   Numerical model, annuities, r = 0.03
              The price of one standard deviation of life in terms of the mean, pS




                                                                                                                                   Numerical model, no annuities, r = 0.03


                                                                                       0




                                                                                     −0.5




                                                                                      −1




                                                                                     −1.5




                                                                                      −2
                                                                                            0   0.01   0.02              0.03            0.04           0.05             0.06
                                                                                                           The rate of time preference, δ

Notes: The thick black line shows pS , the price of a standard deviation in life span in terms of mean life span, as a
function of δ for the simple analytical model when the standard deviation of life span, S = 15.66, the level prevailing
in the U.S. in 1994, and when r = 0.03. In the simple analytical model, when consumption is fixed, pS = −δS. The
thin solid line shows the locus in the full numerical model with complete annuitization of wealth. The dashed line
depicts the locus in the model with no annuities.




                                                                                                                    50
Figure 4: The price of S, a standard deviation in life span, in terms of mean life span as a function
of r when δ = 0.03 and life span is normally distributed

                                                                                       0
                                                                                                Analytical model, annuities, δ = 0.03
                                                                                                Numerical model, annuities, δ = 0.03
              The price of one standard deviation of life in terms of the mean, pS




                                                                                     −0.2       Numerical model, no annuities, δ = 0.03



                                                                                     −0.4



                                                                                     −0.6



                                                                                     −0.8



                                                                                      −1



                                                                                     −1.2



                                                                                     −1.4



                                                                                     −1.6
                                                                                            0   0.01      0.02       0.03         0.04       0.05          0.06   0.07   0.08   0.09
                                                                                                                            The rate of market interest, r

Notes: The thick black line shows pS , the price of a standard deviation in life span in terms of mean life span, as a
function of r for the simple analytical model when the standard deviation of life span, S = 15.66, the level prevailing
in the U.S. in 1994, and when δ = 0.03. In the simple analytical model, when consumption is fixed, pS = −δS. The
thin solid line shows the locus in the full numerical model with complete annuitization of wealth. The dashed line
depicts the locus in the model with no annuities.




                                                                                                                                     51
Figure 5: The price of S, a standard deviation in life span, in terms of mean life span as a function
of δ when r = 0.03, adult survivorship is realistic, but there is no infant mortality

                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                            Analytical model, annuities, r = 0.03
                                                                                                            Numerical model, annuities, real adult survivorship, r = 0.03
              The price of one standard deviation of life in terms of the mean, pS




                                                                                                            Numerical model, no annuities, real adult survivorship, r = 0.03


                                                                                       0




                                                                                     −0.5




                                                                                      −1




                                                                                     −1.5




                                                                                      −2
                                                                                            0   0.01   0.02              0.03            0.04             0.05             0.06
                                                                                                           The rate of time preference, δ

Notes: The thick black line shows pS , the price of a standard deviation in life span in terms of mean life span, as a
function of r for the simple analytical model when the standard deviation of life span, S = 15.66, the level prevailing
in the U.S. in 1994, and when δ = 0.03. In the simple analytical model, when consumption is fixed, pS = −δS.
The thin solid line shows the locus in the full numerical model with complete annuitization of wealth. The dashed
line depicts the locus in the model with no annuities. In this simulation, the survivorship weights are taken from a
modified period life table for the U.S. in 1999, provided by the Human Mortality Database (2009). Life-table deaths
at ages under 10 are set to equal deaths at age 10, and the entire distribution is rescaled to sum to unity.




                                                                                                                    52
Figure 6: The price of S, a standard deviation in life span, in terms of mean life span as a function
of δ when r = 0.03 and survivorship is fully realistic, with infant mortality

                                                                                      0.5
                                                                                                                 Analytical model, annuities, r = 0.03
                                                                                                                 Numerical model, annuities, real survivorship, r = 0.03
              The price of one standard deviation of life in terms of the mean, pS




                                                                                                                 Numerical model, no annuities, real survivorship, r = 0.03


                                                                                       0




                                                                                     −0.5




                                                                                      −1




                                                                                     −1.5




                                                                                      −2
                                                                                            0   0.01   0.02              0.03            0.04            0.05             0.06
                                                                                                           The rate of time preference, δ

Notes: The thick black line shows pS , the price of a standard deviation in life span in terms of mean life span, as a
function of r for the simple analytical model when the standard deviation of life span, S = 15.66, the level prevailing
in the U.S. in 1994, and when δ = 0.03. In the simple analytical model, when consumption is fixed, pS = −δS.
The thin solid line shows the locus in the full numerical model with complete annuitization of wealth. The dashed
line depicts the locus in the model with no annuities. In this simulation, the survivorship weights are taken from a
modified period life table for the U.S. in 1999, provided by the Human Mortality Database (2009). Life-table deaths
at ages under 10 are set to equal deaths at age 10, and the entire distribution is rescaled to sum to unity.




                                                                                                                    53
Figure 7: The standard deviation in life span above age 10 in the U.S. by year and by birth cohort

                                                                             21
                                                                                                                                   Period S10 by year
                                                                                                                                   Cohort S 10 by year of birth
              The standard deviation in the age at death above age 10, S10




                                                                             20



                                                                             19



                                                                             18



                                                                             17



                                                                             16



                                                                             15



                                                                             14



                                                                             13
                                                                              1900   1910   1920   1930   1940    1950   1960   1970     1980      1990       2000
                                                                                                                  Year

Notes: The underlying data are historical and forecast life table death distributions taken from Bell and Miller
(2005). The standard deviation in life span above age 10, S10 , is calculated as described by Edwards and Tuljapurkar
(2005).




                                                                                                                 54
