NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CYCLICAL UNEMPLOYMENT: SECTORAL
SHIFTS OR AGGREGATE DISTURBANCES?

Katharine G. Abraham
Lawrence F. Katz

Working Paper No. 1)410

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 198)4

The authors thank Olivier Blanchard, Charles Brown, Henry Farber,
Olivia Mitchell, David Romer, Martin Weitzman, and participants in
seminars at M.I.T. and the National Bureau of Economic Research for
their helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper. Thanks
are also due to Michelle Kamin for her careful preparation of the
manuscript. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1410
July 1984

Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or
Aggregate Disturbances?

ABS TRACT

Recent work by David Lilien has argued that the existence of a strong
positive correlation between the dispersion of employment growth rates across
sectors (cY) and the unemployment rate implies that shifts in demand from

some sectors to others are responsible for a substantial fraction of cyclical

variation in unemployment. This paper demonstrates that, under certain
empirically satisfied conditions, aggregate demand movements alone can produce
a positive correlation between

and the unemployment rate. Two tests are

developed which permit one to distinquish between a pure sectoral shift
interpretation' and a pure aggregate demand interpretation of this positive

correlation. The finding that

and the volume of help wanted advertising

are negatively related and the finding that 0

is

directly associated with

the change in unemployment rather than with the level of unemployment both

support an aggregate demand interpretation. A proxy for sectoral
shifts that is purged of the influence of aggregate demand is then developed.
Models which allow sectoral shifts in the composition of demand and
fluctuations in the aggregate level of demand to affect the unemployment

rate independently are estimated using this proxy. The results support
the view that pure sectoral shifts have not been an important source of
cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.

Katharine G. Abraham
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253—2661

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology

Cambridge, MA 02139
(617) 253—8710

The business cycle literature typically assumes that aggregate
disturbances, and in particular aggregate demand movements, are the primary
cause of cyclical swings in unemployment (see ,

for

example, Barro [19771;

Baily and Okun [1983]; and Tobin [1980]). The aggregate models utilized by
macroeconomists usually fail to take into account the possibility that shifts
in the sectoral composition of demand can have adverse macro consequences In

an economy where resources are not Instantaneously mobile across sectors. In
a provocative recent paper, Lilien (l982a) argues that shifts In demand from
some sectors to others, rather than movements In the level of aggregate
demand, are in fact responsible for half or more of all cyclical variation in

unemployment in the postwar perIod. Lilien's evidence on this point appears
to have been rather widely accepted (see, for example, Barro [1984];
Bluestone, Harrison and Gorham [19841; Grossman, Hart and Maskin [1983]; and
Rosen [1984]).

The aggregate demand and sectoral shift explanations for cyclical

unemployment have potentially quite different policy implications. A pure
sectoral shift explanation seems to rule out a useful role for aggregate

demand policies in moderating unemployment fluctuations. Thus, the degree to
which each of these two possible sources contributes to cyclical unemployment
is a matter of considerable Importance.
Section I of this paper lays out both a pure sectoral shift explanation
and a pure aggregate demand explanation for cyclical fluctuations In the

unemployment rate. We show that either could produce the strong positive
relationship between the cross—industry dispersion of employment growth rates
and the unemployment rate that Lillen appeals to as evidence for his sectoral

shift hypothesis. Section II argues that information on job vacancies can be
used to distinguish between the pure sectoral shift hypothesis and the pure

—1—

aggregate demand hypothesis. Estimates using the Conference Board help wanted
index as a vacancy proxy offer strong support for the primacy of aggregate
demand disturbances in producing cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.

Evidence that the dispersion in employment growth rates is directly correlated
with the change in the unemployment rate, rather than with the unemployment

rate itself, corroborates this view. Section III considers a model which
allows both sectoral shifts and aggregate demand fluctuations to produce

independent effects on unemployment. Empirical estimates based on this model
confirm that pure sectoral shifts have not been an important cause of cyclical

movements in the unemployment rate. Section IV offers a few concluding
comments.

I. Sectoral Shifts, Aggregate—Demand—Induced Business Cycles, and Dispersion
In Employment Growth Rates
In this section of the paper, we demonstrate that either pure shifts In
the structure of demand or pure shocks to the level of demand could produce a
positive correlation between the dispersion of employment growth rates and the

unemployment rate. This means that evidence of such a correlation cannot be
taken as compellIng support for the vIew that pure sectoral shifts have been
an important cause of cyclical unemployment.

Sectoral Shifts
We begin by thinking about a hypothetical economy which never experiences

fluctuations in aggregate demand around its trend rate of growth. If workers
were perfectly mobile and perfectly substitutable, shifts in the sectoral
composition of demand for labor that did not alter the aggregate level of

demand for labor would have no effect on the unemployment rate. Employment
losses in contracting firms would be exactly matched by employment gains in

—2--

expanding firms. However, if frictions are present, then shifts in employment
demand can lead to at least temporary increases in unemployment. This is the
basis for the relationship posited in Lilien's work between at, the
dispersion in observed employment growth rates across sectors (an empirical
proxy for the dispersion in the desired rates of employment growth across

sectors) and U, the unemployment rate.
We represent the desired rate of employment growth in a particular sector
as the sum of the aggregate trend rate of growth of employment, r, plus a
random sector specific disturbance,

(1)

where

d ln Ejt =

r

+

is assumed to be distributed with mean

and time—varying

:e0
variance cY* according to the distribution f(c*/at). A shock
to the economy which necessitates that proportionally more labor be allocated
to some sectors and proportionally less to others, but does not move aggregate
*
demand off its trend path, may increase a, the dispersion in desired

employment growth rates, but does not affect F. We will refer to a shock of
*

this sort which increaseso as a mean preserving spread in the rates
of growth of labor demand across sectors.V In a frictionless world, the
change in the desired rate of employment growth in a sector will always equal

the change in the actual rate of employment growth in the sector. A mean
preserving spread leaves total employment no different than it would have been

in the absence of the shock. In the presence of frictions, many of the people
losing their jobs in the sectors experiencing negative shocks can expect to be
out of work for some period of time, while searching for employment in the

gaining sectors. Increases incY, the dispersion in desired rates of

—3—

employment change across industries, would raise the number of workers

shifting to new sectors and thereby increase the unemployment rate. Unless
there were some unusual configuration of bottlenecks in the labor market, one

would expect a, the dispersion in desired rates of employment change,

to be tracked reasonably closely bya, the dispersion in actual rates of
employment change. This suggests that, in the absence of aggregate demand
disturbances, pure sectoral shifts in the composition of demand would produce
a positive correlation between the dispersion of employment growth rates and

the unemployment rate.V

Aggregate Demand Fluctuations
The preceding discussion completely ignores the potential effect of

aggregate demand fluctuations on employment growth dispersion. This causes no
problems for empirical analysis ——

in

the sense that the dispersion of

employment growth rates can still safely be interpreted as a measure of
intersectoral shifts

Th Lilien (1982a) —

provided

that two conditions are

satisfied. First, all sectors must have the same trend rate of growth.
Second, sectors must not differ in their sensitivity to aggregate demand
fluctuations.

If these conditions are violated, aggregate demand fluctuations can
produce a positive correlation between the dispersion of employment growth

rates (a) and the unemployment rate

even in the absence of

sectoral shifts of the sort motivating the previous discussion. Specifically,
this will happen if either (1) industries' trend growth rates and cyclical
sensitivities are negatively correlated; and/or (2) industries differ in their

cyclical sensitivities and downturns tend to be steeper than upturns. Both of
these sets of requirements seem to be satisfied empirically.

—4-

The theoretical argument proceeds in two steps. First, we show that,
under either of the specified sets of conditions, aggregate demand
fluctuations will produce a positive correlation between

and the change

in U (A U, equal to U U_1). Second, we show that, with
observations for periods of discrete length, A U and

Itself are

likely to be positively correlated. Taken together, these two results suggest
that aggregate demand fluctuations are likely to generate a positive
correlation between

and U.

We first consider the implications of a negative correlation between

industries' trend rates of growth and their cyclical sensitivities. This
alone is sufficient for aggregate demand fluctuations to produce a correlation

and A U. Consider a hypothetical two—sector economy

between

driven solely by transitory fluctuations in aggregate demand around its trend

rate of growth. Employment in the first sector trends upward rapidly but is
relatively unresponsive to cyclical movements in GNP; employment in the second
sector trends upward less rapidly but is more responsive to fluctuations in

GNP. (Think of sector one as services and sector two as manufacturing.) We
can write:
(2)

in Eit = + T1t + y1(ln Y —

in Y)

and
(3)

lnE2 = + rt + y2(lnY —

lnY)

where Eit and E2t are employment in the two sectors, t is a time trend,

is

actual GNP, Y is trend GNP, r1> r2 (service employment is growing at a
more rapid trend rate than manufacturing employment) and

<

(service

employment is less cyclically responsive than manufacturing employment). A
measure of the dispersion in the rate of growth of employment across sectors
at any point in time is defined as:

—5—

= [lt (A inEit— A lnE)2 +

2t

(A lnE2t — A

lnE)2]"2

This is approximately equal to:

(r1 - 2

+

2

1

' 2 lnY -

A

lnY)

if we assume that the two sectors are equal in size to start with, so that the
employment share weights are approximately one half and the growth rate of

total employment (A mEt) is approximately equal to the average of the
growth rates of employment in each of the two sectors.

How will

move over the business cycle? Figure 1 illustrates

movements in a using hypothetical parameter values and assuming that

lnY — lnY moves like a sine wave (see panel A). At the peak and
again at the trough of the business cycle, the difference A lnEit — A lnE2t
just equals

—

r2,

the difference in the trend rates of growth in

the two sectors. The value of A lnEi —A lnE2 reaches a maximum
midway from peak to trough (where GNP is falling most rapidly) and a minimum
midway from trough to peak (where GNP is growing most rapidly). This implies
that

reaches a maximum midway between peak and trough, and a minimum

midway between trough and peak (see panel
If TJ bears an Okun's law relationship to the percentage deviation of
GNP from trend, then we can write:

ln

*

(5)

Ut = +

where

B is negative. The change in U will reach a maximum midway from peak

0 (ln Yt —

to trough (where GNP is falling most rapidly) and a minimum midway from trough

to peak (where GNP is growing most rapidly). Thus, a.t and A U will
have similar movements and should be positively correlated.

—6—

We have demonstrated that the existence of a negative correlation
between industries' trend rates of growth and their cyclical sensitivities is

sufficient to produce a positive correlation between at and A U.
Differences in industries' cyclical sensitivities combined with asymmetry in
the movement of aggregate demand around trend can also produce a positive
correlation between

and A U. If industries differ in their

cyclical sensitivities and trend differences in growth rates are unimportant,
then the dispersion in employment growth rates will be greatest when output is

changing most sharply, whether falling or rising. Suppose that downturns in
GNP always occur sharply over a short period of time, with recoveries in GNP

occurring more gradually over a longer period of time. Then a will tend to
be larger in downturns than in upturns.

Appealing again to the existence of an Okun's law relationship between
unemployment and the deviation of GNP from trend, the same pattern of output
fluctuation will produce sharp increases in unemployment during downturns and

more gradual reductions in unemployment during upturns. Thus, a will tend
to be large when A U is positive, and smaller when A U is negative; once

again, a. and A U will have similar movements and should be
positively correlated.

This argument has been developed assuming no difference in industries'
trend rates of growth; business cycle asymmetries of the hypothesized variety

will also contribute to a positive correlation betweena andA U

the case where industries' trend growth rates are negatively correlated with
their cyclical sensitivities, so that this effect can operate to reinforce the
preceding effect.

Thus far we have shown only that aggregate demand fluctuations can
produce a positive correlation between the dispersion of employment growth

—7—

rates and the change in the unemployment rate, with this possible via either

of two routes. However, if A

and

and

are positively correlated, then

should also bear a positive relationship to one another. In

actual quarterly data for l951:Q2 to 1982:Q4, the change in detrended

(A UDTt) and detrended U (UDT) itself have a correlation of
0.256; in annual data for the same time period, A UDTt and UDTt have a

correlation of 0.522.' This positive correlation of TJ and A IJ, does

not imply that the unemployment rate series is necessarily explosive. In
fact, a positive correlation between the level of a variable, X, and its

first difference, X —

X_1,

is a basic property of a wide variety of

stationary discrete time stochostic processes. For example, if a random
variable X follows a stationary AR(1) process of the form

X =

4 X1 + et,

I

4

I < 1,

et white noise,

1/2

then the correlation between X andA X equals (4)

> 0.-/

Thus, it

seems quite plausible that an aggregate—demand driven positive correlation

between

and A U could, through a positive correlation between

A U and U, produce a positive correlation betweena and U.

Simulated Effects of Aggregate Demand Fluctuations

The actual economy is more complicated than the preceding discusson would

suggest. However, so long as there is a negative correlation between
industries' trend rate of growth and the responsiveness of their employment
levels to cyclical swings in GNP and/or it is true both that industries differ

in their cyclical sensitivities and that downturns tend to be sharper than
upturns, we can expect aggregate demand fluctuations to produce a positive
relationship between the dispersion of employment growth rates across sectors

—8--

and the change in unemployment. Since changes in unemployment have been
positively correlated with the level of unemployment, we can thus expect to
observe a positive relationship between the variance of employment growth
rates across sectors and the unemployment rate.

We have constructed a multiple sector simulation model to demonstrate the

U, and U one might observe in the real

sort of movements in

world in response to fluctuations in aggregate demand. The essential
ingredients of this simulation model are a set of equations relating the rate
of change in employment in various sectors to change in aggregate demand and
an Okun's—law equation relating the unemployment rate to aggregate demand.
We specify the change in the log of employment in each of eleven major
sectors as:

(6)

I

ln

+

Eit =

r21t

— tln

Y1(Ain

*

+

where Eit is employment in sector 1, t is a time trend, inY is log (GNP),

lnY is the trend value of log (GNP), and ther's andy's are
6/

parameters.—

The results obtained are summarized in Table 1. It is

significant for our purposes that there is a strong negative correlation
across industries between the trend rate of growth in employment at the mean
value of t and the responsiveness of employment to cyclical fluctuations in

GNP. The simple correlation between the estimated value of d in Eit/dt,
evaluated at the mean value of t, and the sum of the y's equals —0.607; the
rank correlation is —0.700.

The unemployment rate was also specified to be a function of the current
and lagged gaps between actual and potential GNP:
4

(7)

U = + z e (in Y
t

j=0

*

—

— ln Y — )
ti

-9-

+ t + ut

where 1J is the civilian unemployment rate, t, inY and lnY are as
above, and u., ri and the e's are parameters. A time trend was included

in the equation since the unemployment rate seems to have drifted upwards over
time and we are interested in exploring its cyclical movements, not its trend

movements. The parameters in this equation were estimated using data for the
same time period and the same serial correlation correction procedure as in
the employment equations.

We then simulated various sectors' employment growth rates and the
detrended unemployment rate by substituting the history of realized gaps
between actual and trend GNP for the period from 1950:Ql to 1982:Q4 into our

simulation equation. Casual inspection of this output gap series suggests
that its movements are asymmetric, with downturns steeper than upturns.
Neftci (1984) has recently offered more formal evidence of this sort of
business cycle asymmetry.

Values of at were calculated according to the formula:

liE

(8)
=

i1

( in Ei — L\ in

Et

I

Et

where thei inEit's are simulated employment growth rates based on the
estimates from equation (6), the Eit's are simulated employment levels

derived assuming actual employment levels at t0, in Et equals the

11
simulated growth rate in total employment and Et equals Z Ei.
1=1

Simulated values of the change in detrended

and detrended

itself

were based on equation (7), but with t set equal to zero for all

observations. Given the lags involved, this yielded simulated observations on
the change in detrended

and detrended

corresponding to l951:Q2 through l982:Q4.

—10—

for 127 periods

What do the simulated data look like? And how do they compare to actual

data? First, there is a strong positive correlation between a and A UDTt
(p

= 0.665).

0.256).

Second, A UDTt and UDTt are positively related (p

Third, there is a positive correlation between 0t and UDt (p =
actual quarterly data,

0.292). In

and A UDTt have correlation 0.554; A UDTt and UDTt

have correlation 0.256; and

and UDTt have correlation 0.276. Our simulation

results do not prove that aggregate demand fluctuations are responsible for

the positive relationship betweena and the unemployment rate we see in
actual data; however, these results do demonstrate that aggregate demand

fluctuations easily could have produced such a positive relationship. Thus,

the positive relationship betweena and the unemployment rate does not
necessarily imply an important role for sectoral shifts in cyclical
fluctuations.

II.

-

Differentiating Between the Sectoral Shift and Aggregate Demand Hypotheses
While either pure sectoral shifts or pure aggregate demand fluctuations

can produce a positive correlation between the dispersion in employment growth
rates and the unemployment rate, the two processes can be distinguished

empirically in other respects. In particular, the behaviour of job vacancies
can reveal which has been the more important cause -of the correlation between

at and U. The relationship between a, and the change in

can

also be informative.

Predictions Concerning Cyclical Movements In the Job Vacancy Rate
One important difference between the mean—preserving spread sectoral
shift story and the aggregate demand story lies with what each predicts for

the behaviour of the job vacancy rate. If the pure sectoral shift hypothesis

—11—

correctly captured why a, and U are positively related, then a and
V, the job vacancy rate, should also be positively related. In contrast,
the aggregate demand scenario concerning the positive relationship between

and U generates a negative relationship between a and V.
These predictions rest on the existence of an inverse cyclical

relationship between U and V. Strong aggregate demand can be expected
to reduce the number of people unemployed and raise the number of vacant jobs;
whereas weak aggregate demand can be expected to raise the number of people

unemployed and reduce the number of vacant jobs. Thus, holding the structural
characteristics of the economy fixed, one might expect to find plots of the
job vacancy rate against the unemployment rate yielding a downward sloping UV

curve. An increase in the unemployment rate that is caused purely by a
negative shock to aggregate demand should be accompanied by a decrease in the
job vacancy rate, as shown in the move from A to B in Figure
Changes in the structural characteristics of the economy can shift the
entire UV curve either inwards (improvements in worker/job matching) or

outwards (worsening of worker/job matching). Increased dispersion in the
desired rates of employment growth across sectors is one possible cause of an

outward shift in the UV curve. An increase in the unemployment rate caused
purely by an increase in the dispersion of desired employment growth rates
should be accompanied by an increase in the job vacancy rate, as shown in the
move from A to C in Figure 2.-'

f-"

The contrast of the predicted relationship betweena and Vt
emerging from the sectoral shift story and that emerging from our aggregate
demand story provides a means of empirically determining which is more
important that we exploit in the empirical analysis which follows.

—12—

Using the Help Wanted Index as a Job Vacancy Proxy
Unfortunately, comprehensive job vacancy data have not been collected on

an ongoing basis in the United States. The best available proxy for the
number of vacant jobs is the Conference Board's help wanted index. This index
is essentially an employment—weighted average of the number of help wanted
advertisements in 51 major metropolitan newspapers, deflated so that 1967
equals lOO.-"

Dividing the national help wanted index by total

nonagricultural payroll employment yields a reasonable proxy for the job

vacancy rate. We use this normalized help wanted index (help wanted index
divided by total nonagricultural payroll employment) as a vacancy rate
surrogate in the analysis which follows.

An important question is whether the normalized help wanted index in
fact does a good job of capturing cyclical fluctuations in the job vacancy

rate. Appendix A presents some evidence on this point which suggests that
short—term movements in help wanted advertising do a good job of tracking
short—term movements in job vacancies.

Patterns of Movement in Annual Data
The left hand panel of Figure 3 plots the dispersion of employment growth
rates

calculated using annual average employment figures against the
and

civilian unemployment rate, as in Lilien (l982a); it is clear that

Ut are positively correlated. The right hand panel of Figure 3 presents a
similar plot, but with the normalized help wanted index ——
job vacancy rate ——

replacing

our

proxy for the

the unemployment rate. The pure sectoral shift

hypothesis implies that o and the normalized help wanted index should
move together; the pure aggregate demand hypothesis implies that they should

move in opposite directions. The fact that

—13—

and the normalized help

wanted index move in opposite directions suggests that aggregate demand
fluctuations, not sectoral shifts, are responsible for the positive
correlation between

and U observed in annual data.

Unemployment and Help Wanted Index Equations
The more formal evidence on the relationship between a and U presented
in Lilien (1982a) consists of unemployment rate models including current and
lagged values of both a and DMR, the unanticipated growth in the money
supply, plus a lagged value of the unemployment rate, as explanatory
variables. The DMR. terms are intended to capture exogenous shocks to
aggregate demand; if they captured aggregate demand sh9cks perfectly, the a
coefficients presumably would be uncontaminated by aggregate demand

influences. Lilien (l982a) uses annual data to estimate his unemployment
equations; the specification he chooses to focus most of his attention on is:

(9) UtaO+af+c2al+cDMR+a4D+D÷
+ a7t + u
where U represents the civilian unemployment rate, a is the dispersion in
employment growth rates across eleven sectors, DNR is the unanticipated growth
in the money supply, t is a time trend, the a's are coefficients to be
estimated, and u Is the error term.

The first column of Table 2 presents an ordinary least squares (OLS)
estimate of equation (9) fit with annual data for the sample period 1949 to

1980. All the variables in this model are identical to those used by Lilien;
our time period differs slightly from his, starting in 1949 rather than 1948,
since 1949 is the earliest year for which we could obtain data to estimate a

comparable help wanted index model. Not surprisingly, we obtain coefficient
estimates very close to those Lilien reports, including large and significant

positive coefficients on both a, and a1.
—14—

Lilien interprets the positive coefficients on his a terms as evidence

of more rapid structural change raising the unemployment rate. A model like
equation (9) but with the normalized help wanted index ——

proxying for the job

vacancy rate —— as the dependent variable offers a test of this interpretation:
(10)

+

NHWI

+ '3fti +

BNHWI
b

t—l

+ 13DMRJ 1+ 25't—2

+

+Bt+w
7
t

where NHWIt represents the normalized help wanted index, the f3's are

parameters and the other variables are defined above. Positive a
coefficients in the help wanted Index equation would support the structural
change interpretation; negative coefficients would suggest that a is
actually serving as an aggregate demand proxy.

Column (2)of Table 2 presents an OLS estimate of equation (10) which
matches the unemployment model in column (1). In this help wanted Index
equation, the current value of a takes on a large and statistically
significant negative coefficient; the coefficient on the once—lagged value of
is also negative though not significant. The fact that the a
variables do not take on positive coefficients —— and in fact assume negative

coefficients ——

In

the help wanted Index equation implies that the positive

a coefficients In the Table 2 unemployment equations cannot be interpreted
as evidence of pure Intersectoral shifts producing cyclical fluctuations in
11/

unemployment.—

Is a Correlated with U or U?
A second important difference between the sectoral shift story and the

aggregate demand story lies with whether they Imply that a Is directly
related to Ut or to A Ut. The sectoral shift story leads directly to a

—15—

prediction that a and U should be positively related. In the aggregate
demand story, however, swings in aggregate demand produce a positive
correlation between a and A Ut; a ends up being correlated with

only because A U and U have a positive relationship. Interestingly,

when

is estimated as a function of detrended U and the change in

detrended U using annual data for 1948 to 1980, the following relationship
emerges:

a = 0.019 + 0.002 UDT + 0.007 A UDT
t

(11)

(0.006)

(0.002)

(0.002)

where the numbers reported in parentheses are standard errors. The data
Indicate that, holding UDTt constant, at is very significantly related

to A UDT; however, holding A UDTt constant, a has no significant
relationship with UDTt. It appears that a and the change in unemployment
are directly related, but that a and unemployment itself are not. While
this result could conceivably be reconciled with the sectoral shift
explanation, It is a much more probable outcome of the aggregate demand
12/
model.—

III. Decomposing Sectoral Shift and Aggregate Demand Influences
on the Unemployment Rate
We have seen that the dispersion in employment growth rates across sectors
Is a poor proxy for the magnitude of pure sectoral shifts In labor demand

occurring in the economy. In this section of the paper, we discuss one
possible approach to better Identifying the true effect of pure sectoral

shifts on short term movements In the unemployment rate. While our approach
Is very similar to that of LIlien (1982b), our conclusions differ markedly

from his. Our results do not provide support for the view that pure sectoral
shifts have been an Important source of cyclical fluctuations in unemployment
in the postwar U.S.

—16—

Creating a Measure of Pure Sectoral Shifts in Labor Demand
The basic problem with using the a measure discussed in the previous
section of the paper as a measure of pure sectoral shifts is that both
aggregate demand fluctuations and pure sectoral shifts can affect the

dispersion in employment growth rates. The obvious solution is to separate
employment growth rates in various sectors into that part which is linked to
aggregate developments and that part which reflects sector—specific

developments. A reasonable proxy for pure sectoral shifts would then be the
dispersion in the sector—specific components of the employment growth rates.
The employment growth rate of a given sector can be specified as a

function of aggregate and sector—specific factors. If sectoral employment
growth can be reasonably separated into trend and non—trend components, then
the employment growth rate for a particular sector I can be written as:
(12)

inEit =

r11 +

r21t + SlAt +

where E represents employment, t is a time trend, At is a vector of

aggregate demand variables, S is a parameter vector of sector specific
responses to aggregate terms, and ct is a disturbance term reflecting
non—trend sector—specific factors)' To implement this specification
empirically, one would ideally like to have variables In A that do a good job
of capturing aggregate influences but are also exogenous to sector—specific

shocks. On the one hand, if the variables included in A fail to capture all
important aggregate demand influences, then the error terms in the employment

growth equations will not represent pure sector—specific effects. On the
other hand, if variables affected by sector—specific shocks are included in A,
then employment growth attributed to these aggregate variables could in fact
be the result of sector—specific factors.

—17—

The following equation represent8 one possible empirical specification:

+

lnE1 =

(13)

T2t +E Yj Dt_ + Cit

where DMR represents unanticipated growth in the money supply and

assumed to follow an AR(l) process. Thus
=

i6it—l +

i

is

can be written as:

e1

where ei is a white noise innovation term. If the L DMR terms captured
all the relevant aggregate influences on sectoral employment growth, then the
would capture the purely sector—specific influences on growth.
The estimated innovations from the employment growth equations specified
above can be used to construct a measure of residual dispersion in employment
growth rates, which we will call SIGRESA:

NE
(14)

SIGRESAt

2

(.._t)

E

11

t

where N equals the number of sectors, Fj equals employment in sector

in

period t, Et equals total period t employment, and eit equals the estimated
innovation in the AR(1) error term cit, and ye is the estimated variance of
i

the it'• Since we are interested in isolating innovations to the growth
rate of employment in different sectors, it is appropriate to calculate SIGRESA

using the elt's rather than the Cit's. The eit's represent current
sectoral shifts. The adjustment to past shifts, the lagged

which make

up c, can affect the unemployment rate and do so through the effect on
lagged SIGRESA's on the unemployment rate. The elt Items are normalized by

v

for comparability with Lilien (1982b); it also turns out that the

ei

normalized SIGRESA measure captures more of the variation In unemployment and
In the help wanted index than does a non—normalized measure.

—18—

There is an obvious potential problem with SIGRESA as a proxy for pure

sectoral shifts in labor demand: unanticipated money growth is unlikely to
the be only important exogenous influence on aggregate demand, so that the
residuals used to construct SIGRESA are likely to reflect aggregate as well as

sector—specific influences on employment growth rates. Evidence that the
errors from employment growth rate equations like (13) were positively

correlated across sectors would confirm that there is reason for concern. One
reasonable response is to purge each sector's employment growth equation
residuals of that component which moves together with the average residual.

To do this, we fit OLS versions of equation (13) and calculate the weighted
average residual from these equations for each time period:

NE
(15)

t

AVERES =

E

i=:L t

.

t

where Ej equals employment in sector I in period t, Et equals total

period t employment, andj is the period t residual from the OLS version
of sector l's employment equation. This weighted average residual is then used as
an explanatory variable in a new set of employment growth equations:

(16)

lnEjt F11 +F21t + ZyA Dt_ +Ki AVES

where K is a parameter,

is again assumed to follow an AR(1) process,

and all other terms have been previously defined. The estimated innovations
to the errors from these equations can be used to construct a new measure of
residual dispersion in employment growth rates, which we will call SIGRESB,
defined in exactly the same way as SIGRESA except based on equations like (16)

rather than on equations like (13). Our use of AVERESt in constructing
SIGRESB Is very similar In spirit to Lilien's (l982b) estimation of a time
fixed effect in the employment growth equations which underlie his sectoral

—19—

shift proxy; our approach has the advantage that AVERESt is less likely to
be dominated by large, erratic movements in the employment growth rate of a
14/
single small sector.—

Both our approach and Lilien's approach suffer from the potential
problem that the aggregate component Introduced Into the sector—specific
employment growth equations can itself be affected by sector specific shocks:
In a period in which shocks create a large need to reallocate labor across
sectors, the adversely affected sectors may shrink without the positively
affected sectors growing by the same amount, causing a drop In the average

employment growth rate. However, since the aggregate component will only
capture sectoral employment movements that are systematically associated with

movements in the aggregate component, this should be a serious problem only in
the unlikely event that pure sector specific shocks keep recurring over time
In the same fixed pattern.

Unemployment and Help Wanted Index Equations
We have estimated both unemployment and help wanted index equations

which

include values of the SIGRESA and SIGRESB measures. The unemployment

equations and the sectoral shift proxies appearing in them have been specified

to make

our results as comparable as possible to those reported in Lilien

(1982b): the SIGRESA and SIGRESB measures were constructed using the
normalized innovations to the residuals from AR(l) employment growth
equations estimated with data for 29 sectors for the 1953:Ql to 1982:Q2 sample
period;

the current and eight lagged values of one or the other of these

sectoral shift proxies, plus a constant and the current and eight lagged
values of DMR, were included in each equation; and all the equations were

estimated allowing for an AR(4) error structure with data for the 1958:Ql to

—20—

1982:Ql sample period. The differences between our models and the central
model in Lilien (l982b) are as follows: our DMR variable may not be identical
to his; we use a detrended unemployment rate as the dependent variable rather
than including a time trend directly in the estimating equation; and, of
course, neither our SIGRESA nor our SIGRESB is identical to Lilien's measure

of residual dispersion in employment growth rates. Only the last of these
16/

differences is apt to be important.—

The first column of Table 3 summarizes the parameter estimates from an
unemployment equation for the civilian unemployment rate which includes

current and lagged values of SIGRESA as explanatory variables. The sum of the
coefficients on these SIGRESA terms implies that a one standard deviation

change in SIGRESA is associated with a 0.962 percentage point (or 0.759
standard deviation) change in the detrended unemployment rate. Figure 4a
plots both the actual detrended unemployment rate (UDTt and a detrended

"natural unemployment rate" series (UDT) calculated as the predicted
value of unemployment based on the column (1) estimates, assuming that the
SIGRESA terms take on their actual values, but that the DMR terms uniformly

equal zero. It is clear from inspection of this plot that the actual
unemployment rate moves around a good deal more than the natural rate series;
over the l958:Ql to l980:Ql sample period, UDTt has a standard deviation of
1.267 and a range of 4.970, while UDTt has a standard deviation of only
17/
0.515 and a range of only 2.133.—
As noted above, one serious concern with the SIGRESA series is that the
employment growth equation residuals upon which it is based are likely to
include a substantial aggregate demand component, in addition to capturing

sector—specific influences. The errors in the sectors' employment growth
equations are in fact highly correlated. Over the l953:Ql to l982:Ql sample

—21—

period,

A
all twenty—nine of the individual equation ej's, the innovations to

the equation (13) errors from which SIGRESA is calculated, are positively

correlated with the employment—weighted average elt. Twenty—five of these
twenty—nine positive correlations are significant at the 0.05 level; only the
innovations to the errors in the tobacco manufacturers equation, the petroleum
refining equation, the federal government equation and the state government
equation are not significantly positively correlated with the weighted average
Some common unobserved factor or factors appear to be affecting the

employment growth rates of many if not all of the twenty—nine sectors. The
help wanted equation estimates reported in column (3) are consistent with the
view that the error innovation terms used in constructing SIGRESA contain an

aggregate demand component in addition to any sector—specific component. The
sum of the coefficient on the current and lagged SIGRESA terms is not
significantly positive; rather, it is slightly, though not significantly,

negative.
The fact that the errors from which SIGRESA terms were constructed

appear to contain an important common cross—sector component motivated our

construction of SIGRESB, following the approach described above. The second
column of Table 3 presents an unemployment equation which Includes current and

lagged values of SIGRESB as an explanatory variable. The point estimates of
the sum of the coefficients on the nine SIGRESB terms in this model Imply that
a one standard deviation change in SIGRESB Is associated with only a 0.278

percentage point (or 0.219 standard deviation) change in the unemployment
rate; moreover, this point estimate is not significantly different from zero.

Figure 4b plots both the actual detrended unemployment rate and a detrended
natural rate series based on the point estimates of the coefficients in the

column (2) model. This plot reveals a rather dramatic contrast between the

—22—

cyclical volatility of the actual detrended unemployment rate, which swings
around quite widely, and the comparative stability of the natural rate

series. Over the 1958:Ql to 1980:Ql sample period, UDTt has a standard
deviation of 1.267 and a range of 4.970; the UDT' series based on the
column (2) model has a standard deviation of only 0.190 and a range of only

0.829. The sum of the SIGRESB coefficients in the help wanted index equation

column (4) is also small and ins1gnificant.!'I2!
In our view, these results provide no support for the view that pure
sectoral shifts are an important source of cyclical variation in the aggregate
unemployment rate.

IV.

Conclusion
Some previous research has taken the fact that the dispersion of

employment growth rates and the unemployment rate are positively correlated to

Indicate that the former bears a causal relationship to the latter. We have
provided evidence which strongly contradicts this interpretation. Our
preferred interpretation is that fluctuations in aggregate demand affect both
the dispersion of employment growth rates and the unemployment rate, producing
a positive correlation between the two.
More generally, our work suggests the following two propositions.
First, any labor market dispersion measure should be interpreted cautiously,
since aggregate demand fluctuations, not just sector specific shocks, can have

an important effect on such measures. Aggregate—demand—induced recessions are
markedly uneven in their impact; the consequences of declines In aggregate
demand can all too easily be mistaken for the consequences of long—term

structural problems in particular sectors. Second, information on job
vacancies can be very helpful for understanding why changes in the
unemployment rate have occurred.

—23—

The major substantive conclusion of the paper is that pure sectoral
shifts, as distinct from aggregate disturbances, appear to have contributed
very little to observed post—war cyclical fluctuations in the unemployment
rate.

—24--

References

Abraham, Katharine G., "Vacancies, Unemployment and Wage Growth," unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Harvard University, 1982.

Rally, Martin N. and Arthur Okun, eds., The Battle Against Inflation and

Unemployment, New York: Norton, 1983.

Barro, Robert M., "Rational Expectations and Macroeconomics in 1984," AEA
Proceedings, May 1984, pp. 179—182.

Barro, Robert N., "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the United
States," American Economic Review, March 1977, pp. 105—115.

Barro, Robert N. and Mark Rush, "Unanticipated Money and Economic Activity,
in S. Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and Economic Policy, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1980.

Bluestone, Barry, Bennett Harrison and Lucy Gorham, "Storm Clouds on the

Horizon: Labor Market Crisis and Industrial Policy," mimeo, May 1984.

Grossman, Sanford J., Oliver D. Hart and Eric s. Maskin, "Unemployment with
Observable Aggregate Shocks," Journal of Political Economy, December 1983,
pp. 907—928.

Hansen, Bent, "Excess Demand, Unemployment, Vacancies and Wages," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, February 1970, pp. 1—23.

—25—

Holt, Charles C. and Martin H. David, "The Concept of Job Vacancies in a
Dynamic Theory of the Labor Market," in The Measurement and Interpretation

of Job Vacancies, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1966,
pp. 73—110.

Jackman, Richard, Richard Layard and Christopher Pissarides, "On Vacancies,"
Discussion Paper No. 165, Center for Labor Economics, London School of
Economics, August 1983.

Johnson, George E. and Richard Layard, "Long—Run Unemployment and Labor Market
Policy," mimeo, September 1983.

Katz, Lawrence F., "Mean Preserving Spreads, Supply Shocks and Uneven

Recessions: A Preliminary Analysis of Sectoral Shifts and Unemployment,"
mimeo, April 1983.

Lilien, David M., "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclical Unemployment," Journal of

- . --.
---- .r.nn
PoiiLlcai. iconomy, August
-

——
,.. /1(O'
pp.
iii—i.
j.joai\

Lilien, David M., "A Sectoral Model of the Business Cycle," NRC Working Paper
No. 8231, Department of Economics, University of Southern California,
December 1982. (l982b)

Lucas, Robert E., Jr., and Edward C. Prescott, "Equilibrium Search and
Unemployment," Journal of Economic Theory, February 1974, pp. 188—209.

—26—

Medoff, James L. and Katharine G. Abraham, "Unemployment, Unsatisfied Demand,

and Compensation Growth, 1956—1980," in Martin N. Baily, ed., Workers,

Jobs and Inflation, Washington, D.C.: Brookings, 1982.

Medoff, James L., "U.S. Labor Markets: Imbalance, Wage Growth, and
Productivity Growth in the 1970's," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1983:1, pp.

Neftci, Salih N., "Are Economic Time Series Asymmetric Over the Business

Cycle?" Journal of Political Economy, April 1984, pp. 307—328.

Preston, Noreen L., The Help Wanted Index: Technical Descriptions and
Behavioral Trends, Report No. 716, New York: The Conference Board, 1977.

Rosen, Sherwin, "Unemployment and Insurance," Working Paper No. 1095, National
Bureau of Economic Research, March 1983.

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, "Increasing Risk: 1. A
Definition," Journal of Economic Theory, 1970:2, pp. 225—243.

Tobin, James, "Stabilization Policy Ten Years After," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1980:1, pp. 19—90.

—27—

Footnotes

1. A formal, generalized notion of "variance" was introduced into the
economics literature under the name of "mean preserving spread" by

Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970). In this paper, we utilize "mean
preserving spread" more informally as defined In the text.

2. Lucas and Prescott (1974) develop a model in which labor market frictions
lead to unemployment when workers must be reallocated across sectors.
This model seems to have motivated the empirical analysis in Lilien
(1982a).

3. Figure 1 was drawn assuming that lnY —

lnY

follows a sine wave

path. It was also assumed that the time period required for lnY —

lnY*

to move through a complete cycle, the amplitude of the cycle,

and the values of I'1 '2 -y1, andy2 were such that
if1 —

This

r21

always exceeds I(yi-y2)(dlnY_ dlnYt*)l.
--

makes a a monotonicaily decreasing tunction ot dinYt —

If l(yi—y2)(d1nY — dinyt*)I

exceeded if1 —

--

1'21 at any

point during the upturn, a would decrease to zero, increase a bit, fall
back to zero, then finally increase again as the economy moved from trough

to peak. However, there would have to be larger differences between the
cyclical responsiveness of the two sectors and/or larger fluctuations of

GNP around trend over shorter time periods than seems reasonable for this

to happen. Even if this flip—flopping pattern did emerge, a and dU
would still be positively correlated.

—28—

4. We present results based on values of U with a linear trend removed
both here and elsewhere, since we are concerned with explaining short term
fluctuations in unemployment, independent of trend movements In the level

of unemployment. Using detrended data rather than non—detrended data
never has an important effect on the results.

5. This positive relationship between the level of a variable and the change
in the variable depends on the length of the time intervals between

observations. It appears to shrink in importance for finer measurement
intervals of the unemployment rate series. As noted above, the
correlation between UDTt and A UDTt is only 0.256 in quarterly data
for 1951 to 1982, as compared to 0.522 in annual data for the same time
period.

6. We began by estimating lnEjt equations for this simulation. The AR(l)
corrected lnEit equations yielded first order autoregressive parameters
quite close to 1 with some residual serial correlation remaining.

Estimating A lnEi equations thus seemed more appropriate. None of
the conclusions derivable from the simulation were affected in any

significant way by whether we worked with 1nEj or A lnEj parameter

estimates. There isa time trend in the A lnEj equations because we
had included both t and t2 in the underlying lnEjt equations.

7. For theoretical models which produce this inverse relationship between
U and Vt (commonly referred to as the Beveridge curve), see Holt and
David (1966), Hansen (1970), and Jackman, Layard and Pissarides (1983).

—29—

8. Secular increases in the U.S. unemployment rate have been linked to
outward shifts in the Beveridge curve; see, for example, Abraham (1982),

Medoff and Abraham (1982) and Medoff (1983). Katz (1983) discusses the
likely consequences of mean preserving spreads in desired employment
growth rates for movements in both unemployment rates and job vacancy
rates, with particular reference to sorting out among possible causes of
cyclical fluctuations in unemployment.

9. The increased unemployment caused by a mean preserving spread in desired

employment growth rates could generate feedbacks reducing aggrete
demand. Absent such feedbacks, a mean—preserving spread would cause
vacancies to rise one—for—one with unemployment; with feedbacks, the short
run increase in the number of vacancies might be less than the short run

Increase in unemployment. Increases In unemployment attributable to the
feedback following a mean preserving spread should not be considered
Increases in the natural rate in the sense of Lilien (l982a), since they
could be reversed by aggregate demand policy In the same way as
unemployment caused directly by a negative shock to aggregate demand.

10. Preston (1977) discusses the data and methodology used In creating the
help wanted index in considerable detail.

11. We also estimated models like those reported in Table 2 with all the
different specifications reported in Lilien (l982b); with an AR(l) error
structure rather than a lagged dependent variable; and with data for

several different time periods. Our qualitative conclusions appear to be
very robust.

—30—

12. Johnson and Layard (1983) present a similar model with a. specified as

a function of current and lagged unemployment. Using annual data for the
period 1949 to 1980, they obtain coefficients on Ut and U_1 that are

essentially equal but opposite in sign. They interpret this result as
evidence that a is related to the change in unemployment, not to
unemployment itself.

13. This basic specification, which we have arrived at using fairly ad hoc

reasoning, can be more formally justified. Lilien (1982b) derives this
structure from a model of a multisectoral labor market with limited labor
mobility across sectors and a gradual process of adjustment of

sector—specific labor forces to permanent sector—specific shocks. A major
problem with this model is that it allows no role for vacancies.

14. When we estimated our own fixed effects model using a maximum likelihood
approach, the fixed effect estimates were completely dominated by the
residuals from the mining sector equation.

15. These 29 sectors are the same sectors utilized in Table 1 except that
durable goods and nondurable goods manufacturing are broken into their 20

two—digit SIC component industries. The employment data are from the BLS
establishment payroll survey.

16. We were not able to ascertain precisely what money equation generated the

DMR series used in Lilien (1982b). Our money equation used Nl as the
dependent variable, with pre—1959 Ml data taken from Barro and Rush
(1980); and the post—1959 Ml data from the Federal Reserve Bulletin; the

—31—

equation was fit for the sample period 1948:Q4 to l982:Q4 and included
four lagged values of Ml, four lagged values of the interest rate on three
month treasury bills, and a time trend. We fit models with detreixied
values of the dependent variables because when we simply included a time
trend in the estimating equations, the coefficients it assumed seemed

unreasonably large. This specification decision had virtually no effect
on the coefficients of the sectoral shift proxies or of unanticipated
money.

17. Another way of assessing how much of the variation in UDT is accounted for
*

2

by movements in UDT would be to look at the R from a regression of
*

UDT on UDT .

However, this produces misleading results; the coefficient

*

on UDT in this model is in the present case 1.830, which means that any
*

swings in UDT are exaggerated In terms of their effect on UDT.

18. In addition to the models reported here, we also experimented with a

variety of alternative specifications. These included: creating SIGRESA
and SIGRESB variables calculated using non—normalized residuals; Including
eight lags rather than only four lags of ADHR In the employment growth
equations used to produce SIGRESA and SIGRESB (for consistency with the
Inclusion of eight lags of DMR in the unemployment and help wanted index

equations); and estimating the unemployment and help wanted index

equations for time periods Including earlier years. In most of these
alternative specifications, the conclusions concerning the effect of the

residual dispersion measures on unemployment and on the help wanted index
were even less favorable to the sectoral shift hypothesis than those
reported here.

—32—

19. If AVERES, a measure of the change in aggregate demand conditions, belcngs
in the employment growth equations used to create SIGRESB, then for
consistency some comparable level of aggregate demand conditions variable
belongs in the unemployment and help wanted index equations which include
SIGRESB.

A reasonable approach

to constructing such a variable would be

to cumulate the values of AVERESt over time; including this cumulative

AVERES

variable

in the column (3) and column (4)

models of Table 3

actually reduced the estimated effect of SIGRESB still further.

—33--

2:!

[

[

[

[

[

[

[

[

.135

(

(

(

(

(

(

.024)

.128

.038)

.049

.011)

.080

.018)

.081

(

C

C

C

.269)

—.626

.431)

—.333

.205)
.316
.121)

—.029

.205
.133)

C

.161)

.0089

.0028

.0100

.0079

.0065

.0053

(

C

C

(

(

(

.232)

.579

.062)

.364

.566
.077)
.690
.070)
.139
.061)

.980
.102)

.106)

.830

.189)

2.345

.126)

—.187

(

.0019

.514
.186)
.188

(

.247)

1.549

.415)

1.113

(

(

Sum of coefficients
on current and four
lagged values of
deviation of log
(GNP) from trend..L

(

.0009

.0030

.0042

.0015

t

Estimated
value of
d in Ejt
dt —
t =

.203)

—.078

.345)

—.247

.449)

2.344
.687)
—.220

.012)

(

(

(

(

(

(

.052

.041
.014)

( .016)

.014
.018)

.030)

— .014

(

(

(

.061)
.056
( .040)
.045

—

Constant/lO

Time
Trend!
10,000

Coefficient on:

2.068

1.938

1.931

2.097

2.029

1.967

2.031

1.849

1.953

1.983

1.995

D.W.

.0057

.0131

.0032

.0022

.0038

.0036

.0060

.0057

.0112

.0147

.0328

S.E.E.

The trend values of log (GNP) were the fitted values from a regression
including
for 1948:Q4 through 1982:Q4.

t

I

indexes the

and t2 estimated using data

The dependent variables are equal to in Ejt —
Eit..i, where E represents employment and
sectors. The underlying employment data came from the establishment payroll
survey.

in

All equations were estimated with seasonally adjusted quarterly data for the
1951:Ql through 1982:Q4.
Maximum likelihood correction was made for first order serial correlation inperiod
the error terms. Standard errors
are reported in parentheses.

State Government

Federal Government

Services

FIRE

Retail trade

Wholesale trade

[

.0015
.0209]
.0004
.0091]
.0015
.00891
.0052
.0057]
.0062
.0062]
.0080
.0036]
.0099
.0043]
.0024
.0141]
.0090
.0063]

.0189]

[

[

.0010
.0346]
.0033

VariableL

Transportation/Util.

Nondurables

Durables

Construction

Mining

Mean

[Standard
Deviation] of
Dependent

Table 1: Sectoral Change in Employment Equations Including the
Deviation of Log (GNP) From Trend as an Explanatory VariableJ

Table 2: Unemployment and Normalized Help Wan,ted Index
Equations Estimated With Annual Data!

Dependent
Variable

U(1)
Constant

at

0.157
(0.602)

—8.7
(2.0)

21.8

—2.9

—19.8

—22.9
(8.2)

DMRt....2

U-j

1.085
(0.231)

(9.2)

(8.0

DMRt_i

(2

56.0

(11.3)

DMRt

Dependent
Variable
NHWI

(2.3)

4.1
(1.7)
5.4
(1.8)

—•7

0.5

(10.3)

(2.3)

0.352
(0.144)

0.292

NHWIt_1

(0.164)

Time trend

SEE

DW

0.078
(0.018)

0.007
(0.003)

0.869
0.566
2.231

0.838
0.012
1.604

WBoth models were estimated with annual data for the sample period 1949 to
1980 using ordinary least squares. U is the civilian unemployment rate (mean
[standard deviation] 5.3 [1.41); NHWI is the Conference Board help wanted
index divided by total nonagricultural payroll employment (1.3 [0.3]); a is
the dispersion in annual employment growth rates across the eleven major
sectors listed in Table 1 (0.025 [0.013]); and DMR is the unanticipated growth
in the money supply (—0.002 [0.016]). Standard errors are reported in
parentheses. The DMR variable used in these models was supplied by David
Lilien. The time trend equals 1 in 1949, 2 in 1950, and so on.

—35—

Table 3: Quarterly Unemployment and Normalized Help Wanted Index Eguatiqns
Including a Measure of Residual Dispersion in Employment Growth Rates!'

Dependent Variable =
Detrended U
(1)

Constant

Sum of coefficients on
current and eight ),agged
values of SIGRESA.'

2.150
(1.303)

(2)

3.950
(1.497)

3.135
(1.445)

Sum of coefficients on
current and eight J,agged
values of SIGRESB'

Dependent Variable =
Detrended NHWIt
(4)

(3)

1.146
(0.245)

1.140
(0.296)

—0.061
(0.276)

1.121
(1.627)

—0.055
(0.334)

Sum of coefficients on

current and eht lagged
values of DMR—'

—157.6
(91.8)

—232.2
(101.0)

43.1
(18.4)

49.9
(18.0)

DW

1.984

1.990

1.969

2.035

SEE

0.300

0.308

0.058

0.059

a! All equations were estImated wIth seasonally adjusted quarterly data for
the 1958:Ql to 1982:Q1 sample period. Detrended Ut, the civilian
unemployment rate with a linear trend removed, has mean [standard
deviation] 4.769 [1.267]; detrended NHWIt, the normalized help wanted
Index with a linear trend removed, has mean [standard deviation] 1.075
[0.237]. All models were fit allowing for an AR(4) error structure; the
TSP LSQ procedure was used to specify the estimating equations. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses.

b/

SIGRESAt equals

(Ej/E) ire1) ,

where Eit is period t

employment is sector i; E is period t total employment, ei is the
period t innovation to the error term from an AR(l) sector i employment
growth equation estimated for the sample period 1953:Q1 to l982:Ql which
includes a constant, a time trend and the current plus four lagged values
of the change in unanticipated money as explanatory variables; and

v is the variance of the e1 's over the 1953:Q1 to 1982:Q1 period.
t
ei
—36—

SIGRESA has a mean [standard deviation] of 0.878 [0.307] over the sample
period for the models presented here.
el

SIGRESB is defined analogously to SIGRESAt, except that the
employment growth equations which yield SIGRESBt also include SRESt,
the employmented—weighted period t average of the errors from OLS
employment growth equations like the AR(l) models described in footnote
b, as an explanatory variable. SIGRESB has a mean [standard deviation]
of O.882[0.248J over the sample period for the models presented here.

d/

The pre—1959 money supply data (Ml) used to create DMR came from Barro
and Rush (1980) and the post 1959 data from the Federal Reserve
Bulletin. The money equation which generated DMR. was fit over the sample
period 1948:Q4 to 1982:Q4 and included four lagged values of Ml, four
lagged values of the inteeet rate on three month treasury bills and a
time trend. DMR has a mean [standard deviation] of 0.000 [0.0061 over
the sample period for the models presented here.

'-37.-

Figure 1: Movements of SeveralSeries Over aUypothetical
Aggregate Demand Driven Business Cycle

1nY — 1nY

0

29i

PANEL A

Peak

:
I

I

P

4—
Trough

Trough

T

P

T

Time

d mE1, d mE2
PANEL B
I

I

r1

P

T

P

T

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

P

T

P

T

—38—

Time

PANELC

Time

Figure 2: Movements Along and Shifts Qf the
Beveridge Curve

Job Vacancy
Rate

C

A

Uvi

UVO

U0

—39--

U1

Unemployment Rate

0

rn
S

C'

P

C

1

P0
P.'

1'

. .7

fl 0'
P.

.4
.1'
P.

P.S PP

vs. Sigma

1

fl fl
(7

.0 N.

(5)

.'

0

a' (75
1

.-4

.41

411

(7

-*

7

4,'

.4
40
0-

PS

.1'

'4 £41
£4 10

(7'

1' 0'

44

Ct 0 SI) N
40 40 441 411

4"

114

Ps

fl

1) (PS
sf4
(7

'7'

0

fl

(N)

(75

N. N0 17

zt7

-

CS)

—4 flJ
34 1(41
175 7'

vs. Sigma

S fl .0 7— 1) Pt- .1 .4 5.4 WI 5 41 p0 N.
'.11 .14 .17 41 45 '-I'- N- N- N— t- N—
'4 (1S(fl(T'r 0' (7
0 (7 1' fl .0 (7 I"
.11.0.14.45

p.4 ('.1 PCI

Normalized Help Wanted Index

Unemployment Rate, Normalized Help Wanted Index,
and Sigma in Annual Data

0 ,fl N.

(U)

3:

'0 0'
—. g
—. fit
S 0 ,fl
fltflIflbi4flfl,fl.flflIC4'.
- C 1 nC
C' .1.1'S' 1'

Unemployment Rate

Figure

1%

-,

.

..c

.c

—

'C

-

*

-,

CC
CC

'C

CCI

55*
CC

'C
'C

-I
——

CI
IC

-,

4a:

'C

55*

—

IC

—
CC

71

ICC ICC

ICC ICC

C...

.0 .0

P. P..
11)

5(541

SC

SI

'C

-

N.

N 0.

—i ..4

P

III

NN

CC

.-C —

*

N.

rCa

'C

N. N N.

-,

P.

ni CII CI WI

-,

'C

Detrended natural unemployment rate based on SIGRESA plotted with

U.

II .0fl Cr)
1) 01 Cl. Ill Ill 1 .3
.3,
SO .0 .0 50 N N. P

.41

N

Detrended actual unemployment rate niotted with

CIa

'C

*

,c

CI

'CC

X.

3,

CC

IC
SC
CC

CC

-,
-1

IC

IC
CC
CC

'Ca

IC

a aa- 0 In In II) .31 .0 SIC -n 71. P. P. P. 1) III .11 0 .1, 74 CI (1,
P N. C'. P.. N. N N P. N N. P N. N. N. N N N.P N N CI. N
N. N. N. P.

XX

-I 'C

Detrended Actual Unemployment Rate and Detrended Natural Unemployment
Rate Based on SIGRESA

.WIe,-,'d,n4—SI'd,)eWIC'4C)e.aWI*.-aCgy)4-..,IiC5--.C
fl It 0 tI II 01
—,
WI CI 4? * .* d•
.5 .4 ..4 — 01 CII (Ci
In IC) .11 cl 4,1 10 p.
0 IC) In
In n In n 0 .31 .0 .11 0 '0 .0 cli 10 '31 .0 14') 41 '0 .0 .11 .0 .0 '0 '0 .0 sO .31 .31 .0 .0 .0 .0 .0

,v

—

-

Figure

51

II
CC

4

,c.,C
'C -

.0

'C

01

0

ICC

.-l — .4 III
3,1 .51

—

CC

I
I
I
CCI
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

I

1,

fl tfl

'PS

PC

40

—

P-i

0' —
flfl .00 3,
tO In

'"a.,.

x

fl

P

PC

.1)

.)

-,

4€ PC

-,

.0 .0 .0

,, PS,

PC

p
'.0

.11

—

•41

fiC

r,

'0 .14 p14 '0

PC

-,

.4 .4 'U .41 41

fl

PC

.0

14

*

-,

%0

,ç

.4)

5

C'4fl.fl*aS#J,
'0 .0 .1) .0 .0
.14

pp

-P

PC

PC
PC PC PC

Pc
SC

'C

PC

—
PC 41

PC
CC

IF.

P

I'.-

-,

PP

PSI

P. P-

P.

(41

-'-p

'C

- — — .. — Cl
P.

4- P.

D

4€

4-.

epa

—
PC

PC 4€

—

PC

-I

_,
—

X.

'C

fl

p(
PC

N.

PC 4€ SC

PP P

fl pP PP ...

PC

Ct
.0 .14
F— PP PP PP PP F-.

fl

PC

Detrended Natural

'U VP VP VP a' a- a- S S 0
P.- 4- P.- P. F-. P.- PP P. P 4—

—

Detrended natural unemnloyment rate based on SICRESB plotted with

U.

P.

4

PC

Detrended Actual UnemnlymentRatea
Unemployment Rate Based on SIGRESB

in
.n a fl piP .4) '04—P—P--F.. a' in 'C tO ,fl 0. 0 'a '
.0 .0 .0 .0 .14 .0 .1) .0 .0 .0 .0 .0 tilt .15 -P .0 .45 .4) .0 P'.

4b

Detrended actual unemployment rate plotted with

.44

.

p5

PC

-P

Figure

4..

4—

PC

pp

'fl

*

PC

04
P4-s PC
PP PP PP 4-. 4... P.

41

t.
a, 0
F-.

4€

N.

444

•t(

41) 414

qa)

C 4€

.4 .4
.0
'p1 CO

PC

"a C" ..4 —4

4- 3. 'C .0)

P4 Cl

PC

I

I

U

—

V

Appendix A: Short Term Movements in Help Wanted
Advertising Versus Short Term Movements in
Job Vacancies

Some insight into how well cyclical swings in help wanted advertising
track cyclical swings in job vacancies can be obtained using job openings data

collected monthly in Minnesota from January 1972 to December 1981. Monthly
help wanted index data are available for Minneapolis/St. Paul for the same

time period. Thus, we are able to compare month to month movements in help
wanted advertising and job vacancies.i"
We estimated equations of the following form:
(A—i)

in NHWIA =

+ I311nVR + y S + 3 T + u

where NHWI represents the city help wanted index divided by metropolitan area
nonagricultural payroll employment, VR represents the metropolitan area
vacancy rate, S is a vector of eleven month dummies, T is a time trend, the

y's and 13's are coefficients to be estimated, and u is an error term. The
published help wanted index data are seasonally adjusted; the available job

vacancy data are not. Rather than seasonally adjust the job vacancy data, we
deseasonalized the help wanted index numbers. A vector of month dummies was
then included in the estimating equation to correct for possible differences

in the pattern of seasonality in the two series. Since we are interested in
how short term movements in the two series compare, not in any possible trend
divergences between the two series, we also included a time trend in the

estimating equations. The estimated coefficient on the lnVR term is equal to
0.884 with a standard error of 0.051. This coefficient estimate is
significantly less than 1.0, which suggests that help wanted advertising may

be somewhat less cyclically responsive than job vacancies. Our main concern
is how closely the two series track each other once trend and cycle have been
controlled for; the equation R2 is a respectable 0.800.

—43—

The limited pertinent, evidence we have available thus suggests that short

term movements in help wanted advertising track short term movements in job

vacancies reasonably well.1 The fact that the fluctuations in the two
series seem to have somewhat different amplitudes relative to their mean
values does not in and of itself cause any problems with using the normalized

help wanted index as a vacancy rate proxy. Given the deficiencies of the
available job vacancy data, the imperfect correlation between movements in the
two series may be as much attributable to noise in the vacancy data as to
noise in the help wanted index data.

—44—

Footnotes to Appendix A

1. See Abraham (1983) for a more detailed discussion of the Minnesota job
vacancy data. These Minnesota statistics are the only available vacancy
data which cover the entire nonagricultural economy of some geographic
region; were collected for a time period long enough for the economy to
pass through a complete business cycle; and could be matched with help
wanted index numbers based on a count of number of help wanted

advertisements. Thus, they are the only vacancy data which we could use
for the purpose at hand.

2. Abraham (in progress) considers the separate issue of whether the
normalized help wanted index and the job vacancy rate have moved together
over longer periods of time.

References to Appendix A

Abraham, Katharine C., "Structural/Frictional versus Deficient Demand

Unemployment: Some New Evidence," American Economic Review, September
1983, pp. 708—724.

Abraham, Katharine G.., "What Does the Help Wanted Index Measure?" in progress.

—45—

