                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  INTANGIBLE CAPITAL AND PRODUCTIVITY:
        AN EXPLORATION ON A PANEL OF ITALIAN MANUFACTURING FIRMS

                                        Maria Elena Bontempi
                                         Jacques Mairesse

                                         Working Paper 14108
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14108


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We are thankfull for comments to participants at the 2005 DRUID Summer Conference, the 2005
EIASM Workshop on "Visualising, Measuring, and Managing Intangibles and Intellectual Capital",
and the 2006 International Conference on Panel Data, as well as seminar participants at Carlos III
Universidad de Madrid, the Free University of Bolzano, and the Bicocca University of Milan. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Maria Elena Bontempi and Jacques Mairesse. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Intangible Capital and Productivity: An Exploration on a Panel of Italian Manufacturing Firms
Maria Elena Bontempi and Jacques Mairesse
NBER Working Paper No. 14108
June 2008
JEL No. C23,C52,D24

                                               ABSTRACT

The paper examines the size and productivity of total intangible capital relative to total tangible capital
for a large panel of Italian Manufacturing firms. In the analysis, we decompose total intangibles in
two different ways: in intangibles expensed in firms' current accounts (as usually considered in empirical
studies) versus intangible capitalized in firms' balance sheets (usually not considered); and in "intellectual
capital" (i.e. R&D expenditures, and patenting and related costs) versus "customer capital" (i.e., advertising
expenditure, and trademarks and related costs). We systematically assess the robustness of our results
by using different specifications of the production functions implying different elasticities of substitution
between tangible and intangible capital, and comparing different panel data estimates. Our results
underscore that firms' accounting information on intangible investments is genuinely informative,
showing that intangible capital and its different components are at least as productive as tangible capital.


Maria Elena Bontempi
Department of Economics, University of Ferrara
Palazzo Bevilacqua Costabili, via Voltapaletto 11
44100 Ferrara Italy
bntmln@unife.it

Jacques Mairesse
INSEE, CREST
15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
FRANCE
and NBER
mairesse@ensae.fr
1.        Introduction

          Inventing new products, improving existing products, refining the techniques used to

produce goods and services, and creating a unique public image of a product’s quality, are all

aspects of a complex process, the end results of which may be termed “intangibles”.

          Although “intangibles”, more broadly speaking, are considered of vital importance in

determining the growth of productivity, the link between “intangibles” and productivity is

poorly understood.

          The stream of new ideas in arrival is neither predictable, nor steady, nor continuous.

Studies designed to estimate the connection between spending on intangibles and productivity

growth encounter considerable problems. Which data level (line of business, firm, industry,

country) would be best used? Do we have sufficient information regarding all types of

intangible (human capital, R&D, patents, etc.)? If yes, what are the “right” methods to be

adopted when measuring output and inputs, and what is the functional link between output and

input? How can account be taken of individuals’ heterogeneity when purchasing and/or

internally generating intangibles? What is the best way of dealing with the presence of

simultaneity (individuals undertaking intangible costs are motivated by the expected profits on

such investment, and these profits, in turn, encourage further investment in intangibles)?

          Hence, empirical estimates may differ substantially, ranging from no effect on

productivity to a very sizeable effect exceeding that of all other types of investment. A survey

of empirical studies and their results is provided, for example, in Mairesse and Sassenou

(1991).

          The present paper aims to assess the productivity of total intangibles and their

components, both in relation to that of tangible capital, and in absolute terms. We have

attempted to provide answers to some previous questions, as well as furnishing certain

innovative information regarding this issue. The sample is a large unbalanced panel of Italian

manufacturing companies; data are provided at company level, as is often the case in



                                                2
productivity studies, whereas the country in question, Italy, is a relatively unusual choice for

empirical studies in this field. In particular, the definition we provide of intangibles is a new

one, compared to the definition usually adopted by both English-language and European

studies. This new definition extends our understanding of the most appropriate measure of

intangibles, and offers us the chance to join the debate on the expensing and capitalising

methods of measuring intangible costs, which is currently of interest from the point of view of

the new System of National Accounts (SNA), as well as for the definition of International

Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). We have taken advantage of detailed (and rarely

available) accounting information on balance sheets, current accounts and investment flows for

the various different components of intangible capital. In fact, we can compare: (a) total

intangibles; (b) what we term “intangibles capitalised by us”, i.e. intangible stock computed by

capitalising the costs recorded in a firm’s current accounts (this is the definition usually

employed by empirical studies of this issue); (c) intangible capital as recorded in a firm’s

detailed balance sheets (a new definition of intangibles, in line with Italy’s Generally Accepted

Accounting Principles, GAAP); (d) what we term “intellectual capital” (i.e. R&D costs;

patenting and related costs); (e) what we term “customer capital” (i.e., advertising costs;

trademarks and related costs).

       As far as the functional link between output and input is concerned, we estimate three

different specifications of the production function. The first, which is the accepted standard in

the literature on this issue, is an extended Cobb-Douglas function into which intangible and

tangible assets enter multiplicatively. It implies that the output elasticities of intangibles and

tangibles are constant, while their elasticity of substitution is one. The technical rate of

substitution - i.e. the marginal productivity of intangibles compared to that of tangibles –

changes according to the tangibles/intangibles ratio. The second Cobb-Douglas has an additive

form of total capital, expressed as a weighted sum of its intangible and tangible components. It

implies a constant technical rate of substitution, but varying output elasticities and an infinite



                                                3
elasticity of substitution. This formulation leads to estimates that can be difficult to reconcile

with the estimates obtained using the more characteristic fully multiplicative Cobb-Douglas

formulation (partly because they are usually less robust, depending more importantly on the

measurement of intangible and tangible assets,– see, for example, Mairesse and Sassenou,

1991 ). We therefore experimented with the third encompassing formulation, in which total

capital is expressed as a CES function of its tangible and intangible components; this implies

constant elasticity of substitution, but possibly different from one or infinite of the particular

nested cases (multiplicative and additive).

       Besides comparing different functional forms, we also systematically analyse a variety

of specifications of the production functions, from the least constrained one – i.e. non-constant

returns to scale - to the most constrained one – i.e. total factor productivity. Moreover, we

check the robustness of our results to different measures of intangibles and tangibles (for

example, at book value or at replacement value) as well as to different samples (for example,

unbalanced and balanced panels, the presence or otherwise of null values for intangibles).

       Finally, we devote particular attention to the application of panel data estimation

techniques to various different specifications. We systematically investigate the empirical

evidence regarding the cross-sectional and time-series dimensions of our data (in this latter

case the estimates are usually much more fragile). We do so mainly by considering the

traditional standard pooled total, within-firm, and one-year and five-year difference estimates;

however we also consider various GMM estimators, in an attempt to control for heterogeneity,

potential simultaneity and errors in variables-specification bias. These estimates also assess the

robustness of our results and attempt to deal with those unsatisfactory results - such as low and

insignificant capital coefficients or unreasonably low estimates of returns to scale – which

often arise when applying panel methods to micro-data (Griliches and Mairesse, 1998).

       The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 outlines Italian reporting rules on

intangibles, and presents the accounting information available at the firm-level for both



                                                4
intangible and tangible capital stocks, together with the main figures for those variables used in

our analysis. Section 3 illustrates our framework of analysis: the Cobb-Douglas production

function with either multiplicative or additive specifications of total capital, and the

encompassing CES production function. We also adopt a variety of specifications

(conventional production function, total factor productivity production function) and a number

of estimation techniques (pooled OLS, within, first- and long-differences). In Section 4 we

explore the robustness of our results to the endogeneity issue, as well as to alternative

measurements of both intangibles and tangibles or to different samples. In Section 5 we

disentangle the contribution made to productivity by each intangible component: intangibles

capitalised by firms or by us, and intellectual and customer capital. Section 6 presents our

principal conclusions. Further details on data and on the estimating methods employed are

provided in the Appendices.



2.     The data

       Company-data are taken from the Company Accounts Data Service CADS. Centrale dei

Bilanci is a company - set up jointly by the Bank of Italy, the ABI-Italian Banking Association

and other leading Italian banks - which has been collecting CADS data since 1982. Appendix

A1 describes the variables in our analysis, as well as the cleaning rules applied to the original

CADS data-set. The final sample we selected is an unbalanced panel of 14,254 Italian

manufacturing firms with an average of 6.7 years over the 1982-1999 period (94,968

observations).



2.1.   Capitalising or expensing the different categories of intangible investments?

       The question of whether it is better to capitalise or to expense intangibles is one of the

most controversial issues to emerge recently in the literature, as is clear from the debate tackled

by the International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) when developing the



                                                5
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS, or International Accounting Standards,

IAS, until 2002) designed to be universally adopted. Other analyses of this issue are provided

by the works of Lev (see e.g. Lev, 2001). This debate is also of interest from the point of view

of the new System of National Accounts (SNA).

   In Italy at present, the reporting of intangibles is subject to a combination of national

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP, based on art. 2424 of the Italian Civil

Code, on Legislative Decree no. 127/91 1, and on principle no. 24 of the Commissione per la

Statuizione dei Principi Contabili of the Consiglio Nazionale dei Dottori Commercialisti e

Ragionieri) and IAS 38 plus IFRS 3 standards (which supersedes IAS 22). This combination

implies that, notwithstanding the fact that the criteria employed in defining intangible assets

are similar to those of the IAS/IFRS, more intangible assets than those provided for by

IAS/IFRS are allowed. In fact, Italian GAAP present a specific classification of intangible

assets; at the same time, they require that certain other specific intangibles (or those intangibles

that do not qualify for capitalisation as assets) be recognised as costs when incurred. For an

international comparison of intangibles accounting principles, see Stolowy and Jany-Cazavan

(2001); for a focus on Italy see Bontempi (2005).

   Deferred charges – such as start-up and formation costs - and applied research spending,

are just some examples of the intangibles capitalised as assets in Italy but not considered for

such treatment by the IAS/IFRS. Contrary to Italy’s GAAP, and applying the prudence

principle, the IAS/IFRS establish that such costs can only be expended. The justification is the

uncertain, discontinuous nature of such intangibles: the amount of intangibles to be capitalised

would be too subjective, thus offering managers a means by which to manipulate reported

earnings and asset values.

   It could be argued, however, that the expensing of intangibles also affords managers a

powerful manipulation tool, arguably more damaging than manipulation-via-capitalisation.

Furthermore, the level of uncertainty of specific intangibles is not notably higher than the



                                                 6
uncertainty of other corporate investments, such as stocks or bonds. Finally, several descriptive

studies report correlations between (a) current and past intangible expenditure and (b) the

future growth in sales, earnings and stock prices (Lev, 2001), expected from assets. Statistical

evidence suggests that, at least on average, the capitalised value of intangibles, such as

software development and R&D costs, provides important information to investors when they

are pricing securities (see, among others, Aboody and Lev, 1998, and Lev and Sougiannis,

1996).

         The aforementioned issues are of central importance both to the current debate on

capitalisation versus expensing of intangibles, as tackled by the IASC when defining the

IAS/IFRS, and to the discussion about the new SNA. In order to try to lighten the effect of both

capitalised and expensed intangibles on company productivity, and thus to disentangle the

informative content of this distinction as allowed by Italy’s GAAP, we propose a new

definition of intangible capital stock. This new definition shall take account not only o the

stock constructed from expensed intangibles - as is the practice in English-language studies -

but also the intangible stocks originally reported as assets in Italian companies’ balance sheets.

The exclusion of the latter, in fact, implies downwards biased estimates.



2.2.     The measurement of intangible and tangible capital: the information provided by

company accounts

   Table 1 shows how we define intangible (panel A) and tangible (panel B) stocks in

accounting terms. Bontempi (2005) illustrates the procedures we followed in order to link the

reporting rules of Italy’s GAAP with the accounting information available for our sample of

Italian companies, and the empirical variables suitable for productivity analysis. A few

important points are briefly mentioned here.



   Table 1 here



                                                7
   We define total intangible capital (K) in two different ways. The rows in Table 1, panel A,

show the two components constituting our first definition of total intangible capital, K = IKBS

+ IKCA, where: IKBS denotes intangibles capitalised as assets and reported in company

balance sheets; IKCA indicates non-capitalised intangible capital that is directly expensed by

firms in their current accounts. We estimated the stock of IKCA by capitalising direct expenses

(see Appendix A1 for details) and hereinafter we refer to such as “intangibles capitalised by

us”.

   As well as distinguishing between intangible assets and expensed intangibles, we also

disentangle the contribution made by different types of intangibles on the basis of the nature of

their productive resources. Thus, the second and third columns in Table 1, panel A, contain the

two addendum contributing towards our second definition of total intangible capital,

K=IK+CK, where IK and CK stand for “intellectual capital” (R&D and patents) and “customer

capital” (trade marks and advertising), respectively. The last column in Table 1, panel A,

shows the accounting information available for other intangible categories that we have either

excluded from our analysis, or have reallocated to those categories under investigation. 2

   Each cell of Table 1, panel A, contains details of the accounting categories of intangibles

that contribute towards the definition of intangible assets, intangible capital constructed by us,

intellectual capital, customer capital, and unconsidered or reallocated intangibles. The

categories from I1. to I7. represent those intangible assets provided for by Italy’s GAAP. We

have labelled these assets IKBSj , indicating intangible stock reported in the balance sheets at

book values and net of depreciation fund (j=start, rd, pat, mark, god, fin). The following

categories are not taken into consideration in the present analysis: formation-expansion assets

(start) and goodwill (good), given their miscellaneous or peculiar natures which require

further, specific study; deferred financial charges (fin), which have to be excluded from the

analysis of company productivity. Note that no label is reported for the I6. category of



                                                8
intangible assets: given their specific nature, we decided to reallocate them to a series of other

categories, from I1. to I5. Thus, total intangible assets, IKBS, are given by   ∑ j IKBS j , where
j=rd (applied R&D), pat (patents), and mark (marks and brands).

   For the sake of homogeneity, we decided to label the categories of intangibles that have to

be expensed from I8. to I10. The label IKCAh is used to denote intangible stock created by

capitalising the corresponding direct expenses, DEh, reported by firms in their current accounts

(details on the capitalising procedure are given in Appendix A1). Intangibles capitalised by us

are indicated by IKCA= ∑h IKCA , where basic R&D is h=rd; patents not respecting
                                       h



recognition-as-an-asset criteria are h=pat; advertising is h=adv. According to the second

method       of   disaggregating    total   intangibles,   intellectual   capital   is   given   by

IK= ∑ j IKBS j + ∑ h IKCA , where j=rd, pat and h=rd, pat; customer capital is given by
                              h




IC= ∑ j IKBS j + ∑ h IKCA , where j=mark and h=adv.
                              h



          Table 1, panel B, also illustrates our definition of tangible stock. As with intangibles,

the cells in Table 1, panel B, show the six tangible assets, from T1. to T6., enumerated by the

Italian GAAP. We label these categories TKBSc, where c=bui, pla, equ, oth, unc, lea, to

indicate tangible stock reported in the balance sheets at book values and net of depreciation.

We define the total tangible capital used as C= ∑ c TKBS c , where c=bui (buildings), pla

(plants), and equ (equipment). Hence, we exclude: leasing (c=lea) because it is basically

irrelevant; dismissed and uncompleted tangibles (c=oth, unc) because of their not-yet and/or

no-longer productive nature (for details, see Bontempi, 2005). 3



2.3.      Intangible capital components: occurrence and magnitude compared with tangible

capital

          In this section we proceed to analyse the magnitude and occurrence of intangible

capital. Each cell of Table 2 shows the mean (in the first row), the weighted average (in the

                                                  9
second row) and the median (in squared brackets, third row) of the intangibles / tangibles ratio.

Tangibles are given by the sum of buildings, plants and equipment; it should be said that we

have excluded companies with zero C, because of unreliable accounting information (see

Appendix A1). On the contrary, we allow total intangible assets to equal zero. The figures in

columns (1) refer to the book values of both intangibles capitalised by firms and tangible

assets; columns (2) indicate replacement values for intangibles capitalised by firms and the

book values of tangible assets; columns (3) indicate the replacement values of both intangibles

capitalised by firms and of tangible assets (see Appendix A1).



       Table 2 here



       Table 3 shows the percentage composition of total intangible capital; as in Table 2, each

cell reports the mean (in the first row), the weighted average (in the second row) and the

median (in squared brackets, third row). Given robustness to the use of different measures

(book or replacement values), both intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) and tangibles (C)

are at book values, as was the case in columns (1) of Table 2.



       Table 3 here



       Sorting out the different forms of intangibles, customer capital (capitalised by us from

current expenses) and intellectual capital (capitalised by the firms) are the first and second

most important components of intangibles, regardless of the scale afforded to the phenomenon

(total tangibles or total intangibles). Customer capital capitalised by firms, and intellectual

capital capitalised by us, follow in third and fourth positions respectively. It should also be

pointed out that customer capital mainly consists of the stock we estimated by capitalising

current expenses. Intellectual capital, on the other hand, is mostly capitalised by firms.



                                                10
   As we have already mentioned, in previous tables total intangible capital has been allowed

to equal zero, while tangible capital had to be other than zero. Hence, the rows in Table 4

reveal how the average intangibles-to-tangibles ratio changes in the sub-samples in which total

intangible capital and various combinations of its components are never equal to zero. To make

comparison easier, the first row, labelled "Full sample", shows the same results as those given

in Table 2, columns (1).



       Table 4 here



       The percentage of observations featuring zero intangibles is not relevant (about 17%),

as is clear if we compare the numbers of observations in the “Full sample” and the “K never

zero” rows of Table 4. At the parameter estimation stage, we have chosen to focus on the “K

never zero” sample. 4

   The “Both IK and CK never zero” and “Both IKBS and IKCA never zero” observations

represent 64% and 35%, respectively, of the “K never zero” sample. Advertising expenses are

rarely characterised by continuous initial zeros; hence, the stock originated through the

permanent inventory formula, which is the main component of CK, is almost not affected by

zeros. On the contrary, the rare presence of initial non-zero observations in R&D and patent

expenses affects the corresponding constructed stocks, included in IKCA. The two samples “IK

and CK both never zero” and “IKBS and IKCA both never zero” will be used for estimates of

the contribution of specific categories of intangibles, in Section 5. 5

       Given the definition of intangible capital presented in Table 1, the comparison of the

percentages reported in the "IK never zero (and CK zero)" row shows that intellectual capital is

mainly composed by applied R&D and patents (77%), which are recognised as an asset and

thus included in IKBS. Basic research and patent royalties (mostly expensed out and included

in the IKCA component) represent the 23% only of IK. Hence, if, ignoring the informative



                                                 11
content of the Italian GAAP, we had merely measured intellectual capital with current

expenses capitalised by us (as the Anglo-Saxon literature does), we would have obtained

downwards biased total intangibles. On the contrary, advertising is the main component of CK

(88%) and it is principally operative and recurrent, and thus expensed and reported in the IKCA

column; this is shown by the "CK never zero (and IK zero)" row of Table 4. Marks account for

just the 12% of customer capital, see the combination of "CK never zero (and IK zero)" row

with the IKBS column.

       The "IKBS never zero (and IKCA zero)" row shows that intangibles capitalised by firms

are composed by applied R&D and patents (two-thirds) and marks (one-third). Conversely,

basic R&D and patents-royalties components of IKCA are almost irrelevant, if compared to the

advertising item (see the "IKCA never zero (and IKBS zero)" row).



2.4.   Basic descriptive statistics

   The main statistics of the variables of interest are reported along the columns of Table 5.



Table 5 here



       Per-employee level statistics, measured in million of Italian Lira at 1995 prices (in the

upper part of Table 5), suggest considerable departures from normality: means are always

bigger than the corresponding medians; the effect of outliers in causing departures between

parametric and non-parametric measures of spread (standard deviation, SD, and inter-quartile

range, IQR) is evident; these results particularly characterise the number of employees and

intangibles. Among the variables, intangibles represent the most extreme cases: for example,

the parametric measures of centre and spread of the total intangible stock per-employee are

about five times bigger than the corresponding non-parametric measures (in particular, the

mean is well over the 3rd quartile). The same features are largely reproduced by the intangible



                                              12
over tangible ratio because of intangibles at numerator. These facts suggest that large

intangible stocks are concentrated in relatively few companies, and that zeros are more

prevailing here than for the other variables. 6

       The distribution of labour costs seems almost normal, with variability that is less than

one-third of the average. In other terms, the share is quite well summarised by the measures of

centre of the distribution; labour share on value added averages at about 65% of production7.

       As far as growth rates are concerned (in the lower part of Table 5), per capita figures of

production, value added, intermediate inputs, and, to a lesser extent, tangible stock statistics are

similar each other over the sample period. The employment growth is slightly more stable than

previous productivity measures, while statistics for total intangibles suggest a 30-50% higher

variability than previous variables. Variability of intangibles is emphasised when disaggregated

components are considered, mainly due to the larger presence of zeros, as shown by the

reduced number of observations and companies involved in the computations of growth rates

(the numbers for NT and N, respectively, reported in the notes to Table 5). The variability is

reduced when measured by robust statistics.

       Table 5 also present the total variability decomposition in between (i.e. across firms)

and within (i.e. due to time). Variables measured in levels have a between-firm variability that

is always bigger than 70-80% of the total variability, with the only exception of the labour cost

share. Between variability greatly loses its relevance when growth rates are considered and

level information is lost: sample variability due to individual effects drops to about 15-20%.

The higher between-variability for the intangible stock growth rate confirms the relevance of

few individual companies, as outlined above. In general, time never shows significant role in

explaining variability; this result, in line with the findings of other studies (see, among the

others, Griliches and Mairesse, 1984), must be taken into consideration in interpreting

estimation results.




                                                  13
         The main features illustrated in Table 5 for the whole sample are qualitatively the same

if we split the sample in the three sub-samples corresponding to the high-, medium- and low-

technology sectors.



3.       Assessing the overall productivity of intangible capital

3.1.     Models specification and estimation.

      We will compare the results from three specifications of the production function: a Cobb-

Douglas with multiplicative total capital, TCmit=(Cαit Kitγ)1/(α+γ); a Cobb-Douglas with additive

total capital, TCait=(Cit+ζKit); and the CES in capital inputs production function, in which the

total capital is TCcit=(C-ρit+ ξK-ρit)-1/ρ. The corresponding equations are:

(1)      Qit=Ai Bt Lβit Cαit Kγit eεmit ,

(2)      Qit=Ai Bt Lβit (Cit+ ζKit)λ eεait ,

(3)      Qit=Ai Bt Lβit (C-ρit + ξ K-ρit)-λ / ρ eεcit .

Label Q indicates the value added. The terms Ai and Bt are efficiency parameters or indicators

of the state of technology: Ai expresses non-measurable firm-specific characteristics; Bt

expresses the macroeconomic events that affect all companies to the same degree. Labels C

and K are tangible and intangible stocks, respectively; the related parameters α and γ are the

elasticities of output with respect to each stock; hence, λ=α +γ measures the returns to scale to

capital inputs. L is the labour input, and the associated parameter, β, is the elasticity of output

with respect to L. The disturbance terms εm, εa, and εc are the usual idiosyncratic shocks. Note

that in all the above cases, we assume a one-period gestation lag before intangible and tangible

stocks (K and C) become fully productive. Beginning-of-period capital measures avoid the

correlation between capital inputs and the disturbance terms. 8

         Equations (1) and (2) can be viewed as particular cases of the CES specification in (3)

where: ξ is the distribution parameter for capital inputs (or input intensity parameter)



                                                          14
associated with the relative factor shares in the product; -1 ≤ ρ ≤ ∞ is the substitution parameter

that determines the value of elasticity of substitution, in other words, the extent of capital-input

substitution. The technical rate of substitution (TRS), i.e. the marginal productivity of

intangible         capital       over              the        marginal     productivity   of   tangible    capital,   is

                                                  ρ +1
          ∂Q / ∂K    ⎛C⎞                                                                           d log(C / K )   1
TRS = ζ =         = ξ⎜ ⎟                                 ; the elasticity of substitution is σ =                 =    .
          ∂Q / ∂C    ⎝K⎠                                                                           d log( TRS ) 1 + ρ

Finally, the elasticities of output with respect to capital inputs change according to each capital

input/total capital ratio, and to the values of the parameters λ, ξ and ρ; for example, in the case

                                                  ∂Q / ∂K      Q           −ρ K      K −ρ
of intangible capital, we have                            = −ρ        λξ K      = λξ      .
                                                   Q/K     C + ξK − ρ         Q      TC c

 The following can be shown:

¾ For ρ → 0, σ → 1 which is the elasticity of substitution in the Cobb-Douglas production

 function with multiplicative specification of the total capital, TCm, reported in equation (1). In

               [
 fact, lim C − ρ + ξK − ρ
        ρ →0
                                ]   −1 / ρ
                                              = (Cit K it ξ )1 /1+ξ and, hence:


                    (           )
                                          λ
                              ξ 1 / 1+ξ ⎤
Qit = Ai Bt Lβit ⎡ Cit K it                 eεmit
                 ⎢⎣                          ⎥⎦           ,


                                                                         ⎛C ⎞ γ ⎛C ⎞.
where α = λ/(1+ξ), γ = λξ/(1+ξ), and TRS = ξ ⎜                              ⎟= ⎜ ⎟
                                                                         ⎝K⎠ α ⎝K⎠

 The Cobb-Douglas production function with multiplicative specification of total capital

assumes that output elasticities with respect to tangibles or intangibles are constant (equal to α

and γ, respectively), while the technical rate of substitution (TRS) changes in accordance with

the ratio C/K; the hypothesis whereby different types of capital are not fully substitutable could

be unlikely and not supported by the data.

¾ For ρ → -1, σ → ∞ i.e. the capital inputs are perfect substitutes for each other, TCc ≡ TCa,

                               ∂Q / ∂K
 and ξ ≡ ζ = TRS =                     . In other words, we have the additive production function of
                               ∂Q / ∂C


                                                                     15
 equation (2), in which the assumption of the unitary elasticity of substitution, as in equation

 (1), is relaxed in favour of fixed factor proportions (elasticity of substitution equal to infinity),

 which is met in the short run as a result of the indivisibility of tangibles, and the

 complementary nature of intangible and tangible capital. In equation (2), as in the CES

 production function, the elasticities of output with respect to capital inputs change according

 to each capital input/total capital ratio. For example, in the case of intangible capital, we get:

  ∂Q / ∂K     λQ    K       K
          =       ζ   = λζ      .
   Q/K      C + ζK Q       TC a

The relationships between the parameters of the three production function specifications are

summarised in Table 6.



Table 6 here



        By taking the logarithms of the previous expressions (1)-(3), and defining all the

variables per employee, the multiplicative, additive and CES production function specifications

become, respectively:

(1')    (q-l)it = ai + bt + (μ -1)lit + α(cit -lit) + γ(kit -lit) + εmit ,

(2')    (q-l)it = ai + bt + (μ -1)lit + λ(tcait-lit) + εait ,

(3')    (q-l)it = ai + bt + (μ -1)lit + (λ / -ρ) (tccit-lit) + εcit ,

where lower-case letters denote logarithms; μ           =   (λ+β); in (2') tcait-lit = log[(Cit+ζKit)/Lit]; and

in (3') tccit-lit = log[(Cit/Lit)-ρ+ξ(Kit/Lit)-ρ)].

        In estimating the parameters of (1'), (2') and (3'), we carry out a number of alternative

options regarding: (a) specification of the individual and temporal heterogeneity (ai and bt), and

of the error terms (εmit, εait, εcit); (b) the non-linearity of (2') and (3') in the ζ, ρ and ξ unknown

parameters; (c) the endogeneity issue; (d) estimation of the TRS in equation (1'), of the




                                                       16
elasticity of output with respect to intangibles (and tangibles) in equation (2'), and of the TRS

and the elasticities in equation (3').

        Point (a) concerns: non-measurable firm-specific advantages (like management ability);

macro influences (like business cycle, “disembodied technical changes ” i.e. changes over time

in the rates of productivity growth, and the use of common price deflators across firms); the

assumption of parameter homogeneity (whereas companies may have different production

functions and diverse rates of utilisation of the various categories of input). We assume the

following four alternative specifications for the ai and bt terms.

¾ The absence of individual effects (pooled OLS estimation), but the presence of per-industry

    and temporal heterogeneity, which exploratory data analysis and accounting standards

    changes indicate as being important. This has been tackled by adding industry and temporal

    dummies to the model.

¾ Two-way fixed effects, both individual and temporal (within estimation).

¾ Estimates of growth rates (first-differences OLS).

¾ Estimates of rates of growth over 5 years (non-overlapping long-differences or five-year

    differences).

Furthermore, we also assume that the error terms, εmit, εait, and εcit, have zero-means and

variances which vary by firm i and time t; we therefore estimated all models with the Eicker-

Huber-White estimator, robust to the presence of general heteroschedasticity. 9

        In order to deal with point (b), we firstly performed grid-searches on the ζ, ρ and ξ

unknown parameters of the additive and CES specifications, in order to obtain values

minimising the residual sum of squares. Secondly, we used iterative procedures on first-order

Taylor-series approximations of equations (2') and (3') around initial values of ζ, ρ and ξ

parameters set to the values obtained by means of the aforesaid grid-searches. Details of the

grid-searches and iterative procedures are given in Appendix A2.




                                                17
        The endogeneity issue (c) derives from: the simultaneous choice of inputs and output;

the efficiency levels - known to companies but not to the researcher - which could lead to

correlation between firm-effects and explanatory variables; the omission of labour and capital

intensity-of-utilisation variables (such as hours of work per employee and hours of operation

per machine); other measurement errors deriving from changes to accounting standards and

requirements , lack of information on economic depreciation rates and prices at the firm-level.

The endogeneity issue may be tackled using GMM estimation methods, which we shall in fact

be employing in Section 4. The imposition of theoretical restrictions on parameters in

equations (1')-(3') to specific values represents another way of tackling the endogeneity issue.

In particular, the constant returns to scale hypothesis implies that μ =1 in equations (1'), (2')

and (3') above; hence, the corresponding restricted models are obtained by dropping the l

regressor, which is probably the one most significantly affected by measurement errors. A few

additional assumptions enable us to move certain inputs to the left-hand side. In particular,

under the assumption of perfect competition (price-taking firms in both the labour and output

markets), the β parameter is not estimated but set at some reasonable value. In this case, still

assuming constant returns to scale, we can obtain measures of total factor productivity (tfpc),

and then use them to estimate the intangible parameters in the following equations:

(1'')   tfpcmit = ai + bt + γ(k-c)it + εmit ,

(2'')   tfpcait = ai + bt + (1-β0)(ζ-ζ(0))pKa(0)it + εait ,

(3'')   tfpccit = ai + bt + [(1 β0)/-ρ](ξ-ξ (0))pKc(0)it + εcit ,

where tfpcmit = qit –β0 lit -(1-β0)cit; tfpcait = qit – β0lit -(1-β0)tca(0)it and tca(0)it = log(Cit+ζ(0)Kit);

tfpccit = qit – β0lit –[(1-β0)/-ρ]tcc(0)it and tcc(0)it = log(C-ρit + ξ(0)K-ρit); β0 is set equal to slmed, the

sample median of the share of labour cost in value added (sl) 10. To facilitate presentation, in

equations (2'') and (3'') we have employed the first-order Taylor-series approximations around

certain initial values ζ(0) and ξ(0) (see Appendix A2 for details).




                                                      18
         Finally, point (d) above has to do with summarising measures which depend on the

level of certain variables. The TRS in equation (1') may be estimated as:

     γˆ ⎛ C ⎞
ζˆq = ⎜ ⎟ ,
     αˆ ⎝ K ⎠ q

where sub-index q indicates that we adopt three measures of the tangibles to intangibles ratio,

namely the 1st, 2nd and 3rd quartiles of the C/K ratio distribution. The elasticity of output with

respect to intangible capital (and similarly to tangible capital) in equation (2') may be estimated

by:

          λˆQ          ⎛K⎞         ⎛ K ⎞
γˆq =              ζˆ ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟ = λˆζˆ ⎜ a ⎟ ,
        C + ζˆK        ⎝ Q ⎠q      ⎝ TCˆ ⎠ q

where, once again, the sub-index q shows that we estimate three γˆ , corresponding to the 1st,

2nd and 3rd quartiles of distribution of the ratio of intangibles to estimated total capital. Finally,

the same procedure is followed in the case of equation (3'), in order to compute the elasticities

of output with respect to capital inputs, and the marginal productivity of intangibles over that

of tangibles:

                                         ⎛ K − ρˆ   ⎞             ⎡       ρˆ +1 ⎤
            ⎛      K − ρˆ        ⎞                  ⎟ and ζˆ = ξˆ ⎢⎛⎜ C ⎞⎟ ⎥ .
γˆ q = λˆξˆ⎜⎜ − ρˆ               ⎟ = λξ ⎜
                                     ˆ ˆ
                          − ρˆ   ⎟       ⎜ TCˆ c    ⎟       q
            ⎝ C + ξˆK            ⎠q      ⎝          ⎠q            ⎢⎣⎝ K ⎠ ⎥⎦ q



3.2.     Main results

         Tables 7a-c report the results of estimations for the multiplicative, additive and CES

specifications of total capital (equations (1'), (2') and (3') and their restricted versions,

respectively).



Tables 7a-7c here




                                                             19
       Tables 7a-c share the same structure: moving along the columns in a rightward

direction, we have set a growing number of restrictions on the model parameters. The

estimation of equations (1')-(3') requires predetermined inputs compared to output. By using

beginning-of-period measures of capital, we minimise the effects of simultaneity between

capital inputs and output. The simultaneity issue should be of less importance in the case of

labour, which was measured for half of observations by the average number of employees;

however, changes in accounting legislation together with a lack of information about the

different categories of workers, may lead to measurement errors. One way of dealing with this

issue, which may affect the model, involves using total factor productivity, as shown in the

final three columns of Tables 7a-c.In order to do so, three steps must be taken. Firstly, we need

to assume a situation of perfect competition (price taking in both labour and output markets),

which implies that labour elasticity can be estimated by the share of value added accounted for

by labour costs. Secondly, we have to calculate total factor productivity, by implicitly

imposing constant returns to scale on the traditional factors (labour and tangible capital).

Finally, we must regress total factor productivity against intangible capital. Note that this way

of avoiding simultaneity is easy to implement and interpret.

       Less restrictive hypotheses regarding the error term are assumed as we move along the

rows in Tables 7a-c. "OLS" uses the OLS estimator (no individual effects are allowed, but

industry and time dummies are added to the model specification). The disturbance terms in

equations (1')-(3') include specification errors arising as a result of companies’ different

production functions, different rates of utilisation of the various inputs, and different firm-

specific advantages. These individual effects, which may be correlated with the regressors, are

not taken into account by the pooled estimates: if the heterogeneity of companies in terms of

their technologies, efficiency levels and utilisation of inputs, is not taken into account, then the

OLS estimates will be affected by an omitted-variable bias. The "Within" and "First-

difference" estimates, on the other hand, allow for additive firm-effects in two different ways:



                                                20
the first uses demeaned data (by firm), while the second estimates growth rates. Apart from

simultaneity and measurement-error biases in the parameter estimates (see Section 4), within

and first-differences estimation methods should give fairly similar results. This is generally

true, except in the labour coefficient case. The labour coefficient …] is lower in the growth rate

estimates, suggesting the presence of simultaneity and/or measurement errors. Finally, the

"five-year-differences" estimation method represents another way of estimating equations with

individual effects. The advantage of long-differences over within and first-difference

transformations is that the former preserves the cross-sectional dimension of variability. In

panel data with a large N compared to T, this implies that greater variance between companies

is used to identify the relevant coefficients, thus preventing other misspecifications from

overwhelming the remaining signal in the data (Griliches and Mairesse, 1998).

       In the multiplicative specification, intangible capital is more closely correlated to

overall firm-effects than tangible capital is. This is shown by the decrease in the former’s

coefficient, which is more evident compared to that of the latter, when moving from OLS to

within and first-differences estimates in the specification with no constant returns to scale

imposed. The hypothesis of constant returns to scale, when imposed, does not significantly

increase the standard error of the estimates. The most important finding here is that intangible

capital coefficients remain significant even when we take account of firm-effects, and are

particularly high in the total factor productivity specification (the median value of intangibles’

share of value added is 2.4%). Long-differences estimates of equation (1'') give reliable results.

       In general, the magnitude of our capital estimates is comparable with that of Hall and

Mairesse (1996) for the USA (6,521 observations for the 1981-1989 period) 11, and of Hall and

Mairesse (1995) for France (2,670 observations for the 1980-1987 period) 12.

       Tables 8a-d and Figures 1-2 enable direct comparisons to be made between

multiplicative, additive and CES specifications for the least constrained (no constant returns to

scale) and for the most constrained (total factor productivity) models.



                                               21
       The first three columns in Tables 8a-d show the elasticity of output with respect to

intangible capital: it is constant and directly estimated in the multiplicative specification; it is

computed from estimated coefficients and quartiles of data sample distribution in the additive

and CES specifications. The last three columns of Tables 8a-d show the marginal productivity

of intangibles over that of tangibles: it is constant and directly estimated in the additive

specification case, while it is computed from the estimates and the sample quartiles of the data

in the multiplicative and CES specifications. Elasticity, as directly estimated by the

multiplicative specification, is similar to elasticity as computed from the additive (CES)

specification in correspondence to the third (second) quartile of the distribution of intangible

capital/estimated total capital ratio. Symmetrically, the TRS directly estimated by the additive

specification resembles the ones obtained by the estimates of the multiplicative and CES

specification in correspondence to the first quartile of the distribution of the

tangibles/intangibles ratio. These facts may reflect the patterns evidenced in Table 5: the

distribution of intangibles over tangibles is positively skewed; intangibles seem to be

concentrated within a limited number of companies.



Tables 8a-d here



       Figures 1 and 2 display the results obtained by different estimation methods and

production functions. If we focus on the results computed at the sample medians, the within

and five year-difference estimates appear somewhat similar. This result confirms the relevance

of heterogeneity. As far as the specifications are concerned, the CES capital is a reasonable

compromise between a point estimate (additive capital) and a range of values (multiplicative

capital). Finally, a comparison of Figures 1 and 2 reveals that the total factor productivity

specification (3'') produces higher estimates than those produced by the non constant returns–




                                                22
to-scale specification (3). This result confirms what was previously shown, i.e. that the

restricted model is better suited to dealing with endogeneity.



Figures 1 and 2 here



4.      Confirmation of the robustness of results

4.1.    GMM estimates

     This section focuses more closely on the simultaneity issue and on the measurement-bias

problems affecting the estimates of equations (1')-(3'). For example, our available labour input

measure does not distinguish between blue- and white-collar workers. As far as our capital

measure is concerned, it is worth remembering that both intangibles and tangibles required

data-intensive construction procedures; 13 moreover, balance-sheet data may not represent the

capital actually employed by companies. Changes in the parameter estimates when first

differences are used - the method most affected by random and short-term measurement errors

and by simultaneity problems - mean that an instrumental variables approach would be

preferable.

        Table 9 shows GMM estimates of first-differences and of levels and system equations

(Blundell and Bond, 1998). In order to keep the presentation as simple as possible, we have

focused on the multiplicative production function and on the two extreme specifications,

namely non constant returns to scale (the least constrained), and total factor productivity (the

most constrained).



Table 9 here



        The GMM levels use moment conditions which are appropriate if the individual effects

are not correlated with the explanatory variables. GMM first-differences and the GMM system,



                                               23
on the contrary, allow for individual effects to be potentially correlated to the explanatory

variables. GMM estimates set all available moment conditions for each year of data separately.

Thus the GMM approach should be more efficient than the IV approach, unless the excess of

over-identifying restrictions emphasises the problem of weak instruments (Ziliak, 1997). The

advantage of GMM-lev and GMM-sys over GMM-dif approaches, is that the former avoid the

poor performance of first-difference transformations characterised by the predominance of

measurement and timing errors (Griliches and Mairesse, 1998). Another cause of invalid

instruments in levels for first-differenced equations is the almost random walk statistical

behaviour of the variables (on this particular topic, see e.g. Bond, 2002).

       In order to tackle both simultaneity and potential measurement problems, we

instrumented all the inputs, checking for alternative instrument sets. 14 The choice of relevant

(i.e. correlated with endogenous explanatory variables) instruments is a difficult one, as it

implies both the bias of parameter estimates and the distribution to depart from asymptotic

normal in finite-sample. Further, the “weak instruments” problem arises even in large-sized

samples (see Bound, Jaeger and Baker, 1995). Due to the large number of observations in our

data-set, we only use the lags from 2 to 3 of the variables as our instruments. 15 We use the

“standard” GMM instrumenting technique, i.e. lags of the r.h.s. variables., as well as “external

instruments”, i.e. variables that do not belong to the explanatory variables in each equation. We

prefer the external instrument approach, since lags of the explanatory variables may be affected

by the same measurement error (possibly correlated over time) that we are trying to tackle. Our

chosen external instruments are gross investments. First-differences of net capital stock would

be a good alternative, as they take disinvestment into account as well. However, they may be

more markedly affected by measurement errors than the levels, and in particular by the

occasional de- and re-valuation. Moreover, they imply a larger loss of observations.




                                                24
       The GMM system results shown in Table 9 are very similar to the total factor

productivity specification estimated by long-differences (see Table 7a), thus pointing to the

simple effectiveness of this approach in tackling simultaneity problems.



4.2.   Variants on intangible capital measures

       This Section examines whether the use of replacement values for intangibles capitalised

by firms or for tangibles, significantly affects the estimation results presented in Section 3.2. It

also investigates the role played by the depreciation rate in relation to intangibles. Once again,

in order to keep the presentation as simple as possible, we have chosen to focus on the

multiplicative production function and the total factor productivity specification (which, as

shown in Section 4.1, is the one least affected by the endogeneity issue). Our results are

presented in Table 10.



Table 10 here



       We present:

¾ the same estimates as those in Tables 8a-d (in the first row of each estimation method),

   obtained using intangibles capitalised by firms and tangibles at book values;

¾ the estimates from all intangibles (both those capitalised by firms and those capitalised by

   us), measured at replacement values subject to a depreciation rate of 30%, or alternatively

   of 20%, and from tangibles at book value (shown in the second and third rows);

¾ the estimates obtained by computing all intangibles (those capitalised by firms and those

   capitalised by us) at replacement value, subject to a depreciation rate of 30%, and tangibles,

   once again at replacement value, subject to depreciation rates of 5% for buildings and of

   11% for machinery-equipment (in the fourth row).




                                                25
     The sample is the same as that featured in Tables 8a-d. We checked (results not reported)

for the effect of using a greater number of observations (for example, 71,761 against 66,953 in

the OLS and within cases) available when capital stock at replacement value is employed (we

should not forget that the permanent inventory method fills more zero-cases). Moreover, we

tested results in a sample cleaned on the basis of capital stocks at replacement values rather

than book values (105,998 observations are available for the OLS and within estimates cases).

Results are qualitatively the same; of course, in the latter case, the larger sample size leads to

more efficient estimates.



5.        An examination of the relative productivity of the major components of intangible

capital

          By using the same theoretical framework illustrated in Section 3.1 for the CES

production function, we disentangled the contribution made to productivity by the different

types of intangible shown in Table 1 (firstly down the columns, and secondly along the rows).

We focused on CES capital because results in Section 3.2. suggest that this specification is a

reasonable compromise between the multiplicative and the additive production functions. 16 In

order to deal with the endogeneity issue in a simple manner, we limited our analysis to the total

factor productivity model. Hence, the new definition of the total factor productivity is tfpcdit =

qit – β0lit –[(1-β0)/-ρ]tcdit, where: the up-index "d" stands for disaggregated intangibles; tcdit =

log(TCdit) = log(C-ρit + ξ1K1-ρit + ξ2K2-ρit); sub-indexes 1 and 2 indicate the different types of

intangible; β0, as before, is set equal to slmed, the sample median of the share of labour cost in

value added (sl). See Appendix A2 for details of the estimating methodology.

          Results regarding the elasticity of output with respect to the two types of intangible, and

the marginal productivity of the two types of intangible with respect to that of tangibles, are

presented in Tables 11a-b. For example, for intangible 1:




                                                  26
                                                     ⎛ K − ρˆ   ⎞             ⎡⎛ C ⎞ ρˆ +1 ⎤
             ⎛        K1 − ρ               ⎞
                            ˆ
γˆ1q         ⎜
       = λξ1 − ρˆ
         ˆ ˆ                               ⎟ = λˆξˆ1 ⎜ 1        ⎟ and ζˆ = ξˆ ⎢⎜
                                                                             1 ⎜      ⎟ ⎥ .
             ⎜ C + ξˆ K − ρˆ + ξˆ K − ρˆ   ⎟         ⎜⎜ TCˆ d   ⎟⎟            ⎢⎣⎝ K1 ⎟⎠ ⎥⎦
                                                                        1q
             ⎝       1 1         2 2       ⎠q         ⎝          ⎠q                          q


where, as before, the sub-index q indicates the 1st, 2nd and 3rd quartiles of the data sample

distribution.



Tables 11a-b here



          The first distinction we made, shown in Table 11a, is intellectual capital, IK, versus

customer capital, CK. As has been pointed out in the literature (e. g. Hirschey, 1982 and, more

recently, Lev, 2005), continuous advertising is important if consumers are not to forget the

innovations developed by a company. Similarly, brand-names are essential for the economic

development of businesses: they allow for the identification and distinction of one product

from other products, creating a unique image of a product’s quality among the buying public.

Hence, brands and similar items represent key competitive factors which influence company

sales.

       The second distinction we make, as shown in Table 11b, is that between intangibles

capitalised by firms, IKBS, and intangibles capitalised by us, IKCA. Hence we explore the

informative content of the distinction between capitalised and expensed intangibles, established

by Italy’s GAAP. We could expect, for example, that R&D and intellectual property assets,

when compared to the corresponding costs, play a predominant role in determining

productivity levels. If this is true, the capitalisation options chosen by managers, albeit

subjective and affected by uncertainty, reveal which part of intangibles (the advanced part

rather than the basic one) drives company performance.

       Figures 3 and 4 display the results obtained by different estimation methods.



Figures 3 and 4 here


                                                       27
       The differences between the estimated marginal productivities of IK and of CK tend to

be concentrated in the third quartile, and to lose statistical significance as we move from the

OLS and first-differences estimation methods to the within and long-differences methods. On

the contrary, the differences between the estimated marginal productivities of IKBS and of

IKCA are significant regardless of the estimation method used; within and five years-

differences show smoother results than those obtained by means of OLS and first-differences

methods. The path of estimates achieved by the estimation method confirmed what had been

previously found at the aggregate level, as shown in section 3.2. If our benchmark is the

aggregated intangibles estimates obtained by long-differences applied to the total factor

productivity specification of the CES production function (the final row of Table 8d), then the

intangibles capitalised by us display a marginal productivity in line with that of total

intangibles; this marginal productivity is smaller than that of those intangibles capitalised by

firms and, in particular, than that of intellectual capital and customer capital (the highest of all).

       Moreover, the IK and IKBS estimated coefficients do not statistically differ from each

other: going back to the definitions given in Table 1, intellectual capital, in fact, consists

mainly of intangibles assets (intangibles capitalised by firms). This is no longer true if we

compare CK and IKCA components: customer capital displays higher coefficients than those

displayed by the intangibles capitalised by us. This indicates that the productivity of IKCA is

mainly driven by advertising, rather than by basic R&D and patent-royalties; 17 moreover,

marks and brand – part of CK derived from intangibles capitalised by firms, IKBS – also play

an important part in raising the productivity of intangibles over that of tangibles.



6.     Concluding remarks

       The present paper contains experimental analyses of the relationship between

productivity and intangibles in Italy. Our definition of intangibles is a broad one which,



                                                 28
according to the Italian GAAP, includes both intangible expenses (which is in line with the

empirical studies of this issue), and intangible assets as reported in company balance sheets

(and as such constitutes a new definition of the term). Furthermore, we have tried to separate

the contribution to productivity made by different categories of intangibles: not only those

intangibles capitalised by us from current expenses compared with intangibles capitalised by

firms, but also intellectual capital (mainly R&D and patents) against customer capital

(trademarks and advertising).

       We use three different production function specifications. The first is the Cobb-Douglas

production function with the multiplicative specification of total capital; it is mathematically

simple, and its parameters are easy to interpret and to estimate using regression techniques.

However, its simplicity implies that rigidity is imposed on the observed production processes.

For example, the output elasticities are assumed to be constants, varying neither with time, nor

with output levels, nor with the ratio of inputs, etc.; the elasticity of substitution is set at one,

implying a uniform flexibility of the response of the input ratio to changes in relative input

costs – while the varying economic circumstances faced by a company may lead it to change

the degree to which an input is utilised.

       As we move toward a less restrictive form, such as the Cobb-Douglas production

function with the additive specification of total capital, we can remove the assumption of

constant output elasticity in relation to intangibles. However, we assume that the elasticity of

substitution is zero, i.e. that the intangibles-tangibles ratio cannot be altered, no matter what

happens to the marginal product ratio; this fixed-factor proportions assumption is justified in

the short-run by the indivisibility of tangible capital and the complementary nature of tangibles

and intangibles. The greater flexibility of this latter production function is counterbalanced by

its more complex mathematical form and the greater difficulty encountered in applying

estimating techniques.




                                                 29
       In order to furnish more proof of the goodness of the two Cobb-Douglas production

functions’ fit-to-our-data, we also employed a third, more general (and sophisticated)

specification, i.e. the constant elasticity of substitution (CES); it nests the two previous

multiplicative and additive production functions; within this specification, the elasticity of

substitution is estimated rather than being taken as equal to 1 or 0.

       We also perform various checks on the model, involving: different specifications of the

production functions (from the least constrained ones – non-constant returns to scale – to the

most constrained ones – total factor productivity); alternative measures of both tangible and

intangible stocks (for example, excluding advertising from the intangibles definition;

replacement values instead of book values); alternative measures of the dependent variable

(sales, with materials among inputs); different samples (the balanced panel for the 1994-1999

sub-period; the sample with zeros in intangibles). All such checks confirm the robustness of

our results.

       The model specifications and estimation panel techniques employed tackle a number of

problems, such as simultaneity, measurement errors, unknown individual and temporal effects.

Measurement errors seem to affect labour input in particular; consequently, the production

function that uses total factor productivity as its dependent variable is the least biased

specification. The general predominance of between-firms variability over temporal variability,

led to a preference for estimates in long-term growth rates. In fact, we discovered that: in the

cross-sectional dimension of the data there is a not negligible relationship between firm

productivity and intangibles; in the time dimension of the data (using deviations from firm-

means or short-term growth rates as our observations), this relationship becomes weaker,

especially in the unconstrained model specifications. Overall, estimates are quite robust and

comparable with those obtained for other countries, such as the USA.

       Focusing on intangible components, the highest marginal productivity is that of

intellectual capital, customer capital and intangibles capitalised by firms. Intangibles



                                                30
constructed by capitalising direct expenditures display the lowest level of productivity; hence,

if by ignoring the informative content of the Italian GAAP, we had merely measured

intangibles with current expenses capitalised by us (as English-language studies do), we would

have obtained downwards biased results.

       Despite the fact that, as we would have expected, there are certain discrepancies

between some of our results, they nevertheless convey a rather consistent, acceptable overall

picture. In particular, the time-series type results agree with the cross-sectional results, to

provide economically and statistically significant estimates of the order of magnitude of the

elasticity of intangible capital and the range of its marginal productivity relative to tangible

capital. In spite of the substantial measuring difficulties encountered, and contrary to the

scepticism shared by many company analysts and economists, the abovementioned findings

confirm that companies’ accounting figures for intangible capital stocks are of a genuinely

informative nature. This should provide some comfort to those who advocate the development

of reporting and accounting requirements for intangibles and for their capitalisation in

company accounts (as well as in national accounts), whereby they are treated as a form of

investment (not only in theory but in practice).



                                      Appendix A1: Data

       The source of our data is the CADS (Company Accounts Data Service), a large

database with detailed accounting information from more than 50,000 Italian companies

operating in a wide range of industrial sectors, covering the 1982-1999 period. The CADS is

highly representative of the population of Italian companies, covering over 50% of the value-

added produced by those companies included in the Italian Central Statistical Office’s Census.

Further details of this data-set can be found in Bontempi (2005).




                                               31
A list of labels and the definitions of the corresponding variables

¾ k is the logarithm of total intangible stock (K), computed at the beginning of year at net

   book values. Total intangibles may be defined as K = IKBS + IKCA = IK + CK, where:

    IKBS = ∑ j IKBS j (with j=rd, pat, mark) represents intangibles capitalised by firms and

   reported in their balance sheets (rd is applied R&D; pat is patents; mark is trademarks and

   brands); IKCA = ∑h IKCA h (with h = rd, pat, adv) represents intangibles capitalised by us

   from intangible expenses reported by firms in their current accounts (rd now indicates basic

   R&D; pat is patent-royalties; adv is advertising); IK = ∑ j IKBS j + ∑h IKCA h (with j, h = rd,

   pat) represents intellectual capital; CK = ∑ j IKBS j + ∑h IKCA h (with j = mark and h = adv)

   represents customer capital. Intangibles capitalised by us are constructed according to the

   formula IKCAith = (1 − δ )IKCAith−1 + DEith−1 , where: δ is the depreciation rate, taken to be equal

                h      h
   to 30%; IKCAi0 = DEi0 /(δ + g) is the initial value of the stock; g is the pre-sample growth

   rate, taken to be equal to 3%; h indicates the category of intangible expenses. Note that the

   effect of the initial value disappears as time goes by. Estimates of intangibles capitalised by

   firms at replacement costs and at the beginning of the year (IKBSR) are obtained on the

   basis of the series of corresponding gross investments (new purchases gross of

   disinvestments), Ij, by using the formula IKBSRitj = (1 − δ ) IKBSRitj−1 + I itj−1 where: j indicates

   the intangible categories; δ is the depreciation rate for all intangibles, taken to be equal to

   30% (the same value used in the case of direct expenses capitalising) or to 20%. The assets

   at book values are used as starting values.

¾ c is the logarithm of the total tangible stock (C), computed at the beginning of the year at

   net book values. Total tangibles are defined as the sum of all buildings, plant and

   equipment, that is C =     ∑ TK c , c = bui, pla, equ. Estimates of tangibles at replacement
                               c


   cost and at the beginning of year (CR) are obtained on the basis of the series of


                                                  32
   corresponding gross investments (new purchases gross of disinvestments), Ic, by using the

   formula CRitc = (1 − δ c )CRitc −1 + I itc −1 , where: c indicates the tangible categories; δ c indicates

   the depreciation rates for tangibles, taken to be equal to 5% for buildings, and to 11% for

   plant and equipment (by-industry averages from the National Accounts of the Italian

   Statistical Office, ISTAT). The assets at book values are used as starting values.

¾ l is the logarithm of the number of employees (L). 18

¾ q is the logarithms of value added (Q) at the end of year.

¾ WL indicates labour costs (wages, social security contributions and various other

   provisions) at the end of year.

       Nominal variables were transformed into real terms. Our chosen deflators were: the

value-added deflator for Q and WL; the investment-in-buildings deflator for TKbui; the

investment-in-machinery-transport-equipment-and-other-tangibles deflator for TKpla and TKequ;

the GDP deflator for all the intangible stocks included in the definition of K 19.



Cleaning rules and sample descriptive statistics

       We selected limited liability manufacturing companies (about 35% of the total CADS

data-set) complying with basic accounting standards and possessing information about the

variables in question (206,538 observations for 22,387 companies). We then defined our

cleaned sample (94,968 observations for 14,254 firms) according to the following criteria (see

Hall and Mairesse, 1995).

a) Those observations for which value added, labour costs, production and intermediate costs

   were zero or negative were removed (1.0% of our initial sample), as they clearly create

   problems when it comes to performing logarithmic transformations. Moreover, any

   observations with tangible net stock (defined as total buildings, plants and equipment)

   equal to zero were also removed (4.7% of observations); in fact, we deemed those firms

   lacking tangible capital to be unreliable.


                                                   33
b) Researchers usually base their empirical analyses on companies with a minimum of 20, or

   even 50, employees. In Italy, small firms (with fewer than 20 workers) predominate.

   Hence, in order to preserve the representativeness of our sample while maintaining the

   meaningfulness of accounting data, we removed those firms with fewer than 5 employees

   in the first year of the sample (0.3% of all observations).

c) Observations for which value added per worker, tangible capital stock per worker, or

   intangible capital stock per worker, lay outside the range median ± three times the inter-

   quartile range, were removed (5.6% of all observations). Such outliers could have affected

   the distribution of variables, since in a Gaussian variable they should only represent

   0.0002% of all observations (see Hoaglin-Iglewicz-Tukey, 1986).

d) Observations for which the growth rate of value added lay outside the [–90%, +300%]

   range, or for which the growth rates of employees, tangible and intangible capitals lay

   outside the [–50%, +200%] range, were removed (16.5% of all observations).

e) We also removed those observations for which the mean of labour cost’s share of sales at t

   and t+1, and the mean of intermediate costs’ share of sales at t and t+1, were lower than the

   1st quartile of the corresponding per-industry Törnqvist indicator, or greater than 1 (1.5% of

   all observations).

f) Previous selection criteria created further gaps in the temporal per-firm data, in addition to

   the ones originally present in the sample (for a discussion of this point, see Bontempi,

   2005). Hence, we selected only those companies with data available for at least 4

   consecutive years, and we chose the longest or the most recent sub-period if an interruption

   in the temporal pattern was present (37.1% of all observations).

   Overall, 46% of total observations were excluded; this percentage is lower than the one

resulting from the selection rules a) to f) (66.6%), because some annual company data are

wrong according to several criteria at the same time.




                                               34
       Table A1 illustrates the composition of our cleaned sample by industry and by size.

Manufacturing industries are listed according to their global technological intensity (ISIC

Revision 2, see Hatzichronoglou, 1997), using the 4-digit industry code. Note the low size of

the HT macro-industry compared to that of the others.



Table A1 here



       Our data, which mirrored the nature of Italian industry during the 1982-1999 period,

mainly covered non-listed companies: only 0.51% of the chosen firms were listed on the stock

exchange (compared to 0.13% of Italian manufacturing companies listed on the Stock

Exchange in 1995); 22.23% of companies belonged to a business group (mainly of a pyramidal

nature).

       Table A2 clearly indicates the inclusion in our dataset of a large number of small and

medium-sized firms. Such firms tend to be predominant in Italy: in fact, the average Italian

limited liability company employs 44 workers. The average number of employees in our

sample is 132, and 47.28% of those companies in our sample have fewer than 50 employees.



Table A2 here



       Table A3 compares average intangible/tangible ratios for the total sample, and for three

manufacturing   macro-industries:    high-medium     technology   (HT+MHT);       medium-low

technology (MLT); low technology (LT). We also disaggregated the information reported in

Table 4 according to the taxonomy suggested by Hatzichronoglou (1997).



Table A3 here




                                              35
    The “Full sample” row and the “K” column of Table A3 display a high value of the ratio of

total intangible capital (K) to total tangible capital (C) in the LT industry. This result can be

explained by looking at the other columns on the right-hand side of Table A3: it is evidently

driven by the component consisting of expensed-out intangibles (IKCA) and, in particular, of

customer capital (CK). Advertising and trademarks are also important to the HT+HMT

industry; nevertheless, as we expected, applied R&D and patents (included in the IKBS

category) played an important role compared to other branches. These results are confirmed by

the “K never zero” row, and are further emphasised by the “IK never zero (and CK zero)”, “CK

never zero (and IK zero)”, “IKBS never zero (and IKCA zero)” and “IKCA never zero (and

IKBS zero)” rows.



              Appendix A2: Estimation methods for the non linear specifications

        By using a first-order Taylor-series approximation around any assumed initial value for

the unknown TRS, ζ(0), the production function with additive capital can be written as:

(A2') (q-l)it = ai + bt + (μ -1)lit + λ(tca(0)it-lit) + λ (ζ-ζ(0))pKa(0)it +εait ,

where lower-case letters denote logarithms; μ                 =   (λ+β); tca(0)it-lit = log(TCa(0)it/Lit) =

log[(Cit+ζ(0)Kit)/Lit]; and pKa(0)it = Kit/TCa(0)it = Kit/[exp(tca(0)it-lit)Lit].

        The starting value, ζ(0), is selected by a single grid-search on the ζ parameter; the grid-

search uses equation (2'), it sets ζ equal to all the values in the range 0-2 with step 0.1, and it

looks for the value of ζ that minimises the residual sum of squares (min-RSS ). Setting this

min-RSS as the initial value, ζ(0), equation (A2') is estimated by an iterative procedure on:

(A2a') (q-l)it= ai + bt + (μ-1)lit + λ (tca(n)it-lit) + λ (ζ(n+1)-ζ(n))pKa(n)it +εait ,

where the exponent (n) is for the nth iteration; ζ(n)=ζ(0) and tca(n)it = tca(0)it for the initial iteration

n=0; tc(n)it = tc(n-1)it + log[1+p(ζ(n)-ζ(n-1))pKa(n-1)it] for n>0, where p is a smoothing parameter. 20

                                                ζ ( n +1) − ζ ( n )
The iterative procedure stops when                                  <0.0001 and the estimated parameter
                                                       ζ (n)

                                                       36
associated with pKa(n)it is not significantly different from zero (because in this case ζ(n+1) is not

significantly different from ζ(n)). Of course, this method of estimating the non-linear equation

(A2') converges in one iteration if the final estimate of the ζ parameter falls within the 0-2

range. In this case, in fact, the grid-search step delivers an initial value, ζ(0), that is very close to

the final estimate of ζ, and the linear approximation is very precise, since (ζ-ζ(0))pKa(0)it ≅ 0 in

equation (A2'). 21 Similar procedures, modified in order to take constraints into account, are

used to estimate the constant-returns-to-scale version of (2'), as well as equation (2'').

              As with the additive specification, estimates of the production function with CES

capital are obtained by an iterative procedure on a first-order Taylor-series approximation

around an initial value ξ(0) and with a fixed ρ of -0.5:

(A3') (q-l)it = ai + bt + (μ -1)lit + (λ / -ρ)(tcc(0)it-lit) + (λ / -ρ)(ξ-ξ(0))pKc(0)it +εcit ,

where lower-case letters denote logarithms; μ              =   (λ+β); tcc(0)it-lit = log(TCc(0)it/L-ρit) = log[(C-
ρ
 it+ξ
        (0)
              K-ρit)/L-ρit]; pKc(0)it = K-ρit/TCc(0)it = K-ρit/[exp(tcc(0)it-lit)L-ρit]; and ξ(0) is any assumed

starting value for the distribution parameter for capital inputs. The starting value ξ(0) is selected

by a single-grid search on the ξ parameter, with ρ set at -0.5. The results obtained by following

this approach are reported in Tables 8a-8d.

              The choice of a fixed value for ρ, equal to -0.5, was made by comparing the results

given in Table 7c, and obtained by a double-grid search on the unknown ξ and ρ parameters of

the CES specification in equation (3'). Once the values of ξ(0) and ρ(0) that minimise the

residual sum of squares were attained, we used the Gauss-Newton regression to obtain the

standard errors of the ξ and ρ parameters. The Gauss-Newton regression is derived from a first-

order Taylor-series approximation around the obtained values ξ(0) and ρ(0):

(A3a') ecit = a*i + b*t + (μ* -1)lit + (λ* / -ρ*)(tcc(0)it-lit) + ξ*d_ξit + ρ*d_ρit + ucit ,




                                                         37
where ecit is the residual of (3') estimated by fixing the ξ and ρ parameters equal to the values

found by the double grid-search; d_ξit and d_ρit are the derivatives of (3') with respect to ξ and

ρ; and ucit is a zero-mean error term with variance varying by firm i and by time t. 22

       The double-grid search on the ξ1 and ξ2 parameters fixing ρ at -0.5, together with the

Gauss-Newton regression to obtain standard errors for the ξ1 and ξ2 parameters, was the same

approach adopted in order to estimate the production function, with CES capital and different

types of intangibles, presented in Section 5.



                                               References

Aboody D. and Lev B. (1998) “The value-relevance of Intangibles: the Case of Software

       Capitalisation” Journal of Accounting Research, Supplement, 161-191.

Baum C. F., Schaffer M.E. and Stillman S. (2003) “Instrumental Variables and GMM:

       Estimation and Testing”, The Stata Journal, 3, 1, 1-31.

Bond S. (2002), “Dynamic panel data models: a guide to micro data methods and practice”,

       Cemmap Working Paper, n. CWP09/02, IFS, Dept. of Economics, UCL, London.

Bound J., D. A. Jaeger and R. M. Baker (1995), “Problems with instrumental variables

       estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous

       explanatory variables is weak”, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90,

       430, 443-450.

Blundell R. and Bond S. (1998) “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in Dynamic Panel

       Data Models”, Journal of Econometrics, 89, 115-43.

Bontempi M. E. (2005) “The Measurement of Intangible and Tangible Assets in a Panel of

       Italian Manufacturing Firms: from the Reporting Rules to the Empirical Variables”,

       Department of Economics, University of Ferrara (http://www2.dse.unibo.it/bontempi/ricerca/ricerca.htm).




                                                    38
Griliches Z. and Mairesse J. (1984) “Productivity and R&D at the Firm Level”, in Z. Griliches

       (ed.) Research and Development, Patents and Productivity, The University Press of

       Chicago, 271-297. (Also NBER WP. n. 826, 1981).

Griliches Z. and Mairesse J. (1998) “Production Functions: the Search for Identification”, in S.

       Strom (ed.) Essays in Honour of Ragnar Frisch, Econometric Society Monograph

       Series, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 169-203.

Hall B. H. and Mairesse J. (1995) “Exploring the Relationship between R&D and Productivity

       in French Manufacturing Firms”, Journal of Econometrics, 65, 263-293.

Hall B. H. and Mairesse J. (1996) “Estimating the Productivity of Research and Development:

       an Exploration of GMM Methods Using Data on French and United States

       Manufacturing Firms”, in K. Wagner and Bart Van Ark (eds.) International

       Productivity Differences and Their Explanations, Elsevier Science, 1996, 285-315.

       (Also NBER WP. n. 5501, 1996).

Hatzichronoglou T. (1997) “Revision of the High-Technology Sector and Product

       Classification”, STI WP. n. 1997/2, OCDE, Paris.

Hirschey M. (1982) “Intangible Capital Aspects of Advertising and R&D Expenditures”;

       Journal of Industrial Economics, 30, 4, 375-390.

Hoaglin D.C., Iglewicz B. and Tukey J.W. (1986) “Performance of Some Resistant Rules for

       Outlier Labelling”; Journal of the American Statistical Association, 81, 396, 991-999.

Lev B. (2005) “Intangible Assets: Concepts and Measurements,” Encyclopedia of Social

       Measurement, Elsevier Inc., 2005, 2, 299-305.

Lev B. (2001) “Intangibles: Management, Measurement, and Reporting”, Washington D.C.:

       Brookings Institution Press.

Lev B. and Sougiannis T. (1996) “The Capitalisation, Amortisation, and Value-Relevance of

       R&D” Journal of Accounting and Economics, February, 107-138.




                                              39
Mairesse J. and Sassenou M. (1991) “R&D and Productivity: a Survey of Econometric Studies

       at the Firm Level” Science-Technology Industry Review, Paris, OECD, n. 8, 1991, 9-

       43. (Also NBER WP. n. 3666, 1991).

Stolowy H. and Jeny-Cazavan A. (2001), “International Accounting Disharmony: The Case of

       Intangibles”, Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal, 14, 477-497.

Ziliak J. P. (1997), “Efficient estimation with panel data when instruments are predetermined:

       an empirical comparison of moment-condition estimators”, Journal of Business and

       Economic Statistics, 15, 419-431.




                                             40
                             Table 1- Definition of intangible capital (K = IKBS+IKCA = IK+CK) and tangible capital (C) based on
                                                                        company current and capital accounts
PANEL A: Intangible assets
                                                           Intellectual capital: IK                          Customer capital: CK                                    Not considered
categories
                                                               rd                                              mark                                               start
                                                 I2. (IKBS ) Applied research and I4. (IKBS ) Trademarks and similar                                  I1. (IKBS ) Formation-expansion-start-
                                                 development costs; advertising costs rights, public concessions and licences.                        up expenses (not considered).
                                                 functional and essential to the start-up                                                             I5. (IKBSgood) Goodwill (not considered).
                                                 phase.                                                                                               I6. Being evaluated and payments on
        Intangible assets: IKBS                  I3.     (IKBSpat)     Purchased      patents,
                                                 intellectual property rights and applied                                                             account        (reallocated      to        I1.-I5.
                                                 software (included unlimited licences to                                                             categories).
                                                 use the said software). Internally developed
                                                 patents, intellectual property rights,                                                               I7. (IKBSfin) Others, largely deferred
                                                 software (protected by law).                                                                         financial charges (not considered).

                                                 I8. (IKCArd computed from DErd) I9. (IKCAadv computed from DEadv)
                                                 Basic R&D, and applied R&D not Advertising not related to I1., but operative
                                                 complying with recognition-as-an-asset and recurrent.
                                                 criteria.
 Intangible capital constructed from             I10. (IKCApat computed from DEpat)
       direct expenses: IKCA                     Patents, intellectual property rights and
                                                 software purchased subject to a limited
                                                 user’s licence obtained against payment of
                                                 regular fees, or obtained free of charge, or
                                                 not complying with recognition-as-an-asset
                                                 criteria.
PANEL B: Tangible assets
                                                                                      Tangible assets: C                                                             Not considered
categories
                                                              bui                                                                                                   oth
                                                 T1. (TKBS ) Lands and buildings.                                                         T5. (TKBS        + TKBSunc + TKBSlea)
                                                 T2. (TKBSpla) Plant and machinery.                                                       Other tangibles (mainly divested, fully
                                                 T3. and T4. (TKBSequ) Equipment, furniture and hardware.                                 depreciated or no longer utilised) plus
                                                                                                                                          incomplete tangibles (mainly under
                                                                                                                                          construction or being purchased) plus
                                                                                                                                          leased tangibles (for building societies).
Notes: K = IK+CK = IKBS+IKCA is the total intangible stock; IK= ∑ j IKBS + ∑ h IKCA , j, h=rd, pat is intellectual capital; CK= ∑ j IKBS + ∑ h IKCAh , j=mark, h=adv is customer capital;
                                                                        j          h                                                    j


IKBS= ∑ j IKBS , j=rd, pat, mark is intangible capital as capitalised by firms in their balance sheets; IKCA= ∑ h IKCA , h=rd, pat, adv is intangible capital not capitalised by firms and directly
                  j                                                                                                           h


expensed. IKCA is capitalised by the authors based on expenditures, using a constant depreciation rate of 30%. C=   ∑c TKBS c , c=bui, pla, equ is tangible capital. See Appendix for details.
                                                                                                  41
                                Table 2- Magnitude of different forms of intangible capital compared to total tangible capital:
                                                     simple and weighted averages, and median (in %)

                                                                 Intellectual capital                        Customer capital                                    Total
                                                                         IK/C                                     CK/C
                                                             (1)          (2)         (3)                (1)       (2)        (3)                   (1)            (2)           (3)

Intangible capital            Average                        5.22          6.13           4.44          2.56           2.58          1.85           7.78          8.71           6.30
capitalised by the firm       Weighted average               3.48          4.12           3.35          1.84           1.34          1.09           5.32          5.46           4.44
IKBS/C                        Median                        [0.44]        [0.69]         [0.54]        [0.06]         [0.12]        [0.10]         [0.69]        [1.04]         [0.82]



Intangible capital            Average                        5.53          5.53           3.80         19.32          19.32         14.05          24.85         24.85          17.84
capitalised by us             Weighted average               1.88          1.88           1.53          7.18           7.18          5.83           9.05          9.05           7.36
IKCA/C                        Median                        [0.00]        [0.00]         [0.00]        [0.45]         [0.45]        [0.36]         [0.72]        [0.72]         [0.58]



                              Average                       10.75         11.66           8.24         21.88          21.91         15.90          32.63         33.56          24.14
                              Weighted average               5.36          5.99           4.87          9.02           8.51          6.92
Total
                              Median                        [0.64]        [0.90]         [0.71]        [1.36]         [1.49]        [1.18]


 Notes: Total Sample: NT= 94988. K=IK+IC=IKBS+IKCA; see Table 1 for definitions of the various different forms of intangible capital and for total tangible capital.
 In columns (1) intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are at replacement values; intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) and tangibles (C) are at book values. In columns (2), both those
 intangibles capitalised by us and those capitalised by firms (IKCA and IKBS respectively) are estimated at replacement values; while tangibles (C) are at book values. In columns (3),
 both intangibles capitalised by us and by firms (IKCA and IKBS) are estimated at replacement values; and tangibles (C) are also estimated at replacement cost. All the stocks are
 measured at the beginning of the year and in millions of Italian Lire at 1995 prices. Intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are constructed from expenditure by using a constant
 depreciation rate of 30%. The estimates of intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) and of tangibles (C) at replacements costs are obtained on the basis of the series of corresponding
 gross investments; a constant depreciation rate of 30% is used for all intangibles; depreciation rates of 5% for buildings and of 11% for plant and equipment are employed. See
 Appendix A1 for details.
 Inside each cell: the estimates reported in the first and third rows are the simple averages and medians (in squared brackets) of the sample distribution of the firm’s ratios of the
 different forms of intangible capital to total tangible capital. The averages reported in the second row are weighted by tangible capital (i.e. they are computed as the ratio of the
 average values of the different forms of intangible capital to the average value of tangible capital).




                                                                                          42
                              Table 3- Magnitude of different forms of intangible capital compared to total intangible capital:
                                                    simple and weighted averages, and median (in %)

                                                                               Intellectual capital             Customer capital                      Total
                                                                                       IK/K                          CK/K

                 Intangible capital              Average                                37.01                          11.07                          48.08
                 capitalised by the firm         Weighted average                       24.20                          12.83                          37.03
                 IKBS/K                          Median                                [19.96]                         [2.47]                        [36.03]



                 Intangible capital              Average                                5.68                           46.25                          51.92
                 capitalised by us               Weighted average                      13.05                           62.97                          62.97
                 IKCA/K                          Median                                [0.00]                         [44.65]                        [63.97]



                                                 Average                                42.69                          57.31                           100
                                                 Weighted average                       37.26                          62.74                           100
                 Total
                                                 Median                                [34.48]                        [65.52]                         [100]


Notes: Total Sample: NT= 94988. K=IK+IC=IKBS+IKCA; K = total intangible stock; IK = intellectual capital; CK customer capital; IKBS = intangibles capitalised by firms; IKCA
= intangibles capitalised by us; see Table 1 for a definition of the various different forms of intangible capital. Intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are estimated at replacement
values; intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) are at book values, as in columns (1) of Table 2. All the stocks are measured at the beginning of the year and in millions of Italian Lire
at 1995 prices.
Inside each cell: the estimates reported in the first and third rows are the simple averages and medians (in squared brackets) of the sample distribution of the firm’s ratios of the
different forms of intangible capital to total tangible capital. The averages reported in the second row are weighted by tangible capital (i.e. they are computed as the ratio of the
average values of the different forms of intangible capital to the average value of tangible capital).




                                                                                           43
     Table 4- Occurrence and relative magnitude of intangible capital for different samples
                                                                 Averages of intangible over tangible (C) ratios
                                                                                  (% values)

                                      NT       N        T         K         IK           CK         IKBS       IKCA

Full sample                         94968 14254 6.66             32.63     10.75        21.88        7.78       24.85

K never zero                        78481 11528 6.81             38.92     12.73        26.19        9.11       29.81

Both IK and CK never zero           50317 7646        6.58       46.69     17.11        29.58       11.71       34.98

Both IKBS and IKCA never            27483 4028        6.82       63.87     19.4         44.47       14.15       49.72
zero



IK never zero (and CK zero)          1446     299     4.84       11.73     11.73          0          8.99       2.74

CK never zero (and IK zero)          3573     643     5.56       23.4        0           23.4        2.83       20.56

IKBS never zero (and IKCA           21656 3759        5.76       10.65     7.85          2.8        10.65         0
zero)

IKCA never zero (and IKBS            3211     564     5.69       25.44     2.87         22.57          0        25.44
zero)
Notes: NT = total number of observations; N = total number of firms; T = average number of per-firm years.
K=IK+IC=IKBS+IKCA; K = total intangible stock; IK = intellectual capital; CK customer capital; IKBS = intangibles
capitalised by firms; IKCA = intangibles capitalised by us; see Table 1 for a definition of the various different forms of
intangible capital and for total tangible capital. Intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are estimated at replacement
values. Intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) and tangibles (C) are at book values, as in columns (1) of Table 2. All
the stocks are measured at the beginning of the year and in millions of Italian Lire at 1995 prices. The "Full sample"
row shows the same results as those shown in Table 2, so as to facilitate comparison. Details of firms’ classification
according to their global technological intensity at the 4-digit level are given in Appendix A1.




                                                            44
                             Table 5- Descriptive statistics for main variables

                             1st Q    Median      3rd Q     Mean        SD       IQR           % variability
                                                                                            Between    Within
  Levels
  L [1]                      29.0       52.0     105.0      131.8     737.7      75.95       99.0%          1.0%
  Q /L [2]                   53.0       70.2      94.3       79.1      41.1      41.28       76.9%          13.1%
  C / L [2]                  22.8       42.8      76.4       62.7      72.8      53.69       88.5%          11.5%
  K / L [2]                   0.3        1.7       6.0        7.9      28.7       5.67       88.5%          11.5%
  WL / Q share [3]          51.3%      63.5%     75.0%      64.5%    26.6%      23.74%       52.4%          47.6%
  K / C ratio [2]           0.7%        3.8%     16.5%      32.6%    266.5%     15.92%       88.7%          11.3%
  IK / C ratio [2]           0.0%       0.6%      3.5%      10.8%    122.2%      3.51%       89.2%          10.8%
  CK / C ratio [2]          0.1%        1.4%      9.3%      21.9%    183.0%      9.17%       83.4%          16.6%
  IKBS / C ratio [2]        0.0%        0.7%      3.4%       7.8%    151.0%      3.37%       93.6%           6.4%
  IKCA / C ratio [2]        0.0%        0.7%      9.4%      24.9%    176.0%      9.31%       80.0%          20.0%
  Growth rates (%)
  L [1]                       -4.0      0.0        6.3       2.2       15.8      10.25       23.0%          76.5%
  Q / L [2]                   -8.2      2.8       14.7       5.3       26.7      22.93       13.7%          88.5%
  C / L [2]                  -13.6      -3.2      12.8       4.0       31.6      26.44       18.4%          79.8%
  K / L [2]                  -30.5     -10.4      15.9       0.6       44.4      46.54       29.3%          70.1%
  WL / Q share [3]            -7.7      0.8       10.3       3.7       28.9      17.94       22.3%          77.1%
  K / C ratio [2]            -29.4     -10.1      19.3       1.7       47.9      48.70       28.6%          70.6%
  IK / C ratio [2]           -35.6     -13.1      25.3      91.33     3795.5     60.97       33.3%          76.7%
  CK / C ratio [2]           -31.5     -14.5      16.8      30.2      1952.0     48.29        9.9%          90.0%
  IKBS / C ratio [2]         -36.3     -11.1      28.6      65.6      1142.4     64.89       26.3%          73.7%
  IKCA / C ratio [2]         -32.7     -20.6      11.1       0.5       258.9     43.84       22.0%          87.9%
Notes: L = number of employees; Q = value added; C = total tangible stock; WL = labour cost; K=IK+IC=IKBS+IKCA;
K = total intangible stock; IK = intellectual capital; CK customer capital; IKBS = intangibles capitalised by firms; IKCA
= intangibles capitalised by us; see Table 1 for a definition of the various different forms of intangible capital and for
total tangible capital. Intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are estimated at replacement values. Intangibles capitalised
by firms (IKBS) and tangibles (C) are at book values, as in columns (1) of Table 2. All the stocks are measured at the
beginning of the year.
Decomposition of variability is between firm and within firm and year (as obtained in a two-way fixed-effects model).
All the level-statistics are computed on NT=94,968 (total number of observations), N=14,254 (total number of firms),
T =6.7 (average number of years): zeros in intangible capital stocks are included in the computation. Growth rates are
calculated as the first differences of logarithms. When only the first year of each firm is lost, as in L, Q/L, , C/L, and
WL/Q share cases, we have NT=80,714, N=14,254 and T =5.7. Growth rates of intangibles are affected to a greater
extent by the presence of zeros: NT=70,567, N=12,748 and T =5.5 for K/L and K/C ratios; NT=67,446, N=12,232 and
T =5.5 for CK/C ratio; NT=60,535, N=11,775 and T =5.1 for IK/C ratio; NT=60,201, N=11,919 and T =5.1 for IKBS/C
ratio; NT=48,339, N=8,034 and T =6.0 for IKCA/C ratio.
[1]
    The number of employees is the average number of workers during the accounting year when this information is
available (42% of total observations); when it is not available, we use the number of employees reported by the firms at
the end of the accounting year (58% of total observations). When both definitions are available (20% of total
observations) the difference is usually small.
[2]
    In millions of Italian Lire at 1995 prices.
[3]
    Shares are computed by using variables at current prices.




                                                           45
                                                             Table 6- Production function parameters

  Functional         Returns to     Elasticity     Returns to     Substitution   Distribution   Elasticity             Elasticity               Marginal
  form               scale to all   of output      scale to       parameter      parameter      of output with         of output with           productivity of
                     inputs         with           capital        for capital    for capital    respect to tangibles   respect to intangibles   intangibles over
                                    respect to     inputs         inputs         inputs                                                         that of tangibles
                                    labour                                                                                                      (TRS)

                     μ              β              λ              ρ              ξ              α                      γ                        ζ


  Multiplicative                                                                          γ                                                           γ⎛C ⎞
                     μ=λ+β          β              λ=α+γ          =0             ξ=             α                      γ                        ζ =    ⎜ ⎟
  (1)                                                                                     α                                                           α⎝K ⎠


                                                                                                        C                         K
  Additive
                     μ=λ+β          β              λ=α+γ          = -1           ξ =ζ           α=λ                    γ = λζ                   ζ
  (2)                                                                                                 C + ζK                    C + ζK

                                                                                                                                                              ρ+1
                                                                                                          C−ρ                    K −ρ                ⎛C ⎞
  CES
                     μ=λ+β          β              λ=α+γ          ρ              ξ              α= λ                   γ = λξ − ρ               ζ = ξ⎜ ⎟
  (3)                                                                                                  C− ρ + ξK− ρ          C + ξK − ρ              ⎝K⎠

Notes:
(1) Multiplicative capital specification: Qit=Ai Bt Lβit Cαit Kγit eεmit ,
(2) Additive capital specification: Qit=Ai Bt Lβit (Cit+ ζKit)λ eεait ,
(3) CES capital specification: Qit=Ai Bt Lβit (C-ρit + ξ K-ρit)-λ / ρ eεcit .




                                                                                     46
              Table 7 a- Production function estimates with multiplicative capital

                                                            Constant returns to scale imposed         Total factor productivity
                 No constant returns to scale imposed
                                                                    on equation (1')                      (equation (1''))
                           (equation (1'))
                                                                                                       (μ=1 and β0=slmed )
                                                                                                                           [1]
                                                                         (μ=1)
Type of              γ        α     μ-1       β    MSE              γ        α         β      MSE           γ        α    MSE
estimates        (k-l)     (c-l)     (l)                        (k-l)     (c-l)                         (k-l)



OLS             0.025 0.130 -0.013 0.832                     0.026        0.131     0.843               0.070   0.297
                                              0.3656                                        0.3658                    0.4020
(NT=66953)    (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)              (0.001)      (0.002)   (0.002)             (0.001) (0.001)


Within          0.008 0.091 -0.219 0.682                     0.024        0.127     0.849               0.071   0.297
                                              0.1860                                        0.1887                    0.1962
(NT=66953)    (0.002) (0.003) (0.007) (0.007)              (0.002)      (0.004)   (0.004)             (0.002) (0.002)

First-
                0.012 0.070 -0.511 0.407                     0.062        0.179     0.758               0.101   0.267
differences                                   0.2210                                        0.2293                    0.2312
              (0.003) (0.004) (0.010) (0.009)              (0.003)      (0.004)   (0.005)             (0.003) (0.003)
(NT=55425)

Five-year-
                0.009 0.101 -0.132 0.758                     0.018        0.120     0.861               0.064   0.303
differences                                   0.3415                                        0.3466                    0.3622
              (0.005) (0.009) (0.017) (0.018)              (0.005)      (0.010)   (0.010)             (0.005) (0.005)
(NT=5518)




                Table 7 b- Production function estimates with additive capital[2]

                                                           Constant returns to scale imposed         Total factor productivity
                 No constant returns to scale imposed
                                                                   on equation (2')                      (equation (2''))
                           (equation (2'))
                                                                                                      (μ=1 and β0=slmed )
                                                                                                                          [1]
                                                                        (μ=1)
Type of           ζ           λ    μ -1       β    MSE          ζ            λ        β      MSE          ζ         λ     MSE
estimates      (pKa)     (tca-l)     (l)                     (pKa)      (tca-l)                        (pKa)



OLS             1.365   0.164 -0.012    0.824                1.396   0.165   0.835                     1.395    0.367
                                                  0.3629                                    0.3631                       0.3977
(NT=66953)    (0.063) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002)              (0.062) (0.002) (0.002)                   (0.031)       (-)


Within          0.467   0.101 -0.218    0.680                0.690   0.148   0.852                     0.810    0.367
                                                  0.1859                                    0.1886                       0.1970
(NT=66953)    (0.104) (0.004) (0.007) (0.007)              (0.088) (0.004) (0.004)                   (0.042)       (-)

First-
                0.536   0.079 -0.513    0.407                1.627   0.228   0.772                     1.951    0.367
differences                                       0.2210                                    0.2296                       0.2322
              (0.180) (0.005) (0.010) (0.009)              (0.139) (0.005) (0.005)                   (0.100)       (-)
(NT=55425)

Five-year-
                0.504   0.112 -0.131    0.756                0.613   0.137   0.863                     0.672    0.367
differences                                       0.3412                                    0.3436                       0.3635
              (0.226) (0.010) (0.017) (0.018)              (0.209) (0.010) (0.010)                   (0.093)       (-)
(NT=5518)




                                                           47
                                                     Table 7 c- Production function estimates with CES capital[3]

                                                                                      Constant returns to scale imposed                   Total factor productivity
                           No constant returns to scale imposed
                                                                                              on equation (3')                                (equation (3''))
                                     (equation (3'))
                                                                                                   (μ=1)                                   (μ=1 and β0=slmed[1])
Type of                ρ          ξ          λ       μ-1         β     MSE            ρ         ξ         λ         β      MSE           ρ          ξ           λ      MSE
estimates                               (tcc-l)       (l)                                            (tcc-l)                                               (tcc-l)


OLS                   -1        1.4     0.164      -0.012     0.824                  -1       1.4     0.165      0.835                -0.4        0.6      0.367
                                                                      0.3629                                              0.3631                                      0.3964
(NT=66953)       (0.064)    (0.125)   (0.002)     (0.002)   (0.002)             (0.064)   (0.125)   (0.002)    (0.002)             (0.014)    (0.147)         (-)

Within              -0.7        0.4     0.103      -0.217     0.680                -0.4       0.5     0.154      0.846                -0.4        0.6      0.367
                                                                      0.1859                                              0.1886                                      0.1959
(NT=66953)       (0.160)    (0.085)   (0.004)     (0.007)   (0.007)             (0.057)   (0.061)   (0.004)    (0.004)             (0.023)    (0.031)         (-)

First-
                    -0.4        0.4     0.084      -0.509     0.407                -0.4       0.9     0.245      0.755                -0.1        0.5      0.367
differences                                                           0.2210                                              0.2292                                      0.2310
                 (0.155)    (0.131)   (0.005)     (0.010)   (0.009)             (0.038)   (0.083)   (0.005)    (0.005)             (0.019)    (0.031)         (-)
(NT=55425)
Five-year-
                      -1        0.5     0.112      -0.132     0.756                -0.7       0.5    0.1397      0.860                -0.4        0.5      0.367
differences                                                           0.3412                                              0.3435                                      0.3614
                 (0.478)    (0.241)   (0.010)     (0.017)   (0.018)             (0.252)   (0.178)   (0.010)    (0.010)             (0.060)    (0.064)         (-)
(NT=5518)
Notes:
OLS estimates include industry and temporal dummies; within, first-differences and five-year differences include individual and temporal effects. Robust standard errors are shown
in brackets.
[1]
    slmed=0.633 is the sample median of labour cost’s share of value added.
[2]
    Estimates of the production function with additive capital are obtained by an iterative procedure on a first-order Taylor-series approximation around an initial value ζ(0). The
starting value ζ(0) is selected by a grid search on the ζ parameter (see Appendix A2).
[3]
    Estimates of the production function with CES capital are obtained by using a grid search on the ρ and ξ parameters. Standard errors of ρ and ξ parameters are obtained by using
the Gauss-Newton regression derived by a first-order Taylor-series approximation around the minimum residual sum of squares estimates of the ρ and ξ parameters. Estimates and
standard errors of the λ, μ-1 and β parameters correspond to the minimum residual sum of squares estimates of the ρ and ξ parameters (see Appendix A2).




                                                                                                                                                                                 48
                       Table 8 a- Pooled estimates of the γ and ζ parameters

                             Elasticity of output with respect to       Marginal productivity of intangibles over
                                      intangible capital                           that of tangibles


OLS
                                 γ(Q1)        γ(med)           γ(Q3)          ζ(Q1)        ζ(med)          ζ(Q3)
(NT=66953)

No constant returns to scale:
                                  0.025         0.025           0.025         0.875          3.097         11.422
Multiplicative
                                (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.034)        (0.120)        (0.442)
                                  0.004         0.013           0.038         1.365          1.365          1.365
Additive[1]
                                (0.000)       (0.001)         (0.002)       (0.063)        (0.063)        (0.063)
                                  0.014         0.025           0.041         1.480          2.783          5.345
CES (ρ = -0.5)[2]
                                (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.002)       (0.053)        (0.099)        (0.190)
Total factor productivity:[3]
                                  0.070         0.070           0.070         1.052          3.722         13.729
Multiplicative
                                (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)       (0.017)        (0.060)        (0.219)
                                  0.009         0.030           0.087         1.395          1.395          1.395
Additive[1]
                                (0.000)       (0.001)         (0.002)       (0.031)        (0.031)        (0.031)
                                  0.035         0.062           0.101         1.693          3.184          6.115
CES (ρ = -0.5)
                 [2]
                                (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.002)       (0.026)        (0.049)        (0.095)



                 Table 8 b- First-differences estimates of γ and ζ parameters

                             Elasticity of output with respect to       Marginal productivity of intangibles over
                                      intangible capital                           that of tangibles


First-differences
                                 γ(Q1)        γ(med)           γ(Q3)          ζ(Q1)        ζ(med)          ζ(Q3)
(NT=55425)

No constant returns to scale:
                                  0.012         0.012           0.012         0.752          2.661          9.815
Multiplicative
                                (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.185)        (0.653)        (2.408)
                                  0.001         0.003           0.009         0.536          0.536          0.536
Additive[1]
                                (0.000)       (0.001)         (0.003)       (0.180)        (0.180)        (0.180)
                                  0.005         0.009           0.015         1.013          1.906          3.661
CES (ρ = -0.5)[2]
                                (0.001)       (0.003)         (0.004)       (0.263)        (0.495)        (0.952)
Total factor productivity:[3]
                                  0.101         0.101           0.101         1.686          5.964         21.997
Multiplicative
                                (0.003)       (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.059)        (0.208)        (0.768)
                                  0.012         0.040            0112         1.951          1.951          1.951
Additive[1]
                                (0.001)       (0.002)         (0.006)       (0.100)        (0.100)        (0.100)
                                  0.049         0.084           0.131         2.472          4.650          8.929
CES (ρ = -0.5)[2]
                                (0.002)       (0.003)         (0.005)       (0.101)        (0.190)        (0.365)




                                                                                                                    49
                                Table 8 c- Within estimates of γ and ζ parameters

                                    Elasticity of output with respect to       Marginal productivity of intangibles over
                                             intangible capital                           that of tangibles


         Within
                                          γ(Q1)      γ(med)           γ(Q3)          ζ(Q1)        ζ(med)          ζ(Q3)
         (NT=66953)

         No constant returns to scale:
                                           0.008       0.008           0.008         0.400          1.414          5.214
         Multiplicative
                                         (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.101)        (0.357)        (1.316)
                                           0.001       0.003           0.010         0.467          0.467          0.467
         Additive[1]
                                         (0.000)     (0.001)         (0.002)       (0.104)        (0.104)        (0.104)
                                           0.005       0.008           0.015         0.744          1.400          2.688
         CES (ρ = -0.5)[2]
                                         (0.001)     (0.002)         (0.003)       (0.140)        (0.262)        (0.504)
         Total factor productivity:[3]
                                           0.071       0.071           0.071         1.062          3.757         13.856
         Multiplicative
                                         (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.036)        (0.127)        (0.467)
                                           0.005       0.018           0.056         0.810          0.810          0.810
         Additive[1]
                                         (0.000)     (0.001)         (0.003)       (0.042)        (0.042)        (0.042)
                                           0.029       0.052           0.087         1.381          2.598          4.989
         CES (ρ = -0.5)
                          [2]
                                         (0.001)     (0.002)         (0.003)       (0.054)        (0.102)        (0.196)



                       Table 8 d- Five-year-differences estimates of γ and ζ parameters

                                    Elasticity of output with respect to       Marginal productivity of intangibles over
                                             intangible capital                           that of tangibles

         Five-year-
         differences                      γ(Q1)      γ(med)           γ(Q3)          ζ(Q1)        ζ(med)          ζ(Q3)
         (NT=5518)
         No constant returns to scale:
                                           0.009       0.009           0.009         0.413          1.461          5.388
         Multiplicative
                                         (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.223)        (0.790)        (2.915)
                                           0.001       0.003           0.011         0.504          0.504          0.504
         Additive[1]
                                         (0.000)     (0.002)         (0.005)       (0.226)        (0.226)        (0.226)
                                           0.005       0.009           0.016         0.748          1.407          2.701
         CES (ρ = -0.5)[2]
                                         (0.002)     (0.004)         (0.007)       (0.300)        (0.564)        (1.084)
         Total factor productivity:[3]
                                           0.064       0.064           0.064         0.944          3.339         12.314
         Multiplicative
                                         (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.084)        (0.298)        (1.098)
                                           0.004       0.015           0.048         0.672          0.672          0.672
         Additive[1]
                                         (0.001)     (0.002)         (0.007)       (0.093)        (0.093)        (0.093)
                                           0.025       0.046           0.078         1.194          2.247          4.314
         CES (ρ = -0.5)[2]
                                         (0.003)     (0.005)         (0.008)       (0.120)        (0.226)        (0.434)
Notes:
OLS estimates include industry and temporal dummies; within, first-differences and five year-
differences include individual and temporal effects. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
[1]
    Estimates of the production function with additive capital are obtained by an iterative procedure on a first-order
Taylor-series approximation around an initial value ζ(0). The starting value ζ(0) is selected by a grid search on the ζ
parameter (see Appendix A2).
[2]
    Estimates of the production function with CES capital are obtained by an iterative procedure on a first-order
Taylor-series approximation around an initial value ξ(0) with a fixed ρ equal to -0.5. The starting value ξ(0) is
selected by a grid search on the ξ parameter fixing ρ equal to -0.5 (see Appendix A2).
[3]
    slmed=0.633 is the sample median of labour cost’s share of value added.



                                                                                                                           50
                Table 9- GMM estimates of production function with multiplicative capital

                                                                                                            Total factor productivity
                                                      No constant returns to scale imposed
                                                                                                                (equation (1''))
                                                                (equation (1'))
                                                                                                             (μ=1 and β0=slmed )
                                                                                                                                 [1]


Type of estimate and instrument list                   γ        α       μ-1        R2    χ2 (d.f.)          γ        α       R2         χ2 (d.f.)
                                                   (k-l)     (c-l)       (l)    (Wald                   (k-l)     (c-l)   (Wald
                                                                                 Test)                                     Test)
GMM first-differences: first-difference
equations instrumented by lags t-2 and t-3         0.021     0.029    -0.496   0.0142        195.9      0.104   0.263   0.0194            230.2
of the three explanatory variables in levels.    (0.019)   (0.034)   (0.081) (1866.1)         (86)    (0.016) (0.016) (1954.1)             (88)
(NT=55425)
GMM first-differences: first-difference
equations instrumented by lags t-2 and t-3
                                                   0.087    -0.074    -0.292   0.0152        126.8      0.100   0.267   0.0198            140.3
of the investment-labour-ratios in levels,
                                                 (0.018)   (0.078)   (0.124) (1595.4)        (113)    (0.019) (0.019) (1822.0)            (115)
and by the corresponding dummies
capturing null values. (NT=55425)
GMM levels: level equations instrumented
                                                  -0.009     0.101     0.112   0.2385        179.1\     0.020   0.348   0.1443            272.6
by lags t-2 and t-3 of the three explanatory
                                                 (0.008)   (0.023)   (0.027) (6494.6)          (80)   (0.007) (0.007) (3986.2)             (82)
variables in first-differences. (NT=66953)
GMM levels: level equations instrumented
by lags t-2 and t-3 of the investment-labour-
                                                   0.004     0.193     0.053   0.2996        171.6      0.012   0.356   0.1501            180.1
ratios in first-differences, and by the
                                                 (0.006)   (0.039)   (0.019) (7304.0)        (109)    (0.006) (0.006) (3981.1)            (111)
corresponding dummies capturing null
values. (NT=66953)
GMM system: level and first-difference
equations instrumented by lags t-2 and t-3
                                                   0.011     0.132     0.117   0.2569        446.9      0.035   0.332   0.1294            622.8
of the three explanatory variables
                                                 (0.006)   (0.015)   (0.015) (7390.0)        (132)    (0.006) (0.006) (4735.6)            (134)
respectively in first-differences and in
levels. (NT=66953)
GMM system: level and first-difference
equations instrumented by lags t-2 and t-3
of the investment-labour-ratios respectively       0.029     0.235     0.063   0.2936        288.4      0.035   0.332   0.1288            298.5
in first-differences and in levels, and by the   (0.005)   (0.030)   (0.014) (7299.2)        (175)    (0.005) (0.005) (4480.1)            (177)
corresponding dummies capturing null
values. (NT=66953)
     Notes:
     Estimates include industry and temporal dummies. The reported estimates and their heteroskedasticity robust
     standard errors (shown in brackets) are the one-step estimates. The R2 are computed as the squared (sample)
     correlation coefficient between actual and fitted values. The Wald statistics test the joint significance of the
     explanatory variables. The chi-2 test statistics of over-identification are the second-step estimates.
     [1]
         slmed=0.633 is the sample median of labour cost’s share of value added.




                                                                                                                                 51
             Table 10- Estimates of the ζ parameters, multiplicative capital and total factor
                                             productivity[1]
                                                                                               Marginal productivity of intangibles over
                                                                                                          that of tangibles
                                                                                                     ζ(Q1)        ζ(med)          ζ(Q3)
OLS (N=66953)
Intangibles non capitalised by firms at replacement values (30%); intangibles capitalised by         1.052          3.722         13.729
firms and tangibles at book values                                                                 (0.017)        (0.060)        (0.219)
                                                                                                     0.868          3.179         12.540
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.015)        (0.054)        (0.211)
                                                                                                     0.747          2.678         10.211
All intangibles at replacement values (20%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.012)        (0.044)        (0.168)
                                                                                                     0.877          3.145         12.413
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at replacement values
                                                                                                   (0.016)        (0.059)        (0.233)
First-differences (N=55425)
Intangibles non capitalised by firms at replacement values (30%); intangibles capitalised by         1.686          5.964         21.997
firms and tangibles at book values                                                                 (0.059)        (0.208)        (0.768)
                                                                                                     1.131          4.141         16.334
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.050)        (0.182)        (0.719)
                                                                                                     1.307          4.688         17.873
All intangibles at replacement values (20%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.057)        (0.206)        (0.785)
                                                                                                     1.175          4.210         16.620
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at replacement values
                                                                                                   (0.062)        (0.223)        (0.880)
Within (N=66953)
Intangibles non capitalised by firms at replacement values (30%); intangibles capitalised by         1.062          3.757         13.856
firms and tangibles at book values                                                                 (0.036)        (0.127)        (0.467)
                                                                                                     0.875          3.204         12.637
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.031)        (0.115)        (0.453)
                                                                                                     0.981          3.519         13.414
All intangibles at replacement values (20%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.033)        (0.119)        (0.453)
                                                                                                     0.971          3.481         13.739
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at replacement values
                                                                                                   (0.040)        (0.142)        (0.561)
Five-year-differences (N=5518)
Intangibles non capitalised by firms at replacement values (30%); intangibles capitalised by         0.944          3.339         12.314
firms and tangibles at book values                                                                 (0.084)        (0.298)        (1.098)
                                                                                                     0.810          2.964         11.690
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.078)        (0.285)        (1.125)
                                                                                                     0.922          3.309         12.614
All intangibles at replacement values (20%) and tangibles at book values
                                                                                                   (0.084)        (0.301)        (1.149)
                                                                                                     0.808          2.897         11.434
All intangibles at replacement values (30%) and tangibles at replacement values
                                                                                                   (0.093)        (0.333)        (1.313)
     Notes:
     To facilitate comparison, the first row of each estimation method shows the same estimates as those given in
     Tables 8 a-d. OLS estimates include industry and temporal dummies; within, first-differences and five-year-
     differences include individual and temporal effects. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
     Intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are constructed from expenditure, at a constant depreciation rate of 30%.
     Estimation of intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) and of tangibles (C) at replacements costs are obtained on
     the basis of the series of corresponding gross investments, by using a depreciation rate for all intangibles taken to
     be 30% or 20%, and depreciation rates of 5% for buildings and of 11% for plant and equipment. See Appendix
     A1 for details.
     [1]
         slmed=0.633 is the sample median of labour cost’s share of value added.




                                                                                                                                 52
            Table 11 a- γ and ζ estimates for intellectual capital (IK) and for customer capital (CK).
                                    CES capital[1], total factor productivity.[2]

                            Elasticity of output with respect              Marginal productivity of the two types of intangibles
                         to the two types of intangible capital                          over that of tangibles

                 Intellectual capital              Customer capital        Intellectual capital             Customer capital
                          IK                             CK                         IK                            CK

Type of
                γ(Q1) γ(med)      γ(Q3)         γ(Q1) γ(med)      γ(Q3)   ζ(Q1) ζ(med)      ζ(Q3)        ζ(Q1) ζ(med)       ζ(Q3)        MSE
estimates

OLS              0.016   0.029   0.049           0.010   0.024   0.050   2.709   5.053   9.637            1.316   3.044   7.694
                                                                                                                                        0.3982
(NT=44096)     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002)         (0.000) (0.001) (0.001) (0.094) (0.175) (0.333)          (0.038) (0.087) (0.221)
First-
                 0.017   0.030   0.051           0.018   0.042   0.080   3.083   5.760 11.004             2.368   5.390 13.472
differences                                                                                                                             0.2334
               (0.001) (0.002) (0.003)         (0.001) (0.003) (0.005) (0.209) (0.391) (0.747)          (0.148) (0.337) (0.842)
(NT=36166)
Within           0.011   0.021   0.035           0.013   0.030   0.061   1.935   3.609   6.884            1.579   3.652   9.233
                                                                                                                                        0.1948
(NT=44096)     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002)         (0.001) (0.002) (0.003) (0.124) (0.249) (0.475)          (0.086) (0.199) (0.504)
Five-year-
                 0.011   0.020   0.035           0.013   0.029   0.056   1.993   3.726   7.011            1.739   3.708   8.685
differences                                                                                                                             0.3636
               (0.002) (0.004) (0.006)         (0.002) (0.004) (0.008) (0.355) (0.664) (1.249)          (0.237) (0.506) (1.186)
(NT=3452)



               Table 11 b- γ and ζ estimates for intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) and for
                                 intangibles not-capitalised by firms (IKCA).
                                   CES capital[1], total factor productivity.[2]

                            Elasticity of output with respect              Marginal productivity of the two types of intangibles
                         to the two types of intangible capital                          over that of tangibles
                Intangibles capitalised            Intangibles not-       Intangibles capitalised            Intangibles not-
                       by firms                  capitalised by firms            by firms                  capitalised by firms
                        IKBS                            IKCA                      IKBS                            IKCA
Type of
                γ(Q1) γ(med)      γ(Q3)         γ(Q1) γ(med)      γ(Q3)   ζ(Q1) ζ(med)      ζ(Q3)        ζ(Q1) ζ(med)       ζ(Q3)        MSE
estimates

OLS              0.015   0.026   0.043           0.035   0.063   0.103   2.682   5.007   9.341            1.412   2.720   5.451
                                                                                                                                        0.3839
(NT=24395)     (0.001) (0.001) (0.002)         (0.001) (0.002) (0.003) (0.147) (0.274) (0.511)          (0.037) (0.072) (0.144)
First-
                 0.012   0.022   0.036           0.039   0.070   0.112   2.295   4.264   7.971            1.617   3.125   6.259
differences                                                                                                                             0.2350
               (0.001) (0.002) (0.004)         (0.003) (0.005) (0.008) (0.230) (0.427) (0.797)          (0.115) (0.223) (0.446)
(NT=20184)
Within           0.011   0.020   0.033           0.028   0.051   0.086   1.916   3.576   6.672            1.059   2.040   4.088
                                                                                                                                        0.1988
(NT=24395)     (0.001) (0.002) (0.003)         (0.002) (0.003) (0.005) (0.167) (0.312) (0.583)          (0.065) (0.125) (0.251)
Five-year-
                 0.013   0.021   0.036           0.018   0.035   0.062   1.877   3.503   6.206            1.092   2.133   4.551
differences                                                                                                                             0.3720
               (0.003) (0.005) (0.008)         (0.003) (0.006) (0.011) (0.433) (0.807) (1.431)          (0.187) (0.366) (0.781)
(NT=2026)
        Notes:
        OLS estimates include industry and temporal dummies; within, first-differences and five-year-differences include
        individual and temporal effects. Robust standard errors are shown in brackets.
        [1]
            Estimates of the production function with CES capital are obtained using a grid search on the ξ1 and ξ2
        parameters by setting ρ equal to -0.5. Standard errors of the ξ1 and ξ2 parameters are obtained by using the Gauss-
        Newton regression derived by a first-order Taylor-series approximation around the minimum residual sum of
        squares estimates of the ξ1 and ξ2 parameters (see Appendix A2).
        [2]
            slmed=0.638 and slmed=0.633 are the sample medians of labour costs’ share of value added in parts a and b of
        Table 11, respectively.




                                                                                                                                   53
                                                            Figure 1 – Different estimates of relative productivity of intangibles,
                                                                                    Non constant returns to scale specification


                                                   Q1                                                                                                                       Q3
                                                                        MED
                                           M_ols

                                           A_ols

                                           C_ols
  Specifications and estimation methods




                                           M_fd

                                            A_fd

                                            C_fd



                                           M_wi

                                           A_wi

                                           C_wi



                                           M_ld

                                            A_ld

                                            C_ld

                                                   0            1        2          3       4       5            6             7         8         9         10        11        12
                                                                                                              Estimates




                                                            Figure 2 – Different estimates of relative productivity of intangibles,
                                                                                        Total factor productivity specification


                                                       Q1
                                                                              MED
                                                                                                                                         Q3
                                           M_ols

                                           A_ols

                                           C_ols
   Specifications and estimation methods




                                           M_fd

                                            A_fd

                                            C_fd



                                           M_wi

                                           A_wi

                                           C_wi



                                           M_ld

                                            A_ld

                                            C_ld

                                                   0        1   2   3    4    5     6   7   8   9   10   11      12       13   14   15   16   17   18   19   20   21   22   23   24
                                                                                                              Estimates




Note:
By definition, the additive estimates have no range.




                                                                                                                                                                                      54
Figure 3 – Different estimates of relative productivity of intellectual and customer capital,
                                                                                       CES capital, total factor productivity specification




                                                                      Q1                              MED

                                                                                                                                             Q3
                                                         CK_ols

                                                         IK_ols
  Types of intangibles and estimation methods




                                                         CK_fd

                                                          IK_fd




                                                         CK_wi

                                                          IK_wi




                                                         CK_ld

                                                          IK_ld

                                                                  0        1       2   3      4        5        6       7       8            9        10   11   12       13        14
                                                                                                                    Estimates




Figure 4 – Different estimates of relative productivity of intangible capital capitalised and
                                non-capitalised by the firm,
                                                                                       CES capital, total factor productivity specification




                                                                               Q1
                                                                                                       MED                              Q3

                                                          IKCA_ols

                                                          IKBS_ols
           Types of intangibles and estimation methods




                                                           IKCA_fd

                                                           IKBS_fd




                                                           IKCA_wi

                                                           IKBS_wi




                                                           IKCA_ld

                                                           IKBS_ld

                                                                      0        1        2         3         4          5            6             7        8         9        10
                                                                                                                    Estimates




                                                                                                                                                                                        55
                                                APPENDIX Tables


                                         Table A1: Industry classification.

                                                  NT     % NT       C/Q       K/Q      IK/Q     CK/Q    IKBS/Q    IKCA/Q

HT                Aerospace                       146     (0.15)    67.96    12.85    10.45      2.40    11.35      1.50
HT                Computer                        240     (0.25)    60.11    11.57     5.71      5.86    6.16       5.41
HT                Electronics                     884     (0.93)    51.28    14.95     7.92      7.04    6.33       8.62
HT                Pharmaceutical                 1379     (1.45)    54.74    21.67    10.55     11.12    7.80      13.87
Total HT                                         2649     (2.79)    54.80    18.03     9.23      8.80    7.36      10.67

MHT               Scientific instruments          1590    (1.67)    53.81    15.09     6.86     8.23      5.49      9.60
MHT               Motor vehicles                  2124    (2.24)    72.40    9.75      3.20     6.55      3.31      6.44
MHT               Electric machinery              4603    (4.85)    64.64    8.56      3.77     4.79      3.47      5.09
MHT               Chemicals                       4174    (4.40)    76.99    15.15     3.26     11.88     2.94     12.21
MHT               Other transport equipment        72     (0.08)    65.34    7.66      0.89     6.78      0.84      6.83
MHT               Non-electric machinery         12984   (13.67)    57.87    9.57      4.00     5.57      3.60      5.97
Total MHT                                        25547    (26.9)    63.19    10.65     3.94     6.71      3.56      7.10

MLT               Rubber-plastic                  5512    (5.80)    85.00    5.91      2.27     3.63      2.08      3.83
MLT               Shipbuilding                    328     (0.35)    106.1    13.73     6.49     7.24      5.65      8.08
MLT               Other manufacturing             359     (0.38)    68.53    14.73     2.55     12.18     2.14     12.59
MLT               Non-ferrous metal                777    (0.82)    94.93    4.25      1.15     3.10      1.07      3.18
MLT               Non-metallic mineral            7352    (7.74)   115.07    7.14      1.83     5.32      1.86      5.29
MLT               Fabricated metal               13173   (13.87)    81.40    5.78      1.94     3.83      1.85      3.93
MLT               Petroleum                       319     (0.34)   114.43    6.58      3.12     3.45      4.46      2.11
MLT               Ferrous metal                   723     (0.76)   122.57    2.07      1.32     0.76      1.34      0.73
Total MLT                                        28543   (30.06)   92.67     6.23      2.01     4.22      1.94      4.30

LT                Paper-printing                  4815    (5.07)    81.75    10.30     4.98     5.32      2.45      7.85
LT                Textile-clothing               17275   (18.19)    67.69    11.07     3.04     8.03      1.69      9.38
LT                Food-tobacco                    9455    (9.96)   145.61    15.15     2.27     12.89     3.29     11.87
LT                Wood                            6684    (7.04)    99.04    12.83     3.95     8.89      3.51      9.32
Total LT                                         38229   (40.25)   94.21     12.29     3.25     9.04      2.50      9.79

Total                                            94968    (100)     84.3     10.19     3.23     6.96      2.75      7.44
   Notes:
   Firms are classified along the rows according to their global technological intensity at the 4-digit level (HT = high
   intensity; MHT = medium-high intensity; MLT = medium-low intensity; LT = low intensity).
   The columns are as follows: NT is the total number of observations; Q = value added; C = total tangible stock; K
   = total intangible stock; IK = intellectual capital; CK customer capital; IKBS = intangibles capitalised by firms;
   IKCA = intangibles capitalised by us. See Table 1 for a definition of the different forms of intangible capital and
   for total tangible capital. Intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are estimated at replacement values; intangibles
   capitalised by firms (IKBS) and tangibles (C) are at book values. Value added and all stocks are in millions of
   Italian Lire at 1995 prices. All stocks are measured at the beginning of the year.




                                                                                                                     56
                     Table A2: Classification of observations by size and industry.

                                     HT+MHT               MLT                LT               Total

     Numbers of employees
     5-19                           2511    (2.64%) 3600 (3.79%) 6130 (6.45%) 12241 (12.89%)
     20-49                          8641    (9.10%) 10635 (11.20%) 13384 (14.09%) 32660 (34.39%)
     50-249                        13376   (14.08%) 12537 (13.20%) 16464 (17.34%) 42377 (44.62%)
     ≥ 250                          3668    (3.86%) 1771 (1.86%) 2251 (2.37%) 7690 (8.10%)

     Total                         28196   (29.69%) 28543 (30.06%) 38229 (40.25%) 94968           (100%)
Notes:
Firms are classified along the rows according to their global technological intensity at the 4-digits level
(HT+MHT = high and medium-high intensity; MLT = medium-low intensity; LT = low intensity).
Along the columns, firms are classified according to the number of employees.
The number of employees is the average number of workers employed during the accounting year when this
information is available (42% of total observations); otherwise, we use the number of employees reported by the
firms at the end of the accounting year (58% of total observations). The difference between the two definitions
(when both available, 20% of total observations) is usually small.




                                                                                                            57
  Table A3- Occurrence of intangible capital stocks and intangible capital stocks to total
                              tangible capital stocks ratios

Total sample and sub-samples                                    Averages of intangible to tangible (C) ratios (% values)
                                      NT       N       T         K           IK            CK         IKBS        IKCA
Full sample
Total                                94968   14254     6.66    32.63        10.75        21.88        7.78        24.85
HT+MHT                               28196    4327     6.52    38.91        14.35        24.55        12.24       26.66
MLT                                  28543    4408     6.48    13.46         3.9         9.56         3.25        10.21
LT                                   38229    5778     6.62    42.31         13.2        29.11        7.87        34.44
K never zero
Total                                78481   11528     6.81    38.92        12.73        26.19        9.11        29.81
HT+MHT                               23929    3608     6.63    45.01        16.41        28.6         13.89       31.12
MLT                                  23378    3528     6.63    16.22         4.67        11.55        3.86        12.36
LT                                   31174    4606     6.77    51.27        15.96        35.32        9.39        41.88
Both IK and CK never zero
Total                                50317    7646    6.58     46.69        17.11        29.58        11.71       34.98
HT+MHT                               16028    2461    6.51     53.63        20.41        33.22        17.14       36.48
MLT                                  14495    2267    6.39     17.95         6.19        11.76        4.77        13.19
LT                                   19794    3003    6.59     62.12        22.43        39.69        12.39       49.73
Both IKBS and IKCA never zero
Total                                27483    4028    6.82     63.87         19.4        44.47        14.15       49.72
HT+MHT                                9074    1354    6.70     69.21        22.32        46.89        16.68       52.53
MLT                                   7295    1109    6.58     27.46          8          19.47         5.56        21.9
LT                                   11114    1624    6.84     83.41         24.5        58.91        17.72       65.69

IK never zero (and CK zero)
Total                                1446     299     4.84     11.73        11.73           0         8.99         2.74
HT+MHT                                493     104     4.74     23.17        23.17           0         17.05        6.11
MLT                                   495     104     4.76      5.64         5.64           0         5.55         0.09
LT                                   458       99     4.63     6.01          6.01           0         4.04         1.97
CK never zero (and IK zero)
Total                                3573     643     5.56     23.4           0          23.4          2.83       20.56
HT+MHT                                829     152     5.45     20.83          0          20.83         3.87       16.96
MLT                                  1055     188     5.61     13.78          0          13.78         0.81       12.97
LT                                   1689     311     5.43     30.66          0          30.66         3.59       27.07
IKBS never zero (and IKCA zero)
Total                                21656    3759    5.76     10.65        7.85           2.8        10.65         0
HT+MHT                                7007    1232    5.69     18.88        15.2          3.69        18.88         0
MLT                                   6782    1199    5.66     5.09         3.88           1.2        5.09          0
LT                                    7867    1377    5.71      8.1         4.72          3.38         8.1          0
IKCA never zero (and IKBS zero)
Total                                3211     564     5.69     25.44        2.87         22.57          0         25.44
HT+MHT                                752     136     5.53     27.53        8.22         19.31          0         27.53
MLT                                  1019     174     5.86     12.79        1.11         11.68          0         12.79
LT                                   1440     261     5.52     33.3         1.32         31.97          0          33.3
Notes:
Firms are classified along rows according to their global technological intensity at the 4-digit level (HT+MHT =
high and medium-high intensity; MLT = medium-low intensity; LT = low intensity).
Along columns NT = total number of observations; N = total number of firms; T = average number of per-firm
years. K = total intangible stock; IK = intellectual capital; CK customer capital; IKBS = intangibles capitalised by
firms; IKCA = intangibles capitalised by us. See Table 1 for a definition of the different forms of intangible
capital and for total tangible capital. Intangibles capitalised by us (IKCA) are estimated at replacement values;
intangibles capitalised by firms (IKBS) and tangibles (C) are at book values. All stocks are measured at the
beginning of the year and in millions of Italian Lire at 1995 prices.


                                                                                                                    58
1
    This implemented the Fourth European Commission Directive which modified some accounting standards.
2
     The reallocation procedures also take into account those legislative changes introduced since 1992, when the
fourth European Commission Directive was implemented by statutory law (Legislative Decree no. 127/91). For
details, see Bontempi (2005).
3
    When we use the broader definition of tangibles, estimation results do not change significantly. All non- reported
results of the present paper are available upon request.
4
 Nevertheless, we also checked the robustness of the results by using the “Full sample” and by including a specific
dummy indicating observations with zero intangibles, among the explanatory variables. The results were the same
from the qualitative point of view.
5
    Again, results in the total sample with specific dummies - capturing null observations in the types of intangibles
- as explanatory variables show robustness.
6
    These facts suggest the use of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd quartiles in computing the technical rate of substitution (TRS) in
the multiplicative specification, and the elasticity of output with respect to intangible capital stock in the additive
specification. See Section 3.1.
7
    Confirming that median values in the total factor productivity approaches do not bias results (see Section 3.1).
8
    We also estimated using end-of-period capital measures; results were qualitatively the same.
9
     The estimates are based on the STATA command developed in Baum, Schaffer and Stillman (2003), which
constitutes a very flexible tool.
10
     We also experimented with different measures of the share of labour cost in value-added, namely the by-
industry median, the by-company median, and the Törnqvist 1/2Δslit. The results are robust.
11
      For tangibles: 0.289 (total), 0.126 (within), 0.148 (first-differences). For intangibles: 0.035 (total), 0.041
(within), 0.010 (first-differences). In the same paper, the estimates for France were: 0.295 (total), -0.046 (within)
and -0.001 not significant (first-differences) for tangibles; 0.90 (total), 0.08 and -0.003 not significant (within and
first-differences, respectively) for intangibles.
12
     For tangibles: 0.167 (total), 0.183 (within), 0.225 (first differences), 0.113 not significant (long differences). For
intangibles: 0.198 (total), 0.070 (within), 0.067 and 0.077 not significant (first and long differences, respectively).
13
     A possible measurement problem arises from the changes made to accounting standards since 1992 (under the
EC’s Fourth Directive). However, if we limit our sample to the 1994-1999 sub-period, estimation results do not
change significantly.
14
     Estimates obtained by instrumenting labour input only, do not produce significantly different estimates for both
forms of capital stock. Thus measurement errors seem to affect labour to a greater degree.
15
     A highly computing-intensive check using lag 2 and higher lags shows that adding longer lags as instruments
produces no efficiency gain and no significant changes in parameter estimates: these additional lags are highly
correlated to those instruments already present.
16
     We also estimated various multiplicative specifications: in the non-zero sample; in the sample with null values
in the intangible categories (accounted for by specific dummies); with intangible components capitalised by firms
and recalculated at replacement values. Results generally display robustness.
17
     Estimates, not reported, of the productivity of total intangibles computed by excluding advertising show results
qualitatively similar to the ones in Tables 7 and 8.


                                                                                                                        59
18
     The reporting rule for the number of employees changes according to the accounting scheme: the number of
employees at the end of the accounting year during the 1982-1991 period; the average number of workers during
the accounting year since 1992, when the IV European Directive was due to be applied. Despite the fact that only
29% of all observations were made under the IV European Directive , the average number of workers is also
available for the 20% of observations covering the 1982-1991 period (which more or less coincides with the
number of employees reported by the firms at the end of the accounting year). Hence, we measure the number of
workers as the average during the accounting year when this information is available (in 42% of all cases);
otherwise, we use the number of employees reported by the firms at the end of the accounting year (in the
remaining 58% of cases).
19
     All the deflators (base 1995=1) were taken from the National Accounts of the Italian Statistical Office, ISTAT.
Apart from GDP deflator, they are disaggregated at 2-digit industry level.
20
     We also try the approximations tca(n)it=tca(n-1)it + p(ζ(n)-ζ(n-1))pKa(n-1)it and tca(n)it=tca(n-1)it + p(ζ(n)-ζ(n-1))DEVpKa(n-1)it ,
                 a(n-1)
where     DEVpK        it   is the deviation of pKa(n-1)it from its sample median. Results do not change significantly. In the
estimates reported in Tables 7 and 8, we set p = 1. Alternatively, we also set p=0.8 and p=2 without any
significant changes in the convergence estimates.
21
     We also attempted the second-order Taylor-series approximation for the non-linear term of equation (2'),
without any substantial changes in the results. The grid-search step for the initial values of the unknown ζ
parameter is the same as above, while the iterated estimation procedure is applied to the equation (q-l)it= ai + bt +
(μ-1)lit + λ(tca(n)it-lit) + λ(ζ(n+1)-ζ     (n)
                                                  )pKa(n)it - ½λ(ζ(n+1)-ζ(n))2(pKa(n))2it +εait , where (pKa(n))2it is measured by the
squared deviation of pKa(n)it from its sample median. If neither of the estimated parameters associated with the
pKa(n) and (pKa(n))2 regressors are significantly different from zero, then the ζ(n+1) and ζ(n) estimates are not
statistically different, and correspond to the unknown ζ estimate.
22
     Note that the grid plus Gauss-Newton regression approach gives the same standard errors as the iterative
procedure; coefficients estimates are extremely close, differing only at the sixth decimal point.




                                                                                                                                       60
