                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    HOW MUCH OF CHINESE EXPORTS IS REALLY MADE IN CHINA? ASSESSING
      DOMESTIC VALUE-ADDED WHEN PROCESSING TRADE IS PERVASIVE

                                            Robert Koopman
                                               Zhi Wang
                                             Shang-Jin Wei

                                         Working Paper 14109
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14109


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2008




The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors alone. They do not necessarily reflect the
views of the US International Trade Commission, any of its individual Commissioners, any other organization
that the authors are or have been affiliated with, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Robert Koopman, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Much of Chinese Exports is Really Made In China? Assessing Domestic Value-Added
When Processing Trade is Pervasive
Robert Koopman, Zhi Wang, and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 14109
June 2008, Revised December 2011
JEL No. F1,O1,O53

                                            ABSTRACT

The rise of China in world trade has brought both benefits and anxiety to other economies. For many
policy questions, it is crucial to know the extent of domestic value added (DVA) in exports, but the
computation is more complicated when processing trade is pervasive. We propose a method for computing
domestic and foreign contents that allows for processing trade. By our estimation, the share of domestic
content in exports by the PRC was about 50% before China’s WTO membership, and has risen to
over 60% since then. There are also interesting variations across sectors. Those sectors that are likely
labeled as relatively sophisticated such as electronic devices have particularly low domestic content
(about 30% or less).


Robert Koopman                                     Shang-Jin Wei
Research Division                                  Graduate School of Business
Office of Economics                                Columbia University
US International Trade Commission                  Uris Hall 619
500 E Street SW                                    3022 Broadway
Washington, DC 20436                               New York, NY 10027-6902
Robert.Koopman@usitc.gov                           and NBER
                                                   shangjin.wei@columbia.edu
Zhi Wang
Research Division
Office of Economics
US International Trade Commission
500 E Street SW
Washington, DC 20436
zhi.wang@usitc.gov
1. Introduction


“Made in China” is one of the most common labels one encounters in a shopping mall in
the United States and Europe. Increasingly, many products that are supposed to be
technically sophisticated and therefore likely to be associated with exports from high-
income countries, such as digital cameras and computers, also carry that label. Since the
most salient characteristic of the factor endowment in China is a vast supply of unskilled
labor relative to either physical or human capital, is the country’s actual export structure
inconsistent with the predictions from the international trade theory based on its
endowment? A possible resolution to the puzzle is that China is simply the last section of
a long global production chain that ends up assembling components from various
countries into a final product before it is exported to the US and EU market. Indeed, a
MacBook computer carries a label at its back (in small type) that reads “Designed by
Apple in California; Assembled in China.” This label is likely to be oversimplified
already, as it reports only the head and the tail of a global production chain, but skips
many other countries that supply other components that go into the product.
       China is the archetype of a national economy that is well integrated into a global
production chain. It imports raw material, equipment, and intermediate inputs, and then
exports a big fraction of its output (on the order of 37% of GDP in 2006) to the world
market. The PRC is not the only country whose production and exports are a part of a
global chain; Japan, Korea, Singapore, and Malaysia are some other examples of
countries that participate actively in the international divisions of labor. However, the
PRC is noteworthy due to its sheer size. In addition, its export/GDP ratio, at 35% or
higher in recent years, is extraordinarily high for a large economy, when compared with
8% for the US and 13% for India. With a reputation as a “world factory,” China is a top
supplier of manufacturing outsourcing for many global companies.
       For many policy issues, it is important to assess the extent of domestic content in
exports. For example, what is the effect of a currency appreciation on a country’s
exports? The answer depends crucially on the share of domestic content in the exports.
Other things being equal, the lower the share of domestic content in the exports, the
smaller the effect on trade volume a given exchange rate appreciation would have. As

                                             1
another example, what is the effect of trading with the PRC on US income inequality?
The answer depends in part on whether the PRC simply exports products that are
intensive in low-skilled labor or whether its exports are more sophisticated. Rodrik
(2006) notes that the per capita income typically associated with the kind of goods bundle
that the PRC exports is much higher than the country’s actual income. He interprets this
as evidence that the skill content of its exports is likely to be much higher than its
endowment may imply. Schott (2008) documents an apparent rapid increase in the
similarity between the PRC’s export structure and that of high-income countries, and
interprets it as evidence of a rise in the level of sophistication embedded in the country’s
exports. Wang and Wei (2008a) use disaggregated regional data to investigate the
determinants of the rise in export sophistication. Indeed, many other observers have
expressed fear that the PRC is increasingly producing and exporting sophisticated
products and may be providing wage competition for mid- to high-skilled workers in the
US and Europe. However, the calculations by Rodrik (2006) and Schott (2008) do not
take into account the imported content in the country’s exports. If the domestic content in
exports from the PRC is low, especially in sectors that would have been considered
sophisticated or high-skilled in the US, then imports from the PRC may still generate a
large downward pressure on the wage of the low-skilled Americans after all (as pointed
out by Krugman, 2008). These are important policy questions and have implications for
both developing and developed countries. A good understanding of the nature and extent
of global supply chains can provide important insights for economists and policy makers.
       How would one assess foreign versus domestic content in a country’s exports?
Hummels et al. (2001) (HIY in subsequent discussion) propose a method to decompose a
country’s exports into domestic and foreign value added share based on a country’s
input-output (IO) table. They make a key assumption that the intensity in the use of
imported inputs is the same between production for exports and production for domestic
sales. This assumption is violated in the presence of processing exports. Processing
exports are characterized by imports for exports with favorable tariff treatment: firms
import parts and other intermediate materials from abroad, with tariff exemptions on the
imported inputs and other tax preferences from local or central governments, and, after
processing or assembling, export the finished products. The policy preferences for

                                             2
processing exports usually lead to a significant difference in the intensity of imported
intermediate inputs in the production of processing exports and that in other demand
sources (for domestic final sales and normal exports). Since processing exports have
accounted for more than 50% of China's exports every year at least since 1996, the HIY
formula is likely to lead to a significant under-estimation of the share of foreign value
added in its exports. In fact, most economies offer tariff reductions or exemptions on
imported intermediate inputs used in production for exports. Ignoring processing exports
is likely to lead to estimation errors, especially for economies that engage in a massive
amount of tariff/tax-favored processing trade, such as the China, Mexico and Viet Nam.
       In this paper, we aim to make two contributions to the literature. First, we present
a formula for computing shares of foreign and domestic value added in a country’s
exports when processing exports are pervasive. We develop this formula because the
production technology and input sourcing differs for goods produced for domestic
consumption and normal exports compared to those produced under export processing
regimes. The HIY formula is a special case of this general formula. Second, we apply
our methodology to China using data for 1997, 2002, and 2007. We estimate that the
share of foreign value added in China’s manufactured exports was about 50% during
1997 to 2002 before China’s WTO membership, almost twice as high as that implied by
the HIY formula, and has risen to over 60% in 2007 after 5 years of its WTO
membership. There are also interesting variations across sectors. Those sectors that are
likely labeled as relatively sophisticated such as computers, telecommunication
equipments, and electronic devices have particularly low domestic content (about 30% or
less). By design, this is an accounting exercise, and does not intend to examine the
determinants, driving forces and the consequences of changes in domestic contents in
China’s gross exports thoroughly. However, a solid methodology to estimate and account
domestic and foreign value added in developing countries exports is the necessary first
step toward a better understanding of these issues.

       Besides the papers on vertical specialization in the international trade literature,
this paper is also related to the I/O literature. In particular, Chen et al. (2004) and Lau et
al (2007) are the first to develop a “non-competitive” type I/O model for China (i.e., one


                                              3
in which imported and domestically produced inputs are accounted for separately) and to
incorporate processing exports explicitly. However, these papers do not describe a
systematic way to infer separate input-output coefficients for production of processing
exports versus those for other final demands. It is therefore difficult for others to replicate
their estimates or apply their methodology to other countries. In addition, they use an
aggregated version of China’s 1995 and 2002 input-output tables, respectively, to
perform their analysis, with 20 some goods producing industries. We provide a more up-
to-date and more disaggregated assessment of foreign and domestic values added in
Chinese exports with 83 goods producing industries. Finally, they impose an assumption
in estimating the import use matrix from the competitive type I/O table published by
China’s National Statistical Bureau: within each industry, the mix of the imported and
domestic inputs is the same in capital formation, intermediate inputs, and final
consumption. We relax this assumption by refining a method proposed in Dean, Fung,
and Wang (2007) that combines China’s processing imports statistics with United
Nations Broad Economic Categories (UNBEC) classification.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a conceptual
framework for estimating shares of domestic and foreign value added in a country’s
exports when processing exports are pervasive. It also describes a mathematic
programming procedure to systematically infer a set of I/O coefficients called for by the
new formula but not typically available from a conventional I/O table. Section 3 presents
the estimation results for Chinese exports. Section 4 evaluate the accuracy of the
estimation results by using an IO table with separate processing trade account complied
by Mexico national statistical agency based 2003 economic census. Section 5 concludes.


2. Conceptual Framework and Estimation Method
2.1 When special features of processing exports are not taken into account


       We first discuss how domestic and foreign contents in a country’s exports can be
computed when it does not engage in any processing trade. The discussion follows the
input-output literature, and is the approach adopted (implicitly) by Hummels et al. (2001)


                                              4
and Yi (2003). Along the way, we will point out a clear connection between the domestic
content concept and the concept of vertical specialization. 2
        When imported and domestically produced intermediate inputs are accounted
separately, a value-based input-output table can be specified as follows: 3
          AD X + Y D = X                                                                          (1)
         AM X + Y M = M                                                                           (2)
         uAD + uAM + Av = u                                                                       (3)

where AD = [aDij] is an nxn matrix of direct input coefficients of domestic products; AM =
[aMij] is an nxn matrix of direct inputs of imported goods; YD is an nx1 vector of final
demands for domestically produced products, including usage in gross capital formation,
private and public final consumption, and gross exports; YM is an n×1 vector of final
demands for imported products, including usages in gross capital formation, private and
public final consumption; X is a n×1 vector of gross output; M is a n×1 vector of imports;
Av = [avj] is a 1×n vector of each sector j’s ratio of value added to gross output, and u is a
1×n unity vector. Subscripts i and j indicate sectors, and superscripts D and M represent
domestically produced and imported products, respectively.
        Equations (1) and (2) define two horizontal balance conditions for domestically
produced and imported products, respectively. A typical row k in Equation (1) specifies
that total domestic production of product k should be equal to the sum of the sales of
product k to all intermediate and final users in the economy (the final sales include
domestic consumption and capital formation, plus exports of product k). A typical row h
in Equation (2) specifies that the total imports of product h should be equal to the sum of
the sales of product h to all users in the economy, including intermediate inputs for all
sectors, plus final domestic consumption and capital formation. Equation (3) is both a
vertical balance condition, and an adding-up constraint for the input-output coefficients.

2
  We use the terms “domestic value added” and “domestic content” interchangeably. Similarly, we use the
terms “foreign value added”, “foreign content”, and “vertical specialization” to mean the same thing.
3
  Such a model is called a “non-competitive” model in the IO literature. HIY (2001) do not specify this
system explicitly but go straight to the implied Leontief inverse while Chen et al. (2004) specify only the
first two equations. A fully specified model facilitates better understanding of the connection between
vertical specialization and domestic content, and a comparison with the model in the next sub-section that
features processing exports.


                                                    5
It implies that the total output (X) in any sector k has to be equal to the sum of direct
value added in sector k, and the cost of intermediate inputs from all domestically
produced and imported products.
           From Equation (1) we have
            X = ( I − A D ) −1 Y D                                                (4) 4

( I − A D ) −1 is the well-known Leontief Inverse, a matrix of coefficients for the total
domestic intermediate product requirement. Define a vector of share of domestic content,
or domestic value added, in a unit of domestically produced products, DVS = {dvsj}, a
1×n vector, as the additional domestic value added generated by one additional unit of
final demand of domestic products (∆YD = u’):
                      ∧                 ∧
            DVS = Av ∆X / ∆Y D = Av ( I − A D ) −1 = Av ( I − A D ) −1            (5)

where AˆV an nxn diagonal matrix with avj as its diagonal elements. Equation (5) indicates
that the domestic content for an IO industry is the corresponding column sum of the
coefficient matrix for total domestic intermediate goods requirement, weighted by the
direct value-added coefficient of each industry. Because standard model assumes that
exports and domestic sales are produced by the same technology, the share of domestic
content in final demand and the share of domestic content in total exports are the same.
So Equation (5) is also the formula for the share of domestic content in total exports for
each industry.
           Define a vector of share of foreign content (or foreign value added) in final
demand for domestically produced products by FVS = u – DVS. By making use of
Equation (3), it can be verified that
           FVS = u − Av ( I − A D ) −1 = uA M ( I − A D ) −1                      (6)

For each industry, this is the column sum of the coefficient matrix for total intermediate
import requirement. This turns out to be the same formula used to compute vertical
specialization by Hummels et al. (2001). In other words, the concepts of vertical
specialization and of foreign content are identical.



4
    ( I − A D ) has to be full rank.

                                                      6
2.2 Domestic Content in Exports When Processing Trade is Prevalent
         We now turn to the case in which tariff-favored processing exports are prevalent;
these exports have a different intensity in the use of imported inputs than do domestic
final sales (and normal exports). Conceptually, we wish to keep track separately of the IO
coefficients of the processing exports and those of domestic final sales and normal
exports. For now, we ignore the fact that these IO coefficients may not be directly
available, and will discuss a formal approach to estimate them in the next subsection.
         The expanded I/O table with a separate account for processing exports is
represented by Figure 1.
Figure 1: Input-output table with separate production account for processing trade

                                              Intermediate use
                                              Production     for   Production   of   Final  use   Gross Output   or
                                              domestic use &       processing        (C+I+G+E)    Imports
                                              normal exports       exports
                                        DIM   1,2,…, N             1,2,…, N          1            1
                   Production     for   1
                                        .
                                                                                     Y D − EP X − E
                   domestic use &                                                                   P
                   normal     exports   .
                                        .
                                              Z DD                 Z DP
                   (D)
                                        N
                                        1
 Domestic                               .     0                    0
 Intermediate
 Inputs
                   Processing           .
                                        .
                                                                                     EP           EP
                   Exports (P)
                                        N
                                        1
                                        .
 Intermediate Inputs from Imports       .     Z MD                 Z MP              YM           M
                                        .
                                        N

 Value-added                            1     VD                   VP
 Gross output                           1     X − EP               EP

         We use superscript P and D, respectively, to represent processing exports on one
hand, and domestic sales and normal exports on the other. This expanded IO model can
be formally described by the following system of equations:

          I − A DD     − A DP   X − E  Y − E 
                                        P         D P

                                       = P                                                  (7)
          0              I   E P        E     
         A MD ( X − E P ) + A MP E P + Y M = M                                                    (8)

         uA DD + uA MD + AvD = u                                                                  (9)

                                                         7
        uA DP + uA MP + AvP = u                                                                  (10)
This is a generalization of the model discussed in the previous subsection. Equations (7)
and (8) are a generalization of Equations (1)–(2), and Equations (9)–(10) are a
generalization of Equation (3), with a separate account for processing exports. Equations
(9) and (10) are also the new adding-up constraint for the IO coefficients.
        The analytical solution of the system is
                                                    −1
         X − E P   I − A DD               − A DP  Y − E 
                                                        D   P

         P       =                                                                         (11)
         E        0                       I   E P     
The generalized Leontief inverse for this expanded model can be computed as follows:
                                −1
   I − A DD         − A DP            B DD   B DP  ( I − A DD ) −1 ( I − A DD ) −1 A DP 
B=                                 =  PD          =                                        (12)
   0                  I              B       B PP        0                  I           
Substituting Equation (12) into Equation (11), we have:
        X − E P = ( I − A DD ) −1 (Y D − E P ) + (1 − A DD ) −1 A DP E p                         (13)
Substituting Equation (13) into Equation (8), the total demand for imported intermediate
inputs is
        M − Y M = A MD ( I − A DD ) −1 (Y D − E P ) + A MD (1 − A DD ) −1 A DP E P + A MP E p (14)

It has three components: the first term is total imported content in final domestic sale and
normal exports, and the second and the third terms are indirect and direct imported
content in processing exports, respectively.
        We can compute vertical specialization (VS) or foreign content share in
processing and normal exports in each industry separately:
                 T                                            T
        VSS D                uA MD ( I − A DD ) −1
                     =                                                                           (15)
        VSS P          uA MD (1 − A DD ) −1 A DP + uA MP

The total foreign content share in a particular industry is the sum of the two weighted by
the share of processing and non-processing exports sp and u−sp, where both s and u are a
1 by n vector:
                                     VSS D
        VSS = (u − s P , s P )                                                                   (16)
                                     VSS P
The foreign content (or foreign value-added) share in a country’s total exports is:

                                                          8
                                             E − EP                                         EP
       TVSS = uA MD ( I − A DD ) −1                 + u ( A MD (1 − A DD ) −1 A DP + A MP )      (17)
                                               te                                           te
where te is a scalar, the country’s total exports. Equation (16) is a generalization of
Equation (7), the formula to compute industry-level share of vertical specialization.
Equation (17) is a generalization of the formula for country-level share of vertical
specialization proposed by Hummels et al. (2001, page 80). In particular, either when
A DD = A DP and A MD = A MP , or when EP/te = 0, Equation (18) reduces to the HIY
formula for VS.
       Similarly, the domestic content share for processing and normal exports at the
industry level can be computed separately:
                T
        DVS D            −                      ( I − A DD ) −1   ( I − A DD ) −1 A DP 
                    = Av B = ( A       D
                                       v
                                               p
                                             A )
                                               v                                        
        DVS P                                         0                    I           
                                                         T                                       (18)
                           A D ( I − A DD ) −1
                    = D v DD −1 DP
                     Av ( I − A ) A + AvP

The total domestic content share in a particular industry is a weighted sum of the two:
                           DVS D
        DVS = (u − s , s )   P   P
                                                                                                 (19)
                           DVS P
The domestic content share in a country’s total exports is:
                                         E − EP
                                     DD −1                   DD −1 DP P E
                                                                           P
       TDVS = A ( I − A
                     D
                     V                 )        + ( AV (1 − A ) A + AV )
                                                     D
                                                                                                 (20)
                                           te                            te
Either when A DD = A DP and AvD = AvP , or when EP/te = 0, Equation (20) reduces to the
HIY formula in Equation (5). Note we can easily verify that for both processing and
normal exports, the sum of domestic and foreign content shares is unity.


2.3 Estimation Issues
       Equations (18-20) allows us to compute the shares of domestic content in
processing and normal exports for each industry as well as in a country’s total exports.
However, statistical agencies typically only report a traditional I/O matrix, AD, and
sometimes AM, but not ADP, ADD, AMP and AMD separately. Therefore, a method to estimate
these matrices, based on available information, has to be developed. In this sub-section,


                                                             9
we propose to do this via a quadratic programming model by combining information
from trade statistics and conventional I/O tables.
        The basic idea of this model is to use information from the standard I/O table to
determine sector-level total imports/exports, and information from trade statistics to
determine the relative proportion of processing and normal exports within each sector,
thus use up all available data to split the national economy into processing and non-
processing blocks, each with its own IO structure. Using the data from the I/O table to
determine sector-level total imports/exports helps to ensure that the balance conditions in
the official I/O account are always satisfied, and that the I/O table with separate
processing and non-processing accounts estimated from the model always sums to the
published official table. Such a method is a formalization of the calibration methods
widely used in macroeconomics and CGE modeling when the number of endogenous
variables larger than the number of equations.
        The following data are observable from a standard I/O table:
         xi = Gross output of sector i;
         z ij = Goods i used as intermediate inputs in sector j;
         v j = Value-added in sector j;
         mi = Total imports of sector i goods; and
         yi =Total final demand except for exports of goods i.

`       We combine those observed data from the I/O table and processing trade shares 5
observed from trade statistics to determine the values for:
         mip = Imports of sector i good used as intermediate inputs to produce processing
exports;
        mid = Imports of sector i goods used as intermediate inputs for domestic
production and normal exports;
        ein = Normal exports of sector i ; and
         eip = Processing exports of sector i.
        The partition of imports into intermediate and final use is based on a combination
of China custom import statistics and UN BEC classification, as described in Dean, Fang

5
 Processing trade are defined by China Customs, which include trade regime “Process & assembling "(14)
and “Process with imported materials" (15) in China Customs statistics. These statistics are relatively
accurate because they involve duty exemption and value-added tax rebates which under intensive Customs
monitoring.

                                                  10
and Wang (2011). The results of such partition and the actual numbers used in our
empirical estimation are reported and discussed in the data source subsection later.
Parameters on domestic and imported final demand can be inferred from the observed
data discussed above:
            y im = Final demand of goods i from imports (residuals of mi - mip - mid );
            y id = Final demand of goods i provided by domestic production (residual of y i -

y im ).

All those data based on official statistics are entered our estimation model as constants.
            Define z ijdd = Domestically produced intermediate good i used by sector j for

domestic sales and normal exports; z ijdp = Domestically produced intermediate good i

used by sector j for processing exports; z ijmd = Imported intermediate good i used by

sector j for domestic sales and normal exports; z ijmp = Imported intermediate good i used
                                                               d
by sector j for processing exports; v j                             =
                                                                        Direct value added by domestic and normal export

production in industry j ; v jp = Direct value added by processing export production in

industry j. Then the IO coefficients for the expanded IO model can be written as:
                                     z ijdd                                       zijmd                            v dj
 A   DD
          = [a ] = [
                   dd
                                               ], A   MD
                                                           = [a ] = [
                                                                md
                                                                                          ] , A = [a ] = [
                                                                                               D           vd
                                                                                                                             ],
                               x j − e jp                                    x j − e jp                         x j − e jp
                   ij                                           ij                             v           j



                             zijdp                                 zijmp                       v jp
A   DP
          = [a ] = [
                dp
                ij                   ], A     MP
                                                   = [a ] = [
                                                      mp
                                                      ij                   ], A = [a ] = [
                                                                              P
                                                                              v
                                                                                          vp
                                                                                          j           ],
                             e jp                                  e jp                        e jp

            To obtain these unobservable IO coefficients, we need estimate within-industry
transactions [zijdd], [zijdp], [zijmd], and [zijmp], as well as sector-level value added [vjd], and
[vjp], subject flowing I/O account identities and statistical adding up constraints:
            K

            ∑ (z
            j =1
                        dd
                        ij   + z ijdp ) = xi − eip         −   en − y d
                                                                i    i                                                            (21)

                   K

              ∑ (z
                j =1
                             md
                             ij       + zijmp ) = m − y m
                                                   i   i                                                                          (22)




                                                                              11
         K

        ∑ (z
        j =1
                dd
                ij   + zijmd ) + v dj = x j    −   e jp                              (23)

        K

       ∑ (z
        i =1
                dp
                ij   + zijmp ) + v jp = e jp                                         (24)

         K

        ∑z = m
        j =1
               md
               ij
                          d
                          i                                                          (25)

         K

        ∑z = m
        j =1
               mp
               ij          i
                            p
                                                                                     (26)

        K                        K

        ∑ ( zijdd + zijdp ) = ∑ zij − (mid + mip )
        j =1                    j =1
                                                                                     (27)


        z ijdd + z ijdp + z ijmd + z ijmp = z ij                                     (28)

        v dj + v jp = v j                                                            (29)

       The economic meanings of these 9 groups of constraints are straightforward.
Equations (21) and (22) are row sum identities for the expanded I/O account. They state
that total gross output of sector i has to equal to the sum of domestic intermediaries, final
demand and exports (both processing and normal exports) in that sector. Similarly, total
imports have to equal imported intermediate inputs plus imports delivered to final users.
Equations (23) and (24) are column sum identities for the expanded I/O account. They
define the value of processing exports in sector j as the sum of domestic and imported
intermediate inputs as well as primary factors used in producing processing exports; these
four groups of constraints correspond to equations (7)-(10) in the extended I/O model
respectively. Equations (25) to (29) are a set of adding up constraints to ensure that the
solution from the model is consistent with official statistics on sector-level trade and
within-industry transactions. Suppose there are K sectors, then there will be 4K2 + 2K
unknowns and only 7K+K2 independent constraints, so we have to cast the calibration
problem as a constrained optimization procedure to minimize following objective
functions:




                                                          12
                          K       K       ( zijdd − z 0 ijdd ) 2             K    K        ( zijdp − z 0 ijdp ) 2         K     K     ( zijmd − z 0 ijmd ) 2
       Min S = ∑∑                                                        + ∑∑                                         + ∑∑
                          i =1 j =1                z 0 ijdd                 i=1 j =1              z 0 ijdp                i =1 j =1           zijmd
                                                                                                                                                               (30)
              K       K        ( zijmp − z 0 ijmp ) 2              K     (v dj − v0 dj ) 2         K      (v jp − v0 pj ) 2
         +∑ ∑                                             +∑                                  +∑
             i=1 i=1                    z 0 ijmp                   j=1        v0 dj                j =1           v0 pj

Where z’s and v’s are variables to be estimated, those variables with a 0 in the suffix
denote initial values.
       These initial values are guesses about the values of variables based on official
statistics using proportional assumptions (will discuss below). However, because all
parameters in the 9 groups of linear constraints (right hand side of equations (21) to (29))
were directly or indirectly obtained from observable official statistical sources, model
solutions thus are restricted into a convex set and will be relatively stable respect to
variations in these initial values as long as all the parameters in these linear constraints
kept as constants.
    The initial value of zijmd and zijmd, are generated by allocating mid and mip in
proportion to input i’s usage in sector j as equation (31):

                               zij (e jp / x j )                                                              zij ( x j − e jp ) / x j
        z0   mp
             ij   =       N
                                                        m     i
                                                               p
                                                                                       z0    md
                                                                                             ij   =       N
                                                                                                                                             mid               (31)
                      ∑z   k
                                   ik
                                          p
                                        (e / x k )
                                          k                                                            ∑z k
                                                                                                                 ik   ( xk − e ) / xk
                                                                                                                                p
                                                                                                                                k



       The split of total inter-sector intermediate inputs flow from sector i to sector j
between normal and processing use are based on their proportion in gross output. The
residuals of the total intermediate inputs and the imported intermediate inputs estimated
from equation (31) are taken the initial values for domestically produced intermediate
inputs as equations (32) and (33):

                                ( x j − e jp )
        z 0 ijdd = z ij                              − z 0 ijmd                                                                                                (32)
                                        xj

                                e jp
        z0   dp
             ij   = z ij                − z 0 ijmp                                                                                                             (33)
                                xj

       The initial values for direct value added in the production for processing exports
in sector j ( v0 pj ), are generally set to be the residuals implied by Equation (24).

However, we set a minimum value at the sum of labor compensation and depreciation in
                                                                                      13
a sector multiplied by the share of processing exports in that sector’s total output. In other
words, the initial value v0 pj is set to equal the greater of the residuals from Equation (24)

or the minimum value. The initial value for direct value added in the production for
domestic sales and normal exports ( v0dj ) is set as the difference between v j (from the I/O

table) and v0 pj .

        We conduct some sensitivity checks using alternative initial values to empirically
verify whether the model solutions are sensitive to these initial values. It turns out that
these alternative initial values do not materially alter our basic conclusions. We
implement this quadratic programming model in GAMS (Brooke et al, 2005), related
computer programs and data files will be available at the USITC website for
downloading.


3. Estimation Results

        After describing the data sources, we report and discuss the estimation results for
shares of domestic and foreign content in Chinese exports at the aggregate level, and by
sector, firm ownership and major destination countries.
3.1 Data
    Inter-industry transaction and (direct) value-added data are from China’s 1997, 2002
and 2007 benchmark I/O tables published by the National Bureau of Statistics of China
(NBS). We use detailed exports and imports data of 1997, 2002, and 2007 from the
General Customs Administration of China to help differentiate the processing and normal
trade in each sector. The trade statistics are first aggregated from the 8-digit HS level to
China’s I/O industries, and then used to compute the share of processing exports in each
I/O industry. Modifying a method from Dean, Fung and Wang (2009), we partition all
imports in a given commodity classification into three parts based on the distinction
between processing and normal imports in the trade statistics, and on the UN BEC
classification scheme:    (a) intermediate inputs in producing processing exports; (b)
intermediate inputs for normal exports and other domestic final sales; and (c) those used
in gross capital formation and final consumption. A summary of these trade statistics as a
percentage of China’s total imports along with share of processing exports during 1996-

                                             14
2008 is reported in Table 1, which shows a downward trend for the use of imported
inputs in producing processing exports, and an upward trend in their use in producing
normal trade and domestic final sales. Processing exports as a share of China’s total
merchandise exports also gradually decline in recent years. Such trend seems partially
reflects the consequence of a series of policy measures to change the preferences to
processing trade and foreign invested enterprises has adopted by Chinese government
since the end of 2006.
   Detailed trade share parameters for each I/O industry in the three benchmark year
(1997, 2002, and 2007) are listed in Appendix tables A-C. These data computed directly
from detailed Chinese official trade statistics are important to understand our estimates of
domestic and imported content in Chinese gross exports, especially their change trends
over time.
   (Inset Table 1 here)


3.2 Domestic and foreign contents in total exports
       Table 2 presents the results for the decomposition of aggregate foreign and
domestic value-added shares in 1997, 2002 and 2007. For comparison, the results from
the HIY method that ignores processing trade are also reported. The estimated aggregate
domestic value added share in China’s merchandise exports was 54% in 1997, and 60.6%
in 2007. For manufacturing products, these estimated shares are slightly lower in levels
but trending upward significantly at 50% in 1997 and 59.7% in 2007, respectively. In
general, the estimated direct domestic value-added shares are less than half of the total
domestic value-added shares. However, the estimated indirect foreign value-added share
was relatively small; most of the foreign content comes from directly imported foreign
inputs, especially in 1997 and 2002. The indirect foreign value-added increase over time,
and reach about a quarter of China’s directly imported foreign inputs in 2007, indicating
the share of simple processing and assembling of foreign parts is declining, while more
imported intermediates are being used in the production of other intermediate inputs that
are then used in the production process.
       (Insert table 2 here)



                                            15
       Relative to the estimates from the HIY method, our procedure produces estimates
of a much higher share of foreign value added in Chinese gross exports and with a
different trend over time. To be more precise, estimates from the HIY method show that
the foreign content share (total VS share) increased steadily from 17.6% in 1997 to
28.7% in 2007 for all merchandise exports, and from 19.0% to 27.1% for manufacturing
only during the same period. In contrast, our estimates suggest a trend in the opposite
direction, with the share of foreign value added in all merchandise exports falling from
46% in 1997 to 39.4% in 2007, and a similar decline for the share in manufacturing
exports, it fell from 50% in 1997 to 40.3% in 2007. The decline occur mainly during
2002-2007 period, which corresponds to the first 5 years of China’s entry to the WTO.
Our estimates indicate that the HIY method appears to incorrectly estimate both the level
and the trend in domestic versus foreign content in the PRC’s exports.
       What accounts for the difference between ours and HIY approaches? There are at
least three factors drive the change of foreign content of the country’s gross exports: (1)
the relative proportions of its total imports used as intermediate inputs in producing
processing exports and domestic sales & normal exports; (2) the share of processing
exports in its total exports; and (3) the sector composition of its exports. Because
processing exports tend to use substantially more imported inputs, and processing exports
account for a major share of China’s total exports, the HIY indicator is likely to
substantially underestimate the true for foreign content in China’s exports. This explains
the level of domestic content by our measure is much lower than that of the HIY
indicator. On the other hand, as exporting firms (both those producing for normal exports
and those for processing exports) gradually increase their intermediate inputs sourcing
from firms within China or multinationals move their upstream production to be near
their downstream production, the extent of domestic content in exports rose over time.
This exactly is what has happened since China joining the WTO. However, because
exports from industries with relatively lower domestic content often grow faster due to
dramatic inflow of foreign direct investment, the composition of a countries total exports
may play as an offsetting factor to reduce the share of domestic value-added in the
country’s gross exports thus slow down the increase of domestic value-added share in a
country’s total exports. As Chinese government start to reduce the policy incentives for

                                            16
both Foreign Invested Enterprises (FIE) and processing exports at the end of 2006, we are
observing a trend of increasing domestic contents in Chinese exports as China continue
its industrial upgrading in the years to come.
       Our interpretation is confirmed by DVA shares for processing and normal exports
estimated separately (Table 3). There is a more than 10 percentage point increase in the
total foreign value-added share for domestic sales and normal exports between 1997 and
2007, which is consistent with the trend indicated by HIY measure. However, in
processing exports we see that more domestic-produced inputs were used, domestic
value-added share increased from 20.7% in 1997 to 37.0% in 2007, up more than 16
percentage point. Because processing exports still constitute more than 50% of China’s
total exports in 2007, which resulting the weighted average total domestic value-added
share went up during the decades.
       There are conflicting forces at work. On the one hand, as domestic input suppliers
increase their quality over time, and multinationals move more and more of their
upstream production into China, exporting firms may decide to increase local sourcing of
their inputs. On the other hand, the reductions in the country’s trade barriers also
encourage exporting firms to use more imported inputs. These two opposing forces
partially offset each other. However, on net, the domestic content share in China’s
exports appears to be on the rise. Looking ahead, the share of imported content in
exports could fall or rise, depending on the relative speed with which domestic input
suppliers and multi-nationals can step up their quality and variety versus the extent of
additional reductions in the cost of using imported inputs.
(insert table 3 here)

       We perform a number of robustness checks on the sensitivity of our main results
to alternative ways of setting the initial values of the variables and the share parameters
of import use. First, we initialize v0 pj and v0dj by apportioning the observed direct value

added in a sector to processing exports and other final demands based on their respective
portions in the sector’s total output. Second, we initialize v0 pj either at the residuals

implied by equation (24) if the residuals are positive, or by following the previous
alternative if the residuals are non-positive. Third, when we partition imports into

                                             17
different users, we use the average of a three-year period (previous, current, and
following years) rather than just one year’s statistics. Fourth, we experiment with 0%
versus 10% annual depreciation rate for capital goods. These variations produce
relatively little change in the main results. For example, the estimated share of domestic
value added in manufacturing exports lies in a relatively narrow range between ?% and
?% in 2002, and between ?% and ?% in 2007.


3.3 Domestic content in exports by firm ownership
        Since foreign-invested firms account for over half of China’s exports, compare
the share of domestic content in exports between them and other Chinese firms may help
us better to understand why there is a raising trend of domestic value-added share in
China’s total exports. However, there is no information on separate input-output
coefficients by firm ownership, our estimation assumes that they are the same on this
dimension. The variation in the share of domestic content comes from different degrees
of reliance on processing exports with a sector, and differences in the sector composition
of their total exports.
        Estimates of the domestic content shares by firm ownership are presented in Table
4. The results show that exports by wholly foreign owned enterprises exhibit the lowest
share of domestic valued-added (at 33.4% in 2002 and increase to 44.1% in 2007),
followed by Sino-foreign joint venture companies (about 44% in both 2002 and 2007).
Exports from Chinese private enterprises embodied the highest domestic content shares
(83.9% and 80.8% in 2002 and 2007, respectively), while those from the state-owned
firms were in the middle (about 70% in both years). Note that these estimates represent
the best guesses based on currently available information; better estimates can be derived
once information on I/O coefficients by firm ownership becomes available.
        The most noticeable feature of this table is the raising domestic contents in export
produced by foreign invested firms, their DVA share increased more than 10 percentage
points between 2002 to 2007(There is a 10.5% percentage point increase for wholly
Foreign Owned firms, and a 13.6 percentage point increase for joint ventures), while
DVA share of Chinese domestic firms basically stay steady during the same period. This
indicates the raise of domestic contents in Chinese exports during the first 5 years of

                                             18
China in WTO is mainly due to FIE sourcing more of their intermediate inputs within
China. This is consistent with the observation of more and more multinationals move
their upstream production to China getting closer to their downstream production already
in China and FIE using more and more intermediate inputs from local suppliers.
        Further exam the change of domestic value-added share across firms with the
same ownership but engage in processing and non-processing exports reveals that firms
engage in normal exports and domestic sales used more imported intermediate inputs
while firms engage in processing exports sourced more of their intermediate inputs
domestically, regardless their ownership types. Therefore, we can conclude that the raise
of domestic value-added content share in Chinese exports are majorly caused by China’s
processing exports using more locally supplied intermediate inputs in 2007 than that in
2002 6. If this trend continues, the difference in the intensity of using imported inputs for
processing and non-processing exports will be further reduced in next decades.

(Insert table 4 here)

3.4 Domestic content by sector
        To see if there are interesting patterns at the sector level that helps to explain the
decline trend of imported contents in China’s total exports, and further assess whether the
increasing domestic value-added share reflect actual upgrade of Chinese industrial
structure, Tables 5 and 6 report, in ascending order on domestic content share, the value-
added decomposition in China manufacturing exports by industry in 2002 and 2007
respectively, together with shares of processing and foreign invested enterprises exports
in each sector’s exports as well as the sector’s share in China’s total merchandise exports.
We choose to report the results from 2002 and 2007 not only because we would like use
the latest I/O table released but also due to these two benchmark tables are consistently
classified on most recent Chinese industry classifications, which simplifies issues
involved in overtime comparison. Similar results for 1997 are omitted to save space.
        Among the 57 manufacturing industries in the table, 15 have a share of domestic
value-added in their exports less than 50 percent in 2002, and collectively account for

6
 Domestic value-added is a concept consistent with Gross Domestic products, which measures the value
creation production activities occurring with national boarder regardless firm ownerships.

                                                  19
nearly 35 percent of China’s merchandise exports that year. Many low-DVA industries
are likely to be labeled as relatively sophisticated, such as telecommunication equipment,
electronic computer, measuring instruments, and electronic devices. A common feature
of these industries is that processing exports account for over two-thirds of their exports
and foreign invested enterprises played an overwhelming role. In 2007, the number of
industry with less than 50 percent domestic contents in their exports declined into 10, but
their exports count for more than 32 percent of China’s total merchandise exports and
these low-DVA industry are more concentrated in high-tech sectors. There are 11
industries in the top 15 low-DVA industries in 2002 still remain in the15 top low-DVA
industries in 2007.
       (insert table 5 and table 6 here)

       The next 18 industries in table 6 have their share of domestic value-added in the
range of 51 to 65 percent; they collectively accounted for 28 percent of China’s total
merchandise exports in 2002. Several labor-intensive sectors are in this group, such as
furniture, toys and sports products, Leather, fur, down and related products.
       The remaining 24 industries have relatively high shares of domestic value-added.
However, they as a group produced only less than 30 percent of China’s total
merchandise exports in 2002. Apparel, the country’s largest labor intensive exporting
industry, which by itself was responsible for 7 percent of the country’s total merchandise
exports in 2002, is at the top of this group with a share of domestic content at 66 percent.
The 12 industries at the bottom of Table 6 with DVA share more than 75 percent
collectively produced only less 10 percent of China’s total merchandise exports in 2002.
       The weights of high-DVA industries in China’s exports increased significantly in
2007. There are, the number of industries with DVA share more than 75 percent increase
to 25 in 2007 (bottom of Table 7), and their exports constitute more than 30 percent of
China’s total merchandise exports in 2007. Among these High-DVA industries, we not
only see the traditional labor industries such as furniture, textiles and apparel still play an
significant role (account for more than half of these high DVA-sector exports) , but also
the increasing role of heavy and capital intensive industries such as automobile, industrial
machinery and rolling steel (account for nearly one thirds of these high-DVA sector’s



                                              20
exports). The data clearly indicate China’s industrial upgrade is real and FIEs have
played very important role in this process.

3.5 DVA shares in Chinese exports by trading partners

        By assuming domestic and foreign value added shares in per unit gross exports
are the same for all destination countries in each IO industry and export regime, we can
further estimate the domestic value-added share in China’s exports to each of its major
trading partners. The decomposition results for China’s total merchandise exports to each
of its major trading partners are reported in Table 7 in increasing order of the estimated
domestic value-added share. Note, however, the variation by destination in this method
is caused solely by China’s export structure to each of its trading partners (exports to
each individual country/region vary by sector and trade regime structures), not the direct
input intensities of imported intermediates in producing such exports.
        Hong Kong, the United States, Singapore, Taiwan and Malaysia are at the top of
the table in both 2002 and 2007, with less than or about 50/60 percent of China’s
domestic value-added embodied in its exports to these five destinations in 2002 and 2007
respectively. Since a large portion of Chinese exports to Hong Kong are re-exports to the
United States, the U.S. remain as China’s largest exports market in both 2002 and 2007.
The lower domestic value-added share in its exports to the U.S. may partially explain
why Chinese exports continued their rapid expansion in the U.S. market despite RMB
gradually appreciation since July 2005. China’s exports to the U.S. have started to slow
down since 2008 when China return to peg exchange its rate to U.S. dollars because the
world financial crisis, likely because of other macro economic factors and policy
measures adopted by the Chinese government during last year. 7
(Insert table 7 here)
        Another interesting feature in Table 8 is that China’s exports to developing
countries embody much higher domestic valued added than its exports to OECD
countries, but exports with higher domestic value-added (more than two thirds of the
gross value of its exports) constituted of less than 13 percent of its total exports of goods

7
 China has taken a series of policy measures to change its preferences to processing trade and
foreign invested enterprises since the end of 2006.

                                               21
in 2002, this share raised to about 20 percent in 2007. It is also interesting to note that the
domestic value-added share in China’s exports to high income country was increased
between 2002 and 2007, while they are declined for exports to developing countries (split
at the row of Mexico in the middle of table 8) indicating relatively more local supplied
inputs were used to making exports to high income countries while relative more
imported inputs were used in producing exports to developing countries.


4. The accuracy of Content Share Estimates
           As we discussed earlier, the estimation procedure presented in this paper is a
formalization and extension of calibration methods widely used in macroeconomics and CGE
modeling. Different from econometric model, evaluation on the accuracy of the calibration
largely rely on a benchmark data set from the real world. However, it is not very easy to find
such a benchmark data set to assess the accuracy of results from our estimation method
because the "true" IO account that separately trace processing exports and other
production transactions in national economy is rarely exist. Fortunately, Mexico’s
statistical agency, the Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Geografía e Informática (INEGI), has
complied 2003 benchmark IO table based on economic census, which have separate accounts for
Mexico domestic and Maquiladora industries 8, which is the major exports promotion program in
Mexico. The table includes national production of goods and services classified under Mexico’s
2002 3- and 4-digit NAICS, inputs purchased in the domestic and Maquiladora industries, and
imports from the rest of the world by both economies. The domestic and foreign content share
computed directly from this special Mexico IO table provides a reference benchmark to
test the performance of the estimation method we proposed. Based on exports and import
statistics for Maquiladora industries in the World Trade Atlas and Mexico's aggregate 2003 IO
table, we implemented the same quadratic programming model that generates domestic/foreign
content estimates for Chinese exports, to compute domestic and foreign value-added share in
Mexico manufacturing exports, and report the estimation results in Table 8.   The three panels in
table 8 lists direct/total domestic/foreign value-added share for normal, processing and total
exports respectively. To quantitatively assess know how much each set of value-added share
estimates differs from the "true" share data computed directly from the Mexico IO table with



8
    We are grateful to INEGI for providing us with the input-output table.

                                                       22
a separate processing trade account, we report three type metrics in the three bottom row
of table 8.
        The first bottom row list the absolute difference between the estimated share and the
"true" shares computed directly from Mexico IO table with a separate processing trade account
for manufacture as a whole. The errors for various share estimates seems less than 3 percentage
point. However, it is the proportionate errors and not the absolute errors that matter; therefore, we
computed the "Mean Absolute Percentage Error" with respect to the true shares as follows:
                          n
                   100 • ∑ | si − s 0 i |
                          i=1
       MAPE =               n

                          ∑ s0
                          i=1
                                 i



where si is the estimated share and s0i share is the reference share for industry i. The
resulted index number is reported in the second bottom row. The error range from 4% to
17% for normal exports, 14% to 28% for processing exports and 12% to 15% for total
exports. Numbers in the last row of table 8 are the correlation coefficients between the
estimated share and the reference shares, they reveal that our estimates are highly
correlated with the true shares computed directly from Mexico IO table with a separate
processing trade account for normal and total exports, while the correlation are lower for
processing exports.

5. Concluding Remarks
        Segmentation of production across countries allows for reductions in production
costs and more efficient allocation of resources. The opening-up of China has likely
facilitated this process. A quantitative assessment of the extent of its participation in
global production chains allows us to get a better grasp of many policy questions,
including the effect of an exchange rate change on bilateral trade balances.
        In this paper, we first present a general framework in assessing the shares of
domestic and foreign value added in a country’s exports when tariff-favored processing
exports are pervasive. This formula nests the existing best known approach (HIY, 2001)
as a special case. Because some of the I/O coefficients called for by the new formula are
not readily available from conventional I/O tables, we propose an easy-to-replicate
mathematical programming procedure to estimate these coefficients by combining
information from detailed trade statistics (which records processing and normal

                                                 23
exports/imports separately) with conventional input-output tables. This methodology
should be applicable to Vietnam, Mexico, and many other developing countries that
engage in a significant amount of processing exports.
       By applying our methodology to Chinese data We find several interesting
patterns. First, the share of foreign content in manufacturing exports from China was
close to 50% during 1997-2002, almost twice as high as that calculated using the HIY
formula. Second, the share of domestic content increased from 51% in 2002 to 60% in
2007, which corresponds to the first five years of China’s membership in the WTO. We
also report interesting heterogeneity across sectors: those sectors that are likely to be
labeled as sophisticated or high-skilled, such as computers, electronic devices, and
telecommunication equipment, tend to have notably low shares of domestic content.
Conversely, many sectors that are relatively intensive in low-skilled labor, such as
apparel, are likely to exhibit a high share of domestic content in the country’s exports.
Finally, we find that foreign invested firms (including both wholly-owned foreign firms
and Sino-foreign joint venture firms) tend to have a relatively low share of domestic
content in their exports.
       There are several areas in which future research can improve upon the estimation
in this paper. First, we assign initial values of the direct domestic value added for
processing exports at the industry level based on the information in a conventional I/O
table. If a firm-level survey data becomes available that tracks the direct value added for
processing and normal exports separately, we can improve the accuracy of our estimates.
Second, as an inherent limitation of an I/O table, the input-output coefficients are
assumed to be fixed - that’s the nature of a Leontief technology - rather than be allowed
to respond to price changes. This could be problematic when a big change in export
volume, such as what China has been experiencing, induces a change in the world market
price for imported inputs, which in turn could trigger a change in the underlying
production technology and in the corresponding I/O coefficients. These could be fruitful
areas for future research.




                                            24
Table 1: Major trade share parameters used in estimation, 1997-2008

           Imported intermediates %          Imported capital goods %    Imported final    Processing
Year                                                                     Consumption      exports as %
        for processing    for normal use   for processing   for normal        %             of total
        exports                            exports          use                             exports
               (1)             (2)                (3)             (4)         (5)             (6)
1996          46.2             26.8              16.7             8.1         2.2            56.0
1997          51.2             28.2              12.1             7.3         1.3            55.1
1998          50.7             28.2              9.7              10.0        1.4            57.4
1999          43.6             35.0              8.2              11.2        2.0            57.3
2000          39.4             41.2              8.5              9.1         1.8            55.7
2001          36.6             41.2              8.7              11.6        1.9            55.9
2002          38.0             39.1              10.2             11.0        1.8            55.9
2003          35.0             41.8              10.7             10.8        1.6            56.0
2004          34.7             43.0              11.8             8.9         1.5            56.3
2005          36.1             43.6              10.6             8.1         1.5            55.6
2006          35.3             44.2              9.8              8.9         1.7            53.6
2007          32.7             47.3              9.0              7.6         3.3            50.1
2008          27.5             53.5              8.1              7.2         3.7            48.1


Source: Authors’ calculations based on official China Custom trade statistics and the United
Nation Broad Economic Categories (UNBEC) classification scheme.

Note: “Normal use” refers to “normal exports and domestic sales.” The UNBEC scheme
classifies each HS 6-digit product into one of three categories: “intermediate inputs,” “capital
goods,” and “final consumption.” For the first two categories, we further decompose the imports
into two subcategories: “processing imports” by customs declaration are classified as used for
producing processing exports and cannot be sold to any domestic users by regulation, and the
remaining imports are classified as for normal use. Capital goods are part of the final demand in a
conventional I/O model (Column (1) to (5) sum to 100%). However, this classification may
under-estimate the import content of exports. We therefore also experiment with classifying a
fraction of the capital goods as inputs used in current year of production. This is discussed in
Section 3.2.




                                                     25
Table 2 Shares of domestic and foreign value added in total exports (%)

                                           The HIY Method                The KWW Method
                                         1997   2002   2007           1997    2002   2007
All Merchandise
Total Foreign value-added                17.6     25.1      28.7       46.0        46.1       39.4
   Direct foreign value-added             8.9      14.7      13.7       44.4        42.5       31.6
Total Domestic Value-added               82.4     74.9      71.3       54.0        53.9       60.6
   Direct domestic value-added           29.4      26.0      20.3       22.2        19.7       17.1

Manufacturing Goods Only
Total Foreign value-added                19.0     26.4      27.1       50.0        48.7       40.3
   Direct foreign value-added             9.7      15.6      16.3       48.3        45.1       32.4
Total Domestic Value-added               81.1     73.6      72.9       50.0        51.3       59.7
   Direct domestic value-added           27.5      24.6      24.6       19.6        18.1       16.5


Source: Authors’ estimates based on China's 1997, 2002 and 2007 Benchmark input-output table
published by Bureau of National Statistics and Official China trade statistics from China
Customs.

Note: The HIY method refers to estimates from using the approach in Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001). The
KWW method refers to estimates from using the approach developed in this paper that takes into account
special features of processing exports.




                                                 26
Table 3: Domestic and Foreign Values Added: Processing vs. Normal Exports
                                    (in percent of total exports)
                                          Normal Exports              Processing Exports
                                       1997   2002     2007         1997     2002     2007
All Merchandise
Total Foreign value-added                 5.2     10.4      16.0     79.0      74.6     62.7
   Direct foreign value-added             2.0         4.2    5.0      78.6      73.0     58.0
Total Domestic Value-added              94.8      89.6      84.0     21.0      25.4     37.3
   Direct domestic value-added           35.1      31.9     23.4      11.7      10.1     10.9

Manufacturing Goods Only
Total Foreign value-added                 5.5     11.0      16.4     79.4      75.2     63.0
   Direct foreign value-added             2.1         4.5    5.2      79.0      73.6     58.3
Total Domestic Value-added              94.5      89.0      83.6     20.7      24.8     37.0
   Direct domestic value-added           31.5      29.5     22.4      11.7      10.0     10.9

Source: Authors’ estimates based on China's 1997, 2002 and 2007 Benchmark input-output table
published by Bureau of National Statistics and Official China trade statistics from China Customs.
Note: The HIY method refers to estimates from using the approach in Hummels, Ishii, and Yi (2001). The
KWW method refers to estimates from using the approach developed in this paper that takes into account
special features of processing exports.




                                                 27
            Table 4: Shares of Domestic Value Added in Exports by Firm Ownership (%), 2002 and
            2007

                              Share of      Non processing             Processing          Weighted-sum         Share of
                             processing                                                                        exports by
                             exports in                                                                           firm
                                total      Direct     Total       Direct      Total      Direct     Total     ownership in
                              exports     domestic   Domestic    domestic    Domestic   domestic   Domestic   China's total
                                           value-     Value-      value-      Value-     value-     Value-      exports
                                           added      added       added       added      added      added
2002
Wholly Foreign Owned            87.5        34.9       90.1          9.8       25.3       13.0       33.4         28.9
Joint Venture Firms             70.5        31.2       89.4          9.9       24.5       16.2       43.6         22.9
State Owned Firms               32.2        32.1       89.6          10.7      26.4       25.2       69.3         38.1
Collectively Owned Firms        27.4        29.9       89.6          10.8      28.2       24.7       72.8          5.8
Private Firms                    9.0        30.7       89.6          10.7      26.3       28.9       83.9          4.3
All Firms                       55.7        31.8       89.3          10.1      26.1       19.7       53.9        100.0
2007
Wholly Foreign Owned            83.0        23.8       83.8          11.4      36.0       13.5       44.1         38.1
Joint Venture Firms             59.5        23.0       83.6          10.4      38.7       15.5       56.9         17.7
State Owned Firms               25.8        23.4       83.4          10.0      39.5       20.0       72.1         18.9
Collectively Owned Firms        24.0        22.4       83.1          8.9       42.0       19.1       73.3         4.0
Private Firms                    9.6        23.5       84.9          9.8       42.0       22.2       80.8         21.3
All Firms                        50         23.5       83.9          10.5      38.7       17.1       60.6        100.0


            Source: Source: Authors’ estimates based on China's 2002 and 2007 Benchmark input-output table
            published by Bureau of National Statistics and Official China trade statistics from China Customs.
            Input/output structure is assumed to be the same for a given export regime within a sector across all
            type firms. The variation of domestic value-added by firm types is due solely to variation in sector
            composition and the relative reliance on processing exports.




                                                                28
Table 5 Domestic Value-added Share in Manufacturing Exports by Sector, 2002
                                                            Value-added decomposition %            % of        % of        % of
IO Industry description                                  Non-        Processing     Weighted     processing     FIE     merchandise
                                                       processing                     sum         exports     exports     exports
                                                      FVA DVA FVA DVA FVA DVA
Telecommunication equipment                           12.6    87.5   94.7    5.3   87.5   12.5        91.2      88.4            3.2
Ship building                                         17.7    82.3   85.3   14.7   82.5   17.5        95.8      21.0            0.6
Electronic computer                                   16.4    83.6   81.3   18.7   80.7   19.3        99.1      89.7            7.0
Cultural and office equipment                         20.3    79.7   80.7   19.3   76.7   23.3        93.4      71.6            4.3
Household electric appliances                         11.8    88.2   93.2    6.8   76.2   23.9        79.1      56.9            1.9
Household Audiovisual Apparatus                       17.5    82.5   78.7   21.3   73.0   27.0        90.6      62.3            5.2
Printing, Reproduction of Recording Media              8.9    91.1   80.3   19.7   68.1   31.9        83.0      62.7            0.3
Plastic                                               15.6    84.4   89.7   10.3   63.4   36.6        64.5      51.2            2.4
Electronic Component                                  15.4    84.6   67.2   32.8   61.9   38.1        89.7      87.5            3.4
Steelmaking                                           11.0    89.0   87.2   12.8   55.8   44.3        58.8      86.1            0.0
Generators                                            14.8    85.2   68.1   32.0   55.7   44.3        76.8      55.8            0.9
Other electronic and communication equipment           2.2    97.8   64.0   36.0   54.7   45.3        84.9      84.9            1.8
Rubber                                                 9.4    90.6   87.8   12.2   51.1   48.9        53.1      44.4            1.6
Nonferrous metal pressing                             13.8    86.2   92.5    7.5   50.7   49.3        46.9      48.7            0.4
Measuring Instruments                                 14.2    85.8   67.1   32.9   50.5   49.5        68.6      51.8            1.8
Paper and Paper Products                               9.2    90.8   87.6   12.4   48.9   51.1        50.7      57.0            0.5
Furniture                                             11.7    88.3   87.5   12.5   47.5   52.5        47.2      56.8            1.7
Articles for Culture, Education and Sports            12.5    87.5   61.8   38.2   47.3   52.7        70.6      56.3            3.3
Activities
Nonferrous metal smelting                             11.1    88.9   89.4   10.6   46.4   53.6        45.0      17.4            0.8
Smelting of Ferroalloy                                16.5    83.6   87.1   13.0   45.2   54.8        40.8      13.1            0.2
Synthetic Materials                                   19.5    80.5   62.9   37.1   44.8   55.2        58.3      65.4            0.3
Petroleum refine and Nuclear Fuel                     20.6    79.4   94.5    5.5   44.3   55.7        32.1      24.9            0.8
Metal products                                         9.7    90.3   89.8   10.2   44.3   55.7        43.2      45.6            4.4
Other transport equipment                             14.0    86.0   87.3   12.7   44.2   55.8        41.2      50.5            1.2
Other electric machinery and equipment                11.6    88.4   59.9   40.1   43.9   56.2        66.8      60.1            5.6
Special Chemical Products                             17.1    82.9   68.6   31.4   41.3   58.7        46.9      48.4            0.8
Other manufacturing products                          10.8    89.2   68.7   31.3   41.0   59.0        52.2      37.6            1.7
Woolen textiles                                        8.9    91.1   91.2    8.8   40.0   60.1        37.8      42.6            0.3
Paints, Printing Inks, Pigments and Similar           16.5    83.5   91.7    8.3   38.4   61.6        29.1      44.4            0.4
Products
Motor vehicles                                        10.5    89.6   90.0   10.0   38.4   61.6        35.2      48.2            0.8
Glass and Its Products                                13.2    86.8   83.5   16.5   36.4   63.6        33.0      48.8            0.5
Leather, fur, down and related products                8.1    91.9   59.7   40.4   36.1   63.9        54.3      50.3            4.5
Chemical Products for Daily Use                       14.7    85.3   73.2   26.8   36.0   64.1        36.3      43.6            0.4
Wearing apparel                                        8.7    91.3   65.7   34.3   34.4   65.6        45.1      39.2            7.0
Chemical Fiber                                        19.8    80.2   90.8    9.2   34.3   65.7        20.5      29.2            0.0
Other special industrial equipment                    10.8    89.3   68.0   32.0   33.6   66.4        39.9      44.0            1.3
Boiler, engines and turbine                           14.1    85.9   86.9   13.1   33.5   66.5        26.7      28.4            0.4
Other industrial machinery                             9.9    90.1   61.4   38.6   32.4   67.6        43.7      43.7            3.5
Iron-smelting                                         13.2    86.8   89.0   11.0   31.2   68.8        23.7       3.0            0.1
Railroad transport equipment                          16.2    83.9   85.4   14.6   29.9   70.1        19.9       5.9            0.1
Wood, Bamboo, Rattan, Palm and Straw Products         12.2    87.8   88.7   11.3   27.2   72.8        19.6      45.6            1.0
Knitted and crocheted fabrics and articles             9.4    90.6   65.3   34.7   27.1   72.9        31.6      34.2            5.8
Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing   14.3    85.7   86.1   13.9   27.1   72.9        17.8      20.8            0.1
machinery
Pesticides                                            23.0    77.0   88.5   11.5   27.1   72.9          6.3     14.4            0.2


                                                             29
Hemp textiles                                    10.5    89.5   88.3   11.7   25.7   74.3        19.5      19.5      0.3
Textiles productions                              9.9    90.1   71.1   28.9   24.6   75.5        24.0      31.8      1.4
Cotton textiles                                   8.2    91.8   64.5   35.6   24.3   75.7        28.7      28.8      3.3
Fire-resistant Materials                          9.5    90.5   84.6   15.4   23.8   76.2        19.1      49.8      0.1
Metalworking machinery                           12.8    87.2   81.2   18.8   21.9   78.1        13.3      27.0      0.2
Medicines                                         9.8    90.2   75.7   24.3   20.9   79.1        16.9      28.7      0.7
Pottery and Porcelain                            11.8    88.2   85.3   14.8   20.2   79.8        11.4      33.1      0.7
Other non-metallic mineral products               9.6    90.4   83.3   16.7   19.9   80.1        14.0      35.7      0.4
Fertilizers                                      15.6    84.4   90.3    9.7   18.9   81.1         4.5      21.7      0.1
Basic Chemical Raw Materials                     12.9    87.1   56.3   43.7   18.0   82.0        11.7      18.8      2.0
Rolling of Steel                                  9.8    90.2   59.5   40.5   17.7   82.3        16.0      16.8      0.3
Cement, Lime and Plaster                          9.0    91.0   79.8   20.3   14.0   86.0         7.0      77.7      0.1
Coking                                            8.6    91.4   86.8   13.2   10.6   89.4         2.6       5.3      0.3
Total Merchandise                                10.4    89.6   74.6   25.4   46.1   53.9        55.7      51.8     92.5



Data source: Authors' estimates. China 2002 and 2007 benchmark IO table have 84 and 90 goods producing
sector respectively, they both concord to China's 4 digit classification of economic activities (GB/T 4754-2002).
This concordance enable us aggregate both year's estimates to 77 consistent goods producing industries reported
in this table.




                                                        30
Table 6 Domestic Value-added Share in Manufacturing Exports by Sector, 2007
                                                               Value-added decomposition %            % of        % of        % of
IO Industry description                                    Non-        Processing     Weighted      processing     FIE     merchandise
                                                         processing                     sum          exports     exports     exports
                                                        FVA DVA        FVA    DVA    FVA DVA
Electronic Component                                    22.5    77.5   76.9   23.1   67.7    32.3        83.1      89.8            4.9
Household Audiovisual Apparatus                         24.1    75.9   70.4   29.6   67.4    32.6        93.4      79.1            2.5
Electronic computer                                     24.3    75.7   67.1   33.0   66.2    33.9        97.9      93.3           11.3
Cultural and office equipment                           25.9    74.1   66.9   33.1   63.5    36.5        91.7      86.4            1.6
Other electronic and communication equipment            32.0    68.0   65.3   34.7   60.3    39.7        84.8      81.6            1.4
Telecommunication equipment                             24.8    75.2   64.7   35.3   56.4    43.6        79.3      83.6            5.9
Ship building                                           16.1    83.9   60.9   39.1   56.2    43.8        89.4      16.5            1.1
Petroleum feline and Nuclear Fuel                       31.3    68.7   79.9   20.1   55.6    44.4        50.1      27.3            0.7
Measuring Instruments                                   20.0    80.0   62.2   37.8   54.2    45.8        81.2      73.3            2.5
Synthetic Materials                                     23.6    76.4   66.1   34.0   52.4    47.7        67.7      66.1            0.6
Household electric appliances                           18.0    82.0   64.4   35.6   48.2    51.8        65.1      61.7            2.7
Other electric machinery and equipment                  19.7    80.3   66.3   33.7   47.9    52.1        60.5      65.9            4.9
Rubber                                                  18.3    81.8   73.0   27.0   46.7    53.4        51.8      41.9            1.7
Plastic                                                 19.2    80.8   68.9   31.1   44.9    55.1        51.7      54.7            1.7
Articles for Culture, Education and Sports Activities   17.0    83.0   54.4   45.6   41.7    58.4        66.0      64.9            2.1
Special Chemical Products                               23.3    76.7   66.0   34.0   38.4    61.6        35.3      51.2            0.8
Chemical Fiber                                          23.6    76.4   48.1   51.9   37.4    62.6        56.2      48.7            0.3
Other special industrial equipment                      17.5    82.5   57.0   43.0   34.8    65.2        43.8      54.7            2.7
Generators                                              19.7    80.3   48.8   51.2   33.4    66.6        47.2      50.3            0.7
Railroad transport equipment                            22.3    77.7   45.9   54.1   31.0    69.0        37.0      12.2            0.1
Leather, fur, down and related products                  9.6    90.4   59.6   40.4   30.8    69.2        42.5      46.0            2.4
Paper and Paper Products                                14.5    85.5   42.4   57.6   30.8    69.2        58.4      62.8            0.4
Metal products                                          15.0    85.1   60.4   39.7   29.9    70.1        32.9      49.5            4.4
Boiler, engines and turbine                             18.4    81.6   61.3   38.7   29.4    70.6        25.6      37.8            0.5
Nonferrous metal pressing                               21.4    78.6   43.9   56.1   28.8    71.2        32.7      41.4            1.0
Other manufacturing products                            13.5    86.5   52.0   48.1   27.7    72.3        36.8      41.5            1.6
Paints, Printing Inks, Pigments and Similar             23.5    76.5   43.2   56.8   27.5    72.6        20.1      47.3            0.3
Products
Pesticides                                              26.1    73.9   46.5   53.6   27.1    72.9          4.8     19.5            0.1
Chemical Products for Daily Use                         19.2    80.8   41.6   58.4   26.7    73.3        33.5      55.5            0.3
Nonferrous metal smelting                               23.8    76.2   43.6   56.4   26.7    73.3        14.6      19.6            0.8
Other transport equipment                               19.0    81.0   45.1   54.9   26.2    73.8        27.8      46.5            0.9
Basic Chemical Raw Materials                            19.2    80.8   57.5   42.5   25.1    74.9        15.6      26.4            1.9
Motor vehicles                                          16.0    84.0   52.6   47.4   24.7    75.3        23.7      42.0            2.0
Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing     19.4    80.6   42.3   57.7   24.4    75.6        21.9      32.7            0.1
machinery
Other industrial machinery                              16.5    83.6   43.8   56.2   24.4    75.6        29.0      49.9            3.4
Iron-smelting                                           24.1    75.9   49.4   50.6   24.4    75.6          1.1     24.3            0.1
Smelting of Ferroalloy                                  24.3    75.7   46.7   53.3   24.4    75.6          0.4       8.8           0.4
Furniture                                               13.3    86.7   43.9   56.1   23.8    76.2        34.2      56.0            2.0
Printing, Reproduction of Recording Media               13.6    86.4   39.0   61.0   23.5    76.5        39.0      44.4            0.2
Glass and Its Products                                  16.7    83.3   41.0   59.0   23.3    76.7        27.2      46.4            0.6
Woolen textiles                                         10.6    89.4   42.2   57.9   23.1    76.9        39.8      46.8            0.2
Metalworking machinery                                  18.8    81.2   43.2   56.8   22.7    77.3        16.0      36.4            0.3
Rolling of Steel                                        20.0    80.0   47.2   52.9   22.2    77.8          8.3     22.6            3.8


                                                               31
Fertilizers                                      19.0    81.0   42.7   57.3   22.1    77.9        13.2       9.5    0.3
Cotton textiles                                  12.0    88.0   54.3   45.8   21.1    78.9        21.5     26.1     2.1
Wearing apparel                                  10.5    89.5   46.1   53.9   21.0    79.0        29.7     36.9     4.6
Medicines                                        12.4    87.6   62.5   37.5   19.7    80.3        14.5     32.3     0.8
Wood, Bamboo, Rattan, Palm and Straw Products    15.4    84.6   41.7   58.4   19.6    80.4        16.1     33.1     1.0
Steelmaking                                      19.2    80.8   48.3   51.7   19.2    80.8         0.2       7.1    0.3
Pottery and Porcelain                            16.6    83.4   41.9   58.2   18.0    82.0         5.2     29.9     0.5
Textiles productions                             11.6    88.4   45.1   54.9   17.6    82.4        18.1     35.1     1.8
Knitted and crocheted fabrics and articles       11.8    88.2   48.4   51.6   17.5    82.5        15.6     25.7     5.7
Other non-metallic mineral products              14.0    86.0   43.4   56.6   17.0    83.0        10.1     25.1     0.5
Hemp textiles                                    13.4    86.6   43.2   56.8   16.1    83.9         9.0     14.7     0.2
Fire-resistant Materials                         13.5    86.6   44.9   55.1   15.3    84.7         5.8     51.6     0.1
Cement, Lime and Plaster                         11.0    89.0   47.1   52.9   11.6    88.4         1.7     29.6     0.1
Coking                                           10.4    89.6                 10.4    89.6         0.0     11.4      0.3
Total Merchandise                                16.0    84.0   62.7   37.3   39.4    60.6        50.1     55.7     96.0



Data source: Authors' estimates. China 2002 and 2007 benchmark IO table have 84 and 90 goods producing
sector respectively, they both concord to China's 4 digit classification of economic activities (GB/T 4754-2002).
This concordance enable us aggregate both year's estimates to 77 consistent goods producing industries reported
in this table.




                                                        32
               Table 7 Total Domestic Value-added Share in Chinese Gross Merchandise Exports
               to its Major Trading Partners, in percent, 2002 and 2007


Region description                 Share of        Non processing        Processing          Weighted-sum     Share in total
                              processing exports                                                              exports to the
                               in total exports                                                                   World
Year                             2002       2007     2002      2007      2002      2007       2002     2007      2002 2007
Hong Kong                         74.0      77.4     89.8      83.0      26.3         35.3     42.8    46.0         17.5   14.3
United States                     67.2      61.7     89.2      84.6      24.3         38.2     45.5    56.0         21.6   19.1
Singapore                         62.7      59.7     88.7      83.4      24.3         33.0     48.3    53.3          2.1    2.4
Taiwan province                   59.6      50.7     89.3      81.9      27.1         34.9     52.2    58.0          2.0    1.9
Malaysia                          57.6      52.0     90.4      84.0      25.5         33.5     53.0    57.7          1.5    1.5
Japan                             59.2      56.4     90.7      85.4      27.6         40.5     53.3    60.1         15.0    8.4
EU15                              54.8      50.9     89.4      84.0      23.6         37.2     53.4    60.2         14.9   18.3
Thailand                          48.1      38.8     88.3      82.0      22.9         38.7     56.8    65.2          0.9    1.0
Rest of OECD                      46.9      38.5     89.7      85.4      25.4         40.3     59.5    68.0          1.7    2.1
Korea Rep                         45.4      43.2     90.4      83.5      27.1         37.0     61.6    63.4          4.8    4.7
Australia/NZ                      41.6      42.8     89.3      84.4      23.0         38.6     61.7    64.8          1.6    1.7
Mexico                            42.1      49.1     89.6      84.2      26.6         35.8     63.1    60.4          0.9    0.9
Philippines                       37.6      38.2     89.1      83.5      25.2         33.8     65.1    64.5          0.6    0.6
EU12                              36.5      50.8     90.2      83.4      22.9         35.8     65.7    59.2          1.5    1.9
Brazil                            35.0      36.7     89.4      83.2      27.1         37.7     67.6    66.5          0.5    0.9
India                             24.0      27.0     89.3      81.7      21.5         38.6     73.1    70.1          0.8    2.0
Rest of Latin Am/Caribbean        20.3      24.2     89.2      83.4      23.1         38.1     75.8    72.5          1.6    2.4
Indonesia                         20.7      23.4     89.4      83.3      25.8         36.1     76.2    72.2          1.1    1.1
Middle East/North Africa          19.4      18.2     89.3      83.9      21.9         38.8     76.3    75.6          3.6    4.8
Eastern Europe/Central Asia       18.9      16.6     89.4      85.0      26.3         39.2     77.5    77.4          0.9    2.8
Rest Asia                         17.2      18.9     88.6      83.5      27.0         41.6     77.9    75.6          2.2    2.6
Sub-Saharan Africa                15.5      16.1     89.6      83.9      22.1         38.8     79.2    76.6          1.4    2.1
Russia                            15.5      16.9     90.9      85.6      30.4         39.3     81.5    77.8          1.1    2.4
World                             55.7      50.0     89.6      84.0      25.4         37.3     53.9    60.6     100.0      99.9


                  Source: Authors’ estimates based on China's 2002 and 2007 Benchmark input-output table
                  published by Bureau of National Statistics and Official China trade statistics from China
                  Customs. Input/output structure is assumed to be the same for a given export regime within a
                  sector across all trading partners. The variation of domestic value-added by destination is due
                  solely to variation in sector composition and the relative reliance on processing exports.




                                                              33
                                             Table 8 Domestic and Foreign content in Mexico Gross Exports, 2003
                                         – Estimated from aggregated Mexico IO table by Mathematical Programing model

                                                                        Normal Exports                       Maquiladora exports                            Weighted Sum
NAICS   NAICS description                                     Direct    Direct     Total     Total      Direct    Direct     Total     Total      Direct    Direct     Total     Total
code                                                          foreign   domestic   Foreign   Domestic   foreign   domestic   Foreign   Domestic   foreign   domestic   Foreign   Domestic
                                                              value-    value-     value-    Value-     value-    value-     value-    Value-     value-    value-     value-    Value-
                                                              added     added      added     added      added     added      added     added      added     added      added     added

311     Food Manufacturing                                        6.2       38.4      12.3       87.7      46.7       20.2      50.3       49.7     10.1        36.7      16.0       84.0
312     Beverage and Tobacco Product Manufacturing               12.4       42.4      17.5       82.5      54.9       22.6      57.7       42.3     14.1        41.6      19.1       81.0
313     Textile Mills                                            20.3       33.6      27.7       72.3      46.1       16.4      51.3       48.7     30.0        27.2      36.6       63.4
314     Textile Product Mills                                    24.9       35.4      32.4       67.6      66.2       16.4      67.5       32.5     41.8        27.7      46.7       53.3
315     Apparel Manufacturing                                    17.8       49.2      23.7       76.3      67.5       18.6      68.5       31.5     54.1        26.8      56.4       43.6
316     Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing                 11.0       36.4      19.3       80.7      64.3       18.7      65.7       34.3     27.0        31.1      33.3       66.8
321     Wood Product Manufacturing                                7.2       43.6      10.7       89.4      59.9       23.0      62.1       37.9     25.3        36.5      28.3       71.7
322     Paper Manufacturing                                      11.8       33.1      19.9       80.1      57.6       17.0      59.6       40.4     27.8        27.5      33.7       66.3
323     Printing and Related Support Activities                  14.8       40.5      20.9       79.2      54.9       20.2      56.6       43.4     46.5        24.5      49.1       50.9
324     Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing                 4.9       14.3      10.0       90.0      56.3        8.1      60.8       39.2       5.2       14.3      10.4       89.7
325     Chemical Manufacturing                                   12.0       30.6      17.1       82.9      48.6       15.8      50.7       49.3     13.6        29.9      18.7       81.4
326     Plastics and Rubber Products Manufacturing               21.9       34.0      28.1       72.0      60.0       16.3      61.8       38.2     41.3        25.0      45.3       54.8
327     Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing                 7.6       53.6      11.8       88.2      45.6       27.6      47.9       52.1     15.5        48.2      19.3       80.7
331     Primary Metal Manufacturing                              10.5       36.6      17.5       82.5      74.6       18.9      75.4       24.6     15.0        35.3      21.7       78.4
332     Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing                   18.4       38.6      24.5       75.5      57.2       18.2      59.6       40.5     37.3        28.7      41.6       58.4
333     Machinery Manufacturing                                  18.4       40.9      25.1       74.9      60.1       19.0      61.8       38.2     35.1        32.1      39.9       60.2
334     Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing            30.6       39.0      38.0       62.0      82.4        8.8      83.1       16.9     74.6        13.4      76.3       23.7
335     Electrical Equipment and Component Manufacturing         25.2       42.3      31.3       68.7      70.6       13.3      72.1       27.9     62.7        18.3      65.0       35.0
336     Transportation Equipment Manufacturing                   24.8       34.6      31.6       68.4      83.8       16.1      83.8       16.2     45.1        28.2      49.6       50.4
337     Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing              16.3       47.1      21.2       78.8      57.9       21.4      59.6       40.4     44.5        29.7      47.2       52.8
339     Miscellaneous Manufacturing                             19.9        50.5      24.9       75.1     65.7        18.5      67.1       32.9     56.2        25.2      58.2       41.8
        Total                                                    20.4       36.7      26.9       73.2      75.8       13.2      76.8       23.2     51.2        23.6      54.6       45.4
B1      Error at manufacture aggregate compare to true data      1.4       -1.0       2.1       -2.1      -0.4       -0.3      -0.7        0.7      -3.3        1.0      -2.8        2.8
B2      Mean Absolute Percentage Error from the True Data        22.7        2.9      17.3        4.3      16.1       14.1      14.2       28.0     18.5         7.8      15.3       12.4
B3      Correlation with true data                             0.829       0.985     0.862      0.862    0.462       0.666     0.474      0.474    0.936       0.972     0.944      0.944




                                                                                         34
                                        Domestic and Foreign content in Mexico Gross Exports, 2003
                             – Computed directly from Mexico IO Table with Separate Maquiladora Economy Account

                                                                     Normal Exports                       Maquiladora exports                            Weighted Sum
NAICS   NAICS description                                  Direct    Direct     Total     Total      Direct    Direct     Total     Total      Direct    Direct     Total     Total
code                                                       foreign   domestic   Foreign   Domestic   foreign   domestic   Foreign   Domestic   foreign   domestic   Foreign   Domestic
                                                           value-    value-     value-    Value-     value-    value-     value-    Value-     value-    value-     value-    Value-
                                                           added     added      added     added      added     added      added     added      added     added      added     added

311     Food Manufacturing                                     7.6       38.5      13.3       86.7      48.9       23.3      52.0       48.0     16.7        35.1      21.8       78.2
312     Beverage and Tobacco Product Manufacturing             7.2       42.4      13.0       87.0       8.8       19.2      19.6       80.4       7.3       41.2      13.4       86.6
313     Textile Mills                                         25.0       34.6      29.9       70.1      50.5       19.0      54.8       45.2     40.5        25.1      45.0       55.0
314     Textile Product Mills                                 18.1       39.5      24.9       75.1      71.4       18.6      72.5       27.5     59.1        23.4      61.6       38.4
315     Apparel Manufacturing                                 15.3       48.7      21.5       78.5      63.3       21.5      65.3       34.7     53.3        27.2      56.2       43.8
316     Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing              12.8       37.3      20.2       79.8      70.7       17.5      72.1       27.9     48.0        25.3      51.8       48.2
321     Wood Product Manufacturing                             5.1       43.8       7.9       92.1      55.8       24.1      58.1       41.9     33.0        32.9      35.6       64.4
322     Paper Manufacturing                                   19.0       33.3      26.3       73.7      65.6       20.0      67.3       32.7     45.3        25.8      49.4       50.6
323     Printing and Related Support Activities               14.2       40.3      20.7       79.3      63.4       19.6      64.9       35.1     48.6        25.8      51.6       48.4
324     Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing              4.5       14.3       8.1       91.9      78.4       14.6      79.1       20.9       4.5       14.3       8.1       91.9
325     Chemical Manufacturing                                11.2       30.7      15.6       84.4      64.3       18.0      66.4       33.6     17.3        29.2      21.5       78.5
326     Plastics and Rubber Products Manufacturing            22.7       34.7      27.6       72.4      64.1       19.0      66.2       33.8     52.8        23.3      55.7       44.3
327     Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing              5.9       54.5       9.7       90.3      62.2       20.3      64.3       35.7     27.8        41.2      31.0       69.0
331     Primary Metal Manufacturing                           12.8       37.0      19.4       80.6      61.9       17.8      64.4       35.6     22.6        33.2      28.4       71.6
332     Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing                14.7       39.7      20.9       79.1      70.6       16.4      72.1       27.9     45.6        26.8      49.2       50.8
333     Machinery Manufacturing                               18.2       43.7      23.1       76.9      75.3       11.9      76.7       23.4     43.7        29.5      47.0       53.0
334     Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing         24.2       43.9      28.8       71.2      85.2        8.2      86.0       14.0     77.7        12.6      78.9       21.1
335     Electrical Equipment and Component Manufacturing      17.8       41.0      23.5       76.5      74.2       13.7      75.7       24.3     63.5        18.9      65.8       34.2
336     Transportation Equipment Manufacturing                24.8       35.6      31.2       68.8      74.3       16.5      75.3       24.7     45.8        27.5      49.9       50.1
337     Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing           11.5       49.2      16.2       83.8      65.3       18.4      67.2       32.8     52.3        25.9      54.8       45.2
339     Miscellaneous Manufacturing                           11.7       52.6      16.1       84.0      70.4       18.5      71.7       28.3     61.4        23.7      63.1       36.9
        Total                                                 19.0       37.7      24.7       75.3      76.3       13.4      77.5       22.5     54.5        22.6      57.5       42.6




                                                                                    35
Reference

Banister, Judith, (2005), “Manufacturing employment in China” BLS Monthly Labor
Review (July)

Brooke, Kendrick, Meeraus, and Raman, 2005, “GAMS -- User's Guide” GAMS
Development Cooperation, Washington, DC.

Chen, X., L. Cheng, K.C. Fung and L. J. Lau. 2004. “The Estimation of Domestic
Value-Added and Employment Induced by Exports: An Application to Chinese Exports
to the United States,” Stanford University.

Chinn, Menzie D., 2005, “Supply Capacity, Vertical Specialization and Tariff Rates: The
Implications for Aggregate U.S. Trade Flow Equations,” NBER working paper 11719.

Dean, Judith M., K.C. Fung, and Zhi Wang, 2007, “Measuring the Vertical Specialization
in Chinese Trade,” Office of Economics Working Paper No. 2007-01-A, U.S.
International Trade Commission.

Goh, Ai-Ting, and Jacques Olivier, 2004, “International Vertical Specialization,
Imperfect Competition and Welfare,” HEC School of Management (France) working
paper.

Koopman, Robert, Zhi Wang and Shang-jin Wei, 2008, “How much Chinese exports is
really made in China – Assessing foreign and domestic value-added in gross exports,”
Office of Economics Working Paper No. 2008-03-B, U.S. International Trade
Commission.

Krugman, Paul, 2008, “Trade and Wages, Reconsidered,” paper prepared for the
Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, Princeton University manuscript, February.
http://www.princeton.edu/~pkrugman/pk-bpea-draft.pdf.

Lau, L.J., X. Chen, L. K. Cheng, K. C. Fung, Y. Sung, C. Yang, K. Zhu, J. Pei and Z.
Tang. “Non-Competitive Input-Output Model and Its Application: An Examination of
the China-U.S. Trade Surplus” Social Science in China, 2007(5): 91-103 (in Chinese).

Lawrence, Robert， 2008， Blue Collar Blues: Is Trade to Blame for Rising US Income
Inequality? Peterson Institute for International Economics.

Linden, Greg, Kenneth L, Kraemer, and Jason Dedrick, 2007, “What Captures Value in a
Global Innovation System?” The Paul Merage School of Business, UC Irvine, working
paper.

Hummels, D., J. Ishii and K. Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical
Specialization in World Trade,” Journal of international economics 54:75-96.


                                          36
National Research Council , 2006, Analyzing the U.S. Content of Imports and the Foreign
Content of Exports. Committee on Analyzing the U.S. Content of Imports and the
Foreign Content of Exports. Center for Economics, Governance, and International
Studies, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press.

Rodrik, Dani, 2006, “What’s so special about China’s exports?” China & World
Economy. 14(5): 1-19, September/October.

Schott, Peter, 2008, “The relative sophistication of Chinese exports,” Economic Policy
53:5-49, January.

Varian, Hal R., 2007, “An iPod Has Global Value. Ask the (Many) Countries That Make
it,” The New York Times, June 28.

Wang, Zhi, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2008, “What accounts for the rising sophistication of
China’s exports?” NBER Working Paper 13771, February.

Xu, Bin, 2007, “Measuring China’s export sophistication,” China Europe International
Business School working paper.

Yi, Kei-Mu, 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 111, 1: 52-102.




                                           37
   Appendix Table A Trade share parameters used in estimation, %, 2007
IO Industry description                              Interme-          Interme-         Capital         Capital       final      processing
                                                     diates for        diates for       goods for       goods for     Consu      exports
                                                     processing        normal use       normal use      Processing    m-ption
                                                     exports                                            exports
                                                          (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)         (5)          (6)
Farming                                                         7.7           83.9                                         8.4              2.0
Forestry                                                      31.2            68.8                                                          3.4
Animal Husbandry                                              30.6            66.9                2.0                     0.5               2.2
Fishery                                                       39.1             6.6                                       54.3               2.4
Services in Support of Agriculture                            14.3            85.7
Mining and Washing of Coal                                                   100.0                                                          0.0
Extraction of Petroleum and Natural Gas                        8.5            91.5                                                          5.4
Mining of Ferrous Metal Ores                                   0.0           100.0
Mining of Non-Ferrous Metal Ores                               4.3            95.7                                                         18.1
Mining and Processing of Nonmetal Ores and Other              45.4            54.6                                                         57.6
Ores
Grinding of Grains                                            12.6               37.6                                    49.9               9.7
Processing of Forage                                           1.9               94.8                                     3.3               5.5
Refining of Vegetable Oil                                      2.7               93.0                                     4.3              32.9
Manufacture of Sugar                                          13.5               69.6                                    16.9              18.5
Slaughtering and Processing of Meat                            9.8               28.7                                    61.5              17.0
Processing of Aquatic Product                                 58.4               24.9                                    16.7              46.5
Processing of Other Foods                                     34.4               22.2                                    43.4              15.2
Manufacture of Convenience Food                               11.4               11.2                                    77.4              29.5
Manufacture of Liquid Milk and Dairy Products                  0.9               61.1                                    37.9               8.6
Manufacture of Flavoring and Ferment Products                 53.2                9.1                                    37.7              17.9
Manufacture of Other Foods                                     7.0               23.5                                    69.5              27.3
Manufacture of Alcohol and Wine                                0.5                1.1                                    98.5               8.6
Processing of Soft Drinks and Purified Tea                     7.3               16.8                                    75.8              30.6
Manufacture of Tobacco                                        30.9                8.4                                    60.6               2.6
Spinning and Weaving, Printing and Dyeing of                  90.4                9.5                                     0.0              21.5
Cotton and Chemical Fiber
Spinning and Weaving, Dyeing and Finishing of                 73.4               26.5                                     0.2              39.8
Wool
Spinning and Weaving of Hemp and Tiffany                      61.2               38.8                                     0.0               9.0
Manufacture of Textile Products                               77.5               19.8                                     2.8              18.1
Manufacture of Knitted Fabric and Its Products                84.4                5.1                                    10.6              15.6
Manufacture of Textile Wearing Apparel, Footwear              57.5                0.0                                    42.5              29.7
and Caps
Manufacture of Leather, Fur, Feather(Down) and Its            68.1               23.6                                     8.3              42.5
Products
Processing of Timbers, Manufacture of Wood,                   46.0               53.7                                     0.3              16.1
Bamboo, Rattan, Palm and Straw Products
Manufacture of Furniture                                       8.3               56.2             5.4           0.4      29.7              34.2
Manufacture of Paper and Paper Products                       28.3               66.2                                     5.5              58.4
Printing, Reproduction of Recording Media                     59.2               23.8                                    17.0              39.0
Manufacture of Articles for Culture, Education and            69.9                6.9             1.9           4.0      17.3              66.0
Sports Activities
Processing of Petroleum and Nuclear Fuel                       2.3               97.5             0.3                     0.0              50.1
Coking                                                         0.6               99.4
Manufacture of Basic Chemical Raw Materials                   19.8               80.2                                                      15.6
Manufacture of Fertilizers                                     0.2               99.8                                                      13.2
Manufacture of Pesticides                                      0.4                                                       99.6               4.8
Manufacture of Paints, Printing Inks, Pigments and            41.7               58.2                                     0.0              20.1
Similar Products
Manufacture of Synthetic Materials                            58.8               41.2                                                      67.7
Manufacture of Special Chemical Products                      48.2               50.6             0.0                     1.2              35.3
Manufacture of Chemical Products for Daily Use                16.3               61.0                                    22.7              33.5
Manufacture of Medicines                                      10.2               38.4                                    51.4              14.5
Manufacture of Chemical Fiber                                 50.3               49.7                                     0.0              56.2

                                                                  38
Manufacture of Rubber                                 27.7     69.2                           3.2        51.8
Manufacture of Plastic                                64.2     28.5                           7.3        51.7
Manufacture of Cement, Lime and Plaster                8.7     91.3                                       1.7
Manufacture of Products of Cement and Plaster         16.1     83.9                                      26.8
Manufacture of Brick, Stone and Other Building        34.9     65.1                                       9.3
Materials
Manufacture of Glass and Its Products                 73.4     25.0                           1.6        27.2
Manufacture of Pottery and Porcelain                  33.1     62.2                           4.8         5.2
Manufacture of Fire-resistant Materials               20.0     80.0                                       5.8
Manufacture of Graphite and Other Nonmetallic         41.3     58.2                           0.5         7.1
Mineral Products
Iron-smelting                                          7.9     92.1                                       1.1
Steelmaking                                            3.4     96.6                                       0.2
Rolling of Steel                                      48.7     51.3                                       8.2
Smelting of Ferroalloy                                16.7     83.3                                       0.4
Smelting of Non-Ferrous Metals and Manufacture of     37.4     62.6                                      14.5
Alloys
Rolling of Non-Ferrous Metals                         68.0     32.0                                      32.7
Manufacture of Metal Products                         42.5     46.6       3.0         6.1     1.8        32.9
Manufacture of Boiler and Prime Mover                 19.6     50.8      22.1         7.3     0.2        25.6
Manufacture of Metalworking Machinery                  2.3     10.5      30.8        56.4                16.0
Manufacture of Lifters                                                   41.9        58.1                51.8
Manufacture of Pump, Valve and Similar Machinery      11.4     41.0      32.3        15.4                23.3
Manufacture of Other General Purpose Machinery        20.3     42.5      18.2        18.9     0.0        27.8
Manufacture of Special Purpose Machinery for           7.6     34.4      41.1        17.0                12.3
Mining, Metallurgy and Construction
Manufacture of Special Purpose Machinery for           1.7      2.9      32.2        63.3                19.3
Chemical Industry, Processing of Timber and
Nonmetals
Manufacture of Special Purpose Machinery for           3.3     11.2      70.4         7.8     7.4        21.9
Agriculture, Forestry, Animal Husbandry and Fishery
Manufacture of Other Special Purpose Machinery        14.6     10.4      32.7        41.2     1.1        66.0
Manufacture of Railroad Transport Equipment            1.9     68.4      29.7         0.0                37.0
Manufacture of Automobiles                             2.3     49.8       4.8         0.3    42.7        23.7
Manufacture of Boats and Ships and Floating           21.4      9.5      65.3         0.8     3.0        89.4
Devices
Manufacture of Other Transport Equipment               3.2      9.2      86.3                 1.3        27.7
Manufacture of Generators                             11.8     21.0      41.1        26.0                47.2
Manufacture of Equipments for Power Transmission      39.4     36.8      12.9        10.9                73.9
and Distribution and Control
Manufacture of Wire, Cable, Optical Cable and         60.1     35.3       2.4         1.9     0.3        65.5
Electrical Appliances
Manufacture of Household Electric and Non-electric    17.7     18.3      20.3        37.0     6.8        65.1
Appliances
Manufacture of Other Electrical Machinery and         59.1     15.0      13.8        11.2     0.9        45.7
Equipment
Manufacture of Communication Equipment                36.6     31.6      22.2         9.5     0.1        79.3
Manufacture of Radar and Broadcasting Equipment       51.3     16.6       7.0         4.9    20.2        84.8
Manufacture of Computer                               34.0     10.3      29.8        25.9                97.9
Manufacture of Electronic Component                   77.0     18.9       0.9         2.9     0.3        83.1
Manufacture of Household Audiovisual Apparatus        74.5      7.6       3.3         1.9    12.6        93.4
Manufacture of Other Electronic Equipment             15.8      4.1      18.7        60.7     0.8        80.9
Manufacture of Measuring Instruments                  32.3     16.4      37.3         9.4     4.6        91.7
Manufacture of Machinery for Cultural Activity &      70.0      9.6       0.3         0.0    20.1        36.8
Office Work
Manufacture of Artwork, Other Manufacture             10.9     89.1                                       7.9
Scrap and Waste                                               100.0                                      41.0
Total Merchandise                                     32.7     47.3       7.6         9.0     3.3        51.6
   Source: Source: Author’s aggregation from official trade statistics from China Customs. UN BEC
   classification and processing trade information from China custom trade statistics were combined to
   identify the purpose of final use.
    Note: Column (1) to (5) sum to 100.

                                                         39
         Appendix Table B Trade share parameters used in estimation, %, 2002

IO Industry description                                       Interme-          Interme-          Capital    Capital         final            processing
                                                              diates for        diates for        goods      goods for       Consum-          exports
                                                              processing        normal use        for        Processing      ption
                                                              exports                             normal     exports
                                                                                                  use
                                                                   (1)               (2)              (3)        (4)             (5)             (6)
Agriculture                                                              11.9              75.0                                        13.1            2.6
Forestry                                                                 66.0              34.0                                         0.0            4.0
Logging and transport of timber and bamboo                                4.0              96.0
Animal Husbandry                                                         32.5              64.9        2.5                              0.0            2.8
Fishery                                                                   6.0               0.5                                        93.5            1.2
Technical services for agriculture, forestry, livestock and
fishing                                                                  52.4                                                          47.6         30.0
Mining and Washing of Coal                                                0.9              99.1
Extraction of Petroleum and Natural Gas                                  11.2              88.8                                                        3.4
Ferrous metal ore mining                                                  5.9              94.1
Non-ferrous metal ore mining                                             19.4              80.6                                                      7.2
Salt mining                                                               9.8              90.2                                                      1.0
Non-metal minerals and other mining                                      70.6              29.4                                                     33.9
Grain mill products                                                      71.0              24.7                                         4.3         53.0
forage                                                                    1.9              95.4                                         2.7         18.2
vegetable oil refining                                                    4.0              91.4                                         4.6         33.1
Sugar manufacturing                                                      32.1              66.7                                         1.2         87.9
Slaughtering and meat processing                                          9.2              25.4                                        65.4         17.5
Fish and fish productions                                                66.8              19.6                                        13.6         41.6
All other food manufacturing                                             15.5              27.1                                        57.4         25.0
Wines, spirits and liquors                                                1.8               2.2                                        96.1         21.0
Soft drink and other beverage                                             5.5              26.5                                        68.0         15.0
Tobacco products                                                          0.5               0.1                                        99.4          5.0
Cotton textiles                                                          84.2              15.8                                         0.0         28.7
Woolen textiles                                                          86.7              13.3                                         0.1         37.7
Hemp textiles                                                            98.0               1.9                                         0.0         19.5
Textiles productions                                                     89.5               9.7                                         0.8         24.0
Knitted and crocheted fabrics and articles                               93.1               1.1                                         5.8         31.6
Wearing apparel                                                          87.2               0.0                                        12.8         45.1
Leather, fur, down and related products                                  91.1               7.6                                         1.3         54.3
Products of wood, bamboo, cane, palm, straw                              59.0              41.0                                                     19.6
Furniture                                                                28.0              42.7        7.3             1.8             20.3         47.2
Paper and paper products                                                 36.9              62.8                                         0.3         50.7
Printing, reproduction of recording media                                71.6               8.8                                        19.5         83.0
Stationary and related products                                          31.1              60.9                                         8.0         39.4
Toys, sporting and athletic and recreation products                      80.4               1.2        0.3             6.8             11.3         72.9
Petroleum and nuclear processing                                          2.5              97.1        0.4             0.0                          32.1
Coking                                                                    3.7              96.3                                                      2.6
Basic chemicals                                                          25.8              74.2                                                     11.7
Chemical fertilizers                                                      0.2              99.8                                                      4.5
Chemical pesticides                                                       5.2                                                          94.8          6.2
paints, varnishes and similar coatings, printing ink and
mastics                                                                  50.4              49.6                                         0.0         29.1
Man-made chemical products                                               59.7              40.3                                                     58.3
Special chemical products                                                65.9              33.1        0.0             0.0              1.1         46.9
Chemical products for daily use                                          33.9              53.1                                        12.9         36.3
Medical and pharmaceutical products                                       5.8              40.1                                        54.1         16.9
Chemical fibers                                                          44.1              55.9                                                     20.5
Rubber products                                                          42.5              54.2                                         3.3         53.1
Plastic products                                                         70.6              25.3                                         4.1         64.5
Cement, lime and plaster                                                 14.0              86.0                                                      7.0


                                                                         40
IO Industry description                                      Interme-        Interme-       Capital    Capital      final            processing
                                                             diates for      diates for     goods      goods for    Consum-          exports
                                                             processing      normal use     for        Processing   ption
                                                             exports                        normal     exports
                                                                                            use
Glass and glass products                                              73.7           25.6                                      0.7         33.0
Pottery, china and earthenware                                        39.8           55.4                                      4.8         11.4
Fireproof materials                                                   33.6           66.4                                                  19.1
Other non-metallic mineral products                                   42.9           56.3                                      0.8         14.0
Iron-smelting                                                          5.4           94.6                                                  23.7
Steel-smelting                                                        36.2           63.8                                                  58.8
Steel pressing                                                        37.6           62.4                                                  16.0
Alloy iron smelting                                                    8.1           91.9                                                  40.8
Nonferrous metal smelting                                             24.3           75.7                                                  45.0
Nonferrous metal pressing                                             68.4           31.6                                                  46.9
Metal products                                                        32.9           33.7        5.9         27.1              0.5         43.2
Boiler, engines and turbine                                            8.8           64.2       21.7          5.2              0.1         26.6
Metalworking machinery                                                 3.7            9.5       28.1         58.8                          13.3
Other general industrial machinery                                    20.7           18.5       18.8         41.6              0.4         43.7
Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing
machinery                                                              2.3           10.7       62.4         17.2              7.4         17.8
Other special industrial equipment                                     7.4            8.6       35.5         47.9              0.5         39.9
Railroad transport equipment                                           0.3           31.9       67.8          0.0                          19.9
Motor vehicles                                                         0.6            2.1       87.7          9.3              0.3         37.8
Parts and accessories for motor vehicles and their engines             4.1           95.9                                                  34.3
Ship building                                                          8.0           40.3       45.7          5.3              0.7         95.8
Other transport equipment                                              9.5           30.7       59.8                           0.0         41.2
Generators                                                            22.9           12.5       28.3         36.2                          76.8
Household electric appliances                                         63.6           23.5        1.0          0.5             11.3         79.1
Other electric machinery and equipment                                53.5           18.6        8.8         18.9              0.2         66.8
Telecommunication equipment                                            4.2           17.4       74.6          3.8              0.0         91.2
Electronic computer                                                                             91.8          8.2                          99.1
Other computer peripheral equipment                                   54.4           12.4       20.4         12.9                          99.2
Electronic element and device                                         80.6           17.7        0.2          1.5                          89.7
Radio, television and communication equipment and
apparatus                                                             76.3            4.3        8.2          6.9              4.4         90.6
Other electronic and communication equipment                          45.0           50.9        3.5          0.6                          84.9
Instruments, meters and other measuring equipment                     10.7            3.4       18.1         66.8              0.9         68.6
Cultural and office equipment                                         54.1           11.2       18.6         14.5              1.6         93.4
Arts and crafts products                                              93.3            1.4                                      5.3         53.8
Other manufacturing products                                          91.4            5.4        0.2          0.0              3.0         48.8
Scrap and waste                                                        9.0           91.0                                                  26.0
Total Merchandise                                                     38.0           39.1       11.0         10.2              1.8         55.9


         Source: Source: Author’s aggregation from official trade statistics from China Customs. UN
         BEC classification and processing trade information from China custom trade statistics were
         combined to identify the purpose of final use.
          Note: Column (1) to (5) sum to 100.
         .




                                                                      41
           Appendix Table C Trade share parameters used in estimation, %, 1997

                                                          Interme-            Interme-           Capital    Capital        final            processing
                                                          diates for          diates for         goods      goods for      Consum-          exports
                                                          processing          normal use         for        Processing     ption
                                                          exports                                normal     exports
Description                                                                                      use
                                                               (1)                 (2)               (3)       (4)             (5)             (6)
Crop cultivation                                                     43.7                 51.7                                        4.7            2.9
Forestry                                                             45.9                 26.2                                       27.8            3.6
Livestock and livestock products                                     69.9                 29.3        0.7                             0.1            3.5
Fishery                                                              16.7                  0.0                                       83.3            8.8
Other agricultural products                                          77.8                 10.6                                       11.5         11.5
Coal mining and processing                                           36.0                 64.0
Crude petroleum products                                             22.2                 77.8                                                       0.0
Natural gas products                                                                     100.0
Ferrous ore mining                                                   53.4                 46.6
Non-ferrous ore mining                                               57.2                 42.8                                                       8.2
Salt mining                                                          43.9                 56.1                                                       0.9
Non-metal minerals and other mining                                  84.7                 15.3                                                    22.6
Logging and transport of timber and bamboo                           27.5                 72.5                                                       5.9
Grain mill products, vegetable oil and forage                        23.6                 76.0                                        0.4         51.6
Sugar refining                                                       51.1                 48.4                                        0.5         88.5
Slaughtering , meat processing, eggs and dairy products              71.6                 22.8                                        5.6         15.4
Prepared fish and seafood                                            93.3                  1.7                                        5.0         41.7
Other food products                                                  43.3                 21.8                                       34.9         26.3
Wines, spirits and liquors                                             5.8                 3.9                                       90.3         18.2
Non-alcoholic beverage                                               69.3                  2.5                                       28.1         15.9
Tobacco products                                                       1.4                 0.1                                       98.5            7.7
Cotton textiles                                                      98.7                  1.3                                        0.0         40.8
Woolen textiles                                                      93.7                  6.2                                        0.0         64.1
Hemp textiles                                                        95.4                  4.6                                        0.0         30.9
Silk textiles                                                        96.2                  3.8                                        0.0            5.9
Knitted mills                                                        98.0                  1.1                                        0.9         37.3
Other textiles                                                       98.6                  1.4                                        0.0         57.0
Wearing apparel                                                      97.4                  0.0                                        2.5         54.8
Leather, furs, down and related products                             98.3                  1.0                                        0.7         72.1
Sawmills and fiberboard                                              72.3                 27.7                                                    22.3
Furniture and products of wood, bamboo, cane, palm,
straw, etc.                                                          57.7                 16.1        6.0            4.0             16.3         42.5
Paper and products                                                   54.1                 45.7                                        0.1         61.7
Printing and record medium reproduction                              76.2                 22.6                                        1.1         78.5
Cultural goods                                                       16.0                 83.3                                        0.6         59.7
Toys, sporting and athletic and recreation products                  64.8                  0.4        4.2         23.4                7.2         75.6
Petroleum refining                                                     8.9                91.1                                                    46.6
Coking                                                               13.9                 86.1                                                       3.6
Raw chemical materials                                               53.1                 46.9                                                       5.5
Chemical fertilizers                                                   0.3                99.7                                                       3.2
Chemical pesticides                                                    6.9                 0.8                                       92.3         21.2
Organic chemical products                                            50.7                 49.3                                        0.0         17.8
Chemical products for daily use                                      64.2                 20.8                                       15.0         39.2
Other chemical products                                              78.6                 21.3        0.0            0.0              0.2         38.2
Medical and pharmaceutical products                                  16.9                 28.6                                       54.4         16.8
Chemical fibers                                                      79.8                 20.2                                        0.0         69.9


                                                                         42
                                                          Interme-            Interme-       Capital    Capital      final           processing
                                                          diates for          diates for     goods      goods for    Consum-         exports
                                                          processing          normal use     for        Processing   ption
                                                          exports                            normal     exports
Description                                                                                  use
Rubber products                                                    73.7               25.8                                     0.5         69.0
Plastic products                                                   88.6                9.2                                     2.2         74.3
Cement                                                             12.4               87.6                                                  4.6
Cement and asbestos products                                       68.1               31.9                                                 53.7
Bricks, tiles, lime and light-weight building materials            52.7               47.3                                     0.0          9.7
Glass and glass products                                           78.6               20.4                                     1.0         41.5
Pottery, china and earthenware                                     66.8               29.9                                     3.3         14.8
Fireproof products                                                 67.0               33.0                                                  7.6
Other non-metallic mineral products                                83.8               15.6                                     0.6         19.0
Iron-smelting                                                      78.1               21.9                                                 91.0
Steel-smelting                                                     23.8               76.2                                                 78.1
Steel processing                                                   62.1               37.9                                                 82.9
Alloy iron smelting                                                52.5               47.5                                                 46.4
Nonferrous metal smelting                                          45.0               55.0                                                 38.0
Nonferrous metal processing                                        83.3               16.7                                                 46.6
Metal products                                                     58.9               19.7        2.5         18.3             0.6         42.7
Boiler, engines and turbine                                        23.9               48.4       13.4         14.2             0.2         31.5
Metalworking machinery                                             10.2                9.3       17.9         62.6                         22.6
Other general industrial machinery                                 22.8               14.1       18.6         44.2             0.2         43.7
Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing
machinery                                                              9.9             4.0       37.1         46.4             2.7          7.7
Other special industrial equipment                                 12.9                5.6       16.7         64.7             0.1         41.5
Railroad transport equipment                                       11.1               28.2       59.8          0.8                         47.4
Motor vehicles                                                         4.1            64.5       25.6          5.8             0.1         38.1
Ship building                                                      12.0                4.9       25.6         56.6             0.9         89.7
Aircraft                                                               2.7            17.1       78.0          1.4             0.8         23.3
Bicycle                                                            89.6               10.0                                     0.4         80.7
Other transport machinery                                          17.5               81.8                                     0.7         40.7
Generators                                                         29.6                5.5       19.5         45.3                         85.2
Household electric appliances                                      40.8               11.3        4.4         35.0             8.5         80.9
Other electric machinery and equipment                             54.3               11.6        9.5         23.9             0.7         76.7
Electronic computer                                                69.2                3.9       13.4         13.5                         97.2
Electronic appliances                                              93.5                2.6        1.8          2.0             0.1         96.8
Electronic element and device                                      74.9               17.4        0.8          6.8                         85.1
Other electronic and communication equipment                       18.5               25.4       47.0          3.5             5.5         92.3
Instruments, meters and other measuring equipment                  37.3                5.0       24.5         33.0             0.2         77.7
Cultural and office equipment                                      89.5                3.2        4.6          2.4             0.3         98.4
Arts and crafts products                                           89.3                2.2                                     8.5         55.2
Other manufacturing products                                       96.6                2.1        0.0          0.0             1.3         71.2
Total Merchandise                                                  51.2               28.2        7.3         12.1             1.3         55.1


           Source: Author’s aggregation from official trade statistics from China Customs. UN BEC
           classification and processing trade information from China custom trade statistics were combined
           to identify the purpose of final use.
            Note: Column (1) to (5) sum to 100.




                                                                         43
        Appendix Table D Domestic and foreign value-added embodied in Chinese gross
        merchandise exports, in percent, 2007
                                                                             Split Method                                HIY Method
IO industry description                                       Direct     Direct     Total     Total       Direct     Direct   Total     Total
                                                              foreign    domestic Foreign     Domestic    foreign    domestic Foreign   Domestic
                                                              value-     value-     value-    Value-      value-     value-   value-    Value-
                                                              added      added      added     added       added      added    added     added
Farming                                                            1.6       64.6       6.2        93.8        1.8       64.9     7.1        92.9
Forestry                                                           5.3       67.9       8.8        91.3        2.6       68.5     7.0        93.0
Animal Husbandry                                                   1.7       48.1       6.2        93.8        1.4       48.4     6.7        93.3
Fishery                                                            1.8       60.9       6.2        93.8        1.0       61.3     6.3        93.7
Services in Support of Agriculture                                 3.5       47.5       9.0        91.0        2.4       47.5     9.3        90.7
Mining and Washing of Coal                                         2.2       45.9       9.1        90.9        2.7       45.9    11.4        88.6
Extraction of Petroleum and Natural Gas                            5.8       57.4      11.7        88.3        3.7       59.7    11.1        88.9
Mining of Ferrous Metal Ores                                     10.0        33.3      18.7        81.3        8.8       33.3    19.9        80.1
Mining of Non-Ferrous Metal Ores                                 15.1        33.8      23.3        76.8        6.6       37.9    17.6        82.5
Mining and Processing of Nonmetal Ores and Other Ores            29.3        26.7      35.8        64.2        4.8       39.2    15.5        84.5
Grinding of Grains                                                 8.5       18.2      13.9        86.1        5.3       19.2    11.8        88.2
Processing of Forage                                               6.9       16.3      13.3        86.7        5.5       16.7    13.3        86.7
Refining of Vegetable Oil                                        14.7        16.1      21.1        79.0        7.8       18.9    15.3        84.7
Manufacture of Sugar                                             12.5        19.3      18.5        81.5        5.0       21.8    12.1        87.9
Slaughtering and Processing of Meat                                7.2       15.2      13.0        87.0        2.2       16.3     8.9        91.1
Processing of Aquatic Product                                    14.5        16.9      19.4        80.7        2.7       21.1     9.4        90.7
Processing of Other Foods                                        13.6        15.3      19.7        80.3        4.9       17.1    13.0        87.1
Manufacture of Convenience Food                                  14.5        16.5      22.4        77.6        3.8       20.7    13.9        86.1
Manufacture of Liquid Milk and Dairy Products                      8.1       17.6      15.5        84.5        4.4       18.7    13.8        86.2
Manufacture of Flavoring and Ferment Products                    16.3        17.4      23.2        76.8        5.3       19.7    14.9        85.1
Manufacture of Other Foods                                       18.6        18.6      25.1        74.9        5.5       22.5    14.7        85.3
Manufacture of Alcohol and Wine                                    7.0       32.3      13.3        86.8        3.4       34.3    11.1        88.9
Processing of Soft Drinks and Purified Tea                       14.7        19.9      22.8        77.2        4.9       24.9    15.8        84.2
Manufacture of Tobacco                                             3.2       61.1       6.8        93.2        2.1       62.4     6.6        93.4
Spinning and Weaving, Printing and Dyeing of Cotton and
Chemical Fiber                                                   12.0        15.8      21.1       78.9        4.5       17.8     17.5       82.5
Spinning and Weaving, Dyeing and Finishing of Wool               15.4        16.2      23.1       76.9        3.3       21.4     13.1       86.9
Spinning and Weaving of Hemp and Tiffany                          7.5        18.1      16.1       83.9        4.3       19.0     15.1       84.9
Manufacture of Textile Products                                   8.8        20.0      17.6       82.4        4.0       21.3     16.6       83.4
Manufacture of Knitted Fabric and Its Products                    8.1        21.9      17.5       82.5        4.3       22.1     17.7       82.3
Manufacture of Textile Wearing Apparel, Footwear and Caps        13.0        21.1      21.0       79.0        4.3       23.8     16.4       83.6
Manufacture of Leather, Fur, Feather(Down) and Its Products      24.4        15.9      30.8       69.2        6.6       20.1     18.0       82.0
Processing of Timbers, Manufacture of Wood, Bamboo,
Rattan, Palm and Straw Products                                  10.2        20.5      19.6       80.4        7.9       22.5     19.6       80.4
Manufacture of Furniture                                         14.5        21.9      23.8       76.2        5.0       25.6     18.1       81.9
Manufacture of Paper and Paper Products                          22.3        13.9      30.8       69.2        8.2       21.8     20.1       79.9
Printing, Reproduction of Recording Media                        14.4        24.5      23.5       76.5        4.9       30.5     18.0       82.0
Manufacture of Articles for Culture, Education and Sports
Activities                                                       33.8        16.7      41.7       58.4        8.3       21.4     24.2       75.9
Processing of Petroleum and Nuclear Fuel                         50.9        10.8      55.6       44.4       26.3       15.3     34.7       65.3
Coking                                                            3.4        32.1      10.4       89.6        3.2       32.1     12.0       88.0
Manufacture of Basic Chemical Raw Materials                      14.6        19.2      25.1       74.9        9.9       20.9     23.4       76.6
Manufacture of Fertilizers                                       11.5        17.5      22.1       77.9        8.5       18.9     22.3       77.7
Manufacture of Pesticides                                        14.7        18.6      27.1       72.9       11.8       19.2     27.1       72.9
Manufacture of Paints, Printing Inks, Pigments and Similar
Products                                                         14.6        15.7      27.5       72.6       11.6       18.0     27.9       72.1
Manufacture of Synthetic Materials                               41.5        11.2      52.4       47.7       12.8       20.9     29.9       70.1
Manufacture of Special Chemical Products                         28.2        13.1      38.4       61.6       13.2       15.4     28.5       71.5
Manufacture of Chemical Products for Daily Use                   17.4        20.7      26.7       73.3        9.5       26.3     22.4       77.6
Manufacture of Medicines                                         12.7        26.4      19.7       80.3        5.8       29.0     15.4       84.6
Manufacture of Chemical Fiber                                    26.8        10.9      37.4       62.6       13.2       16.7     30.2       69.8


                                                                   44
                                                                           Split Method                                HIY Method
IO industry description                                     Direct     Direct     Total     Total       Direct     Direct   Total     Total
                                                            foreign    domestic Foreign     Domestic    foreign    domestic Foreign   Domestic
                                                            value-     value-     value-    Value-      value-     value-   value-    Value-
                                                            added      added      added     added       added      added    added     added
Manufacture of Rubber                                          38.9        14.1      46.7        53.4      11.6        19.7    26.6        73.4
Manufacture of Plastic                                         35.6        13.1      44.9        55.1      11.5        18.5    29.6        70.4
Manufacture of Cement, Lime and Plaster                          3.3       27.6      11.6        88.4        3.1       27.8    13.9        86.1
Manufacture of Products of Cement and Plaster                  11.9        20.4      21.1        78.9        2.7       24.6    14.6        85.4
Manufacture of Brick, Stone and Other Building Materials         6.8       23.1      16.6        83.4        4.9       24.4    17.1        82.9
Manufacture of Glass and Its Products                          13.8        23.6      23.3        76.7        7.5       27.4    19.9        80.1
Manufacture of Pottery and Porcelain                             7.8       25.5      18.0        82.0        5.6       26.0    18.5        81.5
Manufacture of Fire-resistant Materials                          7.8       37.4      15.3        84.7        4.1       39.0    13.6        86.4
Manufacture of Graphite and Other Nonmetallic Mineral
Products                                                        7.9        29.3      16.6       83.4        3.9       30.3     15.0       85.0
Iron-smelting                                                  15.7        18.9      24.4       75.6       14.6       19.0     24.7       75.3
Steelmaking                                                     9.4        27.6      19.2       80.8        9.4       27.6     20.3       79.7
Rolling of Steel                                                9.6        16.9      22.2       77.8        8.7       17.7     23.0       77.0
Smelting of Ferroalloy                                         15.0        26.3      24.4       75.6       12.5       26.3     23.6       76.4
Smelting of Non-Ferrous Metals and Manufacture of Alloys       16.3        15.2      26.7       73.3       15.5       16.8     27.5       72.5
Rolling of Non-Ferrous Metals                                  15.8        16.7      28.8       71.2        9.4       20.9     26.4       73.6
Manufacture of Metal Products                                  19.2        17.2      29.9       70.1        5.0       20.8     20.5       79.5
Manufacture of Boiler and Prime Mover                          19.4        20.2      29.4       70.6        9.3       23.2     23.8       76.2
Manufacture of Metalworking Machinery                          11.5        22.3      22.7       77.3        8.1       24.7     23.1       76.9
Manufacture of Lifters                                         20.0        14.3      30.8       69.2        6.5       19.6     22.8       77.2
Manufacture of Pump, Valve and Similar Machinery               11.7        20.8      23.0       77.0        7.2       23.3     21.9       78.1
Manufacture of Other General Purpose Machinery                 12.6        19.2      23.8       76.2        7.4       23.0     22.4       77.6
Manufacture of Special Purpose Machinery for Mining,
Metallurgy and Construction                                    10.9        21.5      22.1       77.9        6.8       23.1     21.7       78.3
Manufacture of Special Purpose Machinery for Chemical
Industry, Processing of Timber and Nonmetals                   11.0        22.9      22.1       78.0        5.4       25.9     19.9       80.1
Manufacture of Special Purpose Machinery for Agriculture,
Forestry, Animal Husbandry and Fishery                         13.1        18.9      24.4       75.6        6.0       21.3     21.7       78.4
Manufacture of Other Special Purpose Machinery                 36.7        16.2      44.3       55.7       10.7       23.3     25.4       74.6
Manufacture of Railroad Transport Equipment                    20.2        16.3      31.0       69.0        8.5       19.9     24.3       75.7
Manufacture of Automobiles                                     13.3        15.9      24.7       75.3        6.6       18.4     23.3       76.7
Manufacture of Boats and Ships and Floating Devices            50.5        14.8      56.2       43.8        7.9       27.8     22.3       77.7
Manufacture of Other Transport Equipment                       14.4        17.6      26.2       73.8        9.4       20.0     25.9       74.1
Manufacture of Generators                                      22.5        14.9      33.4       66.6        9.5       19.8     26.4       73.6
Manufacture of Equipments for Power Transmission and
Distribution and Control                                       47.6         9.3      54.9       45.1       14.2       17.4     31.1       68.9
Manufacture of Wire, Cable, Optical Cable and Electrical
Appliances                                                     37.1         8.3      46.6       53.4        9.1       14.7     27.6       72.4
Manufacture of Household Electric and Non-electric
Appliances                                                     40.3        11.3      48.2       51.8       11.1       16.7     28.6       71.4
Manufacture of Other Electrical Machinery and Equipment        32.4        15.1      41.9       58.1       12.2       19.2     29.3       70.8
Manufacture of Communication Equipment                         50.2        14.8      56.4       43.6       27.2       15.8     44.5       55.5
Manufacture of Radar and Broadcasting Equipment                55.5        14.0      60.3       39.7       30.8       15.0     46.5       53.5
Manufacture of Computer                                        62.0        13.6      66.2       33.9       31.1       13.9     50.3       49.7
Manufacture of Electronic Component                            63.5        12.1      67.7       32.3       25.3       19.1     41.0       59.0
Manufacture of Household Audiovisual Apparatus                 64.1        12.2      67.4       32.6       30.4       17.1     46.3       53.7
Manufacture of Other Electronic Equipment                      32.3        15.7      40.7       59.3       18.1       25.7     31.7       68.3
Manufacture of Measuring Instruments                           50.3        18.6      55.2       44.8       17.4       25.3     32.8       67.2
Manufacture of Machinery for Cultural Activity & Office
Work                                                           58.8        12.4      63.5       36.5       23.6       14.4     41.6       58.4
Manufacture of Artwork, Other Manufacture                      19.2        20.4      27.7       72.3        5.4       25.0     18.0       82.0
Scrap and Waste                                                10.5        74.8      11.7       88.3        3.6       80.9      5.3       94.7
Total Merchandise                                              31.6        17.1      39.4       60.6       13.7       20.3     28.7       71.3




                                                                 45
         Appendix Table E Domestic and foreign value-added embodied in Chinese gross
         merchandise exports, in percent, 2002

                                                                                     Split Method                                HIY Method
IO industry description                                               Direct     Direct     Total     Total       Direct     Direct   Total     Total
                                                                      foreign    domestic Foreign     Domestic    foreign    domestic Foreign   Domestic
                                                                      value-     value-     value-    Value-      value-     value-   value-    Value-
                                                                      added      added      added     added       added      added    added     added
Agriculture                                                                2.9       64.8       6.2        93.8        1.9       65.4     6.2        93.8
Forestry                                                                   5.0       64.5       7.8        92.3        1.8       65.5     5.4        94.6
Logging and transport of timber and bamboo                                 5.6       60.7       8.3        91.7        2.8       60.7     7.0        93.0
Animal Husbandry                                                           2.6       45.3       5.8        94.2        1.2       45.7     5.6        94.4
Fishery                                                                    2.3       54.8       6.2        93.8        1.6       55.0     6.7        93.3
Technical services for agriculture, forestry, livestock and fishing      24.6        47.8      26.8        73.2        2.3       54.8     7.3        92.7
Mining and Washing of Coal                                                 2.3       56.9       5.9        94.2        3.3       56.9     8.6        91.4
Extraction of Petroleum and Natural Gas                                    5.0       69.5       7.5        92.5        2.9       71.1     6.6        93.4
Ferrous metal ore mining                                                   8.6       46.3      12.7        87.3        5.6       46.3    11.9        88.1
Non-ferrous metal ore mining                                             11.9        38.5      17.7        82.3        5.0       39.9    13.8        86.2
Salt mining                                                                5.1       63.6       7.9        92.1        2.6       63.9     7.5        92.5
Non-metal minerals and other mining                                      20.0        37.8      24.2        75.9        4.7       44.6    12.3        87.7
Grain mill products                                                      50.5        13.4      52.4        47.6        3.0       20.1     8.7        91.3
Forage                                                                   19.8        16.4      23.8        76.2        5.9       18.1    12.4        87.6
vegetable oil refining                                                   32.0        17.5      34.9        65.1        4.6       21.7    10.7        89.3
Sugar manufacturing                                                      65.6        12.8      66.8        33.2        3.2       31.2     8.7        91.3
Slaughtering and meat processing                                         17.5        14.6      20.6        79.4        2.2       16.1     7.9        92.1
Fish and fish productions                                                12.1        20.3      16.0        84.0        2.4       24.9     8.3        91.7
All other food manufacturing                                             16.0        23.2      20.5        79.5        5.1       26.8    12.7        87.4
Wines, spirits and liquors                                               19.7        35.7      22.9        77.1        2.8       40.7     8.6        91.4
Soft drink and other beverage                                            17.8        28.4      22.7        77.3        4.5       31.7    13.1        86.9
Tobacco products                                                           5.5       72.8       6.7        93.3        0.7       76.3     2.6        97.4
Cotton textiles                                                          18.9        20.5      24.3        75.7        8.5       23.7    18.6        81.4
Woolen textiles                                                          36.4        18.4      40.0        60.1        6.3       23.5    14.9        85.1
Hemp textiles                                                            20.4        21.4      25.7        74.3        5.1       23.6    14.1        85.9
Textiles productions                                                     19.5        24.1      24.6        75.5      10.7        26.0    21.3        78.7
Knitted and crocheted fabrics and articles                               22.0        26.3      27.1        72.9      10.3        27.9    21.0        79.0
Wearing apparel                                                          30.1        22.1      34.4        65.6      10.5        27.1    20.9        79.2
Leather, fur, down and related products                                  32.3        15.7      36.1        63.9      13.5        20.5    23.5        76.5
Products of wood, bamboo, cane, palm, straw                              21.7        24.8      27.2        72.8        8.2       27.8    17.3        82.7
Furniture                                                                43.9        21.1      47.5        52.5        7.8       26.4    18.1        81.9
Paper and paper products                                                 46.1        21.0      48.9        51.1        7.2       29.5    15.5        84.5
Printing, reproduction of recording media                                67.2        23.6      68.1        31.9        5.6       42.0    13.9        86.1
Stationary and related products                                          40.2        21.8      44.2        55.8        8.4       26.9    19.6        80.4
Toys, sporting and athletic and recreation products                      43.9        23.7      47.5        52.5      10.9        31.8    21.4        78.6
Petroleum and nuclear processing                                         41.1        12.2      44.3        55.7      18.7        15.3    24.9        75.1
Coking                                                                     6.5       33.8      10.6        89.4        2.9       34.3     9.4        90.6
Basic chemicals                                                          12.4        27.3      18.0        82.0        9.2       28.9    17.2        82.8
Chemical fertilizers                                                     12.1        22.9      18.9        81.1        7.8       23.5    18.6        81.5
Chemical pesticides                                                      19.8        24.9      27.1        72.9      12.7        25.7    23.3        76.7
paints, varnishes and similar coatings, printing ink and mastics         32.0        18.8      38.4        61.6      10.5        22.8    22.1        77.9
Man-made chemical products                                               37.4        14.9      44.8        55.2      13.5        21.6    25.9        74.1
Special chemical products                                                36.3        18.5      41.3        58.7      13.3        23.6    23.9        76.1
Chemical products for daily use                                          30.7        24.2      36.0        64.1        8.0       31.9    18.3        81.7
Medical and pharmaceutical products                                      16.6        34.3      20.9        79.1        5.3       38.7    12.5        87.5
Chemical fibers                                                          26.5        19.1      34.3        65.7      13.8        21.6    26.4        73.6
Rubber products                                                          48.5        20.5      51.1        48.9        7.3       27.7    15.6        84.4
Plastic products                                                         60.0        15.9      63.4        36.6      14.6        25.1    27.9        72.1
Cement, lime and plaster                                                   8.6       27.4      14.0        86.0        4.8       27.9    13.6        86.4


                                                                                 46
                                                                              Split Method                                HIY Method
IO industry description                                         Direct    Direct     Total     Total       Direct     Direct   Total     Total
                                                                foreign   domestic Foreign     Domestic    foreign    domestic Foreign   Domestic
                                                                value-    value-     value-    Value-      value-     value-   value-    Value-
                                                                added     added      added     added       added      added    added     added
Glass and glass products                                           32.3       29.5      36.4        63.6        8.4       35.2    16.8        83.2
Pottery, china and earthenware                                     14.8       30.7      20.2        79.8        5.9       32.2    14.9        85.2
Fireproof materials                                                19.9       36.5      23.8        76.2        3.8       41.4    10.9        89.1
Other non-metallic mineral products                                15.2       31.6      19.9        80.1        4.0       33.9    12.0        88.0
Iron-smelting                                                      26.8       20.3      31.2        68.8        7.0       23.2    14.2        85.8
Steel-smelting                                                     53.2       18.1      55.8        44.3        5.2       25.6    13.0        87.0
Steel pressing                                                     11.3       24.2      17.7        82.3        5.0       26.5    13.8        86.2
Alloy iron smelting                                                41.5       21.9      45.2        54.8        7.1       27.3    15.4        84.6
Nonferrous metal smelting                                          42.6       17.1      46.4        53.6        7.4       22.0    15.9        84.1
Nonferrous metal pressing                                          46.5       12.6      50.7        49.3        9.2       16.9    20.4        79.7
Metal products                                                     40.3       18.5      44.3        55.7        7.0       23.7    17.1        82.9
Boiler, engines and turbine                                        28.6       25.8      33.5        66.5        9.6       30.1    19.2        80.8
Metalworking machinery                                             16.5       30.2      21.9        78.1        8.1       32.2    17.7        82.3
Other general industrial machinery                                 27.3       21.8      32.4        67.6        7.5       27.5    18.0        82.0
Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing machinery      21.4       26.2      27.1        72.9        6.7       28.8    16.9        83.1
Other special industrial equipment                                 28.9       21.9      33.6        66.4        9.3       27.4    19.2        80.8
Railroad transport equipment                                       24.5       25.7      29.9        70.1        7.4       28.4    17.5        82.5
Motor vehicles                                                     36.2       19.6      40.7        59.3        6.1       26.4    17.2        82.8
Parts and accessories for motor vehicles and their engines         32.9       21.5      37.6        62.4        6.6       26.9    17.4        82.6
Ship building                                                      82.2       15.2      82.5        17.5      12.7        23.8    23.1        77.0
Other transport equipment                                          39.7       20.5      44.2        55.8      10.9        25.0    22.3        77.7
Generators                                                         52.4       14.4      55.7        44.3      10.5        23.5    21.4        78.6
Household electric appliances                                      74.6       11.1      76.2        23.9      10.5        23.9    23.0        77.0
Other electric machinery and equipment                             38.8       16.4      43.9        56.2        9.9       24.4    21.8        78.2
Telecommunication equipment                                        86.8         7.3     87.5        12.5      24.2        23.5    37.9        62.1
Electronic computer                                                95.3         4.0     95.4         4.6      35.2        13.2    51.5        48.5
Other computer peripheral equipment                                75.9         7.2     77.5        22.5      35.0        20.8    46.2        53.8
Electronic element and device                                      59.2       14.7      61.9        38.1      23.4        26.1    33.3        66.7
Radio, television and communication equipment and apparatus        71.1       10.7      73.0        27.0      34.6        19.4    45.6        54.4
Other electronic and communication equipment                       52.3       24.6      54.7        45.3      31.7        26.0    40.2        59.8
Instruments, meters and other measuring equipment                  47.6       22.4      50.5        49.5      14.6        32.1    24.3        75.7
Cultural and office equipment                                      74.8         9.1     76.7        23.3      40.0        10.6    56.8        43.2
Arts and crafts products                                           33.3       20.9      37.3        62.7        7.0       27.8    16.5        83.5
Other manufacturing products                                       45.7       21.5      48.7        51.3        6.9       28.6    16.3        83.8
Total Merchandise                                                  42.5       19.7      46.1        53.9      15.0        26.0    25.4        74.6


        Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                                                          47
          Appendix Table F Domestic and foreign value-added embodied in Chinese gross
          merchandise exports, in percent, 1997

                                                                                    Split Method                                         HIY Method
IO industry description                                           Direct       Direct        Total        Total         Direct       Direct        Total        Total
                                                                  foreign      domestic      Foreign      Domestic      foreign      domestic      Foreign      Domestic
                                                                  value-       value-        value-       Value-        value-       value-        value-       Value-
                                                                  added        added         added        added         added        added         added        added
Crop cultivation                                                         3.5          64.4          5.4          94.6          2.5          65.0          6.0          94.0
Forestry                                                                 3.9          72.5          5.2          94.8          1.4          73.3          3.7          96.3
Livestock and livestock products                                         4.0          49.1          6.0          94.0          2.7          49.6          6.3          93.7
Fishery                                                                  6.5          58.9          8.5          91.5          2.2          60.6          6.0          94.0
Other agricultural products                                              8.0          54.9          9.6          90.4          1.8          57.2          5.3          94.7
Coal mining and processing                                               1.7          51.4          4.2          95.8          3.7          51.4          9.2          90.8
Crude petroleum products                                                 1.9          75.2          3.3          96.8          2.5          75.2          5.4          94.6
Natural gas products                                                     2.5          54.2          5.3          94.8          4.5          54.2         10.2          89.8
Ferrous ore mining                                                       6.8          33.7         10.6          89.4          8.4          33.7         16.0          84.0
Non-ferrous ore mining                                                   9.1          34.9         12.3          87.8          4.4          36.1         11.5          88.5
Salt mining                                                              3.0          59.7          5.0          95.0          2.1          60.0          7.3          92.7
Non-metal minerals and other mining                                     19.5          35.9         22.1          77.9          4.9          40.1         11.9          88.1
Logging and transport of timber and bamboo                               7.0          60.1          8.6          91.4          2.4          62.1          5.9          94.1
Grain mill products, vegetable oil and forage                           48.3          12.3         49.9          50.1          3.7          18.7          9.1          90.9
Sugar refining                                                          80.1          11.0         80.5          19.5          3.3          18.7          9.1          90.9
Slaughtering , meat processing, eggs and dairy products                 14.7          14.2         17.4          82.6          1.8          15.3          7.6          92.4
Prepared fish and seafood                                               12.3          19.7         14.8          85.2          1.1          25.1          6.0          94.0
Other food products                                                     23.5          26.5         25.7          74.3          3.8          31.3          9.7          90.3
Wines, spirits and liquors                                              17.8          29.0         20.3          79.7          3.1          32.9          9.0          91.0
Non-alcoholic beverage                                                  16.2          26.8         19.0          81.0          3.7          29.7         10.5          89.5
Tobacco products                                                         8.1          52.1          9.8          90.2          2.0          55.8          5.8          94.2
Cotton textiles                                                         35.4          23.0         37.3          62.7          8.5          28.3         18.2          81.8
Woolen textiles                                                         57.8          19.0         58.7          41.3          5.8          33.5         12.3          87.7
Hemp textiles                                                           28.0          24.7         30.1          69.9          6.3          27.9         12.5          87.6
Silk textiles                                                            6.1          24.0          9.2          90.9          2.6          24.9         10.8          89.2
Knitted mills                                                           25.4          26.2         27.5          72.5          9.0          28.1         18.5          81.5
Other textiles                                                          49.0          16.8         50.4          49.6          5.7          25.9         11.6          88.4
Wearing apparel                                                         34.5          28.0         36.1          63.9          6.8          36.1         15.3          84.7
Leather, furs, down and related products                                49.5          15.7         50.9          49.2         11.6          22.6         20.6          79.4
Sawmills and fiberboard                                                 21.1          26.9         23.6          76.4          6.4          30.5         13.3          86.7
Furniture and products of wood, bamboo, cane, palm, straw, etc.         38.6          20.8         40.6          59.4          7.3          26.3         16.4          83.6
Paper and products                                                      49.3          20.9         50.6          49.5          5.3          29.4         12.4          87.7
Printing and record medium reproduction                                 66.2          21.1         66.8          33.2          6.3          37.4         13.6          86.4
Cultural goods                                                          52.8          26.0         53.9          46.1          6.4          41.1         13.7          86.3
Toys, sporting and athletic and recreation products                     57.8          20.7         58.8          41.2         10.2          27.9         20.0          80.0
Petroleum refining                                                      50.0          14.4         51.6          48.4         15.2          22.0         20.3          79.7
Coking                                                                   5.4          22.7          8.6          91.4          2.5          23.0          9.7          90.3
Raw chemical materials                                                   7.0          31.9         10.3          89.7          3.1          32.9         10.1          89.9
Chemical fertilizers                                                     6.7          22.1         10.7          89.3          5.2          22.4         14.7          85.3
Chemical pesticides                                                     21.7          20.4         25.4          74.6          4.9          23.0         14.6          85.4
Organic chemical products                                               17.3          20.2         21.3          78.7          8.6          22.2         18.3          81.8
Chemical products for daily use                                         37.3          27.2         39.4          60.6          4.5          37.8         12.3          87.7
Other chemical products                                                 31.2          20.7         33.8          66.2          8.1          25.7         15.8          84.2
Medical and pharmaceutical products                                     16.8          32.7         19.3          80.7          3.0          36.9          9.5          90.5
Chemical fibers                                                         61.6          14.0         63.1          36.9         14.8          23.3         25.2          74.8
Rubber products                                                         52.0          16.0         53.4          46.6          8.6          25.0         17.1          82.9
Plastic products                                                        66.8          14.6         67.9          32.1         12.9          24.3         23.6          76.4
Cement                                                                   5.2          23.6          8.8          91.2          3.9          24.0         12.7          87.3
Cement and asbestos products                                            47.6          19.0         49.4          50.7          2.4          26.8         11.1          88.9

                                                                               48
                                                                                  Split Method                                          HIY Method
IO industry description                                         Direct       Direct        Total         Total         Direct       Direct        Total         Total
                                                                foreign      domestic      Foreign       Domestic      foreign      domestic      Foreign       Domestic
                                                                value-       value-        value-        Value-        value-       value-        value-        Value-
                                                                added        added         added         added         added        added         added         added
Bricks, tiles, lime and light-weight building materials                9.5          37.4          12.4          87.6          3.6          39.6          10.3          89.7
Glass and glass products                                              37.3          24.3          39.6          60.4          4.5          30.7          12.4          87.6
 Pottery, china and earthenware                                       14.1          35.2          17.0          83.0          3.3          37.8          10.6          89.4
Fireproof products                                                     9.3          27.3          12.7          87.3          3.6          28.5          11.6          88.4
Other non-metallic mineral products                                   18.7          27.5          21.8          78.2          3.0          30.9          10.6          89.4
Iron-smelting                                                         79.8          13.8          80.1          19.9          5.7          22.3          12.9          87.1
Steel-smelting                                                        67.3          16.8          68.2          31.8          3.9          23.7          11.6          88.4
Steel processing                                                      61.2          12.3          62.8          37.3          5.9          21.0          15.1          84.9
Alloy iron smelting                                                   43.6          17.0          46.1          53.9          5.5          21.4          14.2          85.8
Nonferrous metal smelting                                             35.5          15.8          38.1          62.0          4.6          19.5          12.5          87.6
Nonferrous metal processing                                           34.0          11.7          37.2          62.8          7.2          15.4          16.7          83.3
Metal products                                                        31.5          18.6          34.3          65.7          5.9          23.3          15.4          84.6
Boiler, engines and turbine                                           29.9          28.3          32.6          67.4          7.4          34.6          15.5          84.5
Metalworking machinery                                                22.1          28.2          25.1          74.9          5.8          31.9          14.5          85.5
Other general industrial machinery                                    36.9          27.9          39.0          61.0          5.3          37.7          13.3          86.8
Agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry and fishing machinery         10.1          21.0          14.6          85.4          6.5          21.8          17.2          82.8
Other special industrial equipment                                    36.1          25.0          38.4          61.6          7.6          32.5          16.3          83.7
Railroad transport equipment                                          43.1          21.5          45.6          54.4          5.5          26.3          15.2          84.8
Motor vehicles                                                        35.5          19.5          38.1          61.9          5.2          25.7          15.3          84.7
Ship building                                                         78.7          15.6          79.1          21.0          8.1          28.7          17.6          82.4
Aircraft                                                              33.3          38.8          35.3          64.7         23.5          42.4          28.0          72.0
Bicycle                                                               73.8          11.5          74.8          25.2          6.5          18.8          18.0          82.0
Other transport machinery                                             38.5          20.3          41.2          58.9          6.2          27.4          16.3          83.7
Generators                                                            73.6          14.2          74.3          25.7          7.9          26.2          17.8          82.2
 Household electric appliances                                        74.1          12.8          74.9          25.1          8.7          26.3          19.7          80.3
Other electric machinery and equipment                                69.7          12.4          70.9          29.2          9.0          19.7          20.0          80.0
Electronic computer                                                   83.5           9.2          83.9          16.1         24.5          23.4          36.7          63.3
Electronic appliances                                                 80.9           9.1          81.5          18.5         21.5          19.8          33.5          66.5
 Electronic element and device                                        66.3          15.1          67.3          32.7         14.6          29.7          23.6          76.4
Other electronic and communication equipment                          82.0          13.1          82.3          17.7         18.3          27.3          30.0          70.0
Instruments, meters and other measuring equipment                     61.0          22.6          61.8          38.2         10.6          36.3          19.1          80.9
Cultural and office equipment                                         84.5           8.5          84.9          15.2         15.6          19.8          26.9          73.1
Arts and crafts products                                              42.1          21.0          43.9          56.1          6.1          29.8          14.2          85.9
Other manufacturing products                                          61.2          21.0          62.1          37.9          5.5          34.3          13.7          86.3
Total Merchandise                                                     44.4          22.2          46.0          54.0          9.0          29.4          17.9          82.1


          Source: Authors’ estimates.




                                                                             49
