                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   BANKING GLOBALIZATION, MONETARY TRANSMISSION, AND THE LENDING
                             CHANNEL

                                           Nicola Cetorelli
                                          Linda S. Goldberg

                                        Working Paper 14101
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14101


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




The views expressed in this paper are those of the individual authors and do not necessarily reflect
the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. We appreciate
valuable discussions with Jeremy Stein, Phil Strahan and Adam Ashcraft. We also thank Sarita Subramanian,
Nikki Candelore and Victoria Baranov for research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Banking Globalization, Monetary Transmission, and the Lending Channel
Nicola Cetorelli and Linda S. Goldberg
NBER Working Paper No. 14101
June 2008
JEL No. E5,F3,G20,G3

                                             ABSTRACT

The globalization of banking in the United States is influencing the monetary transmission mechanism
both domestically and in foreign markets. Using quarterly information from all U.S. banks filing call
reports between 1980 and 2005, we find evidence for the lending channel for monetary policy in large
banks, but only those banks that are domestically-oriented and without international operations. We
show that the large globally-oriented banks rely on internal capital markets with their foreign affiliates
to help smooth domestic liquidity shocks. We also show that the existence of such internal capital
markets contributes to an international propagation of domestic liquidity shocks to lending by affiliated
banks abroad. While these results imply a substantially more active lending channel than documented
in the seminal work of Kashyap and Stein (2000), the lending channel within the United States is declining
in strength as banking becomes more globalized.


Nicola Cetorelli
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
nicola.cetorelli@ny.frb.org

Linda S. Goldberg
Research Department, 3rd Floor
Federal Reserve Bank-New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
linda.goldberg@ny.frb.org
I. Introduction

         Monetary policy transmission through banks has long been noted as one of the
key channels for policy effectiveness. Seminal work by Kashyap and Stein (1994, 1995,
2000) shows that this lending channel differs across players within the banking system of
the United States. While lending of small banks appear to be highly responsive to
monetary policy shocks, the same is not true for larger banks. The main reason for the
difference within the population – the authors argue - stems from the presumed greater
ability of large banks to substitute reservable deposits with other external sources of
funds, so that the shock to the liability side of their balance sheet from monetary policy is
not transmitted to the asset side.
         The Kashyap and Stein results provide a mixed picture of the lending channel.
While they indicate that such a channel exists, the effectiveness is also shown to be
limited to the lending of the smaller banks. In an industry where the average size of banks
has progressively increased, the lending channel seemed destined to a more marginal
role. We re-examine the evidence on the lending channel in light of the considerable
changes in the size and structure of U.S. banking in recent decades. Of particular focus is
the observation that bank balance sheets have evolved significantly as a result of
increased international activities.
         Figure 1 shows the share of total U.S. assets of banks that have global orientation,
where we define a bank as having global orientation if it reports positive assets from
foreign offices. 1 While global banks accounted for half of U.S. banking system assets
through the early part of the 1990s, by 2005 they directly accounted for about seventy
percent of U.S. banking system assets. The share of assets from foreign offices within the
total assets of global banks is also of significant size. As Figure 2 shows, it has fluctuated
between twenty and thirty percent of total assets over the recent decades.2 We conjecture
and show that this process of “globalization” of U.S. banking has had a deep and


1
  For reporting purposes, foreign offices are branches or consolidated subsidiaries in a foreign country,
International Banking Facilities, majority-owned Edge or Agreement subsidiaries. Moreover, a branch or
consolidated subsidiary in Puerto Rico or a U.S. territory or possession is also considered a “foreign” office
for reporting purposes.
2
  The reasons for bank globalization are posited to include search for risk-adjusted returns, as in Garcia-
Herraro and Medeiros (2007), and technological advances and institutional environments of home and host
countries, as in Claessens and VanHoren (2008).


                                                                                                            1
pervasive impact on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. Barring truly global
events, banks with activities in multiple countries can reallocate funds in the event of a
liquidity shock occurring either domestically or abroad. Our argument thus presumes that
banking organizations actively operate internal capital markets, in which the global banks
move liquid funds between domestic and foreign operations on the basis of relative
needs. Hence, according to this conjecture the shock to reservable deposits caused by a
change in monetary policy would be absorbed through internal sources of funding rather
than exclusively through an attempt to access external capital markets. This theme is of
interest to macroeconomics for the insights generated on the monetary transmission
mechanism, to international finance for implications on the propagation of shocks across
borders, and to corporate finance and banking studies by providing evidence of existing
capital market frictions even for very large institutions.
       Using quarterly data for all U.S. banks between 1980 and 2005 we find evidence
that large U.S. banks with a global presence are indeed insulated from domestic monetary
policy shocks. We also find that it is exactly their global nature that allows insulation.
Differently from any study on internal capital markets that we know of, in this particular
case we are able to use data on actual internal flows of funds between a bank’s own
domestic and foreign offices. We find that globally-oriented U.S. banks reallocate funds
internally – and in a sizeable manner - in response to domestic monetary policy shocks.
At the same time, large U.S. banks, but those with domestic-only activity, exhibit
sensitivity to monetary policy. For these banks there does not seem to be complete
frictionless access to alternative sources of funds, whether internal or external. Hence,
size per se is not a sufficient trait to explain insulation. Rather it is the global nature of
the bank that effectively determines (or at the very least highly contributes to) insulation
from monetary policy. Our results thus indicate a stronger domestic lending channel than
implicit in the seminal study of Kashyap and Stein (2000), since the lending activity of
the large but non-global banks remain exposed to changes in monetary policy. At the




                                                                                            2
same time, our results also suggest that the lending channel within the United States is
declining in strength as banking becomes more globalized. 3
        Our results also show that the total lending channel consequences of U.S.
monetary policy are underestimated by a focus that is solely concentrated on U.S.
markets. We look at the response of lending of the foreign offices of U.S. global banks to
a change in domestic monetary policy and find evidence consistent with the existence of
an international mechanism of transmission of monetary policy. Hence, monetary policy
through the lending channel may not be losing its effectiveness overall but, rather, it may
be increasingly felt abroad and outside of the traditional field of observation. In this
sense, our work directly complements the Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000) findings that
banks are specifically involved in the international transmission of shocks. In our case,
results based on bank-specific data demonstrate a direct mechanism that may generate the
type of monetary policy transmission across countries documented in analyses of
macroeconomic data, as in Kim (2001), Neumeyer and Perri (2005), and Canova (2005). 4
        Finally, it is worth noting that our findings introduce a new dimension to the
debate on globalization effects on monetary policy and real activity in the United States.
While contributors to this debate focus on issues like whether the Phillips Curve has
flattened (for example, Yellen 2006, Bernanke 2006, Ihrig et al 2007, and Sbordone,
2007), globalization of banking has consequences for the transmission of monetary policy
to the real U.S. economy through the lending channel.

II. The Logic and Estimation of the Lending Channel

        The main argument behind the lending channel of monetary policy, exposited in
Bernanke and Blinder (1992), is that tight money should reduce the volume of reservable




3
  This work is closely related to others that have also suggested a reduced potency for monetary policy as a
result of evolution of the banking industry (e.g., Morgan, Rime and Strahan (2004), Ashcraft (2006) and
Loutskina and Strahan, forthcoming).
4
  Kim (2001) provides evidence on international transmission of U.S. monetary policy shocks in the context
of a VAR framework. For transmission to emerging markets, Neumeyer and Perri (2005) emphasize the
role of world interest rates in emerging market business cycles, and Canova (2005) focuses on transmission
of US shocks to Latin American. Other studies highlight the role of exchange rate regime selection in such
transmission, as in Di Giovanni and Shambaugh (forthcoming), Frankel, Schmukler and Serven (2004), and
Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor (2005).


                                                                                                          3
deposits held by depository institutions. 5 The lending channel for the transmission of
monetary policy arises because a bank faces a significant wedge between the cost of
acquiring insured, reservable deposits and the cost of acquiring other sources of funds
such as large denomination CDs, money market funds, and securities. Hence, a
contractionary monetary policy that drains reserves from the economy and reduces the
amount of reservable deposits, translates into a reduction in bank lending activity when
banks are unable to replace each dollar of deposits with other funds
        Kashyap and Stein (2000) provide seminal evidence on the scale of the lending
channel of monetary policy in the United States used data from the period from the late
1970s through 1993. They argued that lending by any bank is sensitive to its balance-
sheet health, with healthier banks able to lend a greater fraction of their assets, all else
equal. The extent to which banks can convert their balance sheet liabilities into lending
also depends on general liquidity conditions in financial markets. The key Kashyap and
Stein insight is that monetary policy influences lending activity by altering the sensitivity
of lending to balance sheet health. Using the Call Report Data of individual U.S. banks, 6
Kashyap and Stein showed that loan sensitivity to monetary conditions was statistically
important for smaller banks in the United States, but not for the larger banks that
presumably have a greater ability to raise alternative sources of funds from external
sources in the event that the Federal Reserve restricts banking sector liquidity. One main
conclusion was that evidence for the lending channel was concentrated in a part of the
banking system that accounts for a relatively small slice of overall U.S. bank lending.
        The role of sources of funds internal to banking networks was raised by Campello
(2002), who demonstrated that even lending by small banks may be partially insulated
from monetary policy shocks if they are part of banking networks. Using data on
individual U.S. banks between 1981 and 1997, Campello showed that the funding of new




5
  Other basic references on the lending channel see Bernanke and Blinder (1988), Bernanke and Gertler
(1995), Kashyap and Stein (1994, 1995, 2000). See Stein (1998) for specific modeling of the informational
frictions on banks’ liability side.
6
  Banks file quarterly financial data to the FFIEC (Federal Financial Institution Examination Council), with
the reports of Condition and Income commonly referred to as Call Report Data.


                                                                                                          4
loans by small banks that are members of bank holding companies is less dependent on
bank’s own cash flow than is funding by independent or standalone small banks. 7
        Our empirical strategy follows from these insights on external and internal capital
market access by different types of banks, and sets out to make three main points about
the consequences of taking into account U.S. bank globalization. First, banks with a
global outreach are in a better position to absorb liquidity shocks because of their unique
ability to activate an internal capital market between their domestic and foreign offices.
The implicit corollary is that otherwise similar banks without access to this potential
internal source of funds may instead remain exposed to monetary policy changes.
Second, the differences in the observed lending channel across domestic-only and global
banks are not exclusively due to the differences in their size. We provide direct evidence
of internal capital markets at work, with such flows compensating for the funding
shortfalls. Third, the lending channel consequences of monetary policy are larger than the
current conventional wisdom. This arises both because of the large domestic-only banks
that are influenced by U.S. monetary policy, and also because we demonstrate that the
transmission of shocks appears through the lending activity done in foreign markets by
affiliates of U.S. banks. As a final point, we also show that the internal capital markets
argument applies to small banks in the United States, since those small banks that are part
of a banking network containing global banks achieve insulation not afforded to small
banks in domestic-only banking networks.

Identification strategy
        We begin by assessing the degree of sensitivity to monetary policy of global
banks and that of similar banks whose business is however confined within domestic
boundaries. Because global banks are mainly large banks, we restrict our analysis to
banks that in every quarter were in the upper five percent of the asset distribution of all
U.S. banks. These are the banks that in Kashyap and Stein (2000) were all combined into
a single group of banks and found to be insulated from monetary policy. We follow
closely the two-step empirical strategy adopted by Kashyap and Stein (2000) and then

7
  This line of research is closely related to the earlier work by Houston, James and Marcus (1997).
Important extensions are the contributions by Ashcraft (2006), Ashcraft (forthcoming) and Ashcraft and
Campello (2007).


                                                                                                    5
utilized and refined by Campello (2002). As in those studies, we estimate cross-sectional
sensitivities of lending activity of banks to overall balance sheet liquidity at each date. In
the first step of this empirical strategy, cross-sectional regressions for each quarter are run
separately for banks indexed by i within each bank group. The bank groups that are the
primary focus of our analysis are large global banks and the large, but domestic only,
banks. The general stage 1 specification is:
                             4
        (1) Δ log(Yit ) = ∑ atj Δ log(Yit − j ) + β t X it −1 + Controls +ε it
                             j =1


where Yit is either total loans or commercial and industrial (C&I) loans of bank i at time t.

C&I lending, by focusing on business lending, is perhaps a better indicator of the possible
impact on the real economy of liquidity conditions affecting the banking industry. At the
same time, focusing on just C&I lending may be overly restrictive in terms of the actual
impact of liquidity, since different banks may have a different orientations in their asset
portfolios and investing strategies.
        On the right hand side, the main variable of interest is X it −1 , which in this first

empirical exercise is a measure of overall balance sheet liquidity and is defined as the log
of the ratio of a bank’s liquid assets to its total assets. The estimated coefficient on X it −1 ,

denoted by βt , reflects the degree of dependence of lending activity on balance sheet

liquidity. Each regression is run at each quarter, thus generating a separate time series of
estimated βt coefficients for each class of banks under consideration. A bank’s

capitalization ratio, its asset size, and the value of its non performing loans are included
as bank-specific lagged controls. The vector of controls also includes indicator variables
for the state where the bank headquarter is located and whether or not the headquarter is
in a metropolitan statistical area (MSA). The inclusion of the state and MSA indicator
variables allows for different macroeconomic conditions in each period for each
geographical area and is intended to capture unobserved variability of loan demand.
        In the second step of this empirical strategy, the βt series estimated in the first
step are used as dependent variables to determine how lending sensitivity varies with
monetary policy. This second step, which follows Campello (2002), is summarized by the
following specification:


                                                                                                6
                        8
        (2) β t = η + ∑ φ j MPt − j + δ Controls + μt
                       j =1



        where MPt − j is an indicator of monetary policy. In our analysis we use three

alternative indicators of monetary policy, each of which we describe at greater length in
the data section: the Bernanke-Mihov indicator, the nominal Federal Funds rate, and the
real Federal Funds rate. As a convention, these indicators of monetary policy are defined
in our analysis so that they increase in times of liquidity tightening and decrease in times
of looser liquidity conditions. If lending is affected by monetary policy, lending will be
more dependent on balance sheet liquidity in times of monetary policy tightening and less
dependent in times of monetary policy loosening. Hence, the sum of the coefficients of
the monetary policy indicators in the second-step regression would be positive and
significant if the lending channel is active. The regression analysis includes as additional
controls a time trend, three quarterly indicator variables, and the growth rate in real GDP
and its lags.
        The next main element of our analysis focuses on whether differences among the
large global and large domestic banks are attributable to operable internal capital markets
of the global banks. This element is needed, since our first set of results could merely
reflect a size differential, since even within the top five percent in the asset distribution
the median domestic banks are substantially smaller than the median global banks.
Consequently a finding of limited or absent sensitivity to monetary policy could just be,
as in Kashyap and Stein (2000), the result of better access to alternative sources of
external funding.
        We are able to provide direct evidence that an internal capital market exists and
that it is mobilized in response to domestic monetary policy changes. Normally data on
internal transactions within an organization are unavailable in any systematic format,
which is the reason why evidence on the existence of internal capital markets is typically
derived indirectly by looking at the performance of one side of an organization in
response to a (hopefully exogenous) shock to the other side. However, as part of their
filing duties, U.S. banks are required to report quarterly the value of the net liabilities (or
claims) between their domestic offices and their foreign offices. These balance sheet
items record the aggregate value of all transactions between offices, including internal


                                                                                             7
loans and borrowings. 8 A positive amount for NetDuei ,t in a quarter implies that the

domestic office of bank i has received a net inflow of funds from their foreign operations
in period t.
        If global banks are insulated from domestic liquidity shifts just because of their
size, we should not expect to observe any abnormal behavior in the functioning of
internal capital markets between parent banks and their foreign affiliates around times of
changes in monetary policy. In order to test whether such an internal capital market is
active for global banks, we use the following equation specification:

                                   4                      4               4
        (3) ΔNet Duei ,t = α + ∑ ϕ j ΔNet Duei ,t − j + ∑ φ j ΔMPt − j + ∑ γ j ΔGDPt − j + μt
                                  j =1                   j =0            j =0


where ΔNet Duei ,t , the quarterly change in real Net Due funds for bank i at time t, is

regressed on its own four lags, on the change in the indicator of monetary policy and its
four lags, and the growth rate in real GDP and its four lags. Real Net Due is constructed
by deflating nominal net due by the CPI, with 1980 as the CPI base year taking a value of
100. The regression includes the growth rates in real GDP to control for general
economic conditions. If the internal capital market is in operation – and it is used as at
least a partial offset of domestic monetary policy shocks - we should expect to find an
increase in the inflow of funds (or a decline in outflows of funds) from foreign operations
in times of domestic monetary policy tightening. This evidence of internal capital market
response between the parent and foreign affiliates would be reflected in a positive and
significant sum of coefficients φ j on the monetary policy indicators.

        The third set of key results that are provided on bank globalization and monetary
transmission investigate the possible effects of domestic monetary policy on the lending
activity of the foreign offices of global banks. If global banks operate an active internal
capital market between their domestic and their foreign operations, then the lending
activity of the foreign offices of these banks should be affected by domestic liquidity
shocks. If an active internal capital market is in operation, the lending activity of the
foreign offices should depend on the overall level of available liquidity of the domestic

8
 Net Due To or From Own Related Offices in Other Countries is reported in schedule RC-H of Form 030
(Call Report).


                                                                                                 8
head office. However, in times of monetary policy contraction foreign offices would have
to rely less on the overall balance sheet strength of the domestic head office, and vice
versa. The thought experiment is again based on the two-step procedure described above.
In this case, however, in the first step the dependent variable is a measure of the lending
activity of the foreign offices of bank i at time t. The alternative measures used are the
growth in C&I lending of the foreign offices and the growth in total lending of the
foreign offices. The main regressor of interest is the overall liquidity measure of the
reporting bank.
        We present a fourth set of results as well, focused on the internal capital markets
that exist, through bank holding companies, between the parent banks and affiliated small
banks within the United States. The question considered is whether insulation differences
observed across large domestic-only banks and globally-oriented U.S. banks extend to
the small banks affiliated through common bank holding companies. Methodologically,
the empirical steps are analogous to those for equations (1) and (2), with the main
exceptions of additional controls applied for the size of the large banks in the BHC.
These results are included to address the existing work on internal capital markets and
small banks, as presented by Campello (2002).

III. The Data

The sample of banks. We examine data on banks and liquidity conditions for the period
from 1980Q1 through 2005Q4. The core of our analysis utilizes Call Report data
available quarterly for every chartered U.S. bank. 9 Table 1 provides descriptive statistics
on the banks used for our analysis. Four categories of banks are covered in the table:
large domestic banks, large global banks, small banks affiliated with a large global bank
via common ownership under the same bank holding company (BHC) organization, and
small bank in BHCs that contain large banks but no global banks. A large bank is defined
as any bank that is in the 95th percentile or higher of banks sorted by asset size, with this



9
  The specific details on the FFIEC 031 Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income for a Bank with
Domestic and Foreign Offices and FFIEC 041 Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income for a Bank
with Domestic Offices Only are available at http://www.ffiec.gov/forms031.htm and
http://www.ffiec.gov/forms041.htm.


                                                                                                  9
categorization performed in every quarter of the sample period. A small bank is defined
as any bank that is in the 90th percentile or lower.
         U.S. bank asset distribution is well-known to be highly skewed, so that even
within the top 5 percent bracket there is a considerable size difference between banks in
the top 1 percent and those between the 95th and the 99th percentile. Our definition of
small banks, as those in the 90th percentile or smaller of banks sorted by asset size,
differs from Kashyap and Stein (2000), who use a 95th percentile cut-off. 10 We follow
Campello (2002) in our sample choice, and, by leaving out the intermediate group of
banks between the 90th and 95th percentile, impose a cleaner separation between small
and large banks.
         The main balance sheet data of these types of banks are summarized in Table 1.
The information presented covers the number of bank-quarter observations in the sample,
median values for bank size, loan to asset ratios, C&I lending to assets, and bank
liquidity, capitalization and nonperforming loan shares. The full sample of banks is
described, as are the sub-samples containing the large domestic banks, the large global
banks, the group of small banks affiliated with domestic bank holding companies, and the
small banks affiliated with global bank holding companies. We use Call Report data on
foreign assets and foreign liabilities of branches and subsidiaries to determine whether a
bank is global or not. For reporting within the Table, three reference dates are considered,
1985, 1995, and 2005, indicative of the respective decades covered by the full dataset.
         The overall sample consists of more than 1.1 million bank-quarters of data.
Within the group of banks represented, the large global and domestic banks have evolved
to become larger on average and to represent more of the total assets of the banking
sector. While large global banks are fewer in number, by 2005 they account for almost 70
percent of banking system assets. Large domestic banks are more numerous but
characterized by a substantially smaller median bank size. Those small banks that are

10
   Kashyap and Stein (2000), for instance, reported separate results on the effects of monetary policy for
banks below the 95th percentile (their “small” banks), banks between the 95th and the 99th and banks in the
top 1 percent. Their main result was to find a significant effect of monetary policy on small banks only, and
mainly insignificant coefficients, or significant but with opposite sign, for the two largest groups of banks.
Hence, their results indicated overall insulation from monetary policy for banks in the top 5 percent of the
size distribution. We do not split our sample between banks in the 95th to 99th and banks in the top 1
percentile. We already are performing a split between large domestic and large global, so that any further
divisions would result in insufficient observations for a meaningful statistical comparison across groups.


                                                                                                          10
affiliated with large BHCs currently account for less than one percent of banking system
assets.
          The global banks tend to have less liquid assets, lower capitalization, and higher
nonperforming loan shares. The portfolios of the global banks tend to be similar in terms
of loan to asset ratios, but commercial and industrial loans play a larger role in the
business base. 11 The observations about differences in portfolios across the large banks
are consistent with lessons from Berger et al. (2005), wherein it is argued that bank size is
correlated with the bank business model: larger banks tend to lend at a greater distance,
interact more at arms-length with their borrowers, and have shorter and less exclusive
relationships with these borrowers.
          Two other forms of bank-specific data are central to our analysis, both particular
to the global banks. The first data are loans of foreign offices 12 and the second type is net
due with foreign offices. 13 The lending of the foreign offices of U.S. global banks
captures loans extended directly by offices in countries where they are physically located.
These figures do not include possible lending activity of the domestic offices to clients
residing abroad. The net due data reflects direct flows between a parent with its branches
and subsidiaries abroad. Positive values represent flows from foreign operations to the
parent bank located in the United States, and vice versa.
          Some features of the foreign loan and net due data are presented in Table 2, which
primarily focuses on the means, medians and number of observations. The first point to
note is the consistent difference between means and medians, which are substantially
smaller. The implication is that the distribution of activity is highly skewed, with overall
quantities dominated by a few large players. Second, the net due observations are split
across net due to (flows to the parent) and net due from (flows from the parent to foreign
affiliates). In recent years, the flows from affiliates to parents have substantially exceeded
flows in the opposite direction. Third, while foreign lending has risen – both total and
C&I lending – the median bank is not engaged in this activity recently. This is dominated
11
   The patterns are the same when small banks affiliated with global BHCs are compared with small banks
affiliated with domestic BHCs.
12
   These data are from schedule RC-C of the Call Report, item RCFN 2122 (total loans) and RCFN
1763+1764 (C&I loans).
13
   We construct these as the difference between schedule RC-H Net due to own foreign offices, Edge and
Agreement subsidiaries, and IBFs and Net due from own foreign offices, Edge and Agreement subsidiaries,
and IBFs (RC-H 2941-2163).


                                                                                                    11
by very large global banks, as reflected in the means across the years. While total foreign
lending has been rising, domestic lending is rising at a higher rate, so that foreign loans
are declining as a share of total bank lending. The direction of flows from foreign
affiliates to parents, reflected in net due to statistics, show that affiliated foreign banks
have assets abroad that tend to be directed to U.S. markets.


Macroeconomic Liquidity. Three measures of market liquidity, proxied by measures of
monetary policy, are used in our analysis: a nominal Federal Funds rate, a real Federal
Funds rate (the nominal rate adjusted for CPI inflation), and the Bernanke and Mihov
(1998) measure. 14 The quarterly effective Federal funds rate is calculated from monthly
data from the Federal Reserve Board. The Bernanke-Mihov measure is constructed via a
“semi-structural VAR” model of the market for bank reserves. We use an oppositely
signed Bernanke-Mihov series compared to the published measure, so that its
interpretation is similar to the Federal Funds series. In all cases, our empirical results
enter these variables so that an increase in the monetary measure is interpreted as a
tightening of liquidity conditions.
         These three measures are depicted in Figure 3. In terms of the values of these
series, positive values of our Bernanke-Mihov metric and of the real Federal Funds rates
are considered periods of tight monetary policy. Upward movements in all three
measures generally are considered indicative of tighter policy. Of course, the real Federal
Funds rate can be tighter either due to an explicit rise in the nominal policy rate, or from
a reduction in inflation while the nominal rate remains unchanged. The Bernanke-Mihov
measure can reflect tighter liquidity conditions that are generated from policy instruments
other than the Funds rate. 15


14
   Bernanke and Mihov (1998) applied a flexible VAR model which nested specific assumptions about
central bank operating procedures, such as whether it is based on federal funds rate or non-borrowed
reserves targeting. Ilian Mihov kindly updated and revised this measure in 12/06 using data through the end
of 2005. The Kashyap and Stein (2000) study uses a narrative measure of monetary policy, the Boschen-
Mills (1995) index, the Federal Funds rates, and the Bernanke and Mihov measure. Kashyap and Stein
(2000) do not use a real Federal Funds rate.
15
   The differences in definition and construction across these measures generate positive but not necessarily
tight correlations among them, as reported in Appendix Table 1. The tightest correlations are among the
nominal and real Federal Funds rate series, which have a common policy base but differ in terms of
correction for slower moving inflation. The real rate is consistently lower in value and trends downward by
less through these decades as average inflation has declined. The trajectory of the Bernanke-Mihov


                                                                                                         12
Data screens. For our regression analysis we apply a number of screens to the data.
These screens follow closely those of Kashyap and Stein (2000) and Campello (2002).
We drop bank quarters in which mergers or changes in “high holder” within a BHC
occur. We drop bank quarters where asset growth was above 100 percent and total loan
growth was above +50 percent or below –50 percent. In regressions where we focus on
C&I lending, we remove similar outliers in the C&I lending growth distribution. Finally,
for regressions analyzing the lending of foreign offices we dropped outliers at the 1st and
99th percentile of either the series of growth in total and C&I lending of foreign offices.


IV. Empirical Findings

The Lending Channel in Domestic versus Global Large Banks. As described above, the
first empirical exercise tests how lending sensitivity to balance sheet liquidity varies with
monetary policy for different categories of banks. Our main comparison is between large
banks with international operations, our global banks, and those banks that instead
operate exclusively within domestic boundaries.
        Table 3 presents the results from the second stage regressions run on these two
subsets of banks. Each cell within the table presents the summed coefficient on monetary
policy and is generated from a distinct regression. The table is divided into two panels,
representing regressions over the distinct dependent variables for loans. The upper panel
reports estimated summed coefficients where the first stage regressions used growth in
total loans as the dependent variable, while the lower panel reports estimated coefficients
using growth in C&I loans. Within each of the panels we report results of separate
regression specifications run using one of the three alternative indicators of monetary
policy, and which either exclude or include controls for GDP growth in the second stage
regression. In total, Table 3 summarizes results from twenty-four regressions: twelve for


measure is more tightly correlated with the nominal Federal Funds rate than the real rate, perhaps not
surprising since the nominal rate enters the VAR used in constructing the Bernanke-Mihov measure.
Despite this pattern in correlations reflecting changing liquidity conditions, the B-M and real rates have
more comparable direct signals regarding absolute liquidity conditions, namely, whether policy is monetary
policy is loose or tight at any point in time.



                                                                                                       13
large, global banks and twelve for large, domestic banks. Results highlighted in bold are
those where monetary policy consequences for lending are statistically significant at the
10 percent level and which indicate an active lending channel for monetary policy.
         First, consider the results in the second set of columns of Table 3, which are based
on regression analysis over the sample of large, global banks. The sums of coefficients
are never significant at standard significance levels. In these banks we do not observe the
lending channel of monetary policy transmission at work. The more surprising results are
provided in the first set of columns, which reflect the effects of liquidity measures on
bank balance sheets and lending by large, but domestic-only banks. Strikingly, in seven
out of twelve of the regressions the sums of coefficients are statistically significant and
positive, and marginally significant in one additional specification. This finding of a
substantive effect of monetary policy on lending by large banks contrasts with the
Kashyap and Stein (2000) results, which had pooled together the large domestic and large
global banks. Our results show that when the large bank sample is split along domestic
versus global lines, tighter monetary policy is significantly associated with more binding
balance sheet constraints on large banks, but only on the domestically-oriented group of
banks.
         This set of results provides an important insight into the Kashyap and Stein
(2000) result that large banks are shielded from monetary policy shocks because of their
innate ability to freely access alternative sources of funds. This access to external capital
markets is not completely frictionless for large banks: once we remove the banks with
global operations from the cluster of large banks, size itself may not be a sufficient trait
to provide insulation. Stated differently, this result can be evidence that in fact globalness
is a trait that helps explain why the aggregated class of large banks seems to be insulated
from monetary policy. Later in Section IV we turn to the economic significance of these
findings and the strength of our documented internal capital markets within global banks
in explaining the difference between the domestic and global large banks.


Flows Between Global Banks and Their Foreign Affiliates. If globalness is such a trait,
one challenge is to identify the means through which global banks achieve this. As we
have noted, one way global banks can do this is by maintaining an active internal capital



                                                                                           14
market that potentially allows them to reshuffle resources between domestic and foreign
operations depending on the relative liquidity needs within the banking organization. To
determine whether this channel is active, we use equation specification (3), on the “net
due” from foreign operations to the parent and report the results in Table 4. In all
regressions the dependent variable is the change in net due flows between a bank
domestic headquarter and its foreign offices, with the net due flows deflated to be
expressed in constant 1980 dollars. Recall that, by construction, an increase in net due
means that the domestic offices are receiving more funds from their foreign offices or
sending fewer resources abroad.
       The results reported in the first column of Table 4 show that the pattern of funds
flow responds to changes in monetary policy, and this effect is statistically significant. In
particular, this evidence indicates that an active internal capital market between the
domestic headquarter and its foreign offices exists. The next columns of results consider
the size and statistical significance of the effect under periods of tighter versus under
looser monetary conditions, testing for potential asymmetries. The transmission of U.S.
liquidity conditions onto net-due flows is bi-directional. The results show that funds flow
into the parent bank at a faster pace when domestic monetary policy is tighter, and funds
flow out to the affiliates, or into the parent from the affiliate at a slower pace, when
domestic monetary policy is more expansionary. Tests performed for equality across the
asymmetric coefficients show that none of the specifications yield a statistically
significant difference between estimated size of net due response to tightening versus
loosening of credit conditions. Consequently, the empirics reject the notion that an
internal capital market between U.S. banks and foreign affiliates is active only in one
direction of monetary policy conditions.


Internal Capital Markets and Lending by Foreign Affiliates. Our observation that foreign
affiliates help insulate global banks against domestic liquidity shocks does not mean that
the total consequences of U.S. monetary policy are smaller than would be the case
without globalization. While some insulation occurs in U.S. domestic markets,
transmission of U.S. monetary shocks can be magnified on foreign markets. Indeed, the
economic impact of the same amount of inflows and outflows can be markedly different



                                                                                          15
from the domestic lending and foreign perspectives. Since the total foreign lending
portfolios are typically much smaller than the total domestic loan portfolios (Table 2), the
impact of a given outflow on the lending of foreign offices would be proportionately
much larger than the impact of an equally sized inflow on domestic lending.
        We explore the potential impact of changes in U.S. monetary policy for lending
activity abroad by the affiliates of U.S. banks using the bank-specific data on foreign
loans. Again, if global banks are insulated from domestic monetary policy shocks
because of their ability to redirect liquid funds across borders, we should expect that the
lending activity of the foreign offices of such banks to be directly affected by domestic
shocks. Evidence supporting this conjecture would provide a direct channel through
which domestic monetary policy is transmitted internationally, supporting the type of
spillovers of policy established in VAR studies that exclusively rely on macroeconomic
data.
        The empirical strategy relies on the expectation that, with operable internal capital
markets, foreign lending is likely to depend on the strength of the balance sheet of the
domestic office. Consequently, we test whether such degree of dependence varies with
the conditions of domestic monetary policy. The regression specifications cover growth
in C&I lending of foreign offices, shown in the first set of columns of Table 5, and Total
Foreign Lending, shown in the second set of columns of Table 5. As in Table 3, the
reported results are the summed effects across quarters of a change in U.S. monetary
variables, with the cells of the table drawn from regression specifications that are
inclusive or exclusive of controls for real GDP growth.
        The pattern of results reported in Table 5 is highly consistent across specifications
and across the coverage of the foreign lending variable. The estimated sums of
coefficients are always negative and are significant in nine out of the twelve regressions.
The implication is that foreign lending activity of U.S. bank affiliates abroad can rely less
on the overall strength of the home office in times of tighter monetary conditions in the
United States, and rely more on the U.S. parent in times of looser U.S. liquidity.


Internal Capital Markets and Lending by Domestic Affiliates. As a final set of regression
exercises, we test whether the impact of globalization also extends to the lending activity



                                                                                          16
of small size banks operating within the United States. Campello (2002) had argued that
while it must be true that smaller banks are restricted in their ability to raise alternative
sources of external finance – as argued by Kashyap and Stein - it is also true that a
number of small banks are linked to large ones via bank holding company affiliation.
Campello successfully showed that these small banks remain insulated from monetary
policy shocks because they can access internal funds that can be reallocated within the
bank holding company organization. The Campello results made another dent to the
effectiveness of the lending channel by excluding a whole other group of banks from
potential effects. In light of our main results, we revisit this conclusion with the
expectation that the degree of insulation may be different for small banks that are
associated with large and global banks, compared with insulation afforded those
associated with large but domestic-oriented banks.
       The identification is achieved with the same two-step procedure described above
through equations (1) and (2). However, following very closely Campello (2002), in this
case in the first stage we estimate the sensitivity of lending activity of the small banks to
their own internally-generated income and then in the second stage measure how such
sensitivity varies with monetary policy. The intuition is that small banks associated with
banks that are insulated by liquidity shocks should not be in need, or should be less in
need, of their own internally generated income to fund lending activity. If these small
banks cannot rely on funds reallocation provided by the larger, better insulated affiliates,
their lending activity will be more dependent on their own income and such dependence
will be even higher in times of tighter monetary policy. As before, the first stage
regressions include as bank-specific lagged controls a bank capitalization ratio, its size,
and the value of its non-performing loans, together with state and MSA indicator
variables. In addition, we include controls for the overall size of the large banks in the
BHCs to which each bank i belongs. These controls are the lagged values of the log of the
sum of total assets of all large banks in the BHC, and its squared term.
       Table 6 reports the results of second stage regressions for these two new groups of
banks. The first set of columns refer to estimated coefficients from the regressions run on
the subset of small banks affiliated with large, domestic banks, while the second set of
columns refer to regressions run on the subset of small banks affiliated with large, global



                                                                                          17
banks. The second set of columns shows that small banks affiliated with large, global
banks appear to be insulated from liquidity shocks. In all cases, with any indicator of
monetary policy, looking at total lending or just C&I lending, and including or excluding
GDP controls, the estimated sums of coefficients are never positive and significant. In
fact, they are actually negative and significant in three of the regressions with total loans
as dependent variable. By contrast, the results for small banks affiliated with large,
domestic banks are markedly different. In eleven of the twelve alternative specifications
the sums of coefficients from the second stage regressions are positive and significant,
indicating that these small banks need to rely more on their own internal funds in times of
liquidity shortage. The implication is that the small banks affiliated with domestic-only
BHCs appear to remain exposed to changes in U.S. liquidity conditions, an indication that
the large banks in their organizations may not be sufficiently shielded to be able to
activate a meaningful reallocation of resources to their small affiliates through the
organization’s internal capital market.


Overall potency of the lending channel. The analyses presented above using bank-
specific data provide very clear qualitative lessons on the consequences of globalization
of banks for the lending channel. In this section, we pull together those empirical results
in order to gauge both their quantitative economic significance and the role of internal
capital markets in global banks in explaining differences across the large banks. We
undertake exercises similar to those in Kashyap and Stein (2000), computing the impact
on growth in lending occurring over a period of 8 quarters of a 100 basis points change in
the nominal federal funds rate.
         Because the identification strategy relies on banks being liquidity constrained, we
assume that banks are liquidity constrained if they are below the 90th percentile in the
liquidity-to-asset ratio distribution for each separate group of banks that we analyzed.
From each subset of banks below this threshold, we take the median value in the
liquidity-to-asset ratio and evaluate the economic impact of the monetary policy change
at this point in the distribution. 16


16
  Kashyap and Stein (2000) calculated the integral over the entire distribution of banks at the given point in
time. Our exercise is simpler but it is still informative.


                                                                                                          18
         For all of the quantitative exercises, we use the estimated coefficient from the
regressions with the added GDP growth controls and using the nominal Federal Funds
rate. Consider C&I lending by large banks first. The estimated sum of coefficients on
monetary policy from this specification is 0.0012, as reported in Table 3. 17 From
examining the Call Report data, across large domestic banks the value of the liquidity-to-
asset ratio at the 90th percentile is 0.40 and the median value for banks below the 90th
percentile threshold is 0.19 (in logs equal to -1.64). Hence, a 100 basis point tightening
of the nominal federal funds rate would result in a decline in C&I lending growth by 0.2
percentage points for the median bank (0.0012 × -1.64). Since the median quarterly C&I
loan growth for this bank group over our sample period was 1.7 percent, the Federal
Funds tightening would reduce the median growth rate to 1.5 percent, or by about 12
percent of the median value. The same exercise applied to total lending would instead
find a 0.13 percentage points decline in the total lending growth rate (0.008 x 1.64). Since
the median total loan growth rate was 1.9 percent, the monetary tightening would reduce
median total loan growth to 1.77 percent, or about 7 percent of the median value.
         Recall the key result that the global banks were not significantly affected by
monetary policy variables and the conjecture that the net dues adjustment, representing
internal capital markets at work within the globalized banks, provides the offset on the
liability side of the balance sheet so that asset side adjustments through loans do not
occur. In the next paragraphs we compute the quantities of loan adjustment that would
have occurred for the global banks if they did not have this net due offset and compare
these quantities with the estimated net due changes.
         Consider the magnitude of a change in net due flows in response to a 100 basis
point increase in the nominal Federal Funds rate. The estimated sum of the coefficients
on the monetary policy variable for that model specification was equal to 189.07. Since
the net due variable was expressed in real 1980 dollars, we convert back into nominal
terms using the CPI deflator. For instance, consider the effect at the most current data
point, the fourth quarter of 2005, where the multiplication factor for the CPI deflator was

17
   These coefficients indicate the change in the sensitivity of lending growth to liquidity, the estimated β’s
from the first-stage regressions. The sizes of the coefficients in the various specifications are comparable to
the means of the β’s for each corresponding group of banks. For instance, a change in sensitivity by 0.0012
is large compared to the mean of the estimated β’s for large domestic banks, which was equal to 0.0032.
Similar magnitude comparisons apply for the other bank groups.


                                                                                                           19
250.7. Then the total effect of a 100 basis point tightening on the quarterly change in net
due flows is equals to $47.4 million (189.07 x 250.7), with net due variables in the
empirical exercise expressed in thousands of dollars. This figure is within the range of
typical fluctuations in net due flows across the global banks and their subsidiaries. For
example, in the fourth quarter of 2005 the median size of a change in net dues, whether
inflows or outflows, was $15 million, while the absolute size of net due for the median
bank was $74 million. Hence, the evidence suggests that global banks mobilize
substantial funds in their internal capital markets.
        However, to establish that these funds matter for the liquidity needs of global
banks we need a benchmark for what the monetary tightening would have done to banks
in the absence of the foreign-sourced funds. As a hypothetical exercise, we apply to the
group of large global banks the quantified impact of monetary tightening that had been
calculated for large, but domestic-only banks. To obtain a direct comparison with the
calculated response in net due flows, we look at the potential impact on total lending of
the median, liquidity constrained, large and global bank in the fourth quarter of 2005. In
this quarter, the median bank reported about $21 billion in total loans. Using the
coefficient estimated for the group of large, domestic banks, the median, constrained
global banks would experience a potential loss in total lending growth of about $63
million. 18 Hence, the estimated magnitude of the response of net due flows for the
median global bank from our monetary policy experiment can deliver the additional
funds needed to insulate the liability side of the bank balance sheet and mitigate the type
of lending reduction occurring in domestic-only banks due to tighter domestic funding
conditions.
        In terms of lending spillovers from large banks, we can assess the domestic
consequences across affiliated small banks and affiliated foreign branches and
subsidiaries. For the economic impact on lending of small banks, we use the estimated
coefficients from Table 6. An increase of 100 basis points produces a decline in C&I loan
growth of 0.4 percentage points for the small domestic banks affiliated with a domestic-
only BHC. Considering the median in C&I loan growth for the bank group was 0.7

18
  Computed as follows: The 90th pct in log(liquid asset ratio) for large global in 2005q4 = -2.00. Median of
those banks below this threshold = - 4.01. Impact on total lending = 4.01 *0.0008 = 0.003. Total lending for
median, constrained, large global bank = 21Bn. Loss = 21Bn*0.003 = 63Mn.


                                                                                                        20
percent, the monetary tightening effect corresponds to 57 percent of the median value of
loan growth. For total lending, the change in loan growth was calculated to be equal to
0.28 percentage points, corresponding to 19 percent of the median value in loan growth.
These contractionary lending effects from monetary tightening are not evident in the
small banks that are part of a BHC with large global banks.
       For the transmission of U.S. monetary policy to foreign loans through global
banks we use Table 5 estimates and conclude that the economic significance of U.S.
monetary policy on foreign lending is potentially large. The increase in the Federal Funds
rate would reduce C&I lending of foreign offices by about 3 percentage points and reduce
total lending of foreign offices by 2.2 percentage points. Over the entire sample period,
the median values in both C&I and total lending growth for foreign offices were actually
negative (-1.2 and -0.3 percent, respectively). Monetary tightening in the United States
would thus slow lending abroad to an even greater extent. The effect would still be
considerable even for a foreign office at the 75th percentile of either loan growth
distribution (+ 5.9 and + 6.1 percent, respectively).
       In sum, our study confirms that the ongoing process of globalization of the
banking industry impacts the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. The aggregate
impact is not trivial: total lending in the fourth quarter of 2005 was approximately $4.8
trillion. Of this total amount, $3.1 trillion were issued by large, global banks. Hence,
about 65 percent of total lending is largely insulated, at least in terms of direct effects,
from changes in monetary policy. On the other hand, we find that there is evidence of
sensitivity to monetary policy among the remaining large domestic institutions. In
2005Q4 the overall lending of this bank category amounted to about $1 trillion. Hence,
our “reclaiming” about 25 percent of large bank loans to the potential lending channel
effects seems economically significant, even if the coefficient on the magnitude of this
effect for these banks only changes loan growth by a modest amount.
       Continuing with the domestic lending channel consequences, if we add to this
large number the results from lending channel effects through the small banks affiliated
with large domestic banks, the lending channel emerges even more potent than
previously estimated. Going back to the aggregate evaluation, in the fourth quarter of
2005 the total lending of small banks affiliated with large banks was about $31 Billion.



                                                                                         21
Of this grand total, $21 Billion came from small banks affiliated with large, domestic-
oriented ones. Consequently, about 66 percent more lending of small banks are
potentially affected through the lending channel than previously suggested. While this
lending figure is an order of magnitude smaller than the one calculated for large banks, its
economic significance cannot be discounted both due to the size of the estimated median
loan growth response for the banks and the observation that small banks serve principally
small and medium size enterprises, which in turn have a central role in the overall engine
of U.S. economic growth. These consequences are just the domestic ones, with the
lending channel also transmitted abroad through affiliated banks.
       As a final remark, while we are showing that globalization has a first-order impact
on the conduct of monetary policy and that the lending channel is stronger than estimated
without taking this process into account, our analysis highlights time variation in these
effects. The potency of the lending channel evolves as the banking industry trends toward
increasing globalization. In 1995, large global banks issued about 55 percent of total
loans, as opposed to about 65 percent of total loans in 2005. Suppose the estimated
parameters from our regression exercises were stable over time, and consider the
counterfactual of an increase in the share of global banks by another 10 percentage
points, to 75 percent of total domestic lending. For a lower bound on this impact, we
assume that total lending issued by non-global banks, large or small, has the sensitivity to
monetary policy estimated for the large banks, at 0.13 percent, as in the numerical
exercise described after Table 3. Total lending by non-global banks was about $1.8
trillion in the fourth quarter of 2005. Assuming a median loan growth rate of 1.9 percent,
an increase in the Federal Funds rate of 100 basis points would reduce loan growth by
about 7 percent, “shaving” loan growth by about $2.3 billion over eight quarters. If the
share of total lending issued by global banks were instead 75 percent of the current $4.8
trillion, monetary tightening would have instead reduced lending by about $1.56 billion.
While this is still the same 7 percent reduction in loan growth, it amounts to a 33 percent
reduction in the amount of new lending that is affected by monetary policy through the
lending channel.




                                                                                         22
V. Conclusions

       Our goal was to investigate whether there is evidence that globalization of
banking is changing the transmission of monetary policy via the lending channel. Our
conclusion is that globalization has a deep and pervasive impact on the transmission of
monetary policy. Using bank-specific data over the period between 1980 and 2005 we
have found evidence of differences in the lending channel across large banks. While large
banks are typically considered to be insulated from monetary policy, once global banks
are separated from this group of large banks, the remaining domestic-oriented banks
show significant sensitivity to monetary policy in support of the lending channel.
       Insulation of large global banks relative to large domestic-only banks arises due to
a functioning internal capital market between globalized parents in the United States and
their foreign affiliates. We demonstrate this point by showing that the net due flows
between parents and affiliates respond to U.S. monetary policy. Globalness is part of the
insulation of large banks from domestic liquidity shocks, with this form of insulation
apparently unavailable to the domestic only banks. Some of these differences in the
lending channel across banks also extend to small banks, depending on whether they are
affiliated with large domestic banks or large global banks through bank holding
companies.
       The consequences of these results are statistically and economically significant.
The mechanisms we identify imply that, under globalization, the impact of the liquidity
shock on domestic bank lending and on the U.S. economy as a whole will be attenuated,
while at the same time the domestic shock is transmitted more broadly to foreign markets
through affiliated banks. Using bank-specific data, we show that the lending of foreign
offices of U.S. banks is affected by U.S. monetary policy, and these foreign offices can
rely less on support from parent bank balance sheets in times of tighter liquidity
conditions in the United States. While the domestic impact of monetary policy through
the lending channel may have diminished over time as globalization progressed, our other
observation that this channel influences foreign market activity suggests an expanded
breadth of effects of domestic liquidity changes.



                                                                                        23
       Our results also indicate that access to external capital markets may not be
frictionless if large, domestic-oriented banks display a significant degree of sensitivity to
their own balance sheet liquidity, and if large, global banks make use of their
international, internal channel in response to monetary policy. Understanding the
dynamics of international, intra-bank funding adds important insights to our
understanding of banks’ response to liquidity shocks and it should therefore assist in the
undertaking of effective policy making. As a case in point, the response of U.S. global
banks in the aftermath of the liquidity crisis during the summer of 2007 indicates a
significant use of internal funds even during such an event. Our calculation shows that
internal borrowings of global banks from foreign operations jumped from pre-crisis
averages and financed more than 20 percent of domestic asset growth during the second
half of 2007 for these banks, a figure almost doubled from pre-crisis averages. Hence a
banking system that grows increasingly global may have enhanced resilience and self-
adjustment in times of liquidity crisis. However, it may not rule out broader international
propagations of shocks and perhaps a more limited scope for isolated intervention by
national policy authorities.
       As a concluding remark, in principle the importance of the internal capital
markets across globalized parents and their foreign affiliates may be predicated on the
regulatory and macroeconomic regimes at home and abroad. For the channels we identify
the role of the foreign policy regimes warrants further careful study. The potential for
viewing foreign markets as a liquidity buffer against U.S.-generated liquidity shocks may
rely on the presumption that the cost of capital in foreign markets does not move in step
with the U.S. federal funds rate. In this case, it may be that those branches and
subsidiaries in countries in where currencies are not pegged to the dollar are the ones that
play the dominant liquidity buffer role. Indeed, existing studies using macroeconomic
data already identify differences in monetary regimes on monetary policy transmission
across markets that are associated with exchange rate regime. The implication is that
globalization consequences for the lending channel could differ depending on whether
the constellation of partners in banking contains countries that directly tie their monetary
policies to those of the United States.




                                                                                          24
References:

Ashcraft, Adam, “Are Bank Holding Companies a Source of Strength to Their Banking
Subsidiaries?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Forthcoming.

Ashcraft, Adam. “New Evidence on the Lending Channel,” Journal of Money, Credit,
and Banking, Volume 38, Issue 3, pp. 751-776, April 2006.

Ashcraft, Adam and Murillo Campello, “Firm Balance Sheets and Monetary Policy
Transmission” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Berger, Allen, Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan '”Does
Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large
and Small Banks”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 76 (May 2005), pp. 237-69.

Bernanke, Ben. 2006. “Remarks on Global Economic Integration: What's New and
What's Not?” At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Thirtieth Annual Economic
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming August 25, 2006.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20060825/default.htm

Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder. 1988. “Credit, Money, and Aggregate Demand”,
American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May 1988, vol. 78, no. 2, pp. 435-
439.

Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder. 1992. “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of
Monetary Transmission”, in American Economic Review, September, vol. 82, no. 4, pp.
901-21.

Bernanke, Ben and Mark Gertler. 1995. “Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of
Monetary Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 1995, vol. 9, no. 4, pp.
27-48.

Bernanke, Ben and Ilian Mihov. 1998. “Measuring Monetary Policy” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, August, 113 (3), pp. 869-902.

Boschen, John and Leonard Mills. 1995. “The Relation between Narrative and Money
Market Indicators of Monetary Policy” Economic Inquiry (33), pp.24-44.

Campello, Murillo, 2002. “Internal Capital Markets in Financial Conglomerates:
Evidence from Small Bank Responses to Monetary Policy”. Journal of Finance,
December 2002, v. 57, iss. 6, pp. 2773-2805.

Canova, Fabio. 2005. “The Transmission of U.S. Shocks to Latin data.” Journal of
Applied Econometrics. vol. 20 pp. 229-251.



                                                                                     25
Claessens, Stijn and Neeltje Van Horen. 2008. “Location Decisions of Foreign Banks and
Institutional Competitive Advantage.” Manuscript (March).

Di Giovanni, Julian and Jay Shambaugh. Forthcoming. “The Impact of Foreign Interest
Rates on the Economy: The Role of the Exchange Rate Regime” Journal of International
Economics.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler, and Luis Serven. 2004. “Global Transmission of
Interest Rates: Monetary Independence and the Currency Regime.” Journal of
International Money and Finance vol. 23 no. 5 (Sept.) pp.701-734.

Garcia-Herrero, Alicia and Carlos Medeiros. 2007. “International Diversification Gains
and Home Bias in Banking.” IMF working paper wp/07/281 (December).

Houston, Joel, David Marcus, and Christopher James. 1997, “Capital market frictions and
the role of internal capital markets in banking?”, Journal of Financial Economics 46(2),
135-164.

Ihrig, Jane, Steve Kamin, Deb Lindner, and Jaime Marquez. 2007. “Some simple tests of
the globalization and inflation hypothesis”, International Finance Discussion Papers 891.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Kashyap, Anil and Jeremy Stein. 2000. “What Do A Million Observations on Banks Say
About the Transmission of Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 90(3), pp.
407-28.

Kashyap, Anil and Jeremy Stein. 1994. "Monetary policy and bank lending", in: N. G.
Mankiw, ed , Monetary Policy (University of Chicago Press, Chicago) pp 221-256.

Kashyap, Anil and Jeremy Stein. 1995."The Impact of Monetary Policy on Bank Balance
Sheets," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 1995, vol. 42, pp. 151-
95.

Kim, Soyoung. 2001. “International Transmission of U.S. Monetary Policy Shocks:
Evidence from VAR’s” Journal of Monetary Economics vol. 48 pp. 339-72.

Loutskina, Elena and Philip E. Strahan, “Securitization and the Declining Impact of Bank
Finance on Loan Supply: Evidence from Mortgage” Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.

Morgan, Donald P., Bertrand Rime, and Philip E. Strahan, 2004, “Bank integration and
state business cycles,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1555-1584.

Neumeyer, Paolo and Fabrizio Perri. 2005. “Business cycles in emerging economies: the
role of interest rates” Journal of Monetary Economics vol. 52 pp.345-380.




                                                                                      26
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay Shambaugh, and Alan Taylor. 2005. “The Trilema in History:
Tradeoffs among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobility” Review of
Economics and Statistics. Vol. 3 (December) pp. 423-438.

Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren. 1997. “The International Transmission of Financial
Shocks: The Case of Japan” American Economic Review (September) 87 (4), pp.495-505.

Peek, Joe and Eric Rosengren. 2000. “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank
Crisis on Real Activity in the United States” The American Economic Review, Vol. 90,
No. 1. (March), pp. 30-45.

Sbordone, Argia, 2007. “Globalization and Inflation Dynamics: The Impact of Increased
Competition” NBER Working Paper 13556

Stein, Jeremy. 1998. “An Adverse Selection Model of Bank Asset and Liability
Management with Implications for the Transmission of Monetary Policy”, Rand Journal
of Economics 29 (Autumn) pp. 466-486.

Yellen, Janet . 2006. “Monetary Policy in a Global Environment” Speech at The Euro
and the Dollar in a Globalized Economy Conference, U.C. Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA
May 27, 2006. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2006/060527.pdf




                                                                                  27
Data Appendix.

Net due to and Net due from items are located on schedule RC-H--Selected Balance
Sheet Items for Domestic Offices of the CALL report (FFIEC 031, page 24)

Item Number 2941: NET DUE TO OWN FOREIGN OFFICES, EDGE AND
AGREEMENT SUBSIDIARIES, AND IBFS

Data Description: The position of the domestic offices of the bank relative to all of the
bank's Edge and Agreement subsidiaries, foreign branches, consolidated foreign
subsidiaries, and branches in Puerto Rico and U.S. territories and possessions. All intra-
bank transactions of the domestic offices with these other offices of the bank, including
investments (both equity and debt) in consolidated subsidiaries (foreign and domestic),
are reflected here, since all other items are reported on a fully consolidated basis and
excludes all intra-bank transactions. A single net amount for all the intra-bank due to and
due from positions of the domestic office is calculated and entered either in "Net Due
from Own Foreign Offices, Edge and Agreement Subsidiaries, and IBFs (2163)" or this
item, depending on whether the single net amount is a net due from or a net due to
balance.

Item Number 2163: NET DUE FROM OWN FOREIGN OFFICES, EDGE AND
AGREEMENT SUBSIDIARIES, AND IBFS

Data Description:
The position of the domestic offices of the bank relative to all of the bank's Edge and
Agreement subsidiaries, foreign branches, consolidated foreign subsidiaries, and
branches in Puerto Rico and U.S. territories and possessions. All intra-bank transactions
of the domestic offices with these other offices of the bank, including investment (both
equity and debt) in consolidated subsidiaries (foreign and domestic), are reflected here,
since all other items are reported on a fully consolidated basis and exclude all intra-bank
transactions. A single net amount for all the intra-bank due to and due from positions of
the domestic offices is calculated and entered either in "Net Due to Own Foreign Offices,
Edge and Agreement Subsidiaries, and IBFs (2941)" or this item, depending on whether
the single net amount is a net due from or a net due to amount.




                                                                                        28
                                                                                   Figure 1
                                                        Share of total U.S. bank assets in globally-oriented U.S. banks

                                                70
     Share (as a percentage o f total assets)




                                                65




                                                60




                                                55




                                                50
                                                 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
                                                                                        Date


                                                                                   Figure 2
                                                     Share of foreign assets in total assets in globally-oriented U.S. banks

                                                35
Share (as a percentage of total assets)




                                                30




                                                25




                                                20




                                                15
                                                 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
                                                                                        Date




                                                                                                                               29
                                                      Figure 3
                                           Monetary Policy Variables
            20
                                                                                    Fed Funds Rate
                                                                                    Bernanke-Mihov
            15                                                                      Real Fed Funds Rate



            10
 Rate (%)




             5


             0


             -5


            -10
              80     82     84     86     88     90     92      94     96     98     00     02     04
            19     19     19     19     19     19     19      19     19     19     20     20     20
                                                             Date
The Bernanke-Mihov index has been modified from the original so that all three monetary policy indicators
signal tightening when they increase.




                                                                                                          30
                                                    Table 1: Basic Balance Sheet Information for U.S. Banks

                                                                                                                                        Small banks in       Small banks
                                                                                            Large domestic         Large global
                                                                          All banks                                                       domestic            in global
                                                                                                banks                 banks
                                                                                                                                           BHCs                 BHCs
Total number of bank observations (1980Q1-2005Q4)                         1,162,969              43,921                14,252              41,339              47,640
Median values for bank asset size (thousands 2005USD)
  1985             CPI                146.3802641                           62,269              996,951              5,123,663              93,897             102,967
  1995             CPI                209.4354703                           73,906             1,775,889            10,358,585             142,711             134,766
  2005             CPI                267.6469194                          105,223             2,236,512            22,300,000             213,294             213,157
Share of each bank group in total assets (%)
  1985                                                                      100.0                 16.6                  56.0                  1.4                 2.2
  1995                                                                      100.0                 22.6                  56.1                  1.0                 0.9
  2005                                                                      100.0                 17.9                  67.9                  0.4                 0.3
Median total loans / assets (%)                                             55.6                  61.1                  60.4                 57.1                55.5
Median C&I loans / assets (%)                                               17.3                  22.8                  35.4                 18.4                21.0
Median bank liquid assets / total assets (%)                                28.0                  26.5                  20.1                 16.6                27.1
Median capitalization ratio (%)                                              8.7                   7.2                   6.4                  8.0                 7.6
Value of nonperforming loans/ total loans (%)                                1.0                  1.0                   1.1                  1.6                  0.8


Data is from quarterly Call Report forms for all banks from 1980Q1 to 2005Q4. A bank is defined as global in a quarter if it reports positive foreign assets. A bank is
defined as domestic if all its activity comes from offices located domestically. Large banks are those with total assets above the 95th percentile of the total asset
distribution in each quarter. Small banks are those with total assets below the 90th percentile of the total asset distribution in each quarter. Small banks in domestic BHCs
are small banks affiliated in BHCs with at least one large, domestic bank and no global banks. Small banks in global BHCs are small banks affiliated in BHCs with at
least one large global bank.




                                                                                                                                                                        31
                          Table 2 Net due flows and Foreign Loans
                                  (Thousands 2005 USD)


                                                                1985q4             1995q4             2005q4
Net due flows
  Net due to          Median                                       62,279            299,162            657,339
                      Mean                                        304,304            955,710          3,856,075
                      Number of observations                           60                103                 62
  Net due from Median                                              43,264              3,934                 852
                 Mean                                             458,316            332,548             983,989
                 Number of observations                               187                 67                  45
  (Net due to – Net due from)
                 Median absolute value                             47,285            141,930             74,356
                 Mean absolute value                              420,904            710,111          2,648,189
                 Number of observations                               247                170                107
Loans of Foreign Offices
  Total loans    Median value across banks                         19,270                 27                  0
                 Mean value across banks                        1,599,723          1,977,955          3,129,760
                 Number of observations                               247                170                107
                 Share of total bank lending                         0.15               0.11               0.07
   C&I loans      Median value across banks                         4,839                  0                  0
                  Mean value across banks                         866,359            942,215          1,236,887
                  Number of observations                              247                170                107
                  Share of total C&I lending                         0.08               0.05               0.03
Abs(Net due)/ total foreign loans
                   Median value across banks                           0.70               1.01               0.98
                   Aggregate ratio                                     0.26               0.35               0.84

Net due to/from indicate the position of the domestic offices of a bank relative to all of the bank's Edge and
Agreement subsidiaries, foreign branches, consolidated foreign subsidiaries, and branches in Puerto Rico and U.S.
territories and possessions (schedule RC-H from form FFIEC 031 – Call Report). A positive net due to indicates
that the head office owes funds to its foreign offices. A positive net due from indicates that the head office is owed
funds from its foreign offices. Foreign loans are the total loans booked by the foreign offices of U.S. global banks.




                                                                                                        32
   Table 3 Lending Channel for Large Domestic and Large Globally-Oriented Banks
             Summed monetary variable effect on first-stage regression betas
                      [Prob > chi2 that summed coefficients=0]

                                                       Total Bank Lending
                                          Domestic Banks                 Global Banks
                                          no gdp       with gdp         no gdp                         with gdp
                                         controls       controls       controls                         controls
  Federal Funds Rate                      0.0007          0.0008       -0.0013                          -0.0015
  (nominal)                             [0.0059]       [0.0011]       [0.1609]                         [0.1535]
  Federal Funds Rate                      0.0006          0.0012        0.0003                          -0.0004
  (real)                                [0.1125]       [0.0060]       [0.7658]                         [0.9741]
  Bernanke-Mihov                          0.0003          0.0003        0.0001                           0.0003
  index (negative*100)                  [0.0442]       [0.1229]       [0.8984]                         [0.9696]
                                                       Total C&I Lending
                                          Domestic Banks                 Global Banks
                                          no gdp       with gdp         no gdp                         with gdp
                                         controls       controls       controls                         controls
  Federal Funds Rate                      0.0012          0.0012       -0.0009                          -0.0012
  (nominal)                             [0.0171]       [0.0315]       [0.4586]                         [0.2776]
  Federal Funds Rate                      0.0008          0.0012       -0.0002                           0.0001
  (real)                                [0.1041]       [0.0392]       [0.9036]                         [0.9454]
  Bernanke-Mihov                          0.0000         -0.0001       -0.0004                          -0.0007
  index (negative*100)                  [0.9436]       [0.7634]       [0.7377]                         [0.4727]


This table presents results from regressions where the dependent variable is the time series of estimated
coefficients on the liquidity to asset ratio in quarterly cross-sectional regressions where the dependent variable
was either growth in total bank loans or total C&I loans. The reported figures in the columns are from the sum
of the estimated coefficients on the eight lags of each respective monetary policy variables. The Bernanke-
Mihov index has been modified from the original so that all three monetary policy indicators signal tightening
when they increase. Reported in brackets are the probability that the sum of the coefficients is significantly
different from zero. The upper panel reports results from estimations where the dependent variable in the first-
stage regressions was total lending growth. The lower panel reports results from estimations where the
dependent variable in the first-stage regressions was total C&I lending growth. The first two columns reports
results for the group of large domestic banks. The last two columns report results for the group of large, global
banks. Odd columns refer to second-stage specifications without GDP controls, while even columns to
specifications including GDP controls. Bold indicates statistical significance at least at the 10 percent level.
Sample period: 1980:Q1-2005:Q4. Standard errors are computed with an 8-lags Newey-West correction for
autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                                          33
 Table 4 Monetary Policy and Net Due to Parent Banks from Foreign Affiliates

                                                    Real net inflows to parent
                                                   (net due to less net due from)
                                                                       Asymmetry
Monetary variable                    baseline                       Coefficients when
                                                          Tighter money          Looser money
Federal Funds Rate                   189.076                  383.854              206.456
(nominal)                            [0.0243]                [0.0391]              [0.0132]
Fed Funds Rate (real)                229.856                  262.875              325.586
                                     [0.0216]                [0.0102]              [0.0725]
Bernanke-Mihov                        63.218                  118.725               56.400
index (negative*100)                 [0.0446]                [0.0636]              [0.2249]
This table presents results from regressions where the dependent variable is the quarterly real change in
net due flows from foreign affiliates to the head office. The reported figures in the columns are from the
sum of the estimated coefficients on the eight lags of each respective monetary policy variables. The
Bernanke-Mihov index has been modified from the original so that all three monetary policy indicators
signal tightening when they increase. Reported in brackets are the probabilities that the sum of the
coefficients is significantly different from zero. Bold indicates statistical significance at least at the 10
percent level. Sample period: 1980:Q1-2005:Q4. Standard errors are computed with an 8-lags Newey-
West correction for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                                           34
                             Table 5 Monetary Policy and Foreign Lending
                            Summed monetary variable effect on first stage betas
                                [Prob > chi2 that summed coefficients=0]

                                      Total Foreign C&I Lending                   Total Foreign Lending

 Monetary variable                   Without gdp           With gdp           Without gdp            With gdp
                                      controls             controls            controls              controls
 Federal Funds Rate                   -0.0192              -0.0176             -0.0115               -0.0124
 (nominal)                            [0.0006]             [0.0038]            [0.0018]              [0.0009]
 Fed Funds Rate (real)                -0.0146              -0.0137             -0.0115               -0.1366
                                      [0.0118]             [0.0311]            [0.0417]              [0.0098]
 Bernanke-Mihov index                 -0.0057              -0.0043             -0.0033               -0.0034
 (negative*100)                       [0.0610]             [0.1792]            [0.3020]              [0.2479]


This table presents results from regressions where the dependent variable is the time series of estimated
coefficients on the liquidity to asset ratio in quarterly cross-sectional regressions where the dependent variable was
either growth in total bank loans or total C&I loans of the foreign offices of global banks. The reported figures in
the columns are from the sum of the estimated coefficients on the eight lags of each respective monetary policy
variables. The Bernanke-Mihov index has been modified from the original so that all three monetary policy
indicators signal tightening when they increase. Reported in brackets are the probabilities that the sum of the
coefficients is significantly different from zero. The first two columns report results from estimations where the
dependent variable in the first-stage regressions was total lending growth of foreign offices. The last two columns
report results from estimations where the dependent variable in the first-stage regressions was total C&I lending
growth of foreign offices. Odd columns refer to second-stage specifications without GDP controls, while even
columns to specifications including GDP controls. Bold indicates statistical significance at least at the 10 percent
level. Sample period: 1980:Q1-2005:Q4. Standard errors are computed with an 8-lags Newey-West correction for
autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                                               35
       Table 6 Results for Small Affiliated with Domestic or Globally-Oriented Banks
                Summed monetary variable effect on first-stage regression betas
                            [Prob > chi2 that summed coefficients=0]


                                                 Total Bank Lending
                              Small in Domestic Banks            Small in Global Banks
                          no gdp controls     with gdp      no gdp controls      with gdp
                                              controls                           controls
 Federal Funds                0.2909           0.5203           -0.1390          -0.0207
 Rate (nominal)              [0.0471]         [0.0258]         [0.7638]          [0.9697]
 Fed Funds Rate               0.8440           0.9411           -1.0854          -1.0579
 (real)                      [0.0001]         [0.0009]         [0.2329]          [0.2823]
 Bernanke-Mihov               0.1278           0.2495           -0.1084          -0.0145
 index                       [0.1218]         [0.0155]         [0.6038]          [0.9528]
 (negative*100)

                                                  Total C&I Lending
                               Small in Domestic Banks           Small in Global Banks
                          no gdp controls           with gdp           no gdp controls           with gdp
                                                    controls                                     controls
 Federal Funds                 1.4342                1.0752                 -1.1977              -0.3404
 Rate (nominal)               [0.0290]              [0.0874]               [0.1310]              [0.4713]
 Fed Funds Rate                2.5028                2.6469                 -1.5803              -1.8704
 (real)                       [0.0499]              [0.0267]               [0.0571]              [0.1420]
 Bernanke-Mihov                0.7712                0.6619                 -0.6966              -0.4937
 index                        [0.0351]              [0.0566]               [0.0745]              [0.0420]
 (negative*100)

This table presents results from regressions where the dependent variable is the time series of estimated
coefficients on the net income to loan ratio in quarterly cross-sectional regressions where the dependent variable
was either growth in total bank loans or total C&I loans. The reported figures in the columns are from the sum
of the estimated coefficients on the eight lags of each respective monetary policy variables. The Bernanke-
Mihov index has been modified from the original so that all three monetary policy indicators signal tightening
when they increase. Reported in brackets are the probabilities that the sum of the coefficients is significantly
different from zero. The upper panel reports results from estimations where the dependent variable in the first-
stage regressions was total lending growth. The lower panel reports results from estimations where the
dependent variable in the first-stage regressions was total C&I lending growth. The first two columns reports
results for the group of small banks members of BHCs where there is at least one large domestic bank and no
global banks. The last two columns report results for the group of small banks members of BHCs where there is
at least one large global bank. Odd columns refer to second-stage specifications without GDP controls, while
even columns to specifications including GDP controls. Bold indicates statistical significance at least at the 10
percent level. Sample period: 1980:Q1-2005:Q4. Standard errors are computed with an 8-lags Newey-West
correction for autocorrelation and heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                                              36
T
             Appendix Table 1: Correlations of Measures of Monetary Policy
                                              Correlation 1980Q1 to 2005Q4
                                   Nominal Federal     Real Federal    Bernanke-Mihov
                                     Funds Rate         Funds Rate         Measure
 Nominal Federal Funds Rate              1
 Real Federal Funds Rate                0.71                1
 Bernanke-Mihov Measure                 0.41               0.14               1

The Bernanke-Mihov index has been modified from the original so that all three monetary policy
indicators signal tightening when they increase.




                                                                                           37
