NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MINIMUM DRINKING AGE LAWS AND INFANT HEALTH OUTCOMES
Tara Watson
Angela Fertig
Working Paper 14118
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14118

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

We are indebted to Phil Cook, Kit Carpenter, Bill Evans, Tracy Falba, Michael Grossman, Robert
Kaestner, Lucie Schmidt, Lara Shore-Sheppard, seminar participants at Williams College and University
of Notre Dame, and session participants at the 2006 American Society of Health Economists meetings,
the 2007 Eastern Economic Association, and the 2007 Southern Economic Association meetings for
helpful comments. Many thanks to Thomas Dee for sharing data on drinking laws. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Tara Watson and Angela Fertig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Minimum Drinking Age Laws and Infant Health Outcomes
Tara Watson and Angela Fertig
NBER Working Paper No. 14118
June 2008
JEL No. I18,J13
ABSTRACT
Alcohol policies have potentially far-reaching impacts on risky sexual behavior, prenatal health behaviors,
and subsequent outcomes for infants. We examine whether changes in minimum drinking age (MLDA)
laws affect the likelihood of poor birth outcomes. Using data from the National Vital Statistics (NVS)
for the years 1978-88, we find that a drinking age of 18 is associated with adverse outcomes among
births to young mothers -- including higher incidences of low birth weight and premature birth, but
not congenital malformations. The effects are largest among black women. We find suggestive evidence
from both the NVS and the 1979 National Longitudinal Study of Youth (NLSY) that the MLDA laws
alter the composition of births that occur. In states with lenient drinking laws, young black mothers
are more likely to have used alcohol 12 months prior to the birth of their child and less likely to report
paternal information on the birth certificate. We suspect that lenient drinking laws generate poor birth
outcomes because they increase the number of unplanned pregnancies.

Tara Watson
Williams College
Department of Economics
Williamstown, MA 01267
and NBER
tara.watson@williams.edu
Angela Fertig
University of Georgia
College of Public Health and
Carl Vinson Institute of Government
Athens, GA 30602
afertig@uga.edu

1

Introduction

State regulations on the consumption of alcohol by minors are widely credited with reducing teen
drinking and alcohol-related traffic fatalities. Much less emphasized is the potential effect of drinking policy on pregnancy and drinking while pregnant, and subsequent outcomes for infants. The
existing evidence suggests that alcohol policies affect risky sexual behavior and influence teen birth
rates. However, surprisingly little is known about whether, by reducing underage drinking, alcohol regulations also improve birth and infant outcomes. Given the high teen pregnancy rate in the
United States and the high incidence of drinking among young adults (47 percent of twelfth graders
in the 2005 Monitoring the Future Survey drank in the month prior to the survey), the impact of
alcohol regulation on outcomes among births to young mothers is potentially large.
In this paper, we evaluate the consequences of minimum legal drinking age (MLDA) laws on
birth outcomes. Despite the fact that all states have had a drinking age of 21 since the late
1980s, policy interest in minimum drinking ages and alcohol policy more generally remains high.1
There are two channels by which access to alcohol by young adults might affect the health of the
next generation. First, by increasing risky sexual behavior, alcohol consumption could change the
composition of births towards parents with fewer resources and births resulting from unintended
pregnancies. Second, independent of the compositional effect, drinking alcohol during pregnancy
may cause poor health outcomes directly.
Using data from the National Vital Statistics (NVS) to analyze increases in state minimum
drinking ages over the 1980s, we find that less restrictive drinking laws are associated with higher
rates of low birth weight and premature births to young mothers. The results are particularly strong
for black mothers. We then use both the NVS and the 1979 National Longitudinal Study of Youth
(NLSY) to explore whether these adverse outcomes are due to changes in parental characteristics,
1

There have been a number of recent studies examining minimum drinking age laws, as discussed in
section 2.1.

2

prenatal health behaviors, or both. Although the findings suggest that black mothers are more likely
to drink while pregnant if the drinking age is low, most of the evidence points to a compositional
story. In particular, young black mothers are more likely to have used alcohol 12 months prior
to the birth of their child and less likely to report paternal information on the birth certificate in
states with a drinking age of 18.
Our analysis proceeds in two parts. First, we examine the relationship between drinking laws
and low birth weight births, prematurity, and congenital anomalies. Second, we examine parental
characteristics and prenatal health behaviors to evaluate how these might contribute to the observed
relationship between MLDA laws and infant health.

2

Background and Previous Literature

2.1

Minimum Drinking Age Laws

During the early 1970s, 29 states lowered their minimum legal drinking age from 21 (in most
cases) to 18, 19, or 20. Because of a subsequent rise in alcohol-related traffic accidents involving
young drivers, the majority of these states increased their MLDA in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
In 1984, the federal Uniform Drinking Age Act stipulated that federal highway funds would be
withheld from states that did not have a MLDA of 21; as a result, by 1988, the MLDA in all states
was 21. Our study focuses on the years 1978 to 1988.2
The changes in the MLDA have been widely studied, and there is agreement among most
researchers in the field that a higher MLDA reduces driving fatalities and alcohol consumption
among young adults. Using cross-sectional variation in state laws, Coase and Grossman (1988)
estimate that a uniform drinking age of 21 in all states would reduce the fraction of 16-to-21-year2

We do not examine the effect of legal drinking age reductions in the early 1970s. Vital statistics data do
not include consistent reporting for prematurity or congenital anomalies during this time period. Furthermore, it should be noted that these reductions sometimes corresponded with “mature minor” provisions that
influenced access to contraception for young women, making it difficult to isolate the effect of the MLDA
policy during that time period.

3

olds who drink more than 4 times a week by 3 percentage points (from a base of 11.5) and the
number who drink 1-3 times a week by 2 percentage points (from a base of 27.3). Kaestner (2000)
uses several econometric approaches and finds inconsistent estimates of the effect of drinking age
laws overall. However, the estimates of these laws on drinking among affected women are fairly
robust and suggest a reduction in the weekly frequency of drinking of 0.3 on a base of 1 occasion
per week. DiNardo and Lemieux (2001) estimate a structural model using state and time variation
in the drinking age; it implies that raising the drinking age from 18 to 21 decreases the fraction
of high school seniors in a state who use alcohol by 4.5 percentage points from a base of 67.
Carpenter and Dobkin (2007) find a discontinuous jump in alcohol use and associated mortality
around age 21. Miron and Tetelbaum (2007), however, argue that increases in the drinking age are
not responsible for traffic fatalities. In an overview of the alcohol policy literature, Cook and Moore
(2002) conclude that there is “consensus that MPA [minimum purchase age] is effective in controlling
alcohol consumption and abuse by those young enough to be affected (p.125).” Wagenaar and
Toomey (2002) conduct another review of the literature and find that about half of the studies
find evidence of a statistically significant inverse relationship between minimum drinking ages and
alcohol use, while most of the remaining studies find no significant relationship.
It is worth noting that several studies of the studies referenced above document effects of
drinking age policies on high school seniors or youth under eighteen years of age. When the
drinking age is 21, a sixteen-year-old is less likely to have friends or siblings who are legal to
purchase alcohol, and is less likely to be able to ‘pass’ as legal using false identification. Indeed,
given the lack of drinking age enforcement on college campuses, it is possible that the effects of the
minimum age laws would be concentrated among high school students.
In sum, although the findings are not uniform, the preponderance of evidence suggests that
higher legal drinking ages reduce alcohol consumption among young adults, including high school
students under 18, to a modest degree.

4

2.2

Effect of Alcohol Policies on the Composition of Births

Alcohol policies may affect infant outcomes through a change in the composition of births. There
is an extensive literature demonstrating the positive relationship between substance use and risky
adolescent sexual behavior, including early initiation of sexual intercourse, multiple sexual partners,
and engaging in intercourse without contraception (see Rashad and Kaestner (2004) for an extensive
list). Thus, teens that drink are more likely to have unprotected sex and to become pregnant
(Kaestner & Joyce, 2000; Cooper, 2002; Grossman & Markowitz, 2002; Rees, Argys, & Averett,
2001; Hingson, Strunin, Berlin, & Heeren, 1990; Markowitz, Kaestner, & Grossman, 2005; Rashad
& Kaestner, 2004; Sen, 2002).
Previous work has also investigated the relationship between alcohol policy and fertility. Sen
(2003) finds that higher beer taxes do not have an effect on aggregate state-level birth rates, but
that they reduce teen abortion rates. Using variation in MLDA laws, Dee (2001) reports that
alcohol availability and use have large effects on childbearing among black teens, but does not find
convincing evidence that this is the case for white teens.
Birth outcomes may suffer if a greater fraction of births are to teen mothers whose pregnancies
resulted from alcohol use and were unintended. Unwanted pregnancy is associated with prenatal and
postpartum maternal behaviors that adversely affect infant and child health (Brown & Eisenberg,
1995; Joyce, Kaestner, & Korenman, 2000). In sum, it is quite plausible that alcohol control policies
alter the composition of teens who give birth and that this compositional change affects average
birth outcomes.

2.3

Effect of Alcohol Policies on Prenatal Alcohol Use

Despite a large literature on alcohol policies in general and minimum drinking age laws in particular,
there is little evidence on the effect of these policies on drinking while pregnant and on infant
outcomes. It is striking to contrast the sizable literature on the effect of tobacco control policies

5

on maternal tobacco use (e.g., Evans & Ringel, 1999; Colman, Grossman, & Joyce, 2003) to the
absence of information on the effect of alcohol policies on maternal alcohol use.
Maternal alcohol use is of interest because the potential impact is large. Estimates of drinking
alcohol among pregnant women are around 20 percent according to three data sources (CDC,
1995; NIDA, 1994; Serdula, Williamson, Kendrick, Anda, & Byers, 1991) and the rates of drinking
and heavy drinking are particularly high for women who are younger, less educated, and single
(Leonardson & Loudenburg, 2003). Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS), which is thought to result
from high prenatal alcohol exposure, involves growth retardation, characteristic facial features, and
anomalies of the central nervous system (O’Leary, 2004). A conservative estimate of the prevalence
of Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) in 1993 is 6.7 cases in 10,000 births, based on the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention birth defects surveillance programs (CDC, 1995). These estimates
are expected to be a lower bound since FAS is a complex diagnosis and is not always recognized
at birth (Stratton, Howe, & Battaglia, 1996). Higher estimates of FAS and more generally of fetal
alcohol effects are found by clinic-based studies - from 1.7 to 3.3 cases in 1,000 births in the U.S.
(Stratton et al., 1996). Given that there are 4 million births a year in the U.S., there could be as
many as 13,000 babies born with birth defects associated with prenatal alcohol use. The estimated
annual cost of care for individuals with FAS in the U.S. was $4 billion in 1998 (Lupton, Burd, &
Harwood, 2004).
While there is substantial evidence that heavy drinking is related to preterm delivery (Albertsen,
Andersen, Olsen, & Gronbaek, 2004) and low birth weight (Day & Richardson, 2004; Whitehead &
Lipscomb, 2003), epidemiologists and other medical researchers argue that the effects of prenatal
exposure to alcohol may be significant even for low and moderate drinking (see Russell, 1991, for
a review). Day and Richardson (2004) argue that the effects of alcohol exposure on growth are
measurable at below one drink per day. Testa, Quigley, and Eiden (2003) find that prenatal alcohol
exposure at any level is associated with lower mental development. Day et al. (1991) find that

6

children born to mothers who drank alcohol moderately during pregnancy had significant height
and weight deficits at age three. In addition, policies affecting prenatal alcohol consumption in
Sweden are linked to adult labor market outcomes (Nilsson, 2008). An Institute of Medicine report
on prenatal nutrition suggests that prenatal alcohol use may interfere with the absorption of some
minerals, particularly zinc, calcium, and amino acids, and notes that heavy drinkers tend to have
poor nutrition (IOM, 1990). However, the report concludes that“the evidence concerning the effects
of low levels of alcohol consumption is both limited and inconsistent” (p.395). Indeed, most of the
studies in this area are associational in nature and are subject to selection concerns (Nilsson, 2008,
is a notable exception). Thus, neither the effect of alcohol policy on prenatal drinking nor the effect
of prenatal drinking on infant health is well understood.

3

Data

The primary data used in this study are the National Vital Statistics Natality Detail Files. Publicly
available data are available for births in 1968 and subsequent years; these data represent 50 or 100
percent samples of birth certificates for U.S. births, depending on the state and year. By 1979, all
but 9 states report information for 100 percent of births.
We use birth years 1978-1989 to create a sample of births conceived in the years 1978-1988 to
mothers aged 14 to 24 at the time of conception. In 1978, 37 states and DC permitted alcohol
consumption for those under the age of 21; 1988 is the first year where no states permitted drinking
under age 21. We include women under age 18 because the literature described above indicates
that alcohol consumption among those under 18 is affected by state MLDA policies.
Importantly, the data contain information on mother’s age, race, and state of residence. There
is also information on birth weight, and, with less completeness, gestation length and congenital
anomalies. Maternal and paternal characteristics are also reported. More recently, birth certificate
data include questions about smoking and drinking behavior, but this information is unavailable

7

in the years prior to 1989. In addition, there is concern that prenatal alcohol use in particular is
underreported in the Natality data (Evans & Ringel, 1999). We therefore use the Vital Statistics
data to estimate the reduced form relationship between MLDA laws and birth outcomes, and use
another data source, the NLSY, to investigate prenatal health behaviors.
There are well known differences in health outcomes across race and ethnicity groups and
between immigrants and non-immigrants. A limitation of the natality data in this period is that
Hispanic status is inconsistently measured over time and across states, with a very large fraction of
missing values. To investigate heterogeneous effects of alcohol policy, two demographic sub-samples
are considered: births to native born white mothers and birth to native born black mothers. A
third group, births to immigrant mothers, is included in the full sample, but because results for
this group are almost always insignificant, we do not report them separately.3 In interpreting the
results, it is important to keep in mind that all groups include a combination of Hispanic and
non-Hispanic mothers.
The sample includes 16.17 million observations on births to mothers aged 14 to 24 at the time
of conception. As shown in Table 1, about 7.4 percent of births recorded in Vital Statistics have
low birth weight, with a higher rate of 13.0 percent for births to black mothers. The rates of
prematurity and congenital anomalies are 10.5 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively, with rates of
18.3 percent and 1.4 percent for black mothers.
Data on MLDA laws come from the Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S. (DISCUS).4 We use the
minimum drinking age in the estimated month of conception as the indicator for the relevant policy
regime. We use the date of conception as the relevant date because the effects of prenatal alcohol
use are thought to be particularly pronounced in the first trimester. Furthermore, the policy at the
date of conception would capture any health effects due to changes in the composition of women
3

The lack of significance may indicate that these mothers are not affected by the laws or may result from
smaller sample sizes.
4

We are grateful to Thomas Dee for sharing the data with us.

8

becoming pregnant. We assume the month of conception is nine months prior to the month of birth
in cases where gestation length is not reported, and otherwise use the gestation length to calculate
the month of conception. Because the vital statistics report maternal age at birth but not birth
date, we assume age at conception is one year younger than age at birth if gestation length exceeds
six months or is not reported and assume age at conception equals age at birth otherwise. Roughly
twenty-five percent of our sample will be classified as younger at conception than their actual age.
This could bias the estimated effect of the policy regime, most likely by attenuating the results.5
As a supplement to the main analysis, we examine drinking, smoking, and sexual behavior
among young women and mothers using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. The
NLSY follows a cohort aged 14 to 21 in 1979 from 1979 onwards. In 1979, when all individuals in
the NLSY were 21 or younger, 37 states and DC permitted alcohol consumption for those under
the age of 21. By 1986, when the youngest participants in the NLSY reached age 21, only 7 states
permitted drinking under age 21. The restricted version of the dataset includes state identifiers
which allow us to match individuals to the relevant alcohol policy regime. The NLSY asks all
women who became mothers by 1986 whether they had used alcohol or cigarettes in the twelve
months prior to birth or during pregnancy. The NLSY also asks questions about a woman’s sexual,
fertility, and marital history in 1984 and 1985 and a more limited set of questions in 1986. From
these questions, we can discern the month and year in which a woman had sex for the first time
and the timing of her births.
Table 2 shows means of variables for two NLSY samples: one of women in the cohort observed
monthly between 1979 and 1986 if between the ages of 14 and 24, and one of births that occurred
by 1986 to women in the cohort aged 14 to 24. To be consistent with the NVS analysis, we show
separate analyses for native born white mothers and native born black mothers, where native born
Hispanic mothers are assumed to be white. The cohort sample includes 319,346 observations on
5

Analysis by year of age shows a minimal effect of MLDA policies on birth outcomes for 20-year-old
mothers. We are therefore not concerned that our results are driven by misclassification.

9

4,164 women, who are between the ages of 14 and 24, observed between the years 1979 and 1986.
71 percent had sex for the first time and 35 percent became pregnant for the first time during this
period, with slightly higher rates of 77 percent and 37 percent, respectively, among native black
women. 46 percent of all women in the sample had at least one birth (not necessarily their first
birth) during this period, with a higher birth rate of 54 percent among native black women. 16
percent had at least one non-marital birth, with a substantially higher non-marital birth rate of 37
percent among native black women. The birth sample includes 3,910 births to 2,750 mothers aged
14 to 24 at the time of birth. 40 percent of these mothers drank 12 months before the birth of their
child and 33 percent drank during pregnancy, with higher rates of drinking of 46 percent and 38
percent, respectively, among native white women. These are higher rates of prenatal alcohol use
than the 20 percent estimated by the CDC and others (CDC, 1995; NIDA, 1994; Serdula et al.,
1991) mentioned above, presumably because this is a young cohort of women.
Several features of the NLSY are important to note. First, the data set is longitudinal, so each
woman appears multiple times in the cohort sample and, if a woman has had multiple children, she
will appear multiple times in the birth sample. We treat each monthly observation or birth as a
separate observation. Standard errors take account of intrastate correlations across observations, so
they account for repeated observations of a mother in most cases. Second, the NLSY over-samples
blacks and Hispanics. We treat the un-weighted NLSY cohort as our sample, recognizing that it is
not representative of the United States. The number of births in each state-age-year cell is small.
Furthermore, because of the aging of the cohort, there are no births to 16-year-olds after 1981
and no births to 17-year-olds after 1982, and so on. These limitations lead us to view the NLSY
evidence as suggestive rather than definitive, particularly for births to the youngest mothers.

10

4

Empirical Strategy

Studying the effects of alcohol policy, rather than alcohol use per se, has the advantage that it is
less subject to concerns about selection. Women who drink prior to pregnancy or while pregnant
are likely to be different on a wide range of unobserved dimensions. Potential confounding factors
which may be correlated with prenatal drinking include illicit drug use, number of prenatal doctor
visits, nutrition, and other health and life-style behaviors. Drinking frequency may be positively
related to socioeconomic status.6 Because drinking is correlated with factors that directly impact
infant health, it is difficult to isolate the causal effect of drinking on birth outcomes. For this reason,
we focus on the effect of MLDA laws, which are plausibly exogenous to the personal characteristics
of young women affected by them. Changes in birth outcomes associated with MLDA laws are
likely due to the causal impact of the laws on substance use prior to or during pregnancy.
It is important to keep in mind that alcohol policy may affect the use of drugs other than alcohol.
For example, alcohol consumption is a complement to cigarette consumption (Cameron & Williams,
2001; Decker & Schwartz, 2000; Serdula et al., 1991), and maternal smoking is known to be harmful
to the fetus (Case & Paxson, 2002). Decker and Schwartz (2000) estimate that a one percent rise
in the price of beer decreases smoking by about the same amount as a one percent rise in the price
of cigarettes, suggesting that smoking is very responsive to changes in drinking behavior. DiNardo
and Lemieux (2001) estimate that raising the minimum drinking age from 18 to 21 increases the
prevalence of marijuana use among high school seniors by about 2 percentage points, implying that
marijuana and alcohol are substitutes. Thus, the observed relationship between alcohol policy and
infant outcomes could be mediated by substances which are complements or substitutes to alcohol.
We address this concern in part by investigating whether changes in MLDA laws affect smoking
6
Casswell, Pledger, and Hooper (2003) find that frequency of drinking is positively influenced by income,
but less well-educated young adults drink significantly more during a drinking occasion. Cook and Moore
(2002) use the National Household Survey on Drug Abuse for 1996 and find that the self-reported prevalence
of drinking increases with education and family income. However, Lowry, Kann, Collins, and Kolbe (1996)
report that lower family income is associated with episodic heavy drinking among adolescents.

11

behavior.
To estimate the effect of MLDA laws on birth outcomes, we use a difference-in-differences model
with women aged 21 to 24 at the time of conception as a control group to account for unobserved
time-varying state-level factors which could affect infant health. In doing so, we implicitly assume
drinking laws have a negligible effect on the behavior of those 21 and older.7 We view the increase
in the drinking age as an increase in the cost of obtaining alcohol for young women.
In an analysis of drinking habits among high school seniors, Dee (2001) finds that an indicator
for an MLDA of 18 captures the relevant variation in drinking behavior. We follow this standard
in our analysis.8 Thus, the baseline specification for the least squares birth outcome analysis is as
follows:
outcomeiasm = B1 M LDA18sm

(1)

+ B2 M LDA18sm age14to17iasm
+ B3 M LDA18sm age18to21iasm
+ δs + θy + αa + uiasm

where M LDA18 indicates whether the drinking age in the state was 18 in the month of conception,
age14to17 indicates mothers who were between the ages of 14 and 17 at the time of conception, and
age18to20 indicates mothers who were between the ages of 18 and 20 at the time of conception. The
M LDA18 variable controls for any unobserved state characteristics affecting birth outcomes across
7

Because 21-to-24-year-olds in a low MLDA state were themselves more likely to have been legal to drink
at eighteen, they may be more likely to drink as adults. If that is the case, the effect of MLDA laws on
women under twenty-one could be understated.
8
We have also tried tracking the legality of each cohort to drink. This approach generates results that
are less robust, in part because teenagers under eighteen may be indirectly affected by changes to the legal
drinking age. Furthermore, we have replicated the analysis using an indicator for a drinking age of 21. The
results are largely consistent with those presented here for the NVS analysis, but the NLSY results become
insignificant.

12

all ages in a given month. The subscript i indicates each individual birth, a indicates the estimated
age at conception, s indicates the state of residence, m indicates the month of conception, and y
indicates the year of conception. We include state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and maternal
age fixed effects in all specifications. The birth outcomes we examine in this analysis are low birth
weight status, preterm birth status, and whether the baby has any congenital anomalies. Because
the NLSY samples are too small to detect changes in these relatively rare birth events, we only use
the NVS for the birth outcomes regressions.
To augment the baseline model, we include various sets of controls. We include controls for birth
characteristics - whether the infant is male and the plurality of the birth - which are unlikely to be
endogenous to the policy regime. These controls do not affect our estimates very much. In some
specifications, we also add controls for maternal characteristics including race/ethnicity/nativity
status, education, and number of children. These factors may reflect underlying state-level population changes, or may stem from compositional effects associated with the policy change. Paternal
characteristics such as age, race/ethnicity, and education, are also included in some models.9 In the
birth weight analysis, additional controls for preterm birth are included in some models to assess
the extent to which low birth weight is due to prematurity. In addition, in some specifications,
we control for state-specific time trends and age-specific time trends. In the appendix, we also
consider the effects of other time-varying factors that could influence birth outcomes, such as beer
and cigarette taxes, parental notification and consent abortion laws and aggregate birth rates.
All reported results are for linear probability models.10
9

We experimented with including mother’s marital status as a proxy for the father’s relationship to the
mother. However, states had different policies for determining marital status during this time. Some states
used last names to impute marital status, and others assumed the mother was married unless she specifically
indicated otherwise. The results of models including the marital status variables are often counterintuitive.
Because this variable seems to be unreliable, we exclude it from the specifications we present here. We view
the presence or absence of paternal information on the birth certificate as a more reliable indicator of the
relationship between the parents at the time of birth.
10

As noted by Ai and Norton (2003), coefficients on interaction terms in non-linear models cannot be
readily interpreted.

13

5

Effect of MLDA Laws on Birth Outcomes

5.1

Birth Weight

Birth weight is a widely used and accurately measured indicator of infant health at birth. The
medical literature suggests that prenatal alcohol use may stunt fetal growth, which could lead to low
birth weight. In addition, if alcohol use leads to an increased number of unintended pregnancies, the
resulting births could have an increased incidence of low birth weight because of prenatal behaviors
or parental characteristics associated with low birth weight. Births under 2500g are considered low
birth weight.
Table 3 shows the results of the low birth weight analysis for all women. The first column
includes state fixed effects, year of conception fixed effects, and maternal age fixed effects. Columns
II through V add additional sets of controls.
In the first column of Table 3, there is a small but statistically significant effect of the MLDA
of 18 on low birth weight for both women younger than 18 and women between the ages of 18 and
20. Women conceiving under age 21 are 0.27 to 0.50 percentage points more likely to conceive a
low birth weight birth in months and states with a drinking age of 18 (on a base of 7.4 percentage
points.) The effects are larger for younger mothers. However, even among the youngest group, the
estimated effect is small in magnitude; moving to an MLDA of 18 increases the probability of low
birth weight by less than 10 percent. Controlling for birth characteristics (gender of baby, twin,
triplets or higher order status) has little effect on the estimates, as shown in column II.
The model including state-specific time trends in Column III of Table 3 has no effect on the
coefficients of interest. Controlling for preterm birth (<37 weeks gestation) and whether the gestational length information was missing reduces coefficients by about a quarter, suggesting that part
of the observed effect on birth weight is due to prematurity. We explore the relationship between
drinking age laws and prematurity in section 5.2.
When age-specific time trends are included in Column V of Table III, the size of the coefficients

14

falls by about a third and the estimates become statistically insignificant. We discuss this issue
below.
Because birth outcomes are known to differ substantially by race/ethnicity and immigrant
status, we divide our sample into native-born white mothers, native-born black mothers, and immigrant mothers.11 Results for immigrant mothers are almost always insignificant and we do not
report them here. Table 4 presents the effect of MLDA laws on birth weight for the other two
demographic sub-groups. The results for native born white mothers are significant but smaller
in magnitude, ranging from 0.12 to 0.23 percentage points. The estimated effects for native born
black mothers are much larger, ranging from 0.59 to 0.99 percentage points. For both sub-groups,
the effects are robust to the inclusion of state-specific time trends.12
In the third and seventh columns of Table 4, we include an indicator for whether the infant
was born prematurely (<37 weeks gestation) and whether the gestation length information was
missing. The inclusion of premature status reduces the estimated effect of MLDA laws on birth
weight by about a quarter to a third for native black mothers and somewhat less for white mothers.
This suggests that MLDA laws are associated with prematurity for black mothers, but prematurity
cannot fully account for the relationship between MLDA laws and birth weight.13 Below we examine
the association between MLDA laws and preterm birth directly.
For white mothers 18-to-20 years old, the results in Table 4 are also robust to the inclusion of
age-specific time trends. However, for black mothers and for younger white mothers this is not the
11

As noted above, Hispanic status is not reliably reported during this period. All groups include both
Hispanics and non-Hispanics.
12

If we separate by metropolitan status, the results are statistically significant for rural white mothers,
rural black mothers, and urban black mothers. Also, it should be noted that the size of the coefficients for
the youngest black mothers are reduced by about half (but remain statistically significant) when controls for
beer taxes are included in the model. However, as discussed in the appendix, we suspect that the beer tax
variables may not capture meaningful policy variation and we exclude them from our preferred model.
13

Of course, there could be more subtle changes in gestational age that are not fully captured by the
preterm birth indicator and could affect birth weight.

15

case. There are two explanations for this phenomenon. First, policy or other changes over time
may differentially affect the health of infants born to some age groups. The observed pattern is
consistent with the secular improvement in birth outcomes for births to younger mothers relative to
older mothers. In the appendix, we try controlling for a number of factors that might be related to
birth outcomes. However, none of these factors explain the observed pattern (see Appendix Tables
A and B). A second possibility is that the age-specific trends absorb useful variation in MLDA laws
and make identification of their effects difficult. Given this possibility, in the analysis that follows,
we treat the specification with state-specific time trends (but not age-specific time trends) as our
preferred specification, but report results with and without age-specific time trends where space
allows.
As a supplement to the birth weight analysis, we examine the effect of drinking age policy on
a continuous variable, birth weight in grams. The results (not shown) suggest an MLDA of 18 is
associated with a significant 16-22 gram decrease among black women and a small and insignificant
decrease among white women.

5.2

Prematurity

A similar analysis is performed to examine the relationship between MLDA laws and premature
birth, defined as gestation length under 37 weeks. We show results for the two demographic subgroups in Table 5. The results indicate that a drinking age of 18 is associated with an increased
likelihood of premature birth by 0.39 percentage points for native white women (on a base of 8.4
percent) among mothers under age 18 at conception. For native black mothers, the estimated
coefficient is much larger for mothers under age 18 and mothers between the age of 18 and 20. A
drinking age of 18 is associated with an increased likelihood of premature birth by 1.28 percentage
points for native black mothers under age 18 at conception and 0.65 percentage points for native

16

black mothers between the ages of 18 and 20 at conception (on a base of 18 percent).14 This is
consistent with the findings from Table 4 which suggested that prematurity played a role in the
relationship between the MLDA laws and low birth weight among native black women, but less so
for native white women. For both groups, the findings are robust to the inclusion of state-specific
time trends. The inclusion of age-specific time trends substantially reduces most of the estimated
coefficients, though coefficients for the youngest black women remain statistically significant at the
10 percent level.
Estimation of the model with gestation in weeks as the dependent variable indicates reductions
in gestation length of 0-0.04 weeks for white women (with only the youngest group showing a
significant relationship) and 0.07-0.11 weeks for black women (results not shown).

5.3

Congenital Anomalies

Of the three outcome measures, the measure of congenital anomalies is the least well measured.
Definitions of congenital anomalies differ across states and the variable is not reported by every
state in every year. Furthermore, reported anomalies are rare (occurring in about one percent of
births) and so policy impacts are likely to be difficult to detect. Nevertheless, because the medical
literature suggests a relationship between heavy prenatal alcohol use and Fetal Alcohol Syndrome,
it is important to consider the effect of drinking laws on this outcome.
The results in Table 6 are small, wrong-signed, and insignificant, suggesting no relationship
between MLDA laws and congenital anomalies. That we find no persuasive effects on congenital
anomalies is somewhat surprising, given the apparently strong link between heavy drinking during
pregnancy and Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. We believe there are at least two potential explanations.15
First, given the caveats described above, we cannot rule out the possibility that measurement error
14

As in the birth weight analysis, the magnitudes of the coefficients for black women are diminished when
beer taxes are included in the model.
15

It is also possible that the relationship between prenatal alcohol use and congenital anomalies has been
overstated.

17

is driving the null result. Second, it is possible that alcohol policy has little impact on heavy
prenatal drinking. The observed effects of MLDA laws on birth weight and prematurity might
relate not to adverse impacts of prenatal drinking, but rather to the selection into birth. In the
next section, we investigate how MLDA laws affect the composition of births.

6

Effect of MLDA Laws on the Composition of Births

6.1

Evidence from NVS

We find significant effects of MLDA laws on birth weight and prematurity, and no relationship
between the laws and congenital anomalies. The interpretation of the observed relationship between
alcohol policy and birth outcomes hinges on whether MLDA laws affect the composition of births,
the health status of any given birth, or both. In this section, we examine the effects of MLDA
laws on the composition of births. We use the NVS to investigate changes in the composition of
maternal and paternal characteristics and we use the NLSY to examine changes in drinking and
sexual behavior associated with MLDA laws.
First, we investigate the role of MLDA in shifting the composition of births across demographic
subgroups. Point estimates (not shown) suggest a 0.8-2.2 percentage point increase in an infant’s
probability of an infant having a native black mother (on a base of 18.6 percentage points). These
findings are consistent with Dee (2001), who finds six percent reductions in childbearing among
15-to-19 year old black women associated with a higher drinking age. However, the results of our
analysis are statistically insignificant, so we focus on compositional changes within demographic
sub-groups.
In Table 7, we examine whether adding controls for parental characteristics changes the estimated effects of MLDA laws. We focus on low birth weight in this table, but the pattern in the
similar for prematurity (not shown). In the first and fourth columns, we present our preferred

18

specification for native white women and native black women.16 In the column to the right, we add
maternal controls, such as race/ethnicity/nativity status, age at conception, parity, and maternal
education. We then add paternal controls, such as race/ethnicity/nativity status, age at conception, and education. For each set of controls we also include indicators for missing information.
Missing paternal information, in particular, proves to be an important predictor of poor health
outcomes.
The inclusion of maternal controls reduces the size of the estimated coefficients on MLDA laws
for native white women. Further analysis (not shown) shows that less restrictive minimum age
laws are negatively associated with the educational distribution of women who give birth. After
controlling for maternal characteristics, there is no significant relationship between MLDA laws
and infant health among white mothers.
In contrast, column V of Table 7 suggests that including maternal information does not reduce
the estimated effect of MLDA substantially for black mothers. This suggests that the observable characteristics of black mothers do not change very much as the result of drinking age laws.
Rather, it is the inclusion of paternal characteristics that affects the coefficients. A drinking age
of 18 is associated with undesirable (from an infant health perspective) paternal characteristics.
Further analysis suggests that controlling for any one set of paternal controls - age, education, or
race/ethnicity/nativity - weakens the relationship between the policy and infant health. This leads
us to explore the role of missing paternal information.
Given the link between alcohol policy and risky sexual behavior, we are particularly interested
in births that might arise as the result of unintended or unplanned pregnancies. Though the birth
certificate data do little to shed light on this question directly, one proxy for the involvement of the
father is the presence of his information on the birth certificate.17 We focus on whether or not his
16

These models are the same as those presented in Columns II and VI of Table 4.

17

As noted in a footnote 9, we have concerns about the marital status variables and we do not use them
here.

19

age is reported.18 Births with missing paternal information may be more likely to be the result of
unintended pregnancies or may otherwise reflect unobserved maternal or paternal characteristics
associated with poor infant health outcomes.19
Table 8 shows that lower minimum drinking ages are significantly associated with higher rates
of missing paternal age for native black women, but not for white women. The results for black
women are significant even when controlling for age-specific time trends. To investigate whether
these results do suggest a link between MLDA laws and unintended pregnancies, we divide the
sample into states with and without parental notification (or consent) abortion laws. If abortions
are harder for young women to obtain, then we expect the compositional birth effects of MLDA
laws to be greater. We find that, for native born black women, the effect of MLDA laws on missing
paternal information is sizable in states with restrictive abortion laws but not other states. In
parental notification states, for the native black group, a drinking age of 18 is associated with an
8.8-19.5 percentage point increase in the probability of a birth with missing father information (on a
base of 50 percentage points). Though there may be other differences between notification and nonnotification states, these results are consistent with the notion that missing paternal information
is serving as a proxy for unintended pregnancies.
In sum, the evidence from the NVS suggests that composition plays an important role in the
relationship between MLDA laws and birth outcomes. However, the NVS cannot be used to look
at the relationship between MLDA laws and drinking prior to or during pregnancy. In addition,
the NVS does not include any women who did not have births. Thus, we turn to the NLSY to
examine the effect of MLDA laws on drinking prior to pregnancy and sexual behavior, keeping in
18

Paternal age is almost always reported if any paternal information is reported. One exception is that
paternal race is sometimes included even when other information is missing. This may be the result of
imputation.
19

For instance, the probability of a low birth weight birth is estimated to be 0.3 to 1.8 percentage points
lower for any reported age category relative to the missing age category, based on the analysis shown in
Table 7. The link between missing paternal age and birth weight is stronger for black women.

20

mind the limitations of the NLSY discussed previously.

6.2

Evidence from NLSY

First, we use the birth sample to examine drinking in the 12 months prior to pregnancy.20 We
examine the relationship between MLDA laws in effect one year prior to the birth and drinking
behavior, as shown in Table 9. For white women, the key coefficients are sizeable but statistically
insignificant. However, a drinking age of 18 is significantly associated with a marginally significant increased probability of drinking among 18-to-20 year old native black women.21 The point
estimates indicate a 9 to 11 percentage point higher likelihood of drinking in the 12 months prior
to birth, representing approximately a 30 percent increase. The estimated effects of the laws on
alcohol consumption among black women are large.22 This association is robust to the inclusion of
controls for individual characteristics, including Hispanic origin, education of the mother’s parents,
and whether she lived with both parents until age 18. We also test models which account for
age-specific time trends and find that, while the coefficient size remains large, it is not statistically
significant (results not shown).
In Table 10, we examine the relationship between MLDA laws and the timing of a woman’s
sexual initiation using the female cohort sample.23 Among women who had never had sex at the
beginning of 1979, this outcome variable is coded 0 for every month until she had sex for the first
20

Each birth is treated as a separate observation, but standard errors are clustered to account for withinstate correlations. We have a small sample of births to women under 18, so these results should be interpreted
with caution.
21

The lack of significant impact on the younger ages may be due to the relatively few observations for the
youngest groups resulting from the aging of the NLSY cohort.
22

We expect an imperfect correlation between the policy regime and behavior. Drinking laws are widely
evaded, grandfathering of cohorts implies that not all 18-to-20 year old women are affected when the law
is changed, and individuals may live near a state with a lower drinking age than their own. Coase and
Grossman (1988) report small effects of the drinking age in bordering states in some models.
23

Each month between 1979 and 1986 is treated as a separate observation, but standard errors are clustered
to account for within-state correlations.

21

time (such that her last observation is coded 1), or when the latest interview question was asked
(in 1984 or 1985).24 We match the drinking age law to the observation month. The results suggest
that a lower drinking age is associated with an increased probability of having sex for the first time
in a given month for all women. The estimated effects are large for both white and black women
(effects of 0.1 to 0.4 percentage points on a base of 0.5 percentage points), but only statistically
significant for 18-to-20-year-old black women. The results are robust to the inclusion of controls
for individual characteristics but not age-specific time trends.
Finally, although we do not show the results here, we also examine the relationships between
MLDA laws and becoming pregnant for the first time, having a birth, and having a non-marital
birth, all using the female cohort sample. For all three outcomes and both demographic groups,
the coefficients are insignificant. It may be that the laws do not affect these outcomes, but it may
also be the case that the NLSY sample is not large enough to detect modest effects.25
In sum, the evidence reported in this section suggests that drinking laws may affect the composition of births, particularly among native black women. The inclusion of maternal and paternal
controls dampens the effect of MLDA laws on the probability of low birth weight, suggesting an
increase in births to parents with less healthy characteristics in states with lower drinking ages.
Among white women, maternal characteristics change substantially in association with MLDA laws.
Among black women, there is a substantial increase in the fraction of births with absent fathers,
representing up to a 25 percent increase. These are most pronounced in states with restrictive
abortion laws. Evidence from the NLSY indicates that black women are more likely to drink 12
months prior to a birth and have their first sexual intercourse when the drinking age is 18. Overall,
we believe the findings point to an association between a low drinking age and the likelihood of
24

In months when women were no longer at risk for sexual initiation, they are excluded from the analysis.

25

The NLSY analysis is based on a fairly small number of births in each age-year cell. Furthermore, as
noted above, there are no births to 16-year-olds after 1981, no births to 17-year-olds after 1982, and so on,
due to the aging of the sample.

22

birth stemming from unintentional pregnancy.

7

Effect of MLDA Laws on Prenatal Behaviors

Observable characteristics of parents do not explain all of the differences in birth outcomes associated with MLDA laws, particularly among black women. In this section we examine whether the
drinking age is associated with prenatal health behaviors as well.
In Table 11, we investigate the relationship between MLDA laws and drinking during pregnancy
using the birth sample from the NLSY. We match the drinking age law to six months prior to the
birth month.26 Black women between the age of 18 and 20 are more likely to report prenatal
drinking when the drinking age is 18. We observe no evidence of an increase in prenatal drinking
among white women in either age group when the drinking age is 18.
Because smoking is a complement to drinking, and the effects of prenatal smoking are believed
to be quite detrimental, we also examine whether MLDA laws affect prenatal smoking. We do
not show the results because, regardless of specification or demographic group, the coefficients are
never significant and often wrong-signed.
In conclusion, we do find a relationship between the drinking age and prenatal drinking. However, the changing composition of observed parental characteristics leads us to suspect that unobserved characteristics are also influenced by the policy regime. Therefore, we cannot isolate the
causal impact of prenatal drinking on birth outcomes.

8

Conclusions

This paper examines the effect of minimum age drinking laws on birth outcomes. Minimum drinking age laws are related to the incidence of prematurity and low birth weight births among young
women, particularly among black women. We present evidence that a lower drinking age is associ26

The results do not change if we match the drinking age law to 9 months prior to the birth month.

23

ated with drinking in the 12 months prior to a birth and prenatally, sexual initiation, and absence of
paternal information on the birth certificate. Taken together, these findings lead us to suspect that
a lower drinking age raises the proportion of births resulting from unintentional teen pregnancy,
thereby generating adverse health outcomes for infants.
The infant health effects associated with an MLDA of 18 are small, representing far less than
a ten percent change in rates of prematurity or low birth weight for blacks, and smaller changes
for other groups. However, the effects of minimum legal drinking ages on drinking are also modest.
Alcohol policy that more effectively curtailed drinking, or the risky behaviors associated with it,
might hold greater promise for infant health. Our results suggest that alcohol policies may have
positive unintended consequences - benefits for the well-being of a generation beyond those directly
targeted.

24

APPENDIX
Exploring Sensitivity to Age Specific Linear Time Trends
In this appendix we examine the reasons for the sensitivity of our results to the inclusion of agespecific time trends. A number of our results are rendered statistically insignificant by the inclusion
of such trends as controls. Notable exceptions include results for 18-to-20 year old whites in Table
4 (low birth weight analysis), results for the youngest blacks in Table 5 (prematurity analysis) and
all results for black mothers in Table 8 (missing paternal information).
Because the minimum drinking age is increasing over time in our study period, the sensitivity is
consistent with younger age groups experiencing better relative health outcomes over time relative
to older age groups or, equivalently, more recent cohorts experiencing better birth outcomes at any
given maternal age. We try to add a number of sets of control variables to determine if any might be
associated with these trends: beer and cigarette taxes, parental notification and consent abortion
laws, the group-state-age specific birth rate, and the log of the birth rate. Tax data come from
the World Tax Database at the University of Michigan (http://www.bus.umich.edu/OTPR/otpr).
Abortion law information comes from Haas-Wilson (1996) and Greenberger and Connor (1991).
Birth rates are estimated by the authors using the Census Public Use Microdata Series to generate
age-state-group-specific denominators. Linear interpolation is used between Census years.
The results of our analysis are shown in Tables A and B for whites and blacks respectively.
Column I of each table shows our preferred specification which includes state-specific time trends
but not age-specific time trends. In column II, we include the real beer tax interacted with the age
groups and an indicator for missing data. These variables do reduce the coefficients slightly in Table
A and more substantially in Table B, though in neither case do they render the coefficients statistically insignificant. Further investigation reveals that nominal beer taxes changed infrequently
during the time period, so changes are likely to reflect age-specific responses to inflation (or another
time-varying factor) in states with high initial taxes rather than a genuine policy response.

25

Next, we investigate the role of cigarette taxes in column III. We include real cigarette taxes
interacted with the age groups and an indicator for missing data. The results are largely unchanged
relative to the first specification.
In columns IV and V, we explore the role of abortion laws. Though our sample period follows
the Roe decision legalizing abortion, states differed on requirements for minors seeking access to
abortion. We control for the existence of parental notification (or consent) laws, interacted with
age groups, in column IV, and control for the more restrictive parental consent laws only in column
V. These controls do little to change the coefficients, suggesting they do not explain the sensitivity
of our results to age-specific time trends.
Finally, we consider the possibility that increasing teen birth rates might explain the age-specific
time trends. It is possible that healthier teens were entering into the population of mothers over the
time period. To test this hypothesis, we estimate age and state specific birth rates for native whites
and native blacks. Controlling for the birth rate does little to change the estimated coefficients, as
shown in column VI. We try controlling for the log of the birth rate in Column VII, with similar
results.
In sum, we are unable to explain the sensitivity of our results to age-specific time trends. It
is possible that these trends reflect secular trends driven by factors for which we are unable to
account, or that controlling for age-specific trends eliminates useful variation in drinking age laws.
We present both sets of results so the reader can assess the strength of the evidence.

26

References
Ai, C., & Norton, E. (2003). Interaction Terms in Logit and Probit Models. Economics Letters,
80, 123 - 129.
Albertsen, K., Andersen, A. N., Olsen, J., & Gronbaek, M. (2004). Alcohol Consumption during
Pregnancy and the Risk of Preterm Delivery. American Journal of Epidemiology, 159 (2),
155 - 161.
Brown, S. S., & Eisenberg, L. (Eds.). (1995). The best intentions: Unintended pregnancy and the
well-being of children and families. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Cameron, L., & Williams, J. (2001). Cannabis, Alcohol, and Cigarettes: Substitutes or Complements? Economic Record, 77 (236), 19 - 34.
Carpenter, C., & Dobkin, C. (2007). The Effect of Alcohol Consumption on Mortality: Regression
Discontinuity Evidence from the Minimum Drinking Age. (National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 13374)
Case, A., & Paxson, C. (2002). Parental Behavior and Child Health. Health Affairs, 21 (2), 164 178.
Casswell, S., Pledger, M., & Hooper, R. (2003). Socioeconomic status and drinking patterns in
young adults. Addiction, 98, 601 - 610.
CDC. (1995). Update: Trends in fetal alcohol syndrome, United States, 1979-1993 (Vol. 44; Tech.
Rep.).
Coase, D., & Grossman, M. (1988). Effects of Alcoholic Beverage Prices and Legal Drinking Ages
on Youth Alcohol Use. Journal of Law and Economics, 31 (1), 145 - 171.
Colman, G., Grossman, M., & Joyce, T. (2003). The effect of cigarette excise taxes on smoking
before, during and after pregnancy. Journal of Health Economics, 22, 1053 - 1072.
Cook, P. J., & Moore, M. J. (2002). The Economics of Alcohol Abuse and Alcohol-Control Policies.
Health Affairs, 21 (2), 120 - 133.
Cooper, M. L. (2002). Alcohol Use and Risky Sexual Behavior among College Students and Youth:
Evaluating the Evidence. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 14 (14), 101 - 117.
Day, N. L., & Richardson, G. A. (2004). An Analysis of the Effects of Prenatal Alcohol Exposure
on Growth: A Teratologic Model. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C, 28 - 34.
Day, N. L., Robles, N., Richardson, G., Geva, D., Taylor, P., & al., M. S. et. (1991). The effects
of prenatal alcohol use in the growth of children at three years of age. Alcoholism: Clinical
and Experimental Research, 15, 67 - 71.
Decker, S. L., & Schwartz, A. E. (2000). Cigarettes and Alcohol: Substitutes or Complements?
(National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7535)
Dee, T. S. (2001). The Effects of Minimum Legal Drinking Ages on Teen Childbearing. Journal of
Human Resources, 36 (4), 823 - 838.
DiNardo, J., & Lemieux, T. (2001). Alcohol, marijuana, and American youth: the unintended
consequences of government regulation. Journal of Health Economics, 20, 991 - 1010.
Evans, W. N., & Ringel, J. S. (1999). Can higher cigarette taxes improve birth outcomes? Journal
of Public Economics, 72, 13 - 154.

27

Greenberger, M., & Connor, K. (1991). Parental Notice and Consent for Abortion: Out-of Step
with Family Law Principles and Policies. Family Planning Perspectives, 23 (1), 31 - 35.
Grossman, M., & Markowitz, S. (2002). I did what last night?!!! Adolescent risky sexual behaviors
and substance use. (National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9244)
Haas-Wilson, D. (1996). The Impact of State Abortion Restrictions on Minors Demand for Abortions. Journal of Human Resources, 31 (1), 140 - 158.
Hingson, R. W., Strunin, L., Berlin, B. M., & Heeren, T. (1990). Beliefs about AIDS, use of
alcohol and drugs, and unprotected sex among Massachusetts adolescents. American Journal
of Public Health, 80 (3), 295 - 299.
IOM. (1990). Nutrition During Pregnancy. National Academy Press.
Joyce, T. J., Kaestner, R., & Korenman, S. (2000). The Effect of Pregnancy Intention on Child
Development. Demography, 37 (1), 83 - 94.
Kaestner, R. (2000). A note on the effect of minimum drinking age laws on youth alcohol consumption. Contemporary Economic Policy, 18 (3), 315 - 325.
Kaestner, R., & Joyce, T. (2000). Alcohol and Drug Use: Risk Factors for Unintended Pregnancy.
In C.-R. Hsieh & M. Grossman (Eds.), The Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse:
The Experience of Developed Countries and Lessons for Developing Countries. London:
Edward Elgar Publishing Limited.
Leonardson, G. R., & Loudenburg, R. (2003). Risk Factors for alcohol use during pregnancy in a
multistate area. Neurotoxicology and Teratology, 25, 651 - 658.
Lowry, R., Kann, L., Collins, J. L., & Kolbe, L. J. (1996). The effect of socioeconomic status on
chronic disease risk behaviors among US adolescents. JAMA, 276.
Lupton, C., Burd, L., & Harwood, R. (2004). Cost of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders. American
Journal of Medical Genetics Part C, 42 - 50.
Markowitz, S., Kaestner, R., & Grossman, M. (2005). An Investigation of the Effects of Alcohol
Consumption and Alcohol Policies on Youth Risky Sexual Behaviors. American Economic
Review, 95 (2), 263 - 266.
Miron, J., & Tetelbaum, E. (2007). Does the Minimum Drinking Age Save Lives?
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13257)

(National

NIDA. (1994). NIDA survey examines extent of womens drug use during pregnancy (Tech. Rep.).
Rockville, MD: NIDA. (NIDA Media Advisory)
Nilsson, J. P. (2008). Does A Pint A Day Affect Your Childs Pay? The Effect of Prenatal Alcohol
Exposure on Adult Outcomes. (Insitute for Labour Market Policy Evaluation Working Paper
2008:4)
O’Leary, C. M. (2004). Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Diagnosis, epidemiology, and developmental
outcomes. Journal of Paediatric Child Health, 40, 2 - 7.
Rashad, I., & Kaestner, R. (2004). Teenage sex, drugs and alcohol use: problems identifying the
cause of risky behaviors. Journal of Health Economics, 23, 493 - 503.
Rees, D. I., Argys, L. M., & Averett, S. L. (2001). New evidence on the relationship between
substance use and adolescent sexual behavior. Journal of Health Economics, 20, 835 - 845.

28

Sen, B. (2002). Does alcohol-use increase the risk of sexual intercourse among adolescents? Evidence
from the NLSY97. Journal of Health Economics, 21, 1085 - 1093.
Sen, B. (2003). Can beer taxes affect teen pregnancy? Evidence based on teen abortion rates and
birth rates. Southern Economic Journal, 70 (2), 328 - 343.
Serdula, M., Williamson, D. F., Kendrick, J. S., Anda, R. F., & Byers, T. (1991). Trends in Alcohol
Consumption by pregnant women: 1985 through 1988. JAMA, 265 (7), 876 - 879.
Stratton, K., Howe, C., & Battaglia, F. (Eds.). (1996). Fetal alcohol syndrome: Diagnosis, epidemiology, prevention, and treatment. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Testa, M., Quigley, B. M., & Eiden, R. D. (2003). The effects of prenatal alcohol exposure on infant
mental development: a meta-analytical review. Alcohol & Alcoholism, 38 (4), 295 - 304.
Wagenaar, A. C., & Toomey, T. L. (2002). Effects of minimum drinking age laws: review and
analyses of the literature from 1960 to 2000. Journal of Studies on Alcohol Supplement, 206
- 225.
Whitehead, N., & Lipscomb, L. (2003). Patterns of Alcohol Use before and during pregnancy and
the risk of small-for-gestational-age birth. American Journal of Epidemiology, 158 (7), 654 652.

29

Table 1: Summary Statistics for Vital Statistics Data
Native
White
11,426,203

Native
Black
3,032,108

All
Women
16,165,747

0.061
3356.365
0.001
0.084
39.628
0.100
0.013
0.178

0.130
3074.426
0.002
0.183
38.539
0.117
0.014
0.162

0.074
3297.001
0.002
0.105
39.391
0.105
0.013
0.195

Birth Characteristics
Baby Male
Twin Birth
Triplets or Higher Order Birth

0.514
0.016
0.000

0.508
0.021
0.000

0.512
0.017
0.000

Maternal Characteristics
Mother Native White
Mother Native Black
Mother Foreign Born
Mother Hispanic (if avail.)
Mother Hispanic Missing
Estimated Mother Age at Conception
Second Birth
Third Birth
Fourth or Higher Order Birth
Mother Education High School (if avail.)
Mother Education Some College (if avail.)
Mother Education College Grad or More (if avail.)
Mother Education Missing

1.000
0.000
0.000
0.126
0.454
20.517
0.315
0.124
0.056
0.506
0.160
0.048
0.203

0.000
1.000
0.000
0.007
0.434
19.512
0.296
0.158
0.111
0.436
0.134
0.022
0.145

0.701
0.186
0.096
0.174
0.427
20.340
0.310
0.131
0.069
0.481
0.153
0.043
0.217

Paternal Characteristics
Father Race Black
Father Race Native American
Father Race Asian
Father Race Other/Missing
Father Hispanic
Father Hispanic Missing
Mother Married (if avail.)

0.009
0.004
0.003
0.109
0.065
0.513
0.803

0.545
0.000
0.001
0.445
0.006
0.673
0.283

0.115
0.007
0.013
0.176
0.091
0.522
0.694

N
Birth Outcomes
Low Birthweight
Birthweight in grams (if avail.)
Exact Birthweight Missing
Preterm Birth (if avail.)
Weeks Gestation (if avail.)
Preterm Birth/Gestation Length Missing
Congenital Anomoly (if avail.)
Congenital Anomoly Missing

continued on next page

30

continued from previous page

N
Mother Married Missing
Estimated Father Age at Conception (if avail.)
Father Age Missing
Father Education High School (if avail.)
Father Education Some College (if avail.)
Father Education College Grad+ (if avail.)
Father Education Missing

Native
White
11,426,203
0.060
23.834
0.121
0.510
0.171
0.099
0.304

Native
Black
3,032,108
0.057
23.469
0.490
0.565
0.152
0.048
0.599

All
Women
16,165,747
0.061
23.915
0.193
0.507
0.167
0.094
0.385

State Characteristics
Real Beer Tax (if avail.)
Real Cigarette Tax (if avail.)
Beer/Cigarette Tax Missing
Parental Notification (or Consent) Law (if avail.)
Parental Consent Law (if avail.)
Parental Notification/Consent Law Missing
Age-Group Birth Rate (if avail.)
Birth Rate Missing
MLDA is 18
MLDA is 21

0.178
0.162
0.002
0.433
0.269
0.021
90.336
0.000
0.272
0.480

0.246
0.153
0.001
0.422
0.304
0.004
117.268
0.000
0.343
0.422

0.185
0.160
0.005
0.417
0.270
0.018
99.305
0.017
0.279
0.480

31

32
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.191
0.000
20.941
–
33.414
11.065
0.039
11.327
0.095
0.636
0.074

Individual Characteristics
Native Born White
Native Born Black
Immigrant
Hispanic
Race/Ethnicity/Nativity Status Missing
Maternal Age This Month
Maternal Age at Birth
Age-adjusted AFQT score
Mother’s Education (of resp., if avail.)
Mother’s Education Missing
Father’s Education (of resp., if avail.)
Father’s Education Missing
Lived With Both Parents at 18 (if avail.)
Both Parents at 18 Missing

continued on next page

0.699
0.348
0.433
0.099
–
–
–

N
Average number of monthly observation
Average number of births
Number of unique women/mothers
Behavioral Outcomes
Had Sex for First Time
Became Pregnant For the First Time
Had At Least One Birth
Had At Least One Non-Marital Birth
Drank 12 Months Before Birth
Drank During Pregnancy
Smoked During Pregnancy

0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
20.822
–
17.173
10.857
0.067
10.392
0.236
0.464
0.069

0.771
0.371
0.541
0.370
–
–
–

0.728
0.226
0.046
0.170
0.000
20.920
–
28.867
10.833
0.048
10.948
0.131
0.597
0.076

0.709
0.354
0.463
0.160
–
–
–

1979 Cohort Sample
Native Native
All
White
Black Women
232,256
72,301 319,346
76
79
77
–
–
–
3,046
918
4,164

Table 2: Means of Variables in NLSY Data

1.000
0.000
0.000
0.238
0.000
–
21.563
23.758
10.090
0.061
10.035
0.147
0.513
0.123

–
–
–
–
0.461
0.376
0.398

0.000
1.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
–
21.124
12.668
10.287
0.081
9.581
0.305
0.410
0.081

–
–
–
–
0.314
0.254
0.277

0.650
0.299
0.050
0.191
0.003
–
21.439
19.709
9.956
0.069
9.713
0.197
0.484
0.114

–
–
–
–
0.404
0.329
0.348

Birth Sample
Native Native
All
White
Black Births
2,536
1,167
3,910
–
–
–
1.4
1.5
1.4
1,798
803
2,750

33

N
State Characteristics
MLDA is 18
MLDA is 21

continued from previous page

0.357
0.355

0.414
0.244

0.366
0.334

1979 Cohort Sample
Native Native
All
White
Black Women
232,256
72,301 319,346

0.369
0.351

0.419
0.264

0.380
0.329

Birth Sample
Native Native
All
White
Black Births
2,536
1,167
3,910

34
16,165,747
0.00

16,165,747
0.07

-0.0014*
(0.0007)
0.0048*
(0.0018)
0.0025*
(0.0010)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

-0.0011
(0.0007)
0.0048*
(0.0018)
0.0025*
(0.0010)
yes
yes
yes
yes

16,165,747
0.07

III

II

16,165,747
0.19

yes

-0.0018**
(0.0006)
0.0037**
(0.0012)
0.0021**
(0.0007)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

IV

16,165,747
0.07

-0.0009
(0.0008)
0.0028
(0.0022)
0.0019
(0.0011)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

V

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent
statistical significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal Age at Conception dummies included for each year of age (age 14
omitted). Birth controls include male infant and four plurality categories (twins, triplets or more, and plural birth information missing, with
singleton omitted). Preterm birth indicates less than 37 weeks gestation.

Number of Observations
R-squared

I
Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight (mean=0.074)
MLDA is 18
-0.0012
(0.0007)
MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17 0.0050**
(0.0017)
MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20 0.0027**
(0.0009)
State of Residence Fixed Effects
yes
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
yes
Maternal Age at Conception Fixed Effects
yes
Birth Characteristic Controls
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
Age-Specific Linear Time Trends
Preterm Birth

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, All Women

Table 3: Relationship Between MLDA and Low Birth Weight

35
11,426,203
0.20

11,426,203
0.07

-0.0006
(0.0005)
0.0008
(0.0015)
0.0012+
(0.0007)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

IV

3,032,108
0.06

-0.0047**
(0.0017)
0.0098**
(0.0025)
0.0059**
(0.0015)
yes
yes
yes
yes

V

3,032,108
0.06

3,032,108
0.18

yes

VI
VII
Native Black Women
(mean=0.130)
-0.0041*
-0.0045*
(0.0018)
(0.0019)
0.0099** 0.0071**
(0.0025)
(0.0020)
0.0059** 0.0042**
(0.0015)
(0.0012)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

3,032,108
0.06

-0.0014
(0.0021)
0.0057
(0.0035)
0.0010
(0.0021)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

VIII

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent
statistical significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal Age at Conception dummies included for each year of age (age 14
omitted). Birth controls include male infant and four plurality categories (twins, triplets or more, and plural birth information missing, with
singleton omitted). Preterm birth indicates less than 37 weeks gestation.

11,426,203
0.07

Number of Observations
R-squared

11,426,203
0.07

yes

II
III
Native White Women
(mean=0.061)
-0.0007
-0.0011*
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
0.0023+
0.0020+
(0.0013)
(0.0010)
0.0012+
0.0013*
(0.0006)
(0.0006)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
MLDA is 18
-0.0002
(0.0006)
MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17
0.0022+
(0.0013)
MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20
0.0012+
(0.0006)
State of Residence Fixed Effects
yes
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
yes
Age at Conception Fixed Effects
yes
Birth Characteristic Controls
yes
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
Age-Specific Linear Time Trends
Preterm Birth

I

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 4: Relationship Between MLDA, Low Birth Weight and Race

36
10,312,349
0.03

10,312,349
0.03

10,312,349
0.03

2,686,093
0.02

2,686,093
0.02

2,686,093
0.02

V
VI
Native Black Women
(mean=0.183)
-0.0053** -0.0084** -0.0053*
(0.0018)
(0.0021)
(0.0025)
0.0127** 0.0128**
0.0066+
(0.0029)
(0.0029)
(0.0039)
0.0064** 0.0065**
0.0022
(0.0014)
(0.0014)
(0.0021)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

IV

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent
statistical significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal Age at Conception dummies included for each year of age (age 14
omitted). Birth controls include male infant and four plurality categories (twins, triplets or more, and plural birth information missing, with
singleton omitted). Preterm birth indicates less than 37 weeks gestation.

Number of Observations
R-squared

State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
Maternal Age at Conception Fixed Effects
Birth Characteristic Controls
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
Age-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: Preterm Birth
MLDA is 18

II
III
Native White Women
(mean=0.084)
-0.0010
-0.0023**
-0.0020*
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
0.0039*
0.0039*
0.0012
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
(0.0017)
0.0005
0.0005
0.0008
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0009)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

I

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 5: Relationship Between MLDA and Preterm Birth

37
9,748,369
0.00

9,748,369
0.00

9,748,369
0.00

2,617,711
0.00

2,617,711
0.01

2,617,711
0.01

IV
V
VI
Native Black Women
(mean=0.183)
-0.0015
-0.0038
-0.0036
(0.0021)
(0.0027)
(0.0026)
-0.0004
-0.0003
-0.0006
(0.0007)
(0.0007)
(0.0009)
-0.0005
-0.0004
-0.0006
(0.0003)
(0.0003)
(0.0005)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent
statistical significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal Age at Conception dummies included for each year of age (age 14
omitted). Birth controls include male infant and four plurality categories (twins, triplets or more, and plural birth information missing, with
singleton omitted).

Number of Observations
R-squared

State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
Maternal Age at Conception Fixed Effects
Birth Characteristic Controls
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
Age-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: Congenital Anomaly
MLDA is 18

II
III
Native White Women
(mean=0.084)
0.0006
-0.0007
-0.0008
(0.0008)
(0.0007)
(0.0007)
-0.0002
-0.0003
-0.0002
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0005)
-0.0001
-0.0002
0.0001
(0.0002)
(0.0002)
(0.0002)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

I

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 6: Relationship Between MLDA and Congenital Anomalies

38
11,426,203
0.07

11,426,203
0.07

11,426,203
0.07

3,032,108
0.06

3,032,108
0.06

3,032,108
0.06

IV
V
VI
Native Black Women
(mean=0.130)
-0.0041*
-0.0050*
-0.0041*
(0.0018)
(0.0021)
(0.0020)
0.0099** 0.0094** 0.0070**
(0.0025)
(0.0025)
(0.0021)
0.0059** 0.0057** 0.0045**
(0.0015)
(0.0014)
(0.0013)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent
statistical significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal controls include indicators for Hispanic and Hispanic status missing
(non-Hispanic omitted), indicators for less than high school graduate, high school graduate, some college, and college graduate or more
(missing education status omitted), and second birth, third birth, and fourth or greater birth (first birth omitted) Paternal controls include
age 14 or under, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21-24, 25-29, and 30 or higher (missing age omitted), indicators for father black, father Asian, father
Indian, father other/missing race, father Hispanic, and father Hispanic status missing (white Non-Hispanic omitted) and indicators for high
school graduate, some college, college graduate or more, and missing education status (less than high school graduate omitted).

Number of Observations
R-squared

Birth Characteristics
Maternal Controls
Paternal Controls
State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
Maternal Age at Conception Fixed Effects
State-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
MLDA is 18

II
III
Native White Women
(mean=0.061)
-0.0007
-0.0008
-0.0006
(0.0005)
(0.0006)
(0.0007)
0.0023+
0.0008
0.0005
(0.0013)
(0.0011)
(0.0015)
0.0012+
0.0005
0.0003
(0.0006)
(0.0006)
(0.0007)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

I

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 7: Compositional Effects and Low Birth Weight

39
11,426,203
0.10

-0.0016
(0.0083)
-0.0011
(0.0299)
-0.0044
(0.0098)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
11,426,203
0.10

6,116,456
0.09

5,050,375
0.10

II
III
IV
Native White Women
(mean=0.121)
Parental Notification?
No
Yes
-0.0095
-0.0017
-0.0053
(0.0085)
(0.0119)
(0.0098)
0.0221
-0.0011
0.0145
(0.0319)
(0.0441)
(0.0336)
0.0095
-0.0041
-0.0006
(0.0099)
(0.0148)
(0.0111)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
3,032,108
0.26

-0.0467*
(0.0204)
0.1229**
(0.0414)
0.0522*
(0.0212)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

V

3,032,108
0.26

1,678,628
0.24

1,340,828
0.28

VI
VII
VIII
Native Black Women
(mean=0.490)
Parental Notification?
No
Yes
-0.0472+
-0.0303
-0.0754*
(0.0261)
(0.0252)
(0.0327)
0.1211*
0.0674
0.1954**
(0.0560)
(0.0538)
(0.0560)
0.0552+
0.0275
0.0877**
(0.0276)
(0.0291)
(0.0276)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent
statistical significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal Age at Conception dummies included for each year of age (age 14
omitted). Birth controls include male infant and four plurality categories (twins, triplets or more, and plural birth information missing, with
singleton omitted). Notification refers to the requirement that young women obtain parental notification or parental consent to undergo an
abortion in the state of residence and year of conception.

Number of Observations
R-squared

State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
Age at Conception Fixed Effects
Birth Characteristic Controls
State-Specific Linear Time Trends
Age-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

MLDA is 18

Dependent Variable: Missing Paternal
Age on Birth Certificate

I

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 8: Relationship Between MLDA and Missing Paternal Age

40
3,910
0.08

Number of Observations
R-squared

3,910
0.13

-0.076*
(0.034)
0.003
(0.036)
0.052+
(0.029)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
2,536
0.10

yes

-0.086*
(0.042)
-0.004
(0.054)
0.050
(0.047)
yes
yes
yes

2,536
0.15

-0.083+
(0.043)
-0.010
(0.047)
0.045
(0.042)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

III
IV
Native White Women
(mean=0.46)

1,167
0.11

yes

-0.086
(0.063)
0.064
(0.072)
0.105+
(0.053)
yes
yes
yes

1,167
0.12

-0.080
(0.065)
0.053
(0.071)
0.091+
(0.053)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

V
VI
Native Black Women
(mean=0.31)

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +, *, ** represent statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively. Each birth represents a separate observation. Samples include Hispanic and non-Hispanic
women. Maternal Age 12 Months Prior to Birth dummies included for each year of age (age 14 omitted). Individual controls include three
race/ethnicity/nativity categories (Native Born Black, Immigrant, Hispanic, with Native Born White omitted), Age-adjusted AFQT Score,
Respondents’ Mothers’ and Fathers’ Education, Respondent Lived With Both Parents at 18, and missing indicators for all controls.

yes

-0.072*
(0.034)
-0.002
(0.037)
0.063*
(0.031)
yes
yes
yes

State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year Prior to Birth Fixed Effects
Age 12 Months Prior to Birth Fixed Effects
Individual Controls
State-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: Drank 12 Months
Prior to Birth
MLDA 18

I
II
All Women
(mean=0.40)

Births Conceived 1978-1987 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 9: Relationship between MLDA and Maternal Drinking Before Birth

41
285,709
0.01

285,709
0.01

208,104
0.01

208,104
0.01

III
IV
Native White Women
(mean=0.00518)
-0.002*
-0.002*
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.001
0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.002
0.002
(0.001)
(0.001)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
64,301
0.01

64,301
0.01

V
VI
Native Black Women
(mean=0.00499)
-0.001
-0.001
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.004
0.004
(0.003)
(0.003)
0.003+
0.003+
(0.002)
(0.002)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +, *, ** represent statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively. Each birth represents a separate observation. Samples include Hispanic and nonHispanic women. Age of Woman This Month dummies included for each year of age (age 14 omitted). Individual controls include three
race/ethnicity/nativity categories (Native Born Black, Immigrant, Hispanic, with Native Born White omitted), Age-adjusted AFQT Score,
Respondents’ Mothers’ and Fathers’ Education, Respondent Lived With Both Parents at 18, and missing indicators for parents’ education,
both parents at 18, race/ethnicity/nativity status.

Number of Observations
R-squared

State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Age Fixed Effects
Individual Controls
State-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: First Sex This Month
MLDA 18

I
II
All Women
(mean=0.00514)
-0.002+ -0.002+
(0.001)
(0.001)
0.003+
0.003+
(0.002)
(0.002)
0.002*
0.002*
(0.001)
(0.001)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Births Conceived 1978-1987 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 10: Relationship between MLDA and Timing of First Sex

42
3,910
0.08

3,910
0.11

2,536
0.10

2,536
0.14

III
IV
Native White Women
(mean=0.38)
-0.057
-0.065
(0.036)
(0.039)
-0.083
-0.082
(0.064)
(0.063)
0.026
0.037
(0.050)
(0.049)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
1,167
0.11

1,167
0.11

V
VI
Native Black Women
(mean=0.25)
-0.005
-0.007
(0.042)
(0.042)
0.046
0.040
(0.054)
(0.052)
0.143+
0.141*
(0.072)
(0.068)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Note: Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +, *, ** represent statistical
significance at the 10, 5, and 1% levels respectively. Each birth represents a separate observation. Samples include Hispanic and non-Hispanic
women. Maternal Age Six Months Prior To Birth dummies included for each year of age (age 14 omitted). Individual controls include three
race/ethnicity/nativity categories (Native Born Black, Immigrant, Hispanic, with Native Born White omitted), Age-adjusted AFQT Score,
Respondents’ Mothers’ and Fathers’ Education, Respondent Lived With Both Parents at 18, and missing indicators for parents’ education,
both parents at 18, race/ethnicity/nativity status.

Number of Observations
R-squared

State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year Six Months Prior to Birth Fixed Effects
Age Six Months Prior to Birth Fixed Effects
Individual Controls
State-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: Drank during Pregnancy
MLDA 18

I
II
All Women
(mean=0.33)
-0.022
-0.025
(0.026) (0.027)
-0.045
-0.037
(0.048) (0.045)
0.064
0.066+
(0.039) (0.039)
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Births Conceived 1978-1987 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White and Native Black Women

Table 11: Relationship between MLDA and Prenatal Drinking Behavior

43
11,426,203
0.07

yes
yes
yes
yes

-0.0007
(0.0005)
0.0023+
(0.0013)
0.0012+
(0.0006)
yes

11,426,203
0.07

yes
yes
yes
yes

-0.0007+
(0.0004)
0.0019+
(0.0011)
0.0012*
(0.0005)
yes
yes

II

11,426,203
0.07

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

11,426,203
0.07

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

11,426,203
0.07

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

IV
V
Native White Women
(mean=0.061)
-0.0007
-0.0008+
-0.0008
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
(0.0005)
0.0021+
0.0025+
0.0023+
(0.0012)
(0.0013)
(0.0013)
0.0011+
0.0014*
0.0012+
(0.0006)
(0.0006)
(0.0006)
yes
yes
yes

III

11,426,203
0.07

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

-0.0007
(0.0005)
0.0022+
(0.0012)
0.0014*
(0.0006)
yes

VI

11,426,203
0.07

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

-0.0008
(0.0005)
0.0025*
(0.0012)
0.0015*
(0.0006)
yes

VII

Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent statistical
significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal Age at Conception dummies included for each year of age (age 14 omitted).
Birth controls include male infant and four plurality categories (twins, triplets or more, and plural birth information missing, with singleton
omitted). Beer tax variables include real beer taxes and an indicator for missing beer tax data. Cigarette tax variables include real cigarette
taxes and an indicator for missing cigarette tax data. Parental notification includes an indicator for the presence of a parental notification
or consent law and an indicator for missing data. Parental consent includes an indicator for the presence of a parental consent law an an
indicator for missing data. Age-group specific birth rate is specific to age in years at conception and estimated separately for native white
women and native black women.

Number of Observations
R-squared

Birth Characteristics
Beer Taxes *Age Categories
Cigarette Taxes *Age Categories
Parental Notification*Age Categories
Parental Consent*Age Categories
Age-Group Specific Birth Rate
Log (Age-Group Specific Birth Rate)
State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
Age at Conception Fixed Effects
State-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
MLDA is 18

I

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native White Women

Table A: Understanding Age Specific Time Trends

44
3,032,108
0.06

yes
yes
yes
yes

-0.0041*
(0.0018)
0.0099**
(0.0025)
0.0059**
(0.0015)
yes

3,032,108
0.06

yes
yes
yes
yes

-0.0020
(0.0016)
0.0049**
(0.0018)
0.0031*
(0.0014)
yes
yes

II

3,032,108
0.06

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

3,032,108
0.06

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

3,032,108
0.06

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

III
IV
V
Native Black Women
(mean=0.130)
-0.0041*
-0.0042*
-0.0043*
(0.0018)
(0.0017)
(0.0018)
0.0100** 0.0101** 0.0102**
(0.0024)
(0.0024)
(0.0024)
0.0059** 0.0060** 0.0060**
(0.0014)
(0.0015)
(0.0015)
yes
yes
yes

3,031,736
0.06

yes
yes
yes
yes

yes

-0.0042*
(0.0018)
0.0099**
(0.0025)
0.0059**
(0.0015)
yes

VI

3,031,736
0.06

yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

-0.0042*
(0.0018)
0.0099**
(0.0025)
0.0058**
(0.0015)
yes

VII

Linear probability model. Standard errors are clustered by state of residence and reported in parentheses. +,*, and ** represent statistical
significance at the 10,5, and 1% levels respectively. Maternal Age at Conception dummies included for each year of age (age 14 omitted).
Birth controls include male infant and four plurality categories (twins, triplets or more, and plural birth information missing, with singleton
omitted). Beer tax variables include real beer taxes and an indicator for missing beer tax data. Cigarette tax variables include real cigarette
taxes and an indicator for missing cigarette tax data. Parental notification includes an indicator for the presence of a parental notification
or consent law and an indicator for missing data. Parental consent includes an indicator for the presence of a parental consent law an an
indicator for missing data. Age-group specific birth rate is specific to age in years at conception and estimated separately for native white
women and native black women.

Number of Observations
R-squared

Birth Characteristics
Beer Taxes *Age Categories
Cigarette Taxes *Age Categories
Parental Notification*Age Categories
Parental Consent*Age Categories
Age-Group Specific Birth Rate
Log (Age-Group Specific Birth Rate)
State of Residence Fixed Effects
Year of Conception Fixed Effects
Age at Conception Fixed Effects
State-Specific Linear Time Trends

MLDA is 18*Mother is 18-20

MLDA is 18*Mother is ≤17

Dependent Variable: Low Birth Weight
MLDA is 18

I

Births Conceived 1978-1988 Among Women Aged 14-24, Native Black Women

Table B: Understanding Age Specific Time Trends

