                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   THEORY AND EMPIRICAL WORK ON IMPERFECTLY COMPETITIVE MARKETS

                                               Ariel Pakes

                                         Working Paper 14117
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14117


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2008




This is a revised version of my Fisher-Schultz Lecture which was presented at the World Congress
of the Econometric Society in London, August 2005. The paper draws extensively from past interactions
with my students and coauthors, and I would like to take this opportunity to express both my intellectual
debt and my thanks to them. I like to think they enjoyed the experience as much as I did, though that
might have been harder for the students in the group. For help on this paper I owe a particular debt
to Robin Lee, and to my theory colleagues for helping me to come to terms with parts of their literature.
Financial support from the NSF and the Toulouse Network for Information Technologies is greatly
appreciated. The word "theory" in the title refers to both economic and econometric theory. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ariel Pakes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Theory and Empirical Work on Imperfectly Competitive Markets
Ariel Pakes
NBER Working Paper No. 14117
June 2008
JEL No. C01,C5,C73,L0,L1,L4

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper reviews recent methodological developments in the empirical analysis of imperfectly competitive
markets highlighting outstanding problems. Some of these problems are econometric; e.g. the need
for a deeper understanding of the small sample properties of our estimators. Most of the other problems
relate to issues which have been a central part of ongoing research programs in economic theory for
some time. We consider ways in which applied work can cope with these problems and, in so doing,
also inform theory. The use of estimators based on moment inequalities opens up several possibilities
in this regard and a detailed discussion of the assumptions used to rationalize these estimators is provided.
An example, the analysis of contracts in buyer-seller networks, is used to highlight these points.


Ariel Pakes
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Room 117
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ariel@ariel.fas.harvard.edu
    This paper has two goals. It begins by outlining a set of recent developments in the
empirical analysis of imperfectly competitive markets. Each development is motivated by
a barrier to empirical work. The developments themselves often consist of econometric
and computational tools that enabled us to bring to data frameworks that had been used
extensively in prior theoretical work.
    In describing these developments I will point out several issues empirical work has been
less successful in dealing with. Many of these issues are directly related to ongoing research
programs in economic theory. The discussion considers ways in which applied work can
interact with theory to further our understanding of them.
    With these issues in mind, the second part of the paper considers one way of weakening
the assumptions needed to obtain our estimators. It details the different sets of assumptions
which are implicit in the different ways that have been used to construct estimators based
on moment inequalities. We then examine how the different assumptions perform in one
outstanding problem, the analysis of contracts in buyer-seller networks.
    An attempt has been made to make each of the two parts of the paper self-contained.
Sections 1 to 3 provide the review of prior work. Section 1 provides an overview and a
discussion of multiple equilibria, section 2 a review of empirical work using static models,
and section 3 a review of dynamic models. Sections 4 to 6 consider moment inequalities and
their application. Section 4 provides the two sets of assumptions that have been used to
generate moment inequalities and considers the estimators that result from them. Section 5
provides empirical and numerical results on our buyer-seller network example, and section
6 provides a Monte Carlo analysis of the impact of specification errors on the alternative
estimators.


1    Overview.
The goal is to build up a set of tools that enable us to empirically analyze market outcomes
in oligopolistic situations. To keep matters as focused as possible I will begin by assuming:
(i) symmetric information and (ii) that the distribution of future states and controls, condi-
tional on the current states and all investment expenditures, does not depend on the current
price (or quantity) choice. It is this latter assumption which rationalizes the undergraduate
textbook formulation in which price (or quantity) choices can be analyzed in a static frame-
work, and the evolution of the state variables which determine the profits from those static
choices in a dynamic one.
    As I hope will become evident, the modeling choices an empirical I.O. researcher would
like to use are largely determined by the the institutional structure of the industry studied.
In this context the independence assumption in (ii) above seems to rule out the analysis of


                                              2
many markets: those with significant learning by doing effects or adjustment costs (then
future costs depend on current controls); those in which the experience, durability, and/or
the network effects of the products marketed causes future demand to be related to current
price or quantity choices; and most models of collusion (then future prices or quantities are
partly determined by the current price or quantity choice). Still one has to start somewhere,
and I will mention research on these extensions below.
    As for the assumption of symmetric information, most empirical work has not paid a lot
of attention to the structure of agents’ information sets, often choosing whatever structure
seems most convenient for the problem at hand. There are many reasons for this, not
least of which is that the econometrician usually does not have detailed knowledge of the
contents of those information sets. In contrast a great deal of effort has been devoted to
the econometric treatment of unobservables that are known to all of the agents, just not to
the econometrician. Indeed, appropriate treatment of these unobservables underlies many
of the recent advances in demand and production function estimation reviewed below. The
exception here is empirical work on auctions, which has reversed the emphasis and has largely
ignored the role of unobservables known to all the agents but not to the econometrician (for
a notable exception, see Krasnokutskaya, 2006).
    I come back to informational assumptions in the second part of the paper. There I
show that one can often allow for quite general informational assumptions and still obtain
consistent estimates of parameters. There remains, however, the largely unexplored and
important questions of (i) which informational assumptions are consistent with the data,
and (ii) what are the implications of the alternatives.

Static Analysis. Static analysis conditions on (i) the goods marketed (or their charac-
teristics) and their cost functions, (ii) consumer’s preferences over those goods (or over
characteristics tuples), and (iii) “institutional” features like the type of equilibrium, struc-
ture of ownership, and regulatory rules. Many of the recent advances have been directed
towards obtaining better estimates of demand and cost systems. The next section reviews
these advances and comments on the performance of alternative equilibrium assumptions.
    Subsequent analysis takes these “primitives” as input and then calculates equilibrium
prices, quantities, profits and consumer surplus, as a function of the problem’s state variables.
The latter typically include the characteristics of the goods marketed and the determinants
of the cost of producing those goods. The result is a logical framework which can consider
the implications of policy or environmental changes in the “short-run” (conditional on the
state variables prevalent when the analysis is undertaken). This is usually the first step
in the analysis of any policy (e.g., merger or tariff) or environmental (e.g. input price or
demand) change.


                                               3
Dynamic Analysis. The goal of the dynamic analysis is to analyze how the state variables
that are subject to the firms’ controls evolve and how changes in exogenous state variables
affect outcomes. The conceptual framework used for most of the applied dynamic work in
I.O. has been Markov Perfect equilibrium in investment (broadly defined) strategies. The
Markov Perfect notion dates back at least to Starr and Ho (1969) and was used in an
influential set of theory papers examining dynamic issues in oligopolistic settings by Maskin
and Tirole (1987). It is an equilibrium notion that is particularly well suited to applied
work as it allows us to condition on a current state, hopefully a state that we might be able
to read off the data, and generate a probability distribution of the next year’s state. That
distribution can then be used for either estimation or for numerical analysis.
     To use Markov perfection in this way empirical analysis needed a Markov Perfect frame-
work which allowed for the richness of real world data sets; i.e. for firm and industry specific
sources of uncertainty (to enable rank reversals in the fortunes of firms as well as profits of
competing firms that are positively correlated) and entry and exit. This was initially pro-
vided by Ericson and Pakes, 1995, and then extended by a series of authors (see Doraszelski
and Pakes,2005, for a recent review). These frameworks are used for the longer run analysis
of the likely impacts of policy or environmental changes; for e.g. the impact of mergers on
entry or investments and therefore on future prices, or the impact of gas prices on the fuel
efficiency of capital.

Multiple Equilibria and Applied Work.
I will largely ignore problems that might arise due to multiple equilibria below, so a short
digression on how this possibility affects applied work is in order. To an applied person
multiplicity is fundamentally a problem of not having detailed enough information about the
industry studied. There is a set of strategies that are actually selected and used in any given
situation, it is just that the conditions we are comfortable with assuming are not detailed
enough to distinguish between the different possibilities. This implies that as we learn more
about particular industries we might be able to rule out certain possibilities as not being
consistent with observed behavior (or with the institutions governing it). Still in the interim
we will have to consider how the possibility of multiple equilibria affects (i) estimation, and
(ii) the substantive analysis of issues once the primitives have been estimated.
     Taking estimation first, it is clear that if there are multiple possible equilibria maximum
likelihood estimation can not be used without additional assumptions. To obtain the like-
lihood of any parameter vector we need to assign a unique outcome to each combination
of observables and unobservables determinants of that outcome were that parameter vector
correct. When there are multiple equilibria there is no unique outcome. There are a number
of likelihood and non-likelihood based ways of circumventing this problem in estimation. The

                                               4
two most frequently used are; estimating off of the necessary conditions for equilibria (e.g.
the first order conditions for price setting in Nash equilibria), or making assumptions that
allow one to use the data to pick out the equilibria actually observed (see the discussion of
dynamic estimation below). However there remains an important efficiency issue; i.e. we do
not know what an efficient estimator is under assumptions that allow for multiple equilibria,
and we do not have the heuristics of maximum likelihood to guide us to an answer.
    Perhaps more troubling to the applied researcher is the impact of multiple equilibria on
our ability to analyze counterfactuals. Much of the detailed work that goes into empirical
modeling in I.O. is to enable us to analyze what would happen were a policy or the envi-
ronment to change. Though under some assumptions we can identify the equilibria actually
played in the past (or the selection mechanism actually used in the past), we have no direct
evidence on what equilibria would be played (or which selection mechanism would be used)
once a change occurs.
    There are at least two complementary possible approaches to this problem. First, one
could attempt to compute all possible equilibria and bound the outcomes of interest. The
extent to which this is either practical, or helpful if practical, is likely to vary from problem
to problem. Lee and Pakes (2008) illustrate this possibility with an empirical example from
Ishii (2005). Ishii analyzed a two period model of ATM choice; in the first period banks
chose the number of their ATMs and in the second they set interest rates and consumers
chose between banks based on those rates, the proximity of the banks’ branches to their
home, and the banks’ ATMs. We took the actual estimated demand system for Pittsfield
Massachusetts, computed equilibrium interest rates and profits for each possible allocation
of up to fifteen ATMs among Pittsfield’s seven banks, and checked which of the possible
allocations would lead to a full information Nash equilibrium for different specifications of
the cost of ATMs (there were no equilibria with more than fourteen ATMs installed).
    Though there were on the order of 200,000 possible allocations, depending on the cost
specification, only one to three of them satisfied the Nash conditions. Moreover when there
were multiple equilibria for the same cost specification the different equilibria were quite
similar to each other. There were no two equilibria for the same cost specification in which
one firm differed in its number of ATMs by more than one, and the maximum difference in
total number of ATMs across equilibria for a given cost specification was two. Finally, the
“comparative static” results on the relationship of the equilibria across cost specifications
made economic sense. If an allocation which had been an equilibria was no longer an equi-
libria when we lowered the cost, that equilibrium was always the equilibrium with the least
number of ATMs at the higher cost. If an allocation became an equilibrium allocation when
it had not been one at the higher cost, the new equilibrium allocation always had a larger
total number of ATMs than the equilibria that are dropped out.
    To the extent that these findings are indicative of what might happen in other applied

                                               5
problems, they are good news. The small number of equilibria made enumeration possible,
and the expected comparative static results (on sets) held when we compared across the
equilibria of the different cost specifications. The results do, however, rely on the fact that
the actual profit functions have a substantial amount of heterogeneity built into them. Were
we to eliminate the inherited “history” of branch locations and assume that banks chose the
number and location of their branches along with the number of their ATMs (or allow them
to trade the branches at the current locations), the results would be different. On the other
hand empirical work on markets typically does find large asymmetries across competitors,
and there are costs to change, so the conditions assumed in our example are often relevant.
Of course a simple procedure for determining whether a given set of asymmetries in profit
(or value) functions are likely to lead to small numbers of (and/or “well behaved”) equilibria
would be quite helpful.1
    There is a second approach to analyzing counterfactuals when multiple equilibria are
possible. Though we may not feel comfortable with assumptions which would select out an
equilibrium, we may be willing to model how agents respond to changes in their environment.
One possibility is to employ a model for learning about how a policy or environmental change
impacts on the perceived returns from alternative feasible strategies, and assume that the
agent’s choices maximizes their expected perceived returns. If the primitives of the problem
and the current equilibrium were known (or estimated), and one were willing to model this
learning process, it should be possible to simulate out and attach probabilities to the likely
post change equilibria.
    Lee and Pakes (2008) used the ATM example to experiment with this approach also. We
started at one of the equilibria and assumed there was a change in the cost of operating
ATMs. Post regime change, the firms chose the number of their ATMs before knowing
what the costs would be and could change their choice every period. Cost draws were i.i.d.
across time periods and firms. In this environment firms’ expected profits depend on their
expected costs and on their perceptions on what their competitors will do. We assumed a
firm expected its costs to equal the sample mean of the cost shocks it had received since the
regime change, and tried two different specifications for a firm’s beliefs about its competitors’
play (i) that competitors’ play would be the competitors’ actual play in the prior period (so
the firm played its best response to the immediate previous play), and (ii) that the next play
of its competitors would be a random draw from the set of tuples of plays observed since
the regime change (a “fictitious play” specification). Different specifications for the mean
   1
     There is some related work in the theory literature; see, for e.g., McLennan’s (2005) analysis of the
number of possible Nash equilibria for general payoff functions, and the analysis of the impact of different
forms of heterogeneity in global games in Morris and Shin (2002). To date, however, there has been very little
applied work that used the results of the theory literature to overcome problems generated by multiplicity
(for a notable exception, see Jia, 2006).


                                                      6
and variance of the cost shock were tried and for each specification we started 1000 runs
which used the best reply, and 100 runs which used the fictitious play dynamic. Each run
was allowed to continue until it had stayed at the same location for fifty iterations, and that
location was the considered to be a “rest point” of the process. All rest points were Nash
equilibria of the game where each agent knew its mean costs, and there were no convergence
problems.
    We found that the variance in the cost shocks can cause a distribution of rest points from
a given initial condition, and that distribution has a notable dependence on both the cost
specification and on the learning process. Neither the fact that there were a distribution of
rest points nor that they depended on the cost specification is particularly troubling for ap-
plied work, but the dependence of that distribution on the learning process is. Though there
is a theory literature which considers different learning models and analyzes their properties
(see, in particular, Fudenberg and Levine, 1999, Young, 2004, and the literature they cite),
there is little to no empirical evidence on when the different models might be appropriate.
This is an area where more interaction between empirical and theoretical research would be
extremely helpful.


2     Static Analysis.
Static analysis requires (i) a demand system, (ii) a cost system, and (iii) an equilibrium
assumption. I now outline recent work on each of these. My focus is on conceptual issues. I
leave the details required to use the techniques to the original articles and their successors.

2.1    Demand Analysis.
Demand and cost systems are the real (in contrast to the strategic) primitives which deter-
mine pricing incentives, and through prices and costs, the incentives for product development.
Moreover cost data are often proprietary, while market level data on prices charged, quanti-
ties sold, and characteristics of products, are typically not. So costs are often inferred from
estimates of a demand system and a behavioral assumption which determines equilibrium
play. As a result getting a reasonable approximation to the demand surface is often the most
important part of the problem facing an applied researcher.
    The last decade has seen at least two major changes in the empirical analysis of demand
patterns. First there has been a movement away from representative agent models of demand
to models with heterogenous agents, and second there has been a movement away from
models set in “product space” to those set in “characteristic space”.



                                              7
Heterogenous agent models. These have always been used with data that matches in-
dividuals to the products they purchased (micro data). However for the most part the I.O.
researcher has to get by with market level data on quantities, prices and market character-
istics and an ability to obtain distributions of basic consumer attributes from government
data sources (e.g. income and family size).
    Use of heterogeneous agent instead of representative agent models on this market level
data has two important advantages. First they enable the researcher to control for differences
in the distribution of consumer characteristics across markets. This, in turn, provides an
ability both to combine data from different markets in a single estimation algorithm, and to
predict demand in markets where existing goods have not yet been introduced. For example,
a recurrent finding in empirical work on demand is that consumers’ price sensitivity depends
on their incomes, and income distributions typically vary markedly across local markets
(often counties in the U.S.A.). So a representative agent demand system approximation
which provides an adequate fit to the demand in one county is unlikely to fit in another, and
neither approximation is likely to do very well in predicting demand in a market in which
the good (or goods) have not yet been introduced.
    The second reason for the use of heterogenous agent models is the fact that they enable
us to analyze the distributional impacts of policy and environmental changes. This ability
is particulary central to the analysis of regulated markets, as regulators are typically either
elected officials or are appointed by elected officials, and the distributional impact of their
actions is a determinant of voting outcomes.
    Research on explicitly aggregating heterogenous agent models to obtain market outcomes
dates back at least to Houthakker’s (1955) classic paper. However, explicit aggregation only
lead to tractable forms for the market outcomes that needed to be fit to data if very particular
functional forms were chosen for both the primitive micro functions and for the relevant
distributions of consumer attributes. Advances in our computation abilities together with
the introduction of simulation estimators (this dates to Pakes, 1986) were the enabling factors
for the widespread use of heterogenous agent models. Together they allow the researcher to
simulate market outcomes for different parameter values from any functional form for demand
and any distribution of consumer characteristics by simply taking random draws from the
assumed and/or empirical distribution of consumer attributes, computing the consumption
decision for each draw, and adding up the results.

Product vs. Characteristic Space. Models of demand where preferences were defined
on products per se rather than on the characteristics of those products have two charac-
teristics which made them particularly problematic for use in empirical I.O. We often have
to deal with differentiated product markets with a large number of products (often fifty or


                                               8
more). The first problem is that even a (log) linear product level demand system would
then have demand for each good being a function of fifty prices and an income term. As a
result to estimate the demand system for the fifty goods we would need to estimate on the
order of twenty five hundred parameters. We simply do not have data sets that can estimate
that many parameters with any precision.2 Second, demand systems set in product space
can not provide any indication of what demand would be for a new good before that good
is introduced. As a result demand estimates in product space are of no help in analyzing
incentives for product development.
     The use of characteristic space greatly ameliorates both of these problems. If consumers
care only about the characteristics of each product (and not about the product per se),
and there are, say, five important characteristics, then a linear model would depend on the
joint distribution of preferences over those characteristics. If those preferences were, say,
normal, that joint distribution would depend only on twenty parameters (five means and
fifteen covariance terms). Knowledge of those twenty parameters would allow us to obtain
all twenty five hundred own and cross price elasticities. Similarly if the researcher specifies
the characteristics of a new good then the characteristic based models enable the researcher
to compute demand for the new good at any set of prices.
     Characteristic based models have been used in product placement problems in theoretical
I.O. at least since the work of Hotelling (1929). More directly related to our interest was
Lancaster’s (1955) use of characteristic based models in demand analysis, and McFadden’s
(1974) incorporating characteristic based models into his analysis of discrete choice econo-
metric models. Though the Lancaster/McFadden framework had great potential for I.O.,
their use raised two new issues.
     First, the number of characteristics needed to fully specify consumer products can be very
large, too large to include them all in the specification and expect to estimate the parameters
of interest with any precision (producer goods tend to be less problematic in this respect).
Many of the product characteristics in consumer goods tend to have only small effects on
demand patterns, but omitting them entirely caused problems. In particular, “high quality”
goods tend to contain many small features which, though perhaps individually unimportant,
in sum have a noticeable effect on both aggregate demand and price. So ignoring them
entirely causes both an “overfitting” and a simultaneity problem.
     The overfitting problem is that in reasonably sized markets the model will predict a great
deal of precision in the estimates of the aggregate shares. This because the only source of
error in the model is the multinomial sampling error, and when predicting aggregate shares
   2
     A similar “too many parameter problem” motivated much of Gorman’s (1959) ingenious work on multi-
level budgeting. Gorman was careful to detail both the assumptions required for his approach and the
reduction in the number of parameters it implied, and both limit the potential applications in I.O..



                                                  9
this converges to zero with market size. The actual fit at the estimated parameter will not
be nearly that good, and statistical tests will let you know there is something wrong with
the model’s specification. The simultaneity problem is familiar from earlier demand system
analysis. An omitted characteristic known to consumers will be known to producers and,
in virtually any reasonable equilibrium, be correlated with price. What makes it a more
difficult problem in our context is that in characteristic based models that disturbance is
buried deep inside an aggregator function which does not have a simple analytic form. As a
result, the simple solutions used in more standard analysis, like instrumental variables, are
not directly applicable.
     The second problem with the early characteristic based models is that they made as-
sumptions which forced the model to produce unrealistic own and cross price (and other
characteristic) elasticities. The reason could be traced to the independence of irrelevant
alternatives (or IIA) problem noted by McFadden (1981) in his work on micro data. The
impact of the IIA problem on the models used for market level data was, however, much more
dramatic. The early generation of aggregate models assumed that the utility an individual
obtains from consuming a given good consisted of a mean utility and an individual specific
deviation from that mean which became the disturbance. The disturbances were assumed to
be distributed independently across choices: indeed, they were almost always assumed to be
i.i.d. type II extreme value (or logit) deviates. So two individuals who had chosen different
goods were assumed to have the same distribution of preferences over any other good. Con-
sequently, if price increases to the goods they purchased induced both individuals to chose
an alternative good, the probabilities of their choosing the different alternatives would not
depend on their original choices. Moreover since two goods with the same share will have the
same mean utility, and these means are the only characteristic which differentiates goods,
the model implies that goods with the same share must have both (i) the same own price
elasticity (and hence the same markup in a price setting model with single product firms),
and (ii) the same cross price elasticity with every other good. “Must” here means that if
the estimates did not have this property there had to have been an error in the computer
program that generated the results. High quality goods with high prices often have similar
shares to low quality goods with low prices, but no one believes the two types of goods have
similar markups or similar cross price elasticities with other goods.
     A paper by Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995, henceforth BLP) provided practical
solutions to these two problems. The early distributional assumptions were made primarily
to get closed form solutions for the aggregate shares. BLP showed that simulation techniques
and modern computers enables the use of much richer distributions of disturbance terms,
and this largely eliminated the IIA problem. They also allowed for an unobserved product
characteristics and provided a contraction mapping which produced the vector of product
specific values for this characteristic as a linear function of the data (conditional on any

                                             10
given value of the parameter vector). Once the unobservable is obtained in this way one
can control for its impact on price by using any of a number of methods familiar from
linear models (including instrumental variables). There have been several important papers
which have extended these ideas in different ways but they are, for the most part, beyond
the scope of this review (though some of them are considered in the context of the other
problems reviewed below).

2.2    Cost and Production Functions.
As noted cost data are often proprietary, and when they are not proprietary (as is often the
case in regulated industries), they are frequently of questionable quality (partly due to the
incentives facing the firm reporting its costs). As a result there has been little recent work
on cost functions per se.
    In contrast there has been quite a bit of recent work using production functions. This
work was largely motivated by two phenomena. First, there was a noticeable increase in
access to firm (or plant) level panels on production inputs and outputs (often sales and total
costs of inputs rather than physical quantities). Much of this data has become available as a
result of government agencies providing conditions under which researchers could access their
data files. Second, there has been a desire to analyze the efficiency (or productivity) impact
of a number of major changes in the economic environment. They include: the deregulation
of important sectors of the economy (telecommunications, electric utility generation, ....),
privatization programs (particularly in transition economies), and large changes in tariffs,
health care policies, and economic infrastructure.
    These two phenomena resulted in a focus on a particular set of substantive and tech-
nical issues. From a substantive point of view the availability of micro data provided an
ability to distinguish between changes in (i) the efficiency of the output allocation among
establishments, and in (ii) the productivity of individual establishments, and then study the
correlates of both changes. For example, in an early use of the longitudinal research data files
of the U.S. Bureau of the Census, Olley and Pakes (1996) find that the immediate impact
of the break-up of A.T. & T. and the consequent partial deregulation of the telecom sec-
tor on the telecommunications equipment industry was an increase in industry productivity
due primarily to a reallocation of output to more efficient plants (largely resulting from a
reallocation of the industry’s capital to those plants). There was no perceptible immediate
impact on the productivity of individual establishments.
    Productivity is output divided by an index of inputs and the coefficient used to form the
input index are usually obtained by estimating the “production function” relating output to
the inputs used in producing it. The output measure is often sales divided by an aggregate
price index, rather than physical output. Then what we are estimating is a “sales generating”

                                              11
function. One way to obtain its coefficients from a more detailed model is to assume the
demand function has a constant elasticity form and incorporate the resultant differences in
sales conditional on the inputs chosen in the disturbance terms. Then one has to keep in mind
that (i) the coefficients themselves are likely to change if the price elasticity changes (say due
to price changes of competing firms), and (ii) before we can derive the welfare implications
of any change in productivities we have to separate out price effects from quantity effects,
and this will generally require a more detailed modeling effort.
     The technical issues surrounding estimation of the coefficients used to form the input in-
dex resulted from two characteristics of the micro data; (i) there were large serially correlated
differences in “productivity” among plants (no matter how productivity was measured), and
(ii) there was lots of entry and exit (see Dunne Roberts and Samuelson, 1982, and Davis and
Haltwinger, 1986). This led to worries about simultaneity biases (or endogeneity of the input
choices) on the one hand, and attrition biases (the endogeneity of exit) on the other. Firms
whose productivity was positively affected by the changes grew, so input growth was related
to productivity growth and the latter was the residual in the production function analysis.
Moreover firms whose productivities were negatively affected by the change floundered and
often exited, so the exit decision was not independent of the residual either.
     These problems are accentuated by the fact that most research projects were analyzing
responses to large structural changes, changes where the relative rankings of firms and their
identity changed rather dramatically. Partly as a result bias corrections based on familiar
statistical models did not seem rich enough to account for the observed behavior. For
example, the use of fixed effects to account for the endogeneity of input choices was ruled
out because of the changes in the relative productivities of different firms. Propensity score
corrections for selection were ruled out because they assume a single index model and there
clearly was more than one “index” (in I.O. terminology, “state variable”) which determines
exit behavior (all models included at least productivity and capital as state variables).
     The alternative used was to build an economic models of input and exit choices to correct
for the endogeneity and attrition biases in the estimates. The initial article of this sort was
the Olley and Pakes (1996) article, but work by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) and Ackerberg,
Fraser, and Caves (2004), provide alternative estimation procedures which have also been
extensively used. All these articles emphasize the need for computationally simple economic
models that require only minimal functional form and behavioral assumptions, and rely
heavily on the recent econometric literature on semiparametric estimation techniques (see
Andrews, 1994, Newey, 1994, and Chen, forthcoming, and the literature reviewed there).
There are ongoing attempts to weaken the assumptions used further (partly to accommodate
differences between sales and physical output measures; for a review see Ackerberg et. al.,
2006), but perhaps the most striking finding in the empirical results thus far is that, for a
fixed data set, the estimates from the different estimation algorithms referred to above are

                                               12
most often quite similar.
    Perhaps as a result attention is turning to the use of the estimates to analyze the correlates
and timing of productivity growth (e.g. De Loecker, forthcoming). The hope is this, in turn,
will provide a basis for a deeper empirical analysis of the issues surrounding productivity; a
poorly understood topic of wide interest to economics.

2.3    Equilibrium Assumptions.
Of the three “primitives” of static analysis, the “equilibrium” assumption (interpreted broadly
enough to include issues related to the form of the game played), is the one where there has
been least progress. Empirical work has relied heavily on a game in which sellers set prices or
quantities to maximize their current profits, purchasers are price takers and decide how many
units of each good to purchase by comparing their current utility from different bundles of
goods to the bundles’ prices, and the equilibrium is Nash in the seller’s price (or quantity)
strategy. The reliance on this paradigm is, in large part, a result of the fact that it does
so well in tracing out the cross-sectional distribution of prices, particularly in differentiated
product consumer goods markets. The fact that this is true even in situations where there
is good a priori reasons to think the assumptions of the model are inappropriate reflects
the fact that the cross-sectional implications of these simple static models, especially of the
discrete choice characteristic based models whose demand functions were described above,
are likely to carry over to more complex environments.
    The static Nash in prices model has equilibrium price equal to marginal cost plus a
particular form for the markup. Marginal costs are typically modeled as a function of char-
acteristics. We know from simple hedonic pricing functions that characteristics by themselves
account for a large fraction of the variance in price. For example using the monthly BLS
data underlying the consumer price subindex for TV’s, Erickson and Pakes (2007) generate
adjusted R2 s between 87 and 91% (depending on the month) from regressing log price on
just four characteristics (the monthly cross sections average about 240 observations). This
is higher than typically seen in I.O. studies (which probably reflects the quality of the BLS
data), but R2 s for a regression of log price on even a small set of characteristics are frequently
above .6. Moreover the economics of the static markup term from our simple models are both
compelling and consistent with what we know about markups. Higher priced goods (which
are typically higher quality goods) will be purchased by individuals who are less sensitive to
price. As a result they will have lower price elasticities and higher markups (at equilibrium
prices). This, in turn, justifies the investments typically required to develop and produce
the higher quality. The model also predicts that the goods located in a crowded part of the
characteristic space will have larger price elasticities and lower markups, and that the prices
of substitute products owned by the same firm will be higher.

                                               13
    On the other hand there are at least two phenomena which these static equilibrium as-
sumptions seem less well suited for. First, the paradigm does less well with shifts in the level
(usually of the logs of) prices in a market over time. There is growing evidence that many
prices are more “sticky” than our static models would rationalize, a fact which generated
a large literature on exchange rate pass through in international trade and is of consider-
able interest to macroeconomics (see e.g. Nakamura 2006, and the literature cited there).
Secondly there are markets with clear evidence of phenomena which are inconsistent with
a static pricing equilibrium including “introductory” pricing patterns, price wars, periodic
sales in retail outlets, prices noticeably below marginal cost in markets with learning by
doing, and so on. All this points to the need for further work on dynamic pricing models,
though the particular dynamic model that is relevant is likely to depend on market specific
characteristics.
    The relatively tractable dynamic case occurs when consumers are maximizing static util-
ity functions and prices are dynamic for another reason; say because learning by doing or
adjustment costs make today’s price or quantity choice affect tomorrow’s cost, or because
strategic considerations make producers’ future price choices depend on current price choices
(as in many collusive models). Current price choices then affect both current profits and the
distribution of future states, so the model requires a notion of consistency between producer’s
perceptions of the impact of its own and of its competitors’ price choices on future states and
the evolution of those states. In this case the issues we face in formulating dynamic price
setting models that are tractable enough to be used in estimation and policy analysis are
similar to the issues faced in choosing investment strategies in the simpler models where price
is a static control; see the next section and Benkard (2005) for an early applied example.
    If the appropriate model has consumers as well as producers solving a dynamic problem
(as might be required when there are durable, storable, experience, or network goods) the
analysis is harder. Then we need to explicitly consider the sense in which consumers’ percep-
tions are consistent with the outcomes of future producer behavior and producers’ actions
are consistent with their perceptions of future consumer behavior (as well as consistency
with the behavior of other members of the same group). Without special structure this
increases the size of the state space and makes notions of consistency between perceptions
of the evolution of the state variables and their actual evolution more difficult to obtain; for
early applied examples which rely on approximations see Melnikov (2001), Gowrisankaran
and Rysman (2007), and Lee (2008).3 The complexity of the required calculations also calls
into question the ability of consumers (perhaps also producers) to act in accordance with
   3
    There has also been some work on analyzing dynamic demand without imposing a particular form for the
pricing equation (e.g. Hendel and Nevo, 2006, and Crawford and Shum, 2006), and on analyzing pricing in
models for durable goods where consumers can trade goods without incurring transaction costs, see Esteban
and Shum (2007).

                                                   14
the model’s assumptions; a topic we return to below.
    Finally we have a priori reason to doubt the static Nash in prices assumption in markets
with small numbers of both buyers and sellers (but more than one of each). This is often
the case in vertical markets where, perhaps not surprisingly, we frequently have evidence
that directly contradicts the standard Nash in prices assumption (e.g., the finding that the
same goods are sold to different buyers at different prices). The empirical analysis of how
prices are actually formed in these markets is complicated by two facts. First, the prices
themselves are often implicit in proprietary contracts that researchers do not have access to.
This makes it hard to provide reduced form evidence on the determinants of price. Second,
the theory literature does not seem to have an agreed upon framework for analyzing how
these contracts are formed, and this makes the choice of an appropriate structural model
difficult. Since the features of these contracts determine both the split of any net profits
from the vertical relationship (and therefore investment incentives), and the prices faced by
the consumers the buyers remarket to, they are crucial to an understanding of how these
markets work. I come back to this problem as my example of how using inference based on
moment inequalities might further our understanding of a problem of significant interest to
both theory and empirical work.


3    Dynamics.
Recall that in our simpler models we can solve for profits conditional on the state variables
of each active firm (e.g. its capital stocks and/or the characteristics of its products) using
the techniques developed to analyze the static equilibrium problem. The dynamic model is
designed to analyze how this list of state variables, typically called the market structure,
is likely to evolve over time. To do so we construct a dynamic game which mimics, to the
extent possible, the situation faced by competitors in the industry of interest, and analyze
an equilibrium of that game that is Markov Perfect in investment strategies (defined broadly
enough to include entry and exit strategies).
     Incumbents decide whether to exit by comparing continuation values to what they would
earn were they to exit. If they continue they choose investment levels. Potential entrants
enter if the expected discounted value of net cash flows from entering are greater than the
cost of entry. Regularity conditions imply that only a finite set of market structures will ever
be observed. So the equilibrium generates a finite state Markov chain in market structures.
Given any initial location the current market structure will, in finite time, wander into a
recurrent subset of these structures and once within this subset will stay within it forever.
     In order to use this framework to analyze an industry’s behavior we need: (i) estimators
for the parameters needed for the dynamic analysis that do not appear in the static model


                                              15
(the impacts of different types of investments, including the costs of entry and exit), and (ii)
an algorithm for computing equilibrium. I begin with a short description of the methods
available to accomplish these tasks and then come back to a brief general discussion of the
appropriateness of the framework.

3.1    Estimating Dynamic Parameters.
A firm’s state is determined by its own state variables and the market structure. Since
entry, exit, and investment decisions set likely future states, they are determined by the
continuation values from those states. So if we knew the continuation values and the costs
of the decisions up to the parameter vector, we would get predictions for these decisions
conditional on that parameter vector. Estimates could then be found by finding that value
of the parameters that makes predicted decisions “as close as possible” to observed decisions.
The problem with this procedure is that the continuation values implied by a given value
of the parameter vector are hard to compute. Several recent papers have provided ways
of circumventing this computational problem. Their common denominator is the use of
nonparametric techniques to estimate the continuation values that are implicit in the data
from different points in the state space. There are at least two ways to do this.
     We can average the continuation values actually earned from a given state. For example,
consider the case where we know (or have estimated) the parameters of the profit function
and have a good idea of the discount rate, so all we need to estimate are the parameters
of the entry and/or exit cost distributions. Focusing on entry, assume that there is one
potential entrant in each period who draws from an i.i.d. entry cost distribution and enters
if its expected discounted value of net cash flows is greater than its draw. Use the profit
function parameters, the discount rate, and the costs of investment and exit to compute the
average of the realized discounted net returns of firms that had been active at the entry state
in the past. If that state has been visited often enough, this will be a consistent estimate
of the expected discounted net returns from entering at that state. So the fraction of times
that we observe entry at that state is a consistent estimate of the probability that the costs
of entry are less than this value of the discounted net returns. As we vary the discounted
net cash flows across market structures these observed fractions will (at least in the limit)
trace out the sunk cost distribution we are after (for details see Pakes, Ostrovsky, and Berry,
2007). Note that this procedure is implicitly using non-parametric estimates of the transition
probabilities from one market structure to the next to obtain its estimates of continuation
values.
     Alternatively one could start with nonparametric estimates of all policies (entry, exit,
and investment policies) at each state. The estimated policies and the structural model
could then be used to simulate continuation values at each state for different values of the

                                              16
parameters of interest. A consistent estimator for the parameter vector could then be formed
as the value of that vector that makes the models’ implications for the policies as close as
possible to the nonparametric estimates of those policies (for details see Bajari, Benkard,
and Levin, 2007).
    There are related specification and small sample issues associated with these estimators.
The specification issue is that currently both estimators assume that, apart from a serially
uncorrelated disturbance, the econometrician can observe all the state variables that agents
base their decisions on. It is this assumption which enables the econometrician to obtain
consistent estimates of the firm’s perceived distribution of future states from the observed
outcomes from each market structure (at least for the recurrent class of points). This,
together with the profit function, allows us to compute continuation values and optimal
policies at those market structures.4
    Though the assumption that all serially uncorrelated state variables are observed by the
econometrician has been used extensively in the empirical literature on single agent dynamic
programming problems (for early influential examples see Rust, 1987, and Hotz and Miller,
1993), it is an assumption which left empirical researchers uneasy, and it is likely to be
even more problematic in the current context. This because the fact that the small sample
properties of the nonparametric component of the estimators deteriorate rapidly with the
number of state variables, combined with the fact that the cardinality of the state space is now
determined by the state variables of several interacting agents, frequently induces researchers
to ignore variables which, though perhaps not central to the problem being analyzed, might
well jointly have significant impacts on the relevant continuation values (this is similar to
the logic that lead us to worry about unobserved characteristics in demand estimation for
consumer goods, see section 2.1).
    On the other hand we do obtain consistent estimates of some of the objects of interest
regardless of the presence of serially correlated unobserved states, and this implies that we
should be able to incorporate such state variables into the analysis in future research. More
precisely the first estimation technique provides estimates of continuation values, and the
second provide estimates of policies, which will be consistent estimates of the averages of
these objects conditional only on the observed states regardless of whether there are state
variables the econometrician cannot condition on (at least on the recurrent class of points).
If there were unobserved state variables and the econometrician conditioned only on an
observed state (but one that was visited repeatedly), then the continuation value (or policy)
the econometrician estimates would be the averages of the continuation values over the
   4
     Note that under these assumptions this procedure selects out the (generically) unique set of equilibrium
actions that are consistent with play on the recurrent class; for details see Pakes, Ostrovsky, and Berry, 2007,
theorem 1.



                                                      17
distribution of the unobserved states conditional on the observed states. The consistency
of the average value or policy estimates are of interest in themselves. For example, an
antitrust authority may have some idea of entry costs and therefore could use an estimate
of the expected discounted value of an entrant after a merger to evaluate the likelihood
of post merger entry. Moreover, the relationship between the distribution of continuation
values from a given observed state, and the distribution of policies from that state, contains
information on the distribution of unobserved states conditional on the observed state which
is not being utilized by either of the two estimation techniques.
    Coming back to small sample estimation problems, both estimators require nonparamet-
ric estimates of objects that take on different values at different states (in one case of policies
and in the other of continuation values), and if we discretize the state variables the cardi-
nality of the state space typically increases geometrically in the maximum number of firms
ever active and exponentially in the number of state variables per firm (see below). The
precision of estimates of continuation values from a given state depends also on the number
of visits to states that communicate with the given state, and eventually each sample path
will wander into a recurrent class of points and stay within that subset. So it is not appro-
priate to consider the ratio of number of states to the number of observations as an indicator
of the extent of the small sample problem. Moreover to some extent one can ameliorate
these problems by appropriate choice of estimation algorithms (for a discussion see Pakes,
Ostrovsky, and Berry, 2007). Still as the number of states in the recurrent class increase
(sample size staying constant) the nonparametric estimates are likely to become unreliable.
    So, at least with currently available techniques, applied researchers still face a trade-off
between (i) using a fully dynamic model with only a rough partition of the state space (and
there are creative ways to do this, see, Dunne, Klimek, Roberts, and Xu, 2006, Collard-
Wexler, 2006, and Ryan, 2006), and (ii) estimating the parameters of a far more detailed
static equilibrium model and then using the heuristic of a two-period game to gain some
understanding of dynamic phenomena. The two period game heuristic is probably only
appropriate in an environment which has been stable for a period of time which is long
enough to think that agent’s would have changed their decisions if it was profitable to do so,
but it is often used as a reduced form summary of the data when truly dynamic models are
too difficult to implement (for a discussion in the context of entry games see Pakes, 2004,
and Berry and Reiss, forthcoming.).

3.2    Computation.
Pakes and McGuire (1994) adapt standard iterative procedures, procedures that are similar
to those used in single agent dynamic problems (see e.g. Rust, 1994, and the literature
cited there), to the problem of computing polices and values for Markov Perfect equilibria.

                                                18
Estimates of values (and/or policies) for each incumbent and potential entrant at every point
(market structure) in the state space are kept in memory. An iteration cycles through those
points and at each point updates the values and policies associated with all incumbents and
potential entrants at that point. The computational burden of the technique is proportional
to the multiple of (i) the number of points at which we have to calculate continuation
values, and (ii) the number of elements in the summation or expectation which determines
those continuation values. Since value and policy functions are exchangeable in the states of
competitors, the number of points at which we have to calculate continuation values will grow
geometrically in the maximum number of firms ever active, and without further restrictions,
exponentially in the number of state variables per firm.
    As a result despite the continual increase in speed and memory of computers, the com-
putational burden of our models will limit the detail we can include when computing equi-
libria to dynamic problems for some time to come. There have, however, been a number
of algorithmic innovations for computing the solution to dynamic games that can provide
significant help. I will review two of these that have been used in the context of the models
we are discussing. One uses stochastic approximation to approximate the equilibria (Pakes
and McGuire, 2001; see Bertsekas and Tsikilis, 1995, and the literature cited there for an
introduction to stochastic approximation techniques), the other computes equilibria to a
continuous (rather than a discrete) time models (Doraszelski and Judd, 2006).
    The stochastic algorithm uses simulation to (i) approximate the sum over future states
that determines continuation values, and (ii) to search for a recurrent class of points generated
by the equilibrium. The algorithm is iterative; it stores continuation values and/or policies
in memory and updates them every iteration. The iterations are, however, “asynchronous”;
instead of cycling through all points at each iteration they select out a single point per
iteration. Policies at the selected point are chosen to maximize the expectation of the
continuation values in memory at that point. Random draws from the primitives given these
policies are then used to both (i) determine the next state visited, and (ii) to update the
continuation values in memory. The update of continuation values acts as if the draws on
competitors’ states and on variables which evolve exogenously were simulation draws from
the integral determining the true continuation values. I.e. the value in memory associated
with the outcome of these draws is computed and averaged with the values of draws taken
from the same state at previous iterations to form the new estimate of the state’s continuation
value. The iterations are stopped periodically to test whether the equilibrium conditions are
satisfied by the values in memory, and the algorithm is stopped if they are. I do not know
conditions which insure convergence of the algorithm for games which are not zero sum,
though convergence has not been a problem for the examples I have dealt with.
    Coming back to the issue of computational burden, note that by substituting simulation
for summation in computing updates of continuation values, the algorithm changes the

                                               19
burden of computing those values from being exponential in the number of states to being
linear in the number of firms. However, use of the random draws also introduces “sampling
error” in the estimates of the continuation value, and this will only be averaged out if we
visit the point (and hence simulate the draw) many times. Fortunately the precision of the
estimate for a given number of simulation draws does not depend directly on the number
of state variables in the problem, and hence need not increase in the number of those state
variables. Note also that the asynchronous steps taken by the algorithm will eventually
wander into a recurrent subset of the state space and once in that subset will stay their
forever. So after a finite number of iterations the algorithm will only need to update points
in this recurrent subset. The size of the recurrent class depends on the economic primitives of
the problem at hand and need not grow in any particular way in the number of state variables.
In the problems I have worked with the number of points in the recurrent class tends to grow
linearly in the number of state variables. Moving from exponential (or geometric) to linear
growth in both the number of states and in the sum required for continuation values can
generate significant computational savings.
    Doraszelski and Judd’s (2005) continuous time model focuses on reducing the burden of
computing the summation over future states needed for continuation values. They change
the timing conventions for the model and assume that there are independent continuous
time stochastic processes that generate times when events occur that change the state of the
industry. By making the time interval short enough the probability of observing more than
one event per interval can be made negligibly small. A limiting argument is used to show
that to determine continuation values we need only sum over terms which determine the
probability of each possible event occurring times a sum which determines the expectation
of the outcome conditional on that event occurring.
    So the continuous time model specifies (i) hazard rates for each possible event, and (ii)
the transition probabilities conditional on the event occurring. In the Ericson, Pakes (1995)
model with industry specific shocks there are four possible reasons for a change: the invest-
ment of one of the incumbents produces a new outcome, the value of the outside alternative
increases, an incumbent decides to exit, or a potential entrant decides to enter. Both the
hazard rates of these events and/or the transitions conditional on the event occurring can
be made a function of investment choices. If there are n incumbents and a single potential
entrant there are 2n+2 possible events that can occur: an investment outcome for an incum-
bent, a change in an incumbent’s exit value, an entrant appearing, and a change in the value
of the outside alternative. If, in addition, there are K possible outcomes for each possible
event should it occur the summation determining continuation values involves (2n + 2)K
terms (which again is linear in the number of firms). The continuous time model does not
deal with the curse of dimensionality in the number of states, but it could be combined with
the asynchronous aspects of the stochastic algorithm to do so.

                                              20
    The different algorithms require somewhat different modeling assumptions and are there-
fore likely to be more useful in alternative settings. This plus the fact that computational
burden remains a problem in many examples of interest, particularly in the many extensions
to the framework designed to align the framework more closely to empirical work, provides
good reason for the computational research which is now gathering momentum.

3.3    Discussion.
Many of the estimation and computational papers that have enabled us to use a dynamic
framework which can accommodate the complexities of actual data sets are quite recent and
there are still limitations noted above to where they can be used. As a result it is only in
the last few years that we have begun to see empirical work based on dynamic models and
it is probably too early to generalize on how well they do in helping us analyze empirical
phenomena (though the early work does indicate that there is at least a rough level of detail
at which we do quite well; see e.g. Benkard, 2004). The dynamic framework has been used
more extensively to numerically analyze situations that are too complex to admit analytic
results (though not as complex as the situations we find in actual data; see the literature
reviewed by Doraszelski and Pakes, 2007). This numerical analysis has had made it clear
that the framework does provide a useful way of unraveling dynamic incentives.
    The numerical analysis has also made it clear that; the dynamic models can often have
several equilibria, that the calculations required to compute any one of them are quite
complex, and that we often do not have ways of insuring we compute all of them (see Besanko,
et. al, 2007). These issues are especially telling in the extensions of the framework designed
to account for consumer (along with producer) dynamics, and those required for games with
asymmetric information. They lead to a question of whether agents can actually compute
equilibrium strategies and how agents behave when they can not. There is a theory literature
exploring the relationship between alternative learning mechanisms and equilibrium behavior
which arose from similar considerations (see Fudenberg and Levine,1993, and the literature
cited there). One question, then, is when might we do better by approximating behavior
with a learning process than with the implications of an equilibrium notion, and what the
differences might be.
    To learn from past outcomes there has to be a sense in which the primitives underlying
play in the market we are studying have been reasonably stable over some period of time.
If that period is long enough we might be willing to assume that the learning process has
converged to a limit or rest point; a point at which the perceptions of agents are justified by
their objective implications (the perceptions are typically either on the likely outcomes of
the agent’s actions, or on the likely play of their competitors). The rest points to a learning
process generally will satisfy some of the Markov Perfect equilibrium conditions though

                                              21
not all of them; see Fershtman and Pakes (2007) for a discussion of this in the context
of reinforcement learning and dynamic games with asymmetric information, and Esponda
(forthcoming) for a discussion in the context of self-confirming equilibria (Fudenberg and
Levine, 1999) in auctions. These papers also consider the closely related question of the
testability of equilibrium assumptions; and this should help sort out the implications of
equilibrium play we may want to place more weight on.
    It is not as clear how to use learning processes in situations where primitives are changing
in fundamental ways. Then we would need to specify the perceptions of agents when the new
situation unfolds (as well as the learning process). An open question of some importance
is whether empirical work can throw light on which learning process better approximates
behavior in different situations, and on how agents form their initial perceptions.


4     Moment Inequalities.
Estimators based on moment inequalities have a potential for alleviating several of the prob-
lems outlined above. This is because they can often be obtained under weaker assumptions
than alternative estimation procedures and then used to investigate which of the possible
more detailed assumptions are, and which are not, at odds with the data.
    To see this assume that we can use estimates of demand and/or cost primitives to con-
struct profits conditional on at least a subset of the decisions we want to analyze, say (di , d−i ),
and any additional parameters that could not be estimated with the tools outlined in section
2. Now assume that (i) agents expected the choices they made to lead to returns that were
higher than the returns the agents would have made from an alternative feasible choice, (ii)
that our model and data are rich enough to provide an “adequate” approximation to both
the profits that were earned and to the profits that would have been been earned had the
agent made an alternative feasible choice, and (iii) that agents expectations are not “too
much at odds” with what actually happens. Then at the true value of the unknown parame-
ter vector we would expect, at least on average, a positive difference between the profits the
agents did earn and those that would have been earned had the alternative feasible decision
been made. This is an inequality which can be used as a basis for inference.
    To formalize this approach we need more precise definitions of the word “adequate” and
the phrase “too much at odds”. In particular it would suffice to specify (i) measures of the
profits that resulted from the agent’s decision and that would have resulted from a feasible
alternative decision, (ii) the relationship between these measured profit differences and the
profit differences that underlie the agent’s expectations, and (iii) the relationship between
the agent’s expectations and the sample averages that arise from the actual data generating
process. There have been two quite different approaches to filling in the required details, and


                                                 22
the goal of this section is to clarify the assumptions underlying each. Section 5 illustrates the
use of moment inequalities in an empirical and numerical analysis of the buyer-seller network
problem introduced at the end of section 2. Section 6 provides a Monte Carlo analysis of
the robustness of the estimators emanating from the two frameworks when applied to our
buyer-seller network problem.
    The first approach, which dates to Tamer (2003), is a multiple agent generalization
of the standard discrete choice model commonly used in econometrics. It computes two
probabilities conditional on the value of the parameter of interest, say θ; (i) the probability
that the observed actions constitute a Nash equilibrium, and (ii) the probability that those
actions are the only actions that constitute a Nash equilibrium. Since the Nash conditions
are necessary conditions for the assumed equilibrium, the actual probability of the event must
be less than the first probability when it is evaluated at the true value of θ (say θ0 ), and
uniquesness implies that it be more than the second probability. An estimator is obtained by
computing the difference between each of these two probabilities and the observed frequency
of the actions, and accepting any value of θ that makes the first difference positive and the
second negative. The second approach, which dates to Pakes, Porter, Ho, and Ishii (2006),
suggests computing, for each value of θ, the sample average of the difference between the
observable part of the actual realized returns and the observable part of returns that would
have been earned had an alternative choice been made. They then take, as an estimate of
θ, any value that makes that difference non-negative. Note that both approaches require a
“structural” model for the returns that would have been earned had an alternative decision
been made, and neither requires a model which is detailed enough to single out a unique
equilibrium (a fact which is particularly relevant for the more complex market situations
that we are having trouble analyzing).
    I begin with the assumptions that are common to the two approaches. Throughout
I will assume that the relevant model delivers a parametric form for the return function
conditional on all decisions, though, at least in principal, non-parametric functions could
often be substituted without affecting the basic logic of the discussion.

4.1    Common Assumptions.
The condition that agents expect their choice to lead to higher returns than alternative
feasible choices is formalized as follows. Let π(·) be the profit function, di and d−i be the
agent’s and its competitors’ choices, Di be the choice set, Ji be the agent’s information
set, and E be the expectation operator used by the agent to evaluate the implications of its
actions. Then what we require is



                                               23
            C1 : supd∈Di E[π(d, d−i , yi , θ0 )|Ji ] ≤ E[π(di = d(Ji ), d−i , yi , θ0 )|Ji ],
where yi is any variable (other than the decision variables) which affects the agent’s profits,
and the expectation is calculated using the agent’s beliefs on the likely values of (d−i , yi ).
Throughout variables that the decision maker views as random will be represented by bold-
face letters while realizations of those random variables will be represented by standard
typeface.
    Two points about C1 are central to the advantages of both approaches. First, there are
no restrictions on either the choice set or the objective function. In particular the objective
function need not be concave in d, D could be discrete (e.g.’s; a choice among bilateral
contracts, ordered choice, . . .) or continuous (e.g., the choice of the location and size of a
retail outlet), and when continuous di can be at a corner of the choice set. Second, C1 is a
necessary condition for a Nash equilibrium (indeed it is necessary for the weaker notions of
equilibrium we consider below). As a result, were we to assume equilibrium behavior C1 will
be satisfied regardless of the equilibrium selection mechanism. Indeed if one is careful with
the econometric implementation of the approaches outlined below the equilibrium selection
mechanism can be allowed to differ across data points. Also keep in mind that C1 is meant
to be a rationality assumption in the sense of Savage (1954); i.e. the agent’s choice is
optimal with respect to the agent’s beliefs. In itself it does not place any restrictions on the
relationship of those beliefs to the data generating process, and though further restrictions
will be required, the restrictions required by the two frameworks differ.
    Both approaches need a model capable of predicting what expected profits would be were
the agent to deviate from its observed choice. This, in turn, requires a model of what the
agent thinks that d−i and yi would be were it to change its own decision. For example,
one component of yi in the buyer seller network problem is the price the buyer charges
to consumers when it resells the seller’s products, and that will typically depend on which
sellers contract with which buyers. So when a buyer considered whether to reject a contract
offered by a seller (a contract which in fact it had accepted), the buyer knew that if it had
rejected the seller’s offer the equilibrium price at which it would resell the products it does
sell to consumers would change. As a result we will need a model for the buyer’s perception
of what the price component of yi would have been had it rejected the offer. In sequential
problems the model must also specify the agent’s beliefs on the impact of a change in its
choice on the subsequent choices of its competitors.
    The model for how the agent thinks (yi , d−i ) are likely to respond to changes in di is
likely to depend on other variables, say zi , which I will require to be exogenous, in the sense
that the agent thinks the distribution of these variables will not change in response to a
change in the agent’s decision. Condition 2 formalizes this assumption.


                                                   24
     C2 : d−i = d−i (di , zi ), and yi = y(zi , di , d−i ), and the distribution of zi conditional on
(Ji , di = d) does not depend on d.
Note that if the game is a simultaneous move game then d−i (d0 , zi ) = d−i and there is no
need for an explicit model of reactions by competitors (this explains the difference between
our C2 and Assumption 2 in Pakes et. al., 2006). The condition that the distribution of zi
does not depend on the agent’s choice is what we mean when we say that zi is an exogenous
random variable.
    If we let ∆π(di , d0 , d−i , zi ) ≡ π(di , d−i , yi ), −π(d0 , d−i (d0 , zi ), y(zi , d0 , d−i )), where d0 is any
alternative choice in Di , then C1 and C2 together insure

                                 E[∆π(di , d0 , d−i , zi )|Ji ] ≥ 0, ∀ d0 ∈ Di .                                  (1)

  Equation (1) is the moment inequality delivered by the theory. To move from it to a
moment inequality we can use for estimation we need to specify

    • the relationship between the expectation operator underlying the agents decisions (our
      E(·)) and the sample moments that the data generating process provides, and

    • a measurement model which determines the relationship between the π(·, θ) and (zi , di , d−i )
      that appear in the theory and the measures of them we use in estimation.

    These are the two aspects of the problem which differ across our two approaches. We
first introduce each approaches’ assumptions and sketch out estimation algorithms that are
consistent with them. This is followed by a discussion of the use of these assumptions in
empirical research in I.O.

4.2      The Full Information, No Errors, Approach.
The first approach to going from equations (1) to inference begins with Tamer’s (2003) work
on entry models. The relationship between the data generating process and the agents’
expectations assumed in this literature is that

                      FC3:      ∀d ∈ Di ,      π(d, d−i , zi , θ0 ) = E[π(d, d−i , zi , θ0 )|Ji ].

I.e. it is assumed that all agents know both the decisions of their competitors and the
realization of the exogenous variables that will determine profits when they make their own




                                                         25
decision. FC3 rules out asymmetric and/or incomplete information, and as a consequence,
all mixed strategies.5
    To complete the specification we need an assumption on the relationship between the
variables we measure and the variables that enter the theoretical model. This approach
assumes
                                                   f
            FC4. π(·, θ) is known. zi = (ν2,i        , zio ) . (di , d−i , zio , z−i
                                                                                  o
                                                                                     ) are observed, and
                       f    f
                                         o ∼ F (·; θ),
                   (ν2,i , ν2,−i )|zio ,z−i               for a known function F (·, θ).

FC4 assumes there are no errors in our profit measure; that is were we to know (di , d−i , zi , z−i )
we could construct an exact measure of profits for each θ. However a (possibly vector valued)
component of the determinants of the profits (of the zi ) is not observed by the econometri-
            f                                                    f        f
cian (our ν2,i ). Since FC3 assumes full information, both ν2,i     and ν2,−i are assumed to be
known to all agents when they make their decisions, just not to the econometrician. FC4
also assumes that there is no error in the observed determinants of profits (in the zio ) and
                                                       f    f
that the econometrician knows the distribution of (ν2,i  , ν2,−i                          o
                                                                 ) conditional on (zio , z−i ) up to
a parameter vector to be estimated.
    Substituting FC3 and FC4 into equation (1) we obtain
                                                       f                     f      f
       M odel F : ∀d0 ∈ Di , ∆π(di , d0 , d−i , zio , ν2,i ; θ0 ) ≥ 0;     (ν2,i , ν2,−i         o ∼ F (·; θ0 ).
                                                                                         )|zio ,z−i                (2)

To insure that there exists a θ for which the event
                                                                       f
                                  ∀d0 ∈ Di , ∆π(di , d0 , d−i , zio , ν2,i ; θ) ≥ 0

has positive probability for all agents in each market studied, we need further conditions on
F (·) and/or π(·). The additional restrictions typically imposed are that the profit function
is additively separable in the unobserved determinants of profits, that is
                                                             f                                    f
             Restriction RF as : ∀d ∈ Di , π(d, d−i , zio , ν2,i ) = π as (d, d−i , zio , θ0 ) + ν2,i,d ,          (3)
                           f       f                             f
and that the distribution ν2,i ≡ {ν2,i,d }d∈Di , conditional on ν2,−i , has full support.
   Notice that the additive separability in equation (3) can not be obtained definitionally.
That is though we could regress profits on (di , d−i , zi ) and define an error which is the
   5
    Unless there was a unique equilibrium and it was in mixed strategies. In this case we could compute the
only distribution of d−i that is consistent with equilibrium play and use it to form expectations. However
this would increase the computational burden of the estimator significantly. As stated F C3 also rules out
the analysis of sequential games in which an agent who moves initially believes that the decisions of an agent
who moves thereafter depends on its initial decision. However at the cost of only notational complexity we
could allow for a deterministic relationship between a component of d−i and (d, zi ).

                                                         26
                                                     f
residual from that regression, that error is not ν2,i  . We know this because the regression
error is mean independent of (di , d−i ) and the error in equation (3) is not. Indeed it is the
correlation between ν2,i and (di , d−i ) that is the reason for using the inequality estimator
instead of a more standard estimation procedure6 .
                                                                                  f    f
    Though this model does specify a parametric distribution for the (ν2,i          , ν2,−i ) conditional
on the observables, it is not detailed enough to deliver a likelihood. This is because the
conditions required by the model can be satisfied by multiple tuples of (di , d−i ) for any value
of θ (i.e., there can be multiple equilibria). As a result there is not a one to one map between
observables unobservables and parameters on the one hand, and outcomes for the decision
variable on the other.
    Cliberto and Tamer (2006) and Andrews Berry and Jia (2004) note that we can check
                                                                                                 f    f
whether the conditions of the model are satisfied at the observed (di , d−i ) for any (ν2,i        , ν2,−i )
and θ, and this, together with F (·, θ), enable us to calculate the probability of those condi-
tions being satisfied at that θ. Since these are necessary conditions for the choice to be made,
when θ = θ0 the probability of satisfying them must be greater then the probability of actu-
ally observing (di , d−i ). In addition if we checked whether (di , d−i ) are the only values of the
                                                                        f    f
decision variables to satisfy the necessary conditions for each (ν2,i     , ν2,−i ) at that θ we could
construct the probability that (di , d−i ) is the unique equilibrium. That probability must be
lower than the true probability of observing (di , d−i ) at θ = θ0 . These are inequalities that
not all values of θ will satisfy, and, as a result, can be used as a basis for inference. Indeed
we could compute these two probabilities using only a subset of the Nash conditions and the
inequalities should still hold at θ = θ0 (though they are likely to be less informative).
    More formally define the probability that the model in equation (2) (with a restriction
like that in equation 3) is satisfied at a particular (di , d−i ) for a given θ to be
                                      f      f
           P {(di , d−i ) |θ} ≡ P r{(ν2,i , ν2,−i ) : (di , d−i ) satisfy equation (2)|zio , z−i
                                                                                              o
                                                                                                 , θ},

the analogous lower bound to be
                                   f      f
        P {(di , d−i ) |θ} ≡ P r{(ν2,i , ν2,−i ) : only (di , d−i ) satisfy equation (2)|zio , z−i
                                                                                                o
                                                                                                   , θ},

and the true probability of (di , d−i ) for a given θ to be

                               P {(di , d−i )|θ} ≡ P r{(di , d−i ) |zio , z−i
                                                                           o
                                                                              , θ}.
   6
    There are functional forms for the single agent problem which would allow us to solve out for the di as
a function of zi and the regression error. This, however, is not possible in the multiple agent problem when
there is a possiblity of multiple equilibria.



                                                       27
Since we do not know the mechanism which selects among multiple equilibria we can not
calculate the true probability, but we do know that when θ = θ0

                       P {(di , d−i ) |θ0 } ≥ P {(di , d−i )|θ0 } ≥ P {(di , d−i ) |θ0 }.

   Let I{·} be the indicator function which takes the value one if the condition inside the
brackets is satisfied and zero elsewhere, h(·) be a function which only takes on positive
values, and E(·) provide expectations conditional on the process actually generating the
data (including the equilibrium selection process). Then the model’s assumptions imply
that                                                                            
                     E (P {(di , d−i ) |θ} − I{d = di , d−i = d−i })h(zio , z−i
                                                                             o
                                                                                )       (4)

                 = (P {(di , d−i ) |θ} − P {(di , d−i )|θ0 })h(zio , z−i
                                                                      o
                                                                         ) ≥ 0 at θ = θ0 .
An analogous moment condition can be constructed from P {(di , d−i )|θ0 } − P {(di , d−i ) |θ0 }.
    The estimation routine constructs unbiased estimates of (P (·|θ), P (·|θ)), substitutes them
for the true values of the probability bounds into these moments, and then accepts values
of θ for which the moment inequalities are satisfied. Since typically neither the upper nor
the lower bound are analytic function of θ, simulation techniques are employed to obtain
unbiased estimates of them. 7
    The simulation procedure is straightforward, though often computationally burdensome.
Take pseudo random draws from a standardized version of F (·) as defined in F C4, and for
each random draw check the necessary conditions for an equilibrium, i.e. the conditions
in equation (2), at the observed (di , d−i ). Estimate P (di , d−i |θ) by the fraction of random
draws that satisfy those conditions at that θ. Next check if there is another value of (d, d−i ) ∈
Di × D−i that satisfy the equilibrium conditions at that θ and estimate P (di , d−i |θ) by the
fraction of the draws for which (di , d−i ) is the only such value.
    If we were analyzing markets with N interactive agents each of which had #D possible
                                                      f N
choices and we used ns simulation draws on {ν2,i        }i=1 to estimate (P {· |θ}, P (·|θ)), then
   7
     I have implicitly assumed that there is an equilibrium in pure strategies for each point evaluated. If
there is a component of di which is discrete, which is the leading case for applications of this approach, there
may not be; i.e. there may not be a (di , d−i ) ∈ Di × D−i which satisfies the necessary conditions in equation
(2). We can insure existence in discrete games by allowing for mixed strategies (see Bajari, Hong, and Ryan,
2006, for more on this), but the use of mixed strategies implies that d−i is not known with certainty, and so
contradicts the assumptions of the model. Since we actually observe play that is assumed to satisfy these
                                                          f    f
conditions, there should be points in the support of (ν2,i  , ν2,−i ) at which there is an equilibrium when we
evaluate each observation at θ = θ0 . As a result, provided we modify our assumption on F (·) so that the
true distribution is a distribution which conditions on there being an equilibrium, the inequality conditions
                                                                              f    f
above will be satisfied at θ = θ0 if we simply do not count the draws on (ν2,i  , ν2,−i ) for which there does not
exist an equilibrium.

                                                       28
for each market and each θ evaluated in the estimation routine we need to evaluate up to
ns × #D × N inequalities to obtain estimates of P {· |θ}, and we need to evaluate up to
ns × (#D)N inequalities if we also estimated P (·|θ). This can be computationally expensive,
particularly when yi = y(di , d−i , zi ) and/or d−i = d−i (di , zi ) are difficult to calculate. In
particular inequality estimators are often used to analyze an early stage of a multistage
game. In this case to obtain yi = y(zi , di , d−i ) (and/or d−i (di , zi )) we typically would
have to compute equilibria to a later stage of that game, and this can be computationally
prohibitive.8

4.3      Measurement Model.
The model of the last subsection does not consider differences between the profit functions
that underlie agents’ decisions and the econometrician’s profit measures, but the model of the
next subsection does. To facilitate a comparison between the two models we now introduce
notation for these differences.
    Let r(d, d−i , zio , θ0 ) be our observable approximation to π(·) evaluated at the true θ = θ0 ,
and define ν(·) as the difference between the profits that actually accrue to the agent and
this approximation, that is
                          ν(d, d−i , zio , zi , θ0 ) ≡ r(d, d−i , zio , θ0 ) − π(d, d−i , zi ).                 (5)
The definition in equation (5) implies that we can express r(·, θ0 ) as a sum of three compo-
nents, each of which accounts for a possible source of disturbances in the model. In particular
it implies that
                      r(d, d−i , zio , θ0 ) ≡ E[π(d, d−i , zi )|Ji ] + ν2,i,d + ν1,i,d ,    (6)
where
                                     ν2,i,d ≡ E[ν(d, d−i , zoi , zi , θ0 )|Ji ],
and                                                                           
                     ν1,i,d ≡ π(d, ·) − E[π(d, ·)|Ji ] + ν(d, ·) − E[ν(d, ·)|Ji ] .
  Note that E[ν2,i,d |Ji ] 6= 0. The {ν2,i,d } share this property with the disturbances in the
                                                                f
model introduced in the last subsection (i.e. with the {ν2,i,d     } in the model of equation
   8
     There are a number of ways to reduce the computational burden. We noted that we could check a fraction
of the inequalities in equation (2) for each agent though this is likely to increase the size of the identified set.
Use of variance reduction techniques should increase the precision of the estimates of (P (·|θ), P (·|θ)) for a
given ns. Alternatively one might be able to formulate the estimation problem as a minimization problem
subject to a set of constraints, as in Judd (2007), and this might reduce the computational burden. At least
to date, however, the computational burden of this technique has been large enough to deter its use in a
number of applications.

                                                          29
3). On the other hand ∀d ∈ Di , E[ν1,i,d |Ji ] = 0. The model of the last subsection does
not allow for disturbances with this property. The fact that the two disturbances differ in
their conditional expectations implies that they have different impacts on the desirability of
different estimators. So, to provide some guidance on when we need to worry about each of
them, we begin by considering the factors that generate them.

Sources of ν1 . ν1,i is a sum of two terms. π(d, ·) − E[π(d, ·)|Ji ] provides the difference
between the agent’s expectation of profits at the time the agent makes its decision and
the realization of profits. It is a result of uncertainty in the exogenous variables that will
eventually help determine profits (in our zi ) and/or asymmetric information (which causes
uncertainty in d−i ). It follows that to compute the distribution of π(d, ·) − E[π(d, ·)|Ji ] we
would have to specify the probabilities each agent assigns to both the possible play of its
competitors and to realizations of zi , and then repeatedly solve for an equilibrium (a process
which typically would require us to select among equilibria). This is likely to require both
more information (e.g. knowledge of what each agent knows about its competitors) and
more computational power than the econometrician has available. The second component
of ν1 , ν(d, ·) − E[ν(d, ·)|Ji ] is that part of the error in our measure of profits that is mean
independent of the information the agent bases its decision on. It will be generated by
specification error in our profit functions and/or measurement error in the variables used to
construct profits.
    Note that both components of ν1 are not known to either the econometrician or to the
agent when it makes its decision. As a result the agent does not base its decision on ν1 . For
example if we considered a single agent binary choice problem (di ∈ {0, 1}), and we observed
profits up to measurement and expectational error, or

                              r(d, zio , θ0 ) = E[π(d, zi )|Ji ] + ν1,i,d ,

with di = 1 if and only if
                               E[∆π(di = 1, d0 = 0, zi )|Ji ] ≥ 0,
then to construct the probabilty that di = 1 we need to know the probability that ν1 was
non-negative conditional on the observed value of r(·). Since ν1 and r(·) are correlated by
construction, this would require us to specify the probability distribution of ν1 (i.e. of the
expectational and measurement errors), and then solve a challenging integral equation.

Selection and ν2 . ν2 is defined to equal that part of profits that the agent can condition
on when it makes its decisions but the econometrician does not observe. So though it is not
known to the econometrician, ν2,i ∈ Ji , and since di = d(Ji ), di will generally be a function
of ν2,i (and depending on the information structure of the game, perhaps also of ν2,−i ).

                                                  30
    If we temporarily ignore any difference between the agent’s expectations (our E(·) opera-
tor), and the expectations generated by the true data generating process (our E(·) operator),
we can now explain the selection problem in structural models. Assume that x is an “in-
strument” in the sense that E[ν2 |x] = 0, and, in addition, that x ∈ J . Then
                                               E[ν1 |x] = E[ν2 |x] = 0.
    These expectations do not, however, condition on the decision actually made (our di ),
and any moment which depends on the selected choice requires properties of the disturbance
conditional on the di the agent selected. Since di is measurable σ(Ji ), and ν1 is mean
independent of any function of J , E[ν1 |x, d] = 0. However, as we now explain, the logic of
the model implies E[ν2,i |x, d] 6= 0.
    If di was chosen and the observable part of the expected returns to di were less than
those to d0 , then the unobservable part of expected returns to di must have been higher than
that to d0 . Let ∆(·) designate the difference operator, so ∆r(di , d0 , ·) = r(di , ·) − r(d0 , ·). If
E[∆r(di , d0 , ·; θ0 )|Ji , d(Ji )] ≤ 0, then ν2,i,di − ν2,i,d0 > 0. So even if we knew that x was an
                                                        f
“instrument” in the sense that ∀d ∈ Di , E[ν2,i,d           |x] = 0, as long as E[∆r(·)|J ] is correlated
with x, E[ν2,i,di |xi , di ] 6= 0.
    As a result an estimation algorithm based on accepting any value for θ which makes
the sample average of our observable proxy for the difference in profits (of ∆r(·, θ)), or its
covariance with a positive valued instrument, positive should not, in general, be expected
to lead to an estimated set which includes θ0 (even asymptotically). To see this recall that
equation (1) implies that E[∆π(·)|xi , di ] ≥ 0, while equation (6) and our definitions imply
that
      E[∆π(di , d0 , d−i , zi )|xi , di ] = E[∆r(di , d0 , d−i , zio , θ0 )|xi , di ] + E[ν2,i,di − ν2,i,d0 |xi , di ].

Thus to insure that E[∆π(·)|xi , di ] ≥ 0 implies that E[∆r(·)|xi , di ] ≥ 0, we require that
E[ν2,i,di − ν2,i,d0 |xi , di ] ≤ 0. Moreover the fact that x is an instrument, that is that E[ν2,i,di −
ν2,i,d0 |xi ] = 0, does not insure the latter inequality.
     If we go back to the a single agent binary choice problem ( di ∈ {0, 1}) but this time
allow for a ν2 , then di = 1 if and only if
             E[∆π(di = 1, d0 = 0, zi )|Ji ] = E[∆r(di = 1, d0 = 0, zio , θ0 )|Ji ] + ν2,i ≥ 0.
If ν2,i was centered at zero, then
                                                                                
                E[ν2,i |di = 1] = E ν2,i |ν2,i ≥ −E[∆r(di = 1, d0 = 0, zio )|Ji ] ≥ 0,

which violates our condition.

                                                            31
Relationship between the parameters of r(·) and those of π(·). If, as in the last
                         f
subsection, zi = (zio , ν2,i ), and
                                                                         f
                            π(d, d−i , zi ) = π as (d, d−i , zio , θ) + ν2,i,d ,

then the θ0 that appears in r(·, θ0 ) is defined entirely by the parameters of the true profit
function. If the measurement model is more complex than this, for example if π(·) is not
additively separable in ν2 , then it will typically add parameters.

4.4    Profit Inequalities.
This approach is due to Pakes, Porter, Ho, and Ishii (2006). I will present it in a slightly
different way and go into one of their underlying assumptions in greater depth.
    We begin with the assumption on the relationship between the expectation operator un-
derlying agents’ decisions (our E(·)), and the expectation conditional on the process actually
generating the data (our E(·)). The profit inequality approach allows for agents to have
expectations which are not correct, and this assumption determines precisely what types of
errors agents can make without invalidating the properties of the approaches’ estimator.
    We assume that we observe a subset of the variables which are contained in Ji , say xi ,
that are instruments in the sense that if h(·) is any positive valued function, then


        1 X           0
                                             1 X           0
                                                                                
  IC3 :     E ∆π(di , d , d−i , zi )|xi ≥ 0 ⇒     E ∆π(di , d , d−i , zi )h(xi ) ≥ 0 .
        N i                                   N i

Clearly if the agents know (i) the other agents’ strategies, i.e. d−i (J−i ), and (ii) the joint
distribution of other agents’ information sets and the primitives sources of uncertainty (i.e.
of (J−i , zi )) conditional on Ji , then, provided all expectations exist, the assumption that the
agents’ choices constitute a Nash equilibrium (condition C1) insures that IC3 is satisfied.
    These assumptions are, however, stronger than the assumptions needed for IC3. One
sufficient condition for IC3 is that agents’ expectations of profit difference are correct; i.e.
they equal the expectation of the ∆πi (·, θ0 ) conditional on xi resulting from the data gener-
ating process. The agent’s expectation of ∆πi (·, θ0 ) will be correct if the agent’s perception
of the joint distribution of (d−i , zi ) conditional on xi was correct. This does not require the
agent to know either its competitors’ strategies (a point made by Auman and Brandenburger,
1995) or their information sets. Moreover if the decisions being analyzed are decisions that
have been made before, the conditional distribution of (d−i , zi ) is an object which the agent
might learn about directly from past play. There are also cases where we do not require
the agent to know the conditional distributions of (d−i , zi ). For example in an auction the

                                                    32
agents’ expectations on ∆πi (·) would be correct if the agents beliefs about the conditional
joint distribution of their own and the highest bid were correct (see Dekel, Fudenberg, and
Levine (1995) both for this example, and for more on the relationship between correctness
in the sense used here and the closely related notion of self-confirming equilibrium), while if
the profit function were quadratic in (zi , d−i ) all that would be required is that the agents’
conditional means and variances of (zi , d−i ) were correct.
    An important point to make here is that correct expectations about profit differences is
sufficient for IC3, but it is not necessary. A weaker sufficient condition is that
             1 X                                                                
                  E[∆π(di , d0 , d−i , zi )|xi ] − E[∆π(di , d0 , d−i , zi )|xi ] h(xi ) ≥ 0.
             N i
This implies that agents can have incorrect expectations on ∆πi (·, θ0 ) provided their expec-
tational error is mean independent xi . Indeed IC3 would be satisfied even if agents were
incorrect on average, provided they were overly optimistic about the incremental profits
emanating from their decisions.

   The final requirement of this estimation strategy is that there be an x ∈ Ji that is
observed by the econometrician and a function c(·) : Di × Di → R+ , such that
                                                                                !
                     1 X    X                                             
                                χ{di = j}c j, d0 (j) ν2,i,j − ν2,i,d0 (j) h(xi ) ≤ 0
                                                                        
        IC4 : E
                    N i     j∈D       i


where h(·) is a positive valued function, and χ{di = j} is the indicator function which takes
the value of one if di = j. To understand what is required for IC4 to hold it is helpful to
take the expectation operator inside the sum and then rewrite it as the iterated expectation

                                                                                            !
            X                                                                       
                     c j, d0 (j) E[ ν2,i,j − ν2,i,d0 (j) |di = j, xi ] Pr{di = j|xi } h(xi ) ≤ 0.
                                                       
       Ex
              j∈Di


What IC4 requires is that an unconditional average, an average that does not condition on
di , of the differences between the ν2 associated with the decision and the alternative for that
decision be less than or equal to zero. Note that we are free to vary both (i) the weights
assigned to the possible differences (the {c j, d0 (j) }), and (ii) the alternative we compare
to should the decision be d = j (i.e. the {d0 (j)}).
     Before illustrating how this enables us to use an assortment of primitive conditions to
insure IC4, we show how the combination of IC3 and IC4 generate moment inequalities


                                                   33
which can form the basis of an estimation algorithm. C1 and C2 imply that
                                N
                             1 X h X                                   i
                                       χ{di = j}∆π(j, d0 (j), ·) h(xi ) ,
                                                                
                         0 ≤       E                                                                        (7)
                             N i=1   j


which from IC3 implies
                               1 X hX                                 i
                        0≤         E   χ{di = j} ∆π(j, d0 (j), ·) h(xi ) ,
                               N i   j


which from IC4 and the definitions in equation (6)
                              1 X hX                                      i
                          ≤       E   χ{di = j}∆r(j, d0 (j), ·, θ0 )h(xi ) .
                              N i   j


Since this last inequality is in terms of observable moments it can be used as a basis for
estimation.

Assumptions which imply IC4. IC4 will hold if the unobservable known to the agent
when it makes its choice but not observed by the econometrician, i.e. the {ν2,i,d }, is constant
across choices,9 so we focus on cases in which one can form moments which satisfy IC4 even
though the {ν2,i,d } do vary across d.
     Pakes et. al. (2006) note that when the ν2,i,d vary across decisions but the same value
of ν2,i,d appears in more than one decision or for more than one agent (so there are “group
effects”), one can form inequalities which “difference out” the ν2 by appropriate choice of
d0 (j) and c(j, d0 (j)). Examples include: entry models in which ν2,i,d is a location specific fixed
effect, social interaction models where the interaction effects are group specific, panel data
discrete choice models in which the ν2,i,d are choice specific fixed effects, and cross sectional
discrete choice models where the same ν2,i,d appear in more than one choice. Also when a
variable is unobserved at the micro level, but is observed at a higher level of aggregation
(say from census data), then a summation of inequalities will do away with the ν2,i 10 .
     A different subset of cases which satisfy IC4 even though the {ν2,i,d } do vary across d are
cases in which inequalities can be formed which are a linear function of the same ν2,i , for e.g.
   9
     As noted in Pakes et. al, this latter assumption is also used in Hansen and Singleton’s (1982) classic
article. The use of inequalities simply allows us to provide conditions which enable us to extend their analysis
to richer choice sets, choices which are on boundaries of those sets, and multiple interacting agents.
  10
     See De Loecker, Melitz, and Pakes, in process, for an example. A similar procedure applies if variables
are measured with error at the micro level but that error averages out at a higher level of aggregation.


                                                      34
ν2,i,d = ν2,i × d. Then as long as we have an xi ∈ Ji that the ν2,i is mean independent of (an
“instrument”), we can form the uncentered sample covariance of the error in the inequality
and any positive function of xi and its expectation will be zero. Pakes et. al. (2006) shows
that ordered choice models (defined broadly enough to include the vertically differentiated
demand model used in I.O.) is one example of this case. To see this, assume a firm is buying
a discrete number of units, so that di ∈ Z+ , and that we do not observe a determinant of
unit cost that the agent takes into account (our ν2 ). To form an inequality that satisfies
IC4 set d0 (j) = j + 1, c(j, j + 1) = 1 and all other c(·) = 0. This gives us the difference
between what profits would have been had the agent chosen one more machine than it did
chose and the actual profits. The expectation of that difference is linear in the cost of the
machine (which includes ν2 ) no matter the d chosen, so the average of that difference must
be greater than the average of those costs.
     Another example in which inequalities can be formed which are a linear function of the
same ν2,i regardless of the realization of di occurs in the analysis of contracts in buyer seller
networks when the terms of contracts are known to the agents but not to the econometrician.
Then the unobserved component of the payments emanating from the contract are a cost
to the buyer and a revenue source to the seller. So if the inequality used when the contract
is established is the difference between the seller’s profit with and without the contract,
and the inequality used when the contract is rejected is the difference between the buyer’s
actual profits and what its profits would have been were the contract established, then the
inequality will include the unobserved component of the transfer regardless of whether the
contract is established. We return to this example below.

A Single Agent Example. A simple single agent example taken from an unpublished
thesis by Michael Katz (2007) illustrates how the fact that the researcher is allowed to
chose different counterfactuals for different choices when forming inequalities can provide the
flexibility needed to satisfy IC4 (I thank Michael Katz for permission to use this example).
Katz (2007) analyzes the costs shoppers assign to driving to a supermarket. These costs are
of considerable importance to the choice of supermarket locations and, as a result, to the
analysis of the impact of zoning regulations. Moreover they have proven difficult to analyze
empirically with standard choice models because of the complexity of the choice set facing
consumers (all possible bundles of goods at all possible supermarkets).
    Assume that the agents’ utility functions are additively separable functions of the utility
from the basket of goods the agent buys, expenditure on that basket, and drive time to the
supermarket. Since utilities are only defined up to a monotone transformation, there is a
free normalization for each individual, and we normalize the coefficient on expenditure to
equal one. We want to allow for heterogeneity in the cost of drive time that is known to the


                                               35
agents when they make their decision but unobserved by the econometrician, so this will be
one component of ν2,i . The counterfactuals possible are the purchase of any bundle of goods
at any store.
    For a particular di chose d0 (di ) to be the difference in utility between the choice actually
made and the utility that would have been obtained from purchasing (i) the same basket of
goods, (ii) at a store which is further away from the consumer’s home than the store the
consumer shopped at. This choice of alternative (of d0 (di )) will allow us to difference out the
impact of the basket of goods chosen on utility. I.e., if e(d) and dt(d) provide the expenditure
and the drive time for store choice d, and (θ + ν2,i ) is agent i’s cost of drive time (in units of
expenditure), this choice of alternative gives us the inequality
                              "                                     #
                                X
                            E         χ{di = j}∆π(j, d0 (j), zi )|Ji =
                                    j
       "                                                                       #
           X                                                              
   E           χ{di = j} e(j) − e(d0 (j)) + (θ + ν2,i )(dt(j) − dt(d0 (j))) |Ji ≥ 0, at θ = θ0 .
           j

Assuming, as seems reasonable, that (dt(di ), dt(d0 (di ))) ⊂ Ji , this together with the fact that
dt(d0 (j)) − dt(j) > 0 by choice of alternative, implies that
                    "                                                  ! #
                      X                e(j) − e(d0 (j))
                  E       χ{di = j}                      − (θ0 + ν2,i ) |Ji ≥ 0.
                       j
                                     dt(d0 (j)) − dt(j))
                                                                                  P
   Let θ be the average of the cost of drive time across consumers, so               i ν2,i = 0 by
construction, and assume IC3. Then
                       "                               #
                         1 X  e(di ) − e(d0 (di )) 
                     E                                   − θ ≥ 0, at θ = θ0 .
                         N i dt(d0 (di )) − dt(di ))
This provides an upper bound to θ. Were we to consider a second alternative in which the
bundle of goods purchased was the same as in the actual choice but the counterfactual store
required less drive time, we would also get a lower bound to θ. Katz (2007) shows that these
bounds are quite informative and provide a range for the average cost of drive time which
accords with auxiliary information, while more standard discrete choice estimators do not.
    Note that to obtain these inequalities we chose an alternative which allowed us to differ-
ence out the impact of the bundle of goods chosen on utility (differencing out our “group”
effect), and then rearranged these differences to form a moment which was linear in the re-
maining source of ν2 variance no matter di (the source being differences in the costs of travel


                                                  36
time). Were we interested in the impact of a particular good purchased on utility, we would
have considered baskets of goods which differed only in that good and goods which had cross
partials with that good in the utility function, at the same supermarket (thus differencing
out the effects of travel time and other components of utility). A lot more options would
present themselves were we to have data on multiple shopping trips for each household.

4.5     Uses of the Two Approaches in Industrial Organization.
There are at least two ways moment inequalities have been used in I¿O: to provide a reduced
form summary of the relationship between (d−i , zio ) and the profitability of agent i, and to
estimate structural parameters. I now comment on both of them. The comments assume
that the true model is the model in equation (2), with a profit equation built up from a rich
set of demand and cost primitives (e.g., one of those described in section 2). For simplicity
this subsection also assumes the additive separability in equation (3) and that there is no
specification error in π as (·). When this is true there is no difference between the ν2f that
appears in subsection 4.2 and the ν2 that appears in 4.3 and 4.4, so I do not use the f
superscript below.
    We first consider reduced form applications. To see that the reduced form analysis can
be done in a meaningful way recall that in the additively separable model π(·) = π as (·) + ν2
and regress the π as (zio , di , d−i , θ0 ) onto a polynomial in (z̃i , di , d−i ). Typically the z̃i be a
subset of the zio that go into the structural model. The polynomial obtained in this way
defines the “reduced form” function of interest, say f (·, β0 ) as

                            π(zi , d, d−i ) = f (z̃i , d, d−i , β0 ) + ν2,i,d + ν1,i,d

where ν1 is the residual from the regression of π as (·) onto Ji ≡ (z̃i , di , d−i ), so that E[ν1,i,d |Ji ] =
0, though E[ν2,i,d |Ji ] 6= 0. Note that the ν1 are a part of profits, so we have to account for
them when we check the Nash conditions in equation (2). The reason for allowing for ν2,i in
this context is that the researcher is interested in the relationship between πi (·) and (d−i , z̃i )
conditional on unobservable determinants of profits, particularly those that are correlated
with d−i . For example, in the entry models the usual focus is on the relationship of prof-
itability to the number of entrants, and the researcher wants to understand this relationship
conditional on unobserved, as well as observed, market characteristics.
    Now consider the two estimation approaches. Unless ν1,i,d = ν1,i ∀d, the approach based
on F C3 and F C4 will provide inconsistent estimates of the reduced form parameters, β0 .
However, if we were willing to make an assumption on the distribution of this ν1 conditional
on (z̃i , di , d−i ), we could combine it with the assumption made in F C4 on ν2 to provide a
consistent estimation framework as follows. Draw (ν1 , ν2 ) couples for each agent and check

                                                       37
the equilibrium conditions conditional on the draw on the couple before constructing the
outer and inner measures used in the inequalites in equation (4). The draw on ν1 is mean
independent of (z̃i , di , d−i ) while the draw on ν2 will, at most, be mean indpendent of z̃i .
Note that this modification of the algorithm provided in subsection 4.2 requires us to specify
the joint distribution of (ν1 , ν2 ) up to a parameter of interest.
     The approach based on IC3 and IC4 will provide consistent estimates of β0 without
modification. Since it is based on averages it does not require distributional assumptions,
but unless ν2,i,d = ν2,i ∀d, it does require the restriction in IC4. Note, however, that in the
most extensively used reduced form example, that of entry models in which di represents
the number of entrants in market i and ν2 represents a market specific entry cost, then
ν2,i,d = ν2,i × d and taking d0 = d + 1 will result in an inequality that satisfies IC4.
     The second way of using inequality estimators is more in line with the rest of this essay
in that it attempts to estimate the structural parameters that underlie behavioral responses.
We construct the profits implied by the primitives conditional on (di , d−i ) and any structural
parameters one is unable to estimate from more direct estimation procedures, and then use
one of the two estimation approaches to estimate those parameters. Given C1 and C2 the
properties of the two estimators depend on the expectational and measurement assumptions
that underlie them.
     Though the full information assumption in F C3 is not likely to be particularly appealing
as a general approximation to how decisions are actually made, it might be appropriate for
characterizing the “rest point” to an environment which is sufficiently stable. I.e., there
might be good reasons to think FC3 holds in a market where neither the determinants of
profits nor the decisions of the participants have changed over a reasonable period of time.
As noted above this is often the environment that rationalizes the use of two stage games
in empirical work, and hence is of some importance. Then the estimation algorithm in
subsection 4.2 will be apporpriate provided F C4 is justified.
     There are two reasons why one might worry about F C4. First, there is the question of
the robustness of the results to the assumption on the distribution of (ν2,i , ν2,−i ) conditional
on (zio , z−i
           o
              ). Since the full information estimation algorithm undertakes an explicit correction
for selection, even if we assume the additively separable model in equation (3) and are sure
about the specification for the conditional mean of ν2 , our inference from the proposed
estimatiors will not be correct unless more detailed properties of the assumed distribution of
ν2 (in particular its tail) are specified correctly, and typically there is little a priori evidence
on that distribution available. We provide some Monte Carlo results on the impact of the
choice of the distribution function for the buyer-seller network problem below.
     The second reason for worrying about F C4 is that it is unlikely that we can specify
primitives accurately enough to be able to ignore all sources of error in our measures of
profits, particularly for the profits from the counterfactuals. If we allow for errors in our

                                                38
measure of profits and again let r(·) be our observed profit measure

                             r(di , d−i , zio , θ0 ) = π as (di , d−i , zio , θ0 ) + ν1,i,d ,

where the {ν1,i,d } are the errors. Now the agent basis its decision on π as (·) + ν2 , not on ν1 ,
and though ν1 may well be uncorrelated with π as (·) + ν2 , it is correlated with the observed
profit, r(·), by construction. So to check the equilibrium conditions for any given draw on ν2
we would have to determine whether
                                                                
                                                o
                                  r(di , d−i , zi , θ0 ) − ν1,i,d + ν2,i,d ,

satisfies the Nash conditions. Unless ν1,i,d = ν1,i ∀d, in which case the equilibrium conditions
difference out ν1 , this will be difficult, if not impossible, to do. Assuming a parametric
distribution for the {ν1,i,d } would enable us to construct the distribution of the observed
profits conditional on the structural profits, however the distribution we need to draw from
to check the equilibrium conditions is the distribution of structural profits given the observed
profits. To find that conditional distribution we would, at least in general, need to solve an
integral equation.
     We now compare this to the use of the inequality approach to estimate the structural
parameters. IC3 nests F C3, so it is strictly preferable. Importantly IC3 enables us to
proceed in a world where we admit uncertainty without having to specify either the agents’
information sets (and hence what each agent knows about the other agents) or the form of
the probability distribution the agents use to form expectations; objects we typically know
little about.11 Further IC3 allows for expectational and measurement/modelling errors (as
long as the latter are not correlated with the instruments used). So when IC4 is appropriate,
the profit inequality approach is attractive.
     Of course IC4 need not be appropriate, and the choice between approaches in a partic-
ular application is likely to depend on a comparison of the ability of the profit inequality
approach to account for whatever differences in ν2 errors across choices exist, to the problems
caused to the full information approach by its inability to handle ν1 errors and its choice
of distributional assumption on ν2 . In section 6 we provide a Monte Carlo analysis of the
impact of specification errors on the two approaches in the context of analyzing contracts in
buyer-seller networks. That section also pays attention to the computational properties of
the two approaches.
  11
     As noted in Pakes et. al, this latter assumption is also used in Hansen and Singleton’s (1982) classic
article. The use of inequalities simply allows us to provide conditions which enable us to extend their analysis
to richer choice sets, choices which are on boundaries of those sets, and multiple interacting agents.



                                                           39
4.6     A Note on Inference.
Since the theoretical restrictions we bring to data are moment inequalities, our estimators
will typically be set valued. Methods of inference for set valued estimators are an active
and important area of econometric research. There are a number of papers which prove
“consistency” for set valued estimators; i.e. they give conditions which insure that the set of
parameter values that satisfy the sample moment inequalities (the “estimated set”) converges
to the set of values of θ that satisfy the population moment inequalities (the “identified set”)
in the Hausdorff metric. In the examples that follow I will also make statements about the
distribution of the estimates so I now explain how I obtained them.
    Assume the identified set is compact and convex (as it is in our examples which have linear
moment inequalities), so that the set of values of any component of θ that are contained in
this set is a bounded interval. If the first component of θ is θ0,1 , with bounds [θ0,1 , θ0,1 ] which
are obtained when the vector θ = θ1 and θ = θ1 respectively, we can obtain conservative α
level confidence intervals for either θ0,1 or for [θ0,1 , θ0,1 ] if we have an (â, b̂) such that
   n              o        n                     o               n        o         n         o
Pr θ0,1 ∈ [â, b̂] ≥ Pr [θ0,1 , θ0,1 ] ⊂ [â, b̂] ≥ 1 − Pr â > θ0,1 − Pr b̂ < θ0,1 = 1−α.
                                                                                                   (8)
If we find estimators for (θ0,1 , θ0,1 ) whose distributions can be approximated with satisfactory
precision, we can use the (1−α/2) quantile of the estimator for θ0,1 as â, and the α/2 quantile
of the estimator for θ0,1 as b̂.
    Consistent estimators for (θ0,1 , θ0,1 ) are the lowest and highest value of θ1 which satisfy all
the sample moment inequalities. The standard asymptotic approximation to the distribution
of those estimators is obtained by analyzing the impact of the variance in the moments that
define these parameters in the given sample on the estimates of the parameters of interest. If
there are K parameters, there will be K moments that hold with equality at the estimate of θ1
(at least generically), and it is the impact of the variance in these moments on the estimate of
the parameters which will determine this estimate of the variance. This calculation, however,
ignores the fact that in samples of the size we use in economics, the sampling variance in
the moments will often cause different moments to bind in different samples. As a result the
standard approximation does not provide an adequate approximation to the true sampling
distribution of the intervals we are after.
    There are a number of approaches to obtaining confidence intervals which provide a closer
approximation to the true finite sample distributions of the estimated intervals currently
being investigated. I will use the bootstrap methodology introduced in Pakes, Porter, Ho,
and Ishii (2006). I do so not because I have any reason to believe it is more accurate than the
alternatives currently available, but rather because (i) it is easy to use, and (ii) I have done
Monte Carlo experiments on precisely the problem we focus on in the analysis of specification

                                                 40
errors below and found that for the sample sizes used there this bootstrap provides almost
exact coverage for the estimated intervals12 .
    There are a number of other estimation issues which have a different structure when
doing inference based on moment inequalities (in contrast to on moment equalities). Per-
haps most important to applied I.O. is the question of which moment inequalities to chose
when there are more possiblities than parameters to estimate. In the inequality context
that choice determines the boundaries of the identified set, as well as the variance of the
estimator of the boundary points. Testing is an issue which has received more attention.
Though typically there will be more than one value of θ that satisfy the population moment
inequalities, there may well not be any value which satisfies the sample moment inequalities,
even in the case where the model is correctly specified. The twin facts that in finite samples
the sample moments distribute approximately normally and that the estimate of the lower
bound is typically obtained as the maximum of the lower bounds emanating from a number
of inequalities generates a positive small sample bias in the estimate of the lower bound.
Similarly the upper bound will typically be calculated as the minimum of a number of upper
bounds and will have a negative small sample bias. As a result the estimate of the lower
bound for a parameter can exceed that of an upper bound even if there are values of θ at
which all the inequalities are satisfied by the population moments. The tests are designed
to distinguish whether such a finding is due to sampling error, or due to model misspec-
ification. There is a rapidly expanding econometric literature on inference based on the
restrictions generated by moment inequalities; see e.g., Andrews and Guggenberger (2007)
and the literature cited therein.


5      Buyer-Seller Networks.
This section shows how use of moment inequality estimators can help unravel the nature of
contracts in “buyer-seller networks”. By buyer-seller network I mean a market in which there
are a small number of both buyers and sellers with buyers able to buy from more than one
seller and sellers able to sell to more than one buyer. As noted in section 2.3 the contracts
that determine the structure of payments in these markets are often proprietary, yet their
  12
    These Monte Carlo results were deleted from the paper due to space considerations, but are available
from the author on request. The bootstrap does seem to “undercover” for smaller samples than those used
in our specification analysis. For example for samples comparable in size to those used in the empirical
example coverage for the entire interval in experiments designed to provide a 95% confidence interval for
that interval was just over 90%. However coverage for the parameter itself was 100% and the magnitude of
the difference between the estimated bounds and the actual bounds in cases where the estimated bounds did
not cover the actual bounds was quite small.



                                                   41
terms determine both investment incentives and the costs the buyers incur in reselling the
goods to consumers.
    The section begins by developing moment inequality estimators capable of providing a
reduced form characterization of contracts in such markets and applying them to an empirical
example. I then compute and describe equilibria to a buyer-seller network game designed
to be similar to that example. The next section uses the computed equilibria in a Monte
Carlo exercise designed to compare the robustness and computational burdens of the two
approaches to using moment inequalities described in the last section.
    The example is taken from Ho (2007) who analyzes the contracts established between
HMOs and hospitals in forty-two markets. Ho’s estimates are based on an assumption that
there are no structural disturbance in her data (in our notation, ν2 ≡ 0). I begin by showing
that her model can be used to generate moment inequalities that allow for both structural
and non-structural disturbances. The inequalities that this generates differ from those used
in Ho’s article and we compare the results from estimators that allow for structural errors
to those that do not.
    Next I compute contracting equilibria for markets which are constructed to be similar to
the markets analyzed in Ho, and then compare the characteristics of the computed equilib-
rium contracts to the characteristics obtained from the two different estimators. To compute
the equilibria we need a more complete set of assumptions than are needed for the estimation
algorithm, and we consider alternatives. The computed equilibria allow us to engage in a
broader investigation of features of the environment that are correlated with the markups
implicit in equilibrium contracts than is possible in the empirical work. The results highlight
two facts. First though the moment inequality estimators’ characterization is reduced form
in a sense that we will make clear, the empirical results from Ho’s data do pick up impor-
tant features of the contracts generated by our computed equilibria. Second the contracts
that emanate from the complete structural model have features that are familiar from both
unilateral pricing models and from bargaining models.

5.1    Empirical Analysis.
The reason moment inequalities might help sort out the likely correlates of the transfers
implicit in different contracting environments is that though the contents of the contracts
may be proprietary, we do typically observe who contracts with whom in these markets.
Provided we assume a game form which specifies the alternative networks that could have
resulted from a feasible change in a contracting party’s decision and we are able to obtain
a sufficiently good approximation to the profits that would be earned had the alternative
networks been formed, the moment inequalities implicit in the information on who contracts
with whom should enable us to bound the transfers implicit in the contracts formed.

                                              42
    For example assume that; (i) we have a model capable of approximating what buyers
earn from re-marketing the products they buy and (ii) that the buyer seller contracts formed
emanate from a game in which sellers make “take it or leave it” offers to buyers. Then were
we able to specify the networks that the buyer thought would have been established had it
rejected a contract offer that it accepted (or visa versa), we could use the moment inequality
framework to investigate the properties the contract offers must have had in order to have
supported the networks we actually observed. The specification for what the agent believes
would have happened requires assumptions, and the way we make those assumptions might
change the inequalities we bring to data and hence the estimated parameters (a possibility
we consider below). On the other hand at least in principal one can test whether one or more
of the possibilities are consistent with the data and the institutional information available.
    There are a number of reasons to think that the use of moment inequalities might be
particularly helpful in this context. First, typically the information at the disposal of the
analyst is not rich enough to associate a unique contracting equilibrium with any given
market, so we need an estimation algorithm which allows for multiple equilibria. Second,
our ability to use moment inequalities does not depend on the form of the choice set, so
we can make the feasible set of contracts as complicated as reality demands. Finally, the
fact that moment inequality estimators can allow for an assortment of errors is likely to be
helpful in enabling us to get a start on problems as complex as this one.

5.1.1   The Analytic Framework.
It is assumed there are two periods. In the first period contracts between HMOs and hospitals
are established. These determine both the network of hospitals the HMO’s members can
access, and the transfers from the HMO to a hospital for each patient hospitalized. In the
second period the HMOs engage in a premium setting game which we assume has a unique
Nash equilibria.
     The second period equilibrium generate revenues for each HMO conditional on any con-
figuration of hospital networks, and the number of patients each HMO sends to each hospital.
Letting Hm be a vector of dimension equal to the number of hospitals whose components
are either zero or one, a one indicating the hospital is in HMO m’s network, and H−m spec-
ify the networks of the competing HMOs, these revenues and quantities will be denoted by
Rm (Hm , H−m , z), and qm,h (Hm , H−m , z), respectively. The parameters needed for these calcula-
tions are obtained and the calculation is done using the techniques described in section 2 of
this paper (for details see Ho, 2005, 2006).
     The profits of the HMO are the revenues from the second period game minus the payments




                                               43
the HMO makes to each hospital in its networks, say Tm,h or
                                                       X
              πmM (Hm , H−m , z) = Rm (Hm , H−m , z) −   Tm,h (Hm , H−m , z).
                                                           h∈Hm

Analogously if ch is the per patient costs of hospital h and Mh is the hospital’s network of
HMOs, the hospital’s profits are
                                 X                            X
            πhH (Mh , M−h , z) =     Tm,h (Hm , H−m , z) − ch   qm,h (Hm , H−m , z).
                                  m∈Mh                            m∈Mh

Throughout we shall assume that the HMO revenues and hospital costs obtained in this way
are correct up to an approximation error which is mean independent of the variables we use
as instruments.
    We are after a reduced form characterization of the per patient transfers from the HMOs
to the hospitals (our Tm,h ). So the equation of interest is a projection of Tm,h onto a set of
interactions of qm,h (Hm , H−m , z) with a vector of hospital, HMO, and market characteristics,
say xm,h , which we write as

                        Tm,h (Hm , H−m , z) = xm,h (Hm , H−m , z) θ + ν2,m,h .

Note that since the agents know the details of the contracts they sign, it is just the econome-
trician who does not, the disturbance generated by this projection is known to both agents
when they make their decisions; in our terminology it is a ν2 error.
                                                                                      
    Substituting Tm,h (·) into the profit equations and defining rmM (·; θ), rhH (·; θ) to be the
observed portion of profits HMOs and hospitals respectively, we have
                                                               X
                  πmM (Hm , H−m , z) = rmM (Hm , H−m , z; θ) −   ν2,m,h , and                 (9)
                                                               h∈Hm

                                                                    X
                     πhH (Mh , M−h , z) = rhH (Mh , M−h , z; θ) +          ν2,m,h .
                                                                    m∈Mh

Equation (9) provides the profits agents obtain from any given buyer-seller network. To
obtain our moment inequalities we have to specify the network a contracting agent expected
to obtain had it changed its contracting decision.

Counterfactuals Used in the Empirical Work. To obtain the alternative feasible net-
works we need assumptions on the first stage contracting game, and as noted in section 2.3


                                                 44
there is no generally accepted game form for this problem. We begin with a set of famil-
iar assumptions which result in computationally convenient estimators and then consider
alternatives.
    Assume that sellers make take it or leave it offers to buyers (or equivalently for our
purposes, an alternating move game with simultaneous moves on each side and no contracts
established until a final period in which the seller makes offers to the buyer). As in Hart and
Tirole (1991), contract offers are assumed to be proprietary: each HMO knows the offers
made to it but not to its competitors, and each hospital knows the offers it makes but not
those of its competitors. Note that this implies that the outcome need not be renegotiation
proof, a point we return to below.
    We observe which HMOs contracted with which hospitals and can compute the profits
generated by any network. So what we need to proceed is the network that would be estab-
lished were either the HMO or the hospital to change its behavior. Since our assumptions
imply that the HMO could reject any offer it accepted or accept any offer it rejected without
changing the behavior of any other agent, they make it easy to determine the network that
would be established following any change in final period HMO behavior. We simply reverse
the HMO’s acceptance/rejection decision with each of the hospitals in the market, and leave
all other contracts unchanged.
    To obtain a profit inequality for the hospital we need to specify; (i) an alternative feasible
offer the hospital could make, and (ii) what the hospital thinks the HMO would infer about
the offers made to other HMOs if that HMO were to be offered that alternative. We assume;
(i) that the hospital could always offer a null contract (a contract which is never accepted),
and, at least for the empirical work, (ii) “passive beliefs”, i.e. the hospital believes that
the HMO will not change its perceptions about the likelihood of different offers being made
to its competitors were it to receive a different offer, or in terms of our earlier notation,
that d−i (d0 , zi ) = d−i . Note that were an HMO that had accepted a hospital’s offer receive,
instead, the null contract, it might change its contracts with other hospitals. So to compute
the hospital profit inequality that results from the offer of the null contract we either have
to specify how the hospital thinks the HMO would change its contracting decisions with
other hospitals if it received the null contract, or we have to compute a lower bound to
the profits the hospital could make as a result of the actions the HMO might take. In
the empirical results presented here we assume that the hospital thinks the HMO does not
change its behavior with other hospitals were it to receive the null contract, though we have
investigated the possiblity that the HMO that had been contracted with the hospital add a
different hospital when it recieves a null contract from a given hospital.




                                               45
Profit Inequalities from the Counterfactuals. We begin with the assumption that
ν2 ≡ 0. Then we can obtain our inequalities by interacting the differences in profits from
the three counterfactuals listed above with positive valued functions of variables that are
known to the decision maker when it makes its decision. We call these inequalities the ν1
only inequalities. If ν2 6= 0 these inequalities are invalid because they involve the ν2 and
condition on the decision made.
    We considered alternative ways of allowing for ν2 , starting with the familiar specification
in which the ν2 are assumed to be HMO and/or hospital fixed effects. With multiple agents
on each side of the market this generates the quite detailed set of inequalities derived in
Appendix 1. There is no particular reason to assume a fixed effects structure for our problem
and when we allowed for them the empirical results seemed to accentuate the problems with
the ν1 -only model (though the parameter estimates from the two specifications were not too
different from one another). In the ν1 only model about 12% of the inequalities were negative
but under 2% were individually significant at the 5% level. In the model with fixed effects,
about a third of the inequalities were negative and 10% were significant at the 5% level. So
we look for inequalities which allow for ν2 but do not require them to be fixed effects.
    There are at least two such inequalities available. One does involve the ν2 but does not
need to condition on the decision made, while the other does not involve ν2 . Let χm,h = {1, 0}
index the two possible contracting outcomes, with χm,h = 1 if HMO m accepts hospital h’s
offer and zero otherwise. If χm,h = 1 the increment in the hospital’s profit from offering the
given contract instead of the null contract is expected to be positive and contains the transfer
(including ν2,m,h ), while if χm,h = 0 the increment in the HMO’s profit from rejecting (instead
of accepting) the contract saves the transfer (including ν2,m,h ). This gives us an inequality
which does not condition on χm,h .
    More formally let ∆πhH (Mh , Mh /h, M−h , z) be the difference between the hospital’s profit
                                                                                   M
when the network of the hospital includes HMO m and when it does not, and ∆πm        (Hm , Hm ∪
h, H−m , z) be the difference between the HMO’s profit when the network of the HMO excludes
hospital h and when it includes it. Then from equation (9)
                                                         M
          χm,h ∆πhH (Mh , Mh /h, M−h , z) + (1 − χm,h )∆πm (Hm , Hm ∪ h, H−m , z) =

     χm,h ∆rhH (Mh , Mh /h, M−h , z; θ) + (1 − χm,h )∆rm
                                                       M
                                                         (Hm , Hm ∪ h, H−m , z; θ) + ν2,m,h ,
is expected to be positive and is linear in ν2 no matter the outcome. So provided we have
an x ∈ Jm ∩ Jh that is an instrument in the sense that E[ν2 |x] = 0, then for any positive
function, h(·)
       h                                                                     i
                H                                    M
      E χm,h ∆rh (Mh , Mh /h, ·; θ0 ) + (1 − χm,h )∆rm (Hm , Hm ∪ h, · : θ0 ) h(x) ≥ 0. (10)


                                               46
    For the second inequality note that the sum of the increments in profits to the HMO
and the hospital does not contain the transfers between them (and hence not ν2,m,h ), does
contain information on θ (since if the contract is not established there is a change in transfers
to other agents), and must have positive expectation if a contract is established (at least if
contract offers are proprietary). So provided x ∈ Jm ∩ Jh
               h                                                      i
                         H                         M
             E χm,h ∆rh (Mh , Mh /h, ·; θ0 ) + ∆rm (Hm , Hm /h, ·; θ0 ) h(x) ≥ 0            (11)
          M
where ∆rm    (Hm , Hm ∪ h, H−m , z; θ) is the change in HMO m’s profits were it to refuse a
contract it in fact accepted.

Empirical Results. The first four columns of Table 1 present the empirical results. We
subtracted costs per patient from the revenues in all specifications, so the coefficients ap-
pearing on the table are the coefficients of the markup implicit in the per patient payment.
    Despite the fact that none of the test statistics we computed were significant at the 5%
level, there was no value of θ which satisfied all the inequality constraints in any specification,
a finding that is not unusual when there are many inequalities (and all our specifications had
eighty-eight or more inequality constraints). The algorithm then generates a point estimate
for θ0 which is that value which minimizes a squared metric in the negative part of the
sample moments. These are the values reported in the table.13
    Though the small sample size implied that we could not do a very detailed investigation
of the correlates of markups the estimates we do get are eye-opening, indicating just how
important a deeper understanding of the determinants of these contracts might be. This is
because both sets of point estimates imply an equilibrium configuration where the majority
of cost savings from low cost hospitals are captured by the HMOs who do business with those
hospitals, and in which markups increase sharply when a hospital is capacity constrained.
If these findings were interpreted as causal they would imply significantly lower incentives
for hospitals to invest in either cost savings or in capacity expansion than would occur in a
price-taking equilibrium. The difference between the ν1 −only estimates and those that allow
  13
     There were about 450 plans and 630 hospitals in the 40 markets, and we used plan and market character-
istics as instruments. The results reported here weighted the market averages of the moment inequalities by
the square root of the number of plans in the market, as this produced slightly smaller confidence intervals
(interestingly weighting by the variance of the moment inequalities did not improve those intervals). Though
the test statistics were insignificant there was some information which favored the model that allows for ν2
as only six of its inequalities were negative at the estimated parameter value (the ν1 -only model had eleven),
and none of them were individually significant at the 5% level (in contrast to one for the ν1 only model).
Finally Ho (2006) reports a series of robustness checks on the ν1 −only estimates. Though more robust
specifications, particularly those which add right hand side variables, can increase the confidence intervals
quite a bit, the parameter estimates do not change much from those in column (1) of the table.


                                                      47
for ν2 is that the former imply that almost all the cost savings from low cost hospitals go
to the HMOs, while the latter imply that only just over 50% of those savings do and that a
larger fraction of profits go to capacity constrained hospitals. As one might expect low cost
hospitals tend to be more capacity constrained than high cost hospitals, so the two variables
are negatively correlated.
    Might we expect contracts with these characteristics to emanate from a Nash equilibrium?
If so which of our two specifications is likely to lead to coefficients which better approximate
the characteristics of equilibrium contracts, and should we interpret those coefficients to
mean that an increase in the right-hand side variable would, ceterus parabus, generate the
markup response we estimate? To shed some light on these issues we computed equilibria in
markets with characteristic distributions similar to those in Ho’s data, but with population
scaled down to a size where we would expect to have two hospitals and two HMOs in each
market (this made it possible to compute equilibria for many different markets in a reasonable
amount of time).14

5.1.2    Numerical Analysis.
We compute a full information Nash equilibrium to a game in which hospitals make take
it or leave it offers to HMOs. More specifically the algorithm assumes that both hospitals
chose among a finite set of couples of markups, one for each HMO, and that these markups
are offered simultaneously to the HMOs. The offers are public information, as are the
HMO premiums that would result from any set of contracts (these are obtained as the Nash
equilibrium to a premium setting game among the HMOs). The HMOs then simultaneously
accept or reject the offers. At equilibrium each hospital is making the best offers it can given
the offers of the other hospital and the responses of the HMOs, and each HMO is doing the
best it can do given the actions of its competitor and the offers made by the hospitals. An
iterative process with an initial condition in which both hospitals contract with both HMOs
choses among the equilibria when there are multiple equilibria.15
  14
      The closest exercise I know of in the literature is in a paper by Gal-Or (1997). By judicious choice
of primitives she is able to provide provide analytic results from a full information Nash bargaining game
between two HMO’s and two hospitals. She focuses on when her assumptions would generate exclusive
dealing and its effects on consumers. We use a discrete choice model of demand and market and cost
characteristic distributions that are random draws from distributions which mimicked those in Ho’s data.
   15
      There were fifty possible markups to chose from and the algorithm starts with the lowest ones. It
then determines whether HMO1 wants to reject one (or both) of the contracts conditional on HMO2 being
contracted to both hospitals. This requires solving for equilibrium premiums and profits for HMO1 given
each possible choice it can make and the fact that HMO2 is contracted to both hospitals. HMO2 then
computes its optimal responses to HMO1’s decisions in the same way. This process is repeated until we
find a Nash equilibrium for the HMOs’ responses. No matter the offers, we always found an equilibrium


                                                   48
    Note that these assumptions differ from those assumed to generate the data analyzed in
the empirical work. In particular the full information Nash assumptions change the necessary
conditions for an equilibrium into a set of conditions which are renegotiation proof, and this,
in turn, changes the inequalities that we can take to data. In particular in the full information
game the hospital knows that were it to offer a null contract to an HMO which it in fact
had contracted with, both HMO’s may change their other decisions, and the hospital takes
those changes into account when it considers the profits from its counterfactual offer.
    The related questions of which equilibrium notion is likely to be more appropriate for a
given institutional setting, and whether the estimation results are likely to be sensitive to the
notion assumed, are two of the many questions that research on buyer-seller networks will
have to sort out. Though often the contents of contracts are proprietary, at any given point
in time who contracts with whom is usually known to all participants. So if we were trying
to model a set of relationships which have been stable over for some time (long enough so
that each agent could have responded to the situation if it wanted to), we might only want
to consider equilibria which are renegotiation proof in the sense that no two agents would
find it profitable to recontract given the information on who is contracting with whom (an
assumption which may well increase the burden of computing the counterfactual outcome).
Of course the market we are studying may be constantly changing and negotiations might
be costly. Then we might not expect the data to abide by a renegotiation proof criteria, at
least not one with costless renegotiations.
    We have raised these issues in a very simple contracting environment and realisitic ap-
proximations to the contracting process may require much more detail. What we need in
order to use the observed networks to make inferences on the properties of contracts is a way
of obtaining a lower bound to the expected profits from a counterfactual choice. Theoretical
insights into when different counterfactuals might be appropriate and their implications for
the inequalities we can take to data would be helpful. The stronger the conditions we have
the tighter our bounds are likely to be, but we could start with weaker conditions and then
investigate when stronger ones might be appropriate; for example we could start by obtain-
ing our inequalities from the difference between the profits of the chosen alternative and the
minimum profits from any of a group of counterfactuals.

Numerical Results. Column (5) through (8) of Table 1 present the results from projecting
the computed full information Nash equilibrium markups onto variables of interest. The
to this subgame. We then vary the first hospital’s (say H1) offers, holding H2’s offers fixed. For each offer
we repeat the process above until we find a Nash equilibrium for the HMOs’ responses. This gives us H1’s
optimal offers given the initial offers by H2. Next H1’s offer is held fixed and H2 optimize against that. We
repeat this process until we find a Nash equilibrium to the offers. For about 3% of the random draws of
characteristics we could not find an equilibria, and those markets were dropped from the analysis.


                                                     49
first two columns show that the three variables that the empirical study focused on have
the appropriate signs, are significant, and account for a large fraction, about 70%, of the
variation in markups (this translates into over 85% of the variance in transfers). The second
two columns add variables and rerun the projection. The original three variables maintain
their signs and remain significant but there are noticeable changes in their magnitudes; a
fact which accentuates the reduced form nature of the analysis.
    The coefficients of the additional variables illuminate the likely relationships embodied
in equilibrium outcomes. When the average hospital cost in the market goes up by 1% the
markups of the hospitals in the market go down by .23%, but if the difference between a
hospital’s cost and the average hospital cost goes up by 1%, the hospitals markup goes down
by .56%. So a hospital’s markup over costs depends on the costs of the other hospitals it
is competing with. Hospitals earn higher markups in “tighter” markets (when the ratio of
population to the number of hospital beds is lower) and once we account for this effect the
effect of capacity constraints is greatly reduced (though not eliminated). HMOs seem to get
a small quantity discount (the markups they pay are lower when they send more patients to
the hospital), and hospitals earn higher markups when the HMOs they are dealing with can
charge their members higher markups. There is a lot of economic intuition underlying the
signs on these coefficients, a fact which should encourage a deeper analysis.
    One final point. After adding the extra variables 20% of the variance in markups, or 8%
of the variance in transfers, is not accounted for by our observables. As noted this variance
would be classified as variance in the structural error (or in ν2 ) in our prior discussion. On
the other hand even if our behavioral, informational, and functional form assumptions were
perfect we would expect substantial measurement error in hospital costs in any data set and
this would constitute a ν1 error. We now turn to an investigation of how well the different
estimation approaches fair when the different sources of error are present.


6    Specification Errors and Alternative Estimators.
This section presents a comparison of both the computational requirements and the per-
formance of the different moment inequality estimators in the context of the analysis of
contracts in buyer-seller networks. Most of the statistical results will be Monte Carlo results
based on the data from the full information equilibrium computed in the last section. This
includes results for the ν1 -only and the ν2 -only estimators both when their assumptions are
the assumptions generating the data, and when they are not. When possible we will also
present results from Ho’s data.




                                              50
Details of the Monte Carlo Analysis. The counterfactuals used to generate inequalities
in the Monte Carlo analysis are the same as those used in the empirical work; each HMO
reverses its equilibrium decision with each hospital, and each hospital replaces its equilibrium
contract offer to each HMO with a null contract. However since the Monte Carlo data is
generated from a full information Nash equilibrium when the hospital offers a null contract
to an HMO which had accepted its equilibrium offer that hospital considers the profits that
would accrue to it were both HMOs to reoptimize. If om,h is the contract offered by hospital
h to HMO m in equilibrium, φ designates the null contract, and h=1’s offer was accepted
by m=1, then the counterfactual requires the profits of h=1 from the HMO equilibrium
responses to the tuple (φ, o1,2 , o2,1 , o2,2 ).16
    We estimate a model with only one parameter, the average markup. To obtain the true
value of that parameter for the simulated data sets we took the transfers implicit in the
equilibrium offers and projected them onto the number of patients and the variables we used
as instruments.17 The function obtained from this projection is treated as the parametric
transfer function. The coefficients of the instruments in this function are treated as known
and the coefficient of the patient variable is the coefficient to be estimated. When all we
require is a ν1 error we also treat the residual from the projection as known, and then add
pseudo random draws on measurement error to the costs of each hospital (and sometimes
also to the population, and hence the patient flows in the market, see below). When we
require a ν2 error we let the residual from our parametric transfer function be unknown.
Note that this insures that ν2 has zero covariance with our instruments before we condition
on the outcome (as is required of our “instruments”). On the other hand the distribution of
ν2 conditional on x that results from this procedure may well depend on x.
    We used the algorithm described in the last subsection to compute equilibria for about
twenty thousand markets with two HMOs and two hospitals in each. Monte Carlo data sets
were obtained by taking random draws of 1,385 markets (without replacement) from these
simulated markets18 . This gives us data sets that have about the same number of contracts
  16
     A few other details are of some interest. First note that a hospital which contracts with an HMO does
not necessarily make the lowest offer that is consistent with the HMO accepting. Different offers change
the HMO costs per patient. This changes the outcome of the premium setting game that the HMOs engage
in and feeds back into hospital profits. Note also that we are not using all the necessary conditions for
equilibrium. At the cost of increasing the computational burden of the estimator we could have used the
inequalities obtained from simultaneously switching each HMO’s (each hospital’s) behavior with respect to
both hospitals (both HMOs). If more details of the actual contracts were available to the researcher yet
other inequalities would become available.
  17
     For accepted offers these were the actual transfers, for the offers that were rejected these are the transfers
that would have resulted if the last offer had been accepted.
  18
     Since some markets will appear in more than one sample and our results do not take account of this,
the Monte Carlo results are currently not quite right. More equilibria are now being computed and we will


                                                        51
as in Ho’s data, but many fewer inequalities per market (Ho’s data has about eight hospitals
and ten HMOs per market, but only forty markets). The small number of inequalities implies
that the identified set from the Monte Carlo data can be quite large.
    For the profit inequality approach we began by drawing normal ν1 errors which were held
fixed throughout the analysis. We then drew two hundred Monte Carlo data sets, obtained
estimators from each, and tabulated the results.19 To compute the inequalities from the
full information no error algorithm we took two hundred draws on a ν2 vector of length
equal to the number of possible contracts and held them fixed for the entire algorithm (the
distribution we took these draws from is specified below). Then for each θ evaluated in the
estimation algorithm we computed the simulated probabilities that our three Nash conditions
are satisfied at the observed market structure for each market. This gives us the upper bound
to the probabilities. To get a lower bound we would have to check if the observed structure
was the only structure which satisfied all the Nash inequalities (not just our three conditions)
for all possible market structures. This was computationally demanding even for our two
by two problem. Computational concerns also limited the Monte Carlo to one hundred and
twenty data sets for the full information no error approach.

Results. Table 5, which presents the results, is split into panels. Panel A provides es-
timates obtained from using the ν1 -only inequalities, Panel B from using the ν2 -only in-
equalities (the inequalities from the full information no error model), and Panel C uses the
inequalities that allow for both ν1 and ν2 disturbances. The true value of θ0 is 18.77, and
the interval we obtain from the “population” moment inequalities when there are no errors
of any kind is [15.43,20.62].
    The first three rows of Panel A provide results from the Monte Carlo data that only has
ν1 errors so the estimators in these rows are consistent estimators of the “identified” set. Row
1 adds measurement error in costs equal to 25% of the true measured variance in cost. The
estimated lower bound is 8% lower than the true lower bound, while the estimated upper
bound is almost exactly equal to the truth. The 95% confidence interval for the interval
covers the true interval and is not too different from the estimated interval per se, indicating
that our bound estimates are quite precise (and this sample is not large by modern IO
standards). When we add an expectational error to the population, and hence to the patient
flows from the HMOs to the hospitals, the estimated interval gets substantially larger and
have enough to correct this flaw in time for a revision/resubmission.
  19
     Actually we did the analysis in two ways. In the second we drew a Monte Carlo data set, took two
hundred draws on vectors of ν1 errors for that data set, tabulated the results for each data set, and then
averaged over data sets. This provides confidence intervals that condition on the observables, while the
results reported in the text do not. However the difference in results from the two procedures was too small
to report both.


                                                    52
it is estimated with less precision. This is a little unfair to the inequality estimator since,
though there may be some uncertainty in the relevant population size and patient flows
variables when contracts are signed, we would generally expect to be able to construct good
instruments for them from current population size and predicted flows, and we did not use
those instruments here. Keeping this case, however, allows us to examine the impact of
specification errors in one setting where the bounds define a short interval and one where
they do not.
     Rows four and five use the data set with both ν1 and ν2 errors, but the inequalities from
the ν1 -only model. The ratio of the variance in ν2 to the variance in the dependent variable
is 12.7%. Now the estimated bounds are inconsistent; in particular the lower bound will,
in the limit, be too large, while the upper bound will be too low. This makes the bounds
move towards θ0 . The problem is that they can overshoot, leaving us either with an interval
which does not cover the true θ0 or a point estimate. Adding ν2 also adds variance to the
estimators, so in any finite sample the estimated bounds may be smaller or larger with ν2
errors than without them.
     In the case where the only measurement error is in costs, the specification error introduced
by adding ν2 increases the estimated lower bound of the confidence interval by about 25% but
it is still within .5% of the true lower bound. The upper bound hardly changes at all. There
is no effect of ν2 on the lower bound when there is also measurement error in population,
and though the upper bound falls by about 15%, the estimated interval still covers the true
interval. Apparently in this example estimates from the ν1 −only inequalities do not change
dramatically when there is a reasonable amount of ν2 error.
     Panel B provides the results when we use the ν2 -only inequalities. To use the ν2 -only
algorithm we need a distributional assumption for the ν2 disturbances. We tried two as-
sumptions; random draws from the empirical distribution of the actual ν2 , and a normal
distribution. The first option would not be available to empirical researchers, but might be
closer to the true population distribution (it would be asymptotically if the ν2 were truly
independent of our instruments, rather than just mean independent, but this is unlikely).
Note also that the identified set for the ν2 −only estimator depends on the unknown true
distribution of ν2 , so we will not be able to say whether the estimated confidence interval
covers that set.
     Both estimators, that based on the empirical distribution and the normal distribution for
the ν2 , generate point estimates and have estimated confidence intervals that are unusually
short. The confidence interval for the estimator which uses the bootstrap distribution does
not cover the true θ0 , but the one that uses the normal distribution does. The confidence
intervals from the empirical distribution and the normal distribution do not overlap, indicat-
ing that the choice of functional form for the ν2 distribution has a significant impact on the
estimators. On the other both estimators appear to be close enough to the truth for most

                                               53
applied issues. The problem is only in the shortness of the confidence intervals, giving what
appears to be a misleading impression of the precision of the estimates. Apparently a lot of
(incorrect) information is fed into the algorithm through the choice of the ν2 distribution; a
problem which would be hard to avoid in applied work using the ν2 -only estimator.
    Just as we added ν2 variance to the algorithm which uses the ν1 -only inequalities, rows 9
and 10 add ν1 variance to the algorithm which uses the ν2 -only inequalities. The estimates
presented in these rows use the normal distribution of the ν2 , as an empirical researcher
would not have access to the bootstrap distribution. Unsurprisingly we still obtain point
estimates. The confidence intervals from the data that had cost and population errors did not
cover the true θ0 , but that from the data that only had cost errors did. The point estimates
themselves are still reasonably close the true value of the parameter, so the primary problem
with the ν2 -only estimator appears to still be in providing a misleading impression of the
precision of the estimates.
    We tried to compute estimates from both the ν1 and the ν2 -only algorithms using Ho’s
actual data set. The ν1 -only algorithm generated a point estimate, but with a reasonably
large confidence interval (column 6 panel A). The ν2 -only estimator could not be computed
on the real data set; its computational burden is just too large. The number of HMOs
and hospitals in Ho’s data imply that there are on the order of 100,000 outcomes for which
premium setting equilibria and profits must be calculated for each ν2 draw and each θ
evaluated. This will be beyond our computational abilities for some time to come. In contrast
none of the other estimates that used Ho’s data took more than an hour of computer time.
    Panel C provides the estimates obtained when we used the inequalities that allow for
both ν1 and ν2 disturbances; the “robust” inequalities in equations (10) and (11). The
fact that there are only two agents on each side of the simulated markets implies that the
robust inequalities do not deliver an upper bound. The lower bound is lower than the bound
obtained when we used the ν1 only inequalities, but it is not that much lower. Using Ho’s real
data we get an estimate which is larger than the estimate which allows for only ν1 errors but
a confidence interval of similar length, and both confidence intervals cover both estimates.
    We conclude that the ν1 -only estimator is easy to use and, at least in the buyer-seller
network problem, seems reasonably robust to a moderate amount of ν2 variance. The ν2 -
only estimator presents two problems to the researcher. First it requires a distributional
assumption, and second it can have a very large computational burden. In our problem
the distributional assumption used seemed not to have too much of an effect on the actual
estimates, but it gave what appears to be a misleading impression of the precision of those
estimates. Of course the estimators which use the robust inequalities are least subject to
consistency and misleading precision problems, but they will lead to larger identified sets.



                                             54
7    Concluding Remarks.
Every review must choose among topics. This review has focused on a set of methodological
questions which seem to be important to enabling empirical work to progress further. It
ignores both developments in the availability of data and the substantive contributions of
work which has used the techniques that have been developed to date. This reflects a
combination of space constraints and my own personal limitations. It is important to realize,
however, that data availability is the “sine qua non” of good empirical work, and that the
most notable immediate benefit from the recent advances in I.O. is the applied work that
has generated a deeper understanding of substantive issues in our field.
    Coming back to methodological issues, we noted that there are a set of econometric prob-
lems which are of central importance to further development in our field; examples include
the small sample properties of estimators based on moment inequalities and of semipara-
metric estimators, as well as the development of estimators for dynamic models that allow
for serially correlated unobservables. There has been an increase in the interaction between
empirical I.O. researchers and econometricians, and this bodes well for finding solutions to
these problems.
    Perhaps more surprising was the extent to which issues which have been part of research
programs in economic theory for some time seem critical to furthering our ability to em-
pirically analyze market interactions. Examples include; the empirical researchers’ need for
models of behavior in market situations where it would seem difficult to formulate consistent
prior distributions, the role of learning theory in formulating expectations, the forces guiding
equilibrium selection in different institutional and historical settings, and the understanding
of equilibrium conditions in markets with a small number of agents on each side. There has
been less interaction between theoreticians and empirical I.O. researchers on these topics,
and it may well be that more is needed.
    Recent empirical work in I.O. has worked with a new generation of models which have
both generated an ability to analyze a broader class of market interactions, and provided a
much clearer understanding of causality issues and the assumptions that go into the anal-
ysis of counterfactuals. This, together with related advances in both data generation and
computational power, were major factors in enabling empirical I.O. researchers to analyze
an assortment of substantive issues in a more coherent and realistic way. The combination
of the care with which we approach our specifications and the realism we have tried to build
into our models has also, however, left us with new set of questions, perhaps even a richer
set than those we have focused on thus far.




                                              55
References.
Ackerberg, D., K. Caves, and G. Fraser, 2005, ”Structural Identification of Production Functions,”
mimeo, UCLA.
Ackerberg, D., Berry, S., Benkard, L., and Pakes, A., (forthcoming);”Econometric Tools for An-
alyzing Market Outcomes”, in J. Heckman and E. Leaner (ed.s) The Handbook of Econometrics,
Volume 6.
Andrews, D., 1994, “Asymptotics for Semiparametric Econometric Models via Stochastic Equicon-
tinuity”, Econometrica 62, 1994, pp.43-72.
Andrews, D., Berry, S., and P. Jia (2004), “Confidence Regions for Parameters in Discrete Games
with Multiple Equilibria, with an Application to Discount Chain Store Location,” mimeo Yale
University.
Andrews, D., and P. Guggenberger (2007); “Validity of Subsampling and Plug-in Asymptotic In-
ference for Parameters Defined by Moment Inequalities” Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No.
1620.
Bajari, P., L. Benkard, and J. Levin (2006), “Estimating Dynamic Models of Imperfect Competi-
tion,” Econometrica, forthcoming.
Benkard, L . (2004), “A Dynamic Analysis of the Market for Wide-Bodied Commercial Aircraft,”
Review of Economic Studies, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 581-612.
Berry S., and Reiss P., (forthcoming), “Empirical Models of Entry and Market Structure”, The
Handbook of Industrial Organization, M. Armstrong and R. Porter editors.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes, 1995, ”Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,” Econo-
metrica, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 841-890.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes, 2004, ”Estimating Differentiated Product Demand Systems
from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data: The New Car Model,” Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 112, no. 1, pp. 68-105.
Bertsekas, D., J. Tsitsiklis (1996), Neuro-Dynamic Programming, Athena Scientific Publications.
Besanko, D., Doraszelski, U., Kryukov, Y., and M. Satterthwaite (2007); “Learning-by-Doing,
Organizational Forgetting, and Industry Dynamics”, mimeo Northwestern University.
Chen, X., forthcoming, “Large Sample Sieve Estimation of Semi-nonparametric Models” in J.
Heckman and E. Leaner (ed.s) The Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6.
Cliberto, and E. Tamer, 2006, “Market Structure and Multiple Equilibria in the Airline Markets,”
manuscript.
Collard Wexler, A., 2006 “Demand Fluctuations and Plant Turnover in the Ready-Mix Concrete
Industry”, mimeo, New York University.

                                               56
Crawford, G. and M. Shum, 2005, “Uncertainty and Learning in Pharmaceutical Demand”, Econo-
metrica, 1137-74.
De Loecker, J. M. Melitz, and A. Pakes, in process; “Plant Location Decisions”, mimeo, New York
University.
De Loecker, J., forthcoming, “Do Exports Generate Higher Productivity? Evidence from Solvenia”,
Journal of International Economics.
Davis, S. and J. Haltwanger, 1992, ”Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment
Reallocation”” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 819-64.
Doraszelski, U. and K. Judd (2004), “Solution Methods for Markov Perfect Nash Equilibria of
Continuous Time, Finite State Stochastic Games,”mimeo, Hoover Institution.
Doraszelski, U., and A. Pakes (forthcoming); “A Framework for Dynamic Analysis in Applied I.O;
Computation.”, The Handbook of Industrial Organization, M. Armstrong and R. Porter (ed.s)
Dunne,T., S. Klimek, M. Roberts and Y. Xu, 2005, “Entry and Exit in Geographic Markets”,
mimeo, Pennsylvania State University.
Dunne, T., M. Roberts, and L. Samuelson, 1988, ”Patterns of Firm Entry and Exit in U.S. Manu-
facturing Industries,” Rand Journal of Economics, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 495-515.
Erickson, T., and A. Pakes, 2007, “An Experimental Component Index for the CPI: From Annual
Computer Data to Monthly Data on Other Goods”, mimeo Harvard University.
Ericson, R., and A. Pakes, 1995, “Markov-Perfect Industry Dynamics: A Framework for Empirical
Work,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 53-83.
Esponda, I, forthcoming, “Information Feedback in First Price Auctions”, the Rand Journal of
Economics.
Esteban, S., and M. Shum, 2007, “Durable Goods Oligopoly with Secondary Markets: The Case
of Automobiles” the Rand Journal of Economics.
Fershtman, C. and A. Pakes, 2005, “Finite State Dynamic Games with Asymmetric Information:
A Computational Framework,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Fudenberg, D. and D. Levine, 1993, “Self-Confirming Equilibrium”, Econometrica, Vol. 61, pp.
523-45. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fudenberg, D. and D. Levine, 1999, Learning in Games, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gal-Or, Esther, 1997, “Exclusionary Equilibria in Health-Care Markets” Journal of Economics and
Management Strategy”, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp.5-43.
Gorman, T., 1959, “Separable Utility and Aggregation”, Econometrica Vol. 27, pp. 469-81.



                                              57
Gowrisnakaran G., and M. Rysman (2007) “Dynamics of Consumer Demand for New Durable
Goods” mimeo, Boston University.
Hansen, Lars Peter, and Kenneth J. Singleton, 1982, “Generalized Instrumental Variables Esti-
mation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models”, Econometrica, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1269-86.


Hart O., and J. Tirole, 1990, “Vertical Integration and Market Foreclosure” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity; Microeconomics, pp.205-76.
Hendel, I. and A. Nevo, 2006,”Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer Stockpiling
Behavior”, Econometrica, 74(6),1637-1673.
Ho, K.,2006, ”Insurer-Provider Networks in the Medical Care Market ” mimeo Columbia University.


Ho, K.,2006, ”The Welfare Effects of Restricted Hospital Choice in the US Medical Care Market”
Journal of Applied Econometrics.
Hotz, J. and R. Miller, 1993; “Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic
Models”, The Review of Economic Studies, 60, pp.265-89.
Hotelling, H., 1929, ”Stability in Competition,” Economic Journal, vol. 39, pp. 41-57.
Houthakker, H.S., 1955, ”The Pareto Distribution and the Cobb-Douglas Production Function,”
Review of Economic Studies, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 27-31.
Ishii, J. ,2006, “Interconnection Pricing, Compatibility, and Investment in Network Industries:
ATM Networks in the Banking Industry”, mimeo Stanford University.
Jia, P., 2006, “What Happens When Wal-Mart Comes to Town: An Empirical Analysis of the
Discount Retail Industry”,mimeo MIT.
Judd K.,2007,
Katz, M., 2007, “Supermarkets and Zoning Laws”, Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation Harvard Uni-
versity.
Krasnokutskaya, E, 2006, “Identification and Estimation in Highway Procurement Auctions under
Unobserved Auction Heterogeneity,” mimeo University of Pennsylvania.
Lancaster, K., 1971, Consumer Demand: A New Approach, Columbia University Press, New York.


Lee, R., 2008, “Essays on Platform Competition and Two-Sided Markets”, unpublished Ph.D
dissertation, Harvard University.
Lee, R. and A. Pakes, 2008, “Multiple Equilibria, Selection, and Learning in an Applied Setting”,
mimeo, Harvard University.


                                               58
Levinsohn, J., and A. Petrin, 2003, ”Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control for
Unobservables,” The Review of Economic Studies, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 317-341.
Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (1988) “A Theory of Dynamic Oligopoly: I and II” Econometrica, Vol.56,
pp.549-99.
McFadden, D., 1974 ”Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,” in P. Zarembka
eds. Frontiers of Econometrics, Academic Press, New York.
McFadden, D., 1981, ”Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice,” in C. Manski and D. Mc-
Fadden, eds. Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
McLennan, A., 2005 “The Expected Number of Nash Equilibria of a Normal Form Game” Econo-
metrica, pp. 141-74.
Melnikov, O., 2001, “Demand for Differentiated Products: The case of the U.S. Computer Market”
mimeo, Cornell University.
Morris, S. and H. Shin, 2002, “Heterogeneity and Uniqueness in Interaction Games”, mimeo Yale
University.
Nakamura, E., 2007, “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through” mimeo, Harvard University.
Newey, W., 1994, “ The Asymptotic Variance of Semiparametric Estimators”, Econometrica 62,
1994, pp.1249-82.

Olley, S., and A. Pakes (1996), “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equip-
ment Industry,” Econometrica, vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 1263-1298.
Pakes, A., 1986, ”Patents as Options: Some Estimates of the Value of Holding European Patent
Stocks,” Econometrica, vol. 54, pp. 755-784.
Pakes, A., 2004, ”Common Sense and Simplicity in Industrial Organization” the Review of Indus-
trial Organization, vol. 23, pp. 193-215.
Pakes, A. and P. McGuire (1994), “Computing Markov-Perfect Nash Equilibria: Numerical Impli-
cations of a Dynamic Differentiated Product Model,” Rand Journal of Economics, vol. 25, no. 4,
pp. 555-89.
Pakes, A., and P. McGuire (2001), “Stochastic Approximation for Dynamic Models: Markov Perfect
Equilibrium and the ‘Curse’ of Dimensionality,” Econometrica, vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 1261-81.
Pakes, A., M. Ostrovsky, and S. Berry (2006), “Simple Estimators for the Parameters of Discrete
Dynamic Games (with Entry/Exit Examples),” RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Pakes, A., J. Porter, K. Ho, and J. Ishii, 2006, ”Moment Inequalities and Their Application,”
mimeo, Harvard University.


                                              59
Rust, J. (1987); “Optimal Replacement of GMC Bus Engines; An Empirical Model of Harold
Zurcher”, Econometrica, 55, pp.999-1033.
Rust, J. (1994), “Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes,” in R. F. Engle and D. L.
McFadden (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Volume IV, Elsevier Science, Amsterdam.
Ryan, S. (2007); “The Costs of Environmental Regulation in a Concentrated Industry”, mimeo ,
M.I.T.
Starr, A.W. and Y.C. Ho (1969); “Nonzero-Sum Differential Games”, Journal of Optimization
Theory and Applications, pp.1984-208.
Tamer, E.,2003, ”Incomplete Simultaneous Discrete Response with Multiple Equilibria”, Review of
Economic Studies, pp.147-65.
Young, H.P.,2004, Strategic Learning and Its Limits, Oxford UK, Oxford University Press.


Appendix: Inequalities for Buyer Seller Network With Fixed Effects.
We use the notation introduced for the hospital HMO problem in subsection 4.1.1, and
consider the case in which the {ν2,m,h } are HMO fixed effects;20 i.e. that ∀(h, m), ν2,m,h =
ν2,m . These restrictions generate two sets of inequalities.
     The first is a difference in difference inequality. If an HMO accepts at least one hospital’s
contract and rejects the contract of another, then the sum of the increment in profits from
accepting the contract accepted and rejecting the contract rejected; (i) differences out the
HMO effect and (ii) has a positive expectation. More formally for every h̃ ∈    / Hm and h ∈ Hm
we have
       ∆πmM (Hm , Hm ∪ h̃, ·) + ∆πmM (Hm , Hm \h, ·) = ∆rmM (Hm , Hm ∪ h̃, ·) + ∆rmM (Hm , Hm \h, ·),
which implies that provided x ∈ Jm ∩ Jh and h(·) is a positive valued function
                 h                                                       i
                E ∆rmM (Hm , Hm ∪ h̃, ·; θ0 ) + ∆rmM (Hm , Hm \h, ·; θ0 ) h(x) ≥ 0.

   For the second inequality note that if ν2,m,h = ν2,m we can use the logic leading to equation
(10) in the text to show that for any positive valued function, h(·)
           "                                                                        #
              1 X                                                                
    0≤E               χm,h ∆πhH (Mh , Mh /h, ·) + (1 − χm,h )∆πm
                                                               M
                                                                 (Hm , Hm ∪ h, ·) h(x) =
             #H h
  20
     A more complete analysis of effects models in buyer-seller networks would allow for both buyer and seller
effects. This is a straightforward, though somewhat tedious, extension of the results below. We examine the
HMO effects case in detail because all the contract correlates we use in our analysis are hospital specific, and
we wanted to make sure that the absence of HMO characteristics did not bias the analysis of the impacts of
these hospital specific variables.

                                                      60
    "                                                                             #
     1 X                                                                  
  E       χm,h ∆rhH (Mh , Mh /h, ·; θ) + (1 − χm,h )∆rm
                                                      M
                                                        (Hm , Hm ∪ h, ·; θ) + ν2,m h(x)
    #H h
                                 h r                i
                           ≡ E S (m, ·; θ) + ν2,m h(x).
                    r
This implies that ES (m, ·; θ0 )h(x) ≥ −Eν2,m h(x), and consequently that for any x ∈ Jm ∩Jh
                       h                             r
                                                                 i
                      E ∆rmM (Hm , Hm \h, ·; θ0 ) + S (m, ·; θ0 ) h(x) ≥ 0.




                                            61
                Table 1: Determinants of Hospital/HMO Contracts.

            Data                   Real Data              Simulated Data
            Estimator       Inequality Estimators         OLS Regression
                             ν1 only         ν1 & ν2       Actual Markups
            column       (1)      (2)    (3)      (4)    (5) (6) (7) (8)
                          θ     95% CI    θ     95% CI    θ    s.e.  θ    s.e.
            Variable            UB/LB           UB/LB
            Per Patient Markup (Units = $ thousand/patient)
            Const.       9.5 15.4/4.8 8.2 15.2/3.3 8.9 .09 3.7 .24
            CapCon.      3.5 8.6/1.4 13.5 16.1/2.3 1.2 .10 .48 .11
            Cost/Adm. -.95 -1.5/-.57 -.58 -.2/-1.1 -.39 .01          –     –
            Av.Cost       –        –      –        –      –     – -.23 .01
            Cost-AC       –        –      –        –      –     – -.56 .01
            Pop/bed       –        –      –        –      –     –   .11 .01
            # patient     –        –      –        –      –     – -.09 .01
            HMOmarg       –        –      –        –      –     –   1.4 .10
              2
            R             –        –      –        –        .71        .80

Notes: Real Data. There are 40 markets. CapCon measures whether the hospital would be capacity
constrained if all hospitals contracted with all HMOs, Cost/Adm = hospital cost per admission.
Costs and admissions ∈  / IV.
Simulated Data. These are least squares regressions coefficients from projecting computed markups
onto the included variables. See below for the calculation of equilibrium markups. There are 1385
markets with 2 HMOs and 2 Hospitals in each. This generates approximately the same number
of buyer-seller pairings as in the data set used in the empirical analysis. Additional variables are
defined as follows; “Cost-AC” is the cost per admission of the hospital minus the average of that
over the hospitals in the market, Pop/bed is population over total number of hospital beds in the
market, # patients is number of patients the HMO sends to the hospital, and HMO margin is the
HMO’s average premium minus its average cost.




                                                62
             Table 2: Inequality Estimators: Simulated and Real Data.

         Simulated data: True θ=18.77; true interval with no errors (15.43, 20.62).
         Disturbances                Not In           Average        95% CI of θ
                                        IV           LB     UB      LB       UB
                                  A: Using ν1 inequalities.
                             Only ν1 disturbances; Simulated Data.
         1. 25% Cost                       Cost        14.25 20.77 13.59            21.12
         2. 25% Cost,5% pop           Cost, Nj,k ,Pop 13.36 39.85 12.89             47.50
         3. 25% Cost,5% pop                Cost        14.24 20.68 13.54            21.13
                             ν1 & ν2 disturbances; Simulated Data.
         4. ν2 , costs                     Cost        16.22 21.02 15.48            21.27
         5. ν2 , costs, pop           Cost, Nj,k ,Pop 14.26 34.94 13.88             41.06
                                Actual disturbances; Real Data.
         6. actual disturbances            Cost         8.2    8.2   2.3             16.4
                                  B: Using ν2 inequalities.
                             Only ν2 disturbances; Simulated Data.
         7. ν2 (bootstrap dist)                        18.59 18.59 18.50            18.75
         8. ν2 (normal dist)                           18.80 18.80 18.75            19.00
                             ν1 & ν2 disturbances; Simulated Data.
         9. ν2 ∼ N , Costs, Pop         Costs Pop      18.33 18.33 18.00            18.50
         10 ν2 ∼ N , Costs                Costs        18.79 18.79 18.75            19.00
                                Actual Disturbances; Real Data.
         11. Assume ν2 normal                       Could Not Compute.
                               C: Using Robust inequalities.
                              Robust Inequalities; Simulated Data.
         12. ν2 , costs                    Cost        14.52 n.b. 14.15              n.b.
         13. ν2 , costs, pop          Cost,Nj,k ,Pop 14.25 n.b. 13.88                n.b.
                                Actual Disturbances; Real Data.
         14. Actual Disturbances           Cost        11.7 11.7     3.6             17.9

Notes. Instruments for ν1 and robust inequalities case (unless indicated as omitted); constant, Nj,k ,
hospital cost characteristic and capacity measures, market cost capacity and population measures,
HMO characteristics, and some interactions among above. Instruments for ν2 inequalities are
market averages and sums of above variables. The model used to estimate on Ho’s data allowed
also for a cost coefficient; without that coefficient the estimate of the average markup was negative.



                                                 63
