                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WILL THE STORK RETURN TO EUROPE AND JAPAN? UNDERSTANDING FERTILITY
                    WITHIN DEVELOPED NATIONS

                                           Bruce Sacerdote
                                            James Feyrer

                                        Working Paper 14114
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14114


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We thank James Hines, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Timothy Taylor, Oded Galor and David Weil
for helpful comments. We thank Ann Norman for superb editing. We thank the National Science
Foundation and the Institute for Education Sciences and Dartmouth College for generous support.
This paper was prepared as part of a Journal of Economics Perspective Symposium. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Bruce Sacerdote and James Feyrer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Will the Stork Return to Europe and Japan? Understanding Fertility Within Developed Nations
Bruce Sacerdote and James Feyrer
NBER Working Paper No. 14114
June 2008
JEL No. I0,J13,J16

                                              ABSTRACT

Only a few rich nations are currently at replacement levels of fertility and many are considerably below.
 We believe that changes in the status of women are driving fertility change. At low levels of female
status, women specialize in household production and fertility is high. In an intermediate phase, women
have increasing opportunities to earn a living outside the home yet still shoulder the bulk of household
production. Fertility is at a minimum in this regime due to the increased opportunity cost in women's
foregone wages with no decrease in time allocated to childcare. We see the lowest fertility nations
(Japan, Spain, Italy) as being in this regime. At even higher levels of women's status, men begin to
share in the burden of child care at home and fertility is higher than in the middle regime. This progression
has been observed in the US, Sweden and other countries. Using ISSP and World Values Survey data
we show that countries in which men perform relatively more of the childcare and household production
(and where female labor force participation was highest 30 years ago) have the highest fertility within
the rich country sample. Fertility and women's labor force participation have become positively correlated
across high income countries. The trend in men's household work suggests that the low fertility countries
may see increases in fertility as women's household status catches up to their workforce opportunities.

We also note that as the poor nations of the world undergo the demographic transition they appear
to be reducing fertility faster and further than the current rich countries did at similar levels of income.
 By examining fertility differences between the rich nations we may be able to gain insight into where
the world is headed.


Bruce Sacerdote
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
Bruce.I.Sacerdote@dartmouth.edu

James Feyrer
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Center
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
james.feyrer@dartmouth.edu
       The last 30 years have witnessed a social change unprecedented in human history: a
variety of high-income nations have experienced fertility declines so large that these countries
are far below replacement-level fertility. Total fertility rates in 2005 are as low as 1.3 children
per woman in Italy, Spain, Germany, and Japan (according to <http://unstats.un.org/>). Within
the high-income countries of the world, no countries are solidly above the fertility rate of 2.1
children per women that is needed to replace the population at a constant level, with only the
United States, New Zealand, Ireland, Iceland, and France above 1.9 children per woman.
Absent any change in immigration policy, populations in Italy, Spain, and Germany will all be
declining within the next two decades. Japan’s population began declining in 2005 and will
continue to fall for the indefinite future. While other cultures have had brief episodes of less-
than-replacement-level fertility, this is the first time in recorded history that large populations
with high and growing per capita income have failed to reproduce themselves over an extended
period of time.
       This phenomenon is unlikely to be restricted to the currently high-income countries.
Fertility rates in the majority of developing countries are rapidly moving toward levels below
replacement. If recent evidence from Asia offers any indication, developing countries may be
on a trajectory toward lower long-run fertility than high-income countries. Korea, Singapore,
and Hong Kong all have estimated total fertility rates below 1.5 children per women in 2005,
compared to values in the range of 3.5 to 6.0 children per woman in 1970. Chinese total
fertility rates are near replacement levels nationally and substantially below replacement levels
in urban areas. Hong Kong has the lowest fertility rate in the world at 1.0 child per woman.
India’s current fertility rate of about 3.2 children per women is above replacement rate, but
represents a substantial decline from the 4.5 children per woman rate of 20 years ago.
       As fertility rates around the world rapidly converge towards the fertility rates of the
high-income nations, it seems useful to investigate why some why some high-income nations
have birth rates near replacement level while others are substantially below. We consider a
variety of possible theories to explain the differences in fertility rates across high-income
countries. Our particular focus is on how increases in women’s status over time affect fertility.
       Our underlying assumption is that certain forces that are exogenous with regards to
fertility are increasing the opportunities of women in the workforce. One mechanism may be



                                                                                           2
technological change that favors human capital over physical labor (Galor and Weil, 1996).
Assuming that women are at a comparative disadvantage in physical labor, this gradual change
will tend to increase relative wages for women over time. This increase in women’s labor force
opportunities interacts with preexisting social attitudes about the relative status of women at
home.
         We assume that technological trends are increasing labor market opportunities
everywhere, but that predetermined social differences will generate heterogeneity in the timing
of changes in female status on a country-by-country basis. In particular, we are interested in the
interaction between the increasing status of women in the workforce and their status in the
household, particularly with regards to child care and home production. The latter may be more
affected by longstanding societal attitudes than the former.
         We observe three distinct phases in women’s status generated by the gradual increase in
women’s workforce opportunities. In the earliest phase, characteristic of the 1950s and 1960s
in the United States, women earn low wages relative to men and are expected to shoulder all of
the child care at home. As a result, most women specialize in home production and raising
children.
         In an intermediate category, women have improved (but not equal) labor market
opportunities but their household status lags. Women in this stage are still expected to do the
majority of child care and household production. Increasing access to market work increases
the opportunity cost of having children and fertility falls. Female labor force participation
increases. Working women in this phase of development have the strongest disincentives to
having additional children since the entire burden of child care falls on them.
         In the final phase of development, women’s labor market opportunities begin to equal
those of men. In addition, the increased household bargaining power that comes from more
equal wages results in much higher (if not gender-equal) male participation in household
production.2 Female labor force participation is higher than in the intermediate phase. The
increased participation of men in the household also reduces the disincentives for women to
have additional children, and fertility rates rise compared to the intermediate phase.



2
  It is also reasonable to think that social attitudes move more slowly than the labor market in recognizing
the changing role of women.


                                                                                                               3
       The intermediate, low-fertility phase might describe Japan, Italy, and Spain in the
present day. Labor market opportunities for women in these countries (as proxied by
participation rates) are somewhat lower than the other high-income countries, but more
importantly, the participation of men in household production is much lower in these countries.
The Scandinavian countries, the Netherlands, and the modern-day United States may be
entering the final phase. Male participation in household production is relatively high (and
rising) in these countries, and fertility has risen modestly over the last decade or so despite
continued increases in female participation rates.
       This framework can explain at least two key facts in the data: First, high-income
countries such as Italy, Spain, Germany, and Japan, where men do the smallest fraction of the
household chores and child care (as detailed in the next section), are also the high-income
countries with the lowest fertility rates. Second, within the high-income countries, the cross-
country relationship between fertility and labor force participation has changed markedly over
the last 40 years. In the 1960s and even 1970s, fertility rates and labor force participation rates
were negatively correlated across countries. In the most recent data, the two rates are positively
correlated.
       We think that causality is running from changes in female status to fertility, not the
other way around. The heterogeneity in women’s status is generated by two factors. First,
changes in the nature of work are raising the relative wages of women in the workforce over
time. These changes are a byproduct of human-capital-augmenting technological change and
are therefore exogenous with regards to fertility. Second, heterogeneity between countries is
driven by longstanding cultural differences which move more slowly than fertility rates. In the
long run, cultural attitudes are being driven by common fundamental economic forces, but in
the short run, cultural differences generate timing differences.
       Therefore, the increase in women’s status may eventually reverse fertility trends in
Europe and Japan. In particular, men in all high-income countries appear to be taking on a
larger share of household duties, which could lead to a large positive increase in fertility.
       We also explore various possible market causes of differences in fertility across time
and across developed countries, namely population density and housing prices, but find little
evidence that these factors matter much. We do find that policies that reduce the burden of
caring for children make a difference. Government spending on family support and publicly



                                                                                            4
provided day-care services is positively correlated with fertility. This result is consistent with
the notion that reducing the household cost of having children increases fertility.
       However, given the large cost of raising a child in wealthy, modern societies, it is
somewhat hard to believe that the current subsidy levels can make a significant impact. Peer
effects may play an important role. Because many people imitate their friends, siblings, and
parents in choosing their number of children (Fernandez and Fogli, 2006), policies or
exogenous shocks that have modest effects on fertility at the individual level may have very
large impacts at the macro level thanks to peer effects. This social multiplier could work
through a variety of mechanisms in addition to simple imitation. Societies with larger numbers
of children may develop more family-friendly infrastructure. Businesses in high fertility
countries may cater more to families. This hypothesis also implies that when the pendulum in
Italy, Japan, Germany, and Spain swings back towards higher fertility, it may swing far enough
that these countries could have a baby boom in later decades.


Birth Rate Trends and Patterns


       Our analysis will make repeated use of some key conceptual terms: birth rate, total
fertility rate, and completed fertility rate. A birth rate is the number of children born to a group
of women in a given year divided by the group size.
       To calculate a total fertility rate for a given year, one first calculates birth rates by age
for all women of child-bearing age (for example, ages 15–45). The total fertility rate is the sum
of these birthrates by age. Conceptually the total fertility rate is the number of children a
woman entering her child-bearing years would expect to have if the expected number of births
during each year of her life were equal to the current age-specific birth rates being experienced
by women of child-bearing ages in the current year. A total fertility rate of 2.1 births per
woman is estimated to be the rate at which the population of developed nations will replace
itself; the replacement rate is slightly above 2.0 children per woman because of infant and child
mortality.
       Completed fertility rates are a simpler concept: one computes the number of births per
woman for women who have completed their child-bearing years. For example, in Spain
completed fertility for women born in 1940 is equal to 2.9 compared to 1.6 for women born in



                                                                                            5
1963. In our calculations, completed fertility for both cohorts excludes births to women 45 and
older, though the number of such births is small relative to the mean. Completed fertility rates
reveal the actual experience for an identifiable group of women. But completed fertility rates
by definition ignore available information on fertility for women who are currently in their
child-bearing years. Total fertility rates have the disadvantage of summing across different
cohorts of women who may have different age-specific fertility rates, but have the advantage of
incorporating the most recent information on birth rates for women of child-bearing age in the
population.3
         Figure 1 shows total fertility rates over time for the United States, France, Germany,
Italy, and Japan. The United States in 1955 has a total fertility rate of about 3.5 births per
woman. This rate falls quite rapidly throughout the 1960s and 1970s and flattens out in the
1980s at roughly 1.8 births per woman. Total fertility then rises modestly during the 1990s and
reaches roughly replacement level by 1995.
         Total fertility in France is 2.7 births per woman in 1955 and declines steadily until 1995
to 1.7. At this point, the trend reverses and total fertility climbs to 1.9 births per woman. What
is behind the increase in fertility in France? While definitive causal statements are impossible,
it is widely believed that the French government was able to engineer increased fertility by
offering a combination of more generous tax incentives to families with children, more
generous maternity leave, and several forms of subsidized day care (Moore, 2006). Gatenio-
Gabel and Kamerman (2006) calculate that annual federal subsidies per child in France rose
from $1,793 per child in 1980 to $3,056 per child in 2000 (calculated in 1995 purchasing
power parity dollars). These incentives, working together with a social multiplier effect
(Maurin and Moschion, 2006), may explain some of the increase in French fertility.
         In contrast to the French experience, total fertility in Japan, Italy, and Germany has
continued to decline and in 2005 was down to 1.3 children per woman. Italy decreased its
federal subsidies per child from 1980 to 2000, while Germany increased subsidies per child 67
percent to $2,216 (Gatenio-Gabel and Kamerman, 2006).



3
  Because total fertility rates are an average over many cohorts, these rates are known to be biased
downward if there is a trend toward fertility occurring later in a woman’s life. However, the low fertility
rates in the high-income countries are sufficiently persistent that the observed changes cannot be explained
by timing effects.


                                                                                                           6
Convergence in Fertility Rates
         The most striking fact about fertility rates across countries is the degree of absolute
convergence. Regardless of income levels or income growth, countries around the world
appear to be heading toward a total fertility rate of something less than 2 children per woman.
We show this graphically in Figure 2, using United Nations data on total fertility in 1970 and
2000 for 110 countries. The x-axis is the total fertility rate in 1970 and the y-axis is the change
from 1970 to 2000. Almost every country saw a decrease in total fertility during the 30-year
period, and these decreases were linearly related to the initial level. Countries that had 1970
total fertility rates of 4–5 children per woman had decreases on the order of 2–3 children per
woman over the subsequent 30 years (for example, Cuba, Chile, and Fiji). Countries with 1970
fertility in the range of 3–4 children per woman had decreases on the order of 1 to 2.2 children
per woman over the same period (for example, China, Portugal, Romania, and New Zealand).
The countries in the upper right of Figure 2 are countries that had small fertility decreases
given their initial level. Countries in sub-Saharan Africa are overrepresented in this group.
Though there is a clear negative relationship between income and fertility levels (the
correlation in the cross-section is –0.65), convergence in fertility rates has occurred despite a
lack of convergence in income per capita. The initial level of fertility is by far the most
important right-hand-side variable in any attempt to understand changes in fertility rates across
the full set of countries for which we have data.4


Extensive Versus Intensive Margins
         How much of the long-run decrease in fertility has come from fewer women having any
children (the extensive margin) versus the number of children per woman among those that
have any (the intensive margin)? Both margins are important and the answer varies country by
country. We compared completed fertility rates for 15 high-income countries for women born
in 1940 and women born in 1963. (The latter group is the youngest cohort of women for which
we can reliably estimate completed fertility since they are 44 years old in 2007.) For each
country, we decomposed the total change in completed fertility into the portion attributable to



4
  For more details on convergence in fertility rates across countries, see Appendix Table A1, available with
this paper at <http://www.e-jep.org>.


                                                                                                           7
the change in the number of women having any children and the portion attributable to the
change in children per women conditional on having children.5
        At one extreme, Ireland saw a drop in total fertility of 1.37 births per woman from the
1940 cohort to the 1963 cohort. The bulk of the change in Ireland (0.99 of the 1.37) was
attributable to the intensive margin and the rest was attributable to fewer women having
children at all. In contrast, Germany had a drop of 0.59 births per woman, and this was nearly
all due to the extensive margin. In 10 of the 14 countries we considered (Ireland, Spain,
Portugal, Belgium, France, Netherlands, Italy, Iceland, Norway, and Denmark), the intensive
change in fertility was greater than the extensive; in the other four countries (West Germany,
United Kingdom, Finland, and Sweden) the extensive margin was larger. Perhaps not
surprisingly, the intensive margin plays a larger role for the countries with the largest decreases
in completed fertility over the period: Ireland, Spain, and Portugal.


Determinants of Fertility: Men’s Work at Home, Women’s Market Work, and Childcare
Subsidies


        The twentieth-century decrease in fertility in high-income countries is commonly
associated with five major factors: 1) increases in the demand for human capital (Galor and
Weil, 2000), which increased the desire of parents to produce high-human-capital children; 2)
increases in income which increased the opportunity cost of men’s and women’s time (Becker,
1981); 3) the long-run increase in women’s labor force participation (Mira and Ahn, 2002;
Brewster and Rindfuss, 2000); 4) declines in childhood mortality; and 5) the availability of
easy-to-use and effective contraception for women (Goldin and Katz, 2000, 2002).6 However,
we argue that the changes brought about by the pill or associated with the first waves of
women entering the work force en masse had largely played themselves out by the 1990s, and


5
  For a detailed breakdown of these figures by country, see Appendix Table A2, available with this paper at
<http://www.e-jep.org>. Completed fertility rates are calculated from birth records data available from
Eurostat at <http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu>. We ignore births to women 45 and older in this table in
order to estimate completed fertility for the most recent cohort possible.
6
  Galor (2005) argues from both empirical and theoretical grounds that the demand for human capital is a
more plausible explanation for the demographic transition than a pure income effect or a childhood
mortality effect. The association between women’s labor force participation and fertility could work
through an increase in the opportunity cost of women’s time relative to men’s if the gender gap is
narrowing at the same time that women are entering the workforce (Galor and Weil 1996).


                                                                                                          8
so these factors do little to explain the substantial cross-sectional differences in fertility across
the high-income countries in the early twenty-first century.


Female Labor Force Participation and Fertility Rates
         Higher female labor force participation is generally associated with lower fertility. For
illustration, Figure 3 plots female labor force participation versus total fertility rates for 83
countries in 1995. The relationship is highly significant. A ten-percentage-point increase in
female labor force participation is associated with 0.45 fewer children per women. This slope
has been relatively constant over time in the large sample.
         However, the same relationship for high-income countries has shifted over time (see
also Mira and Ahn, 2002). In 1970, high-income countries with low female labor force
participation were also the ones with high fertility. The coefficient on this relationship in the
1970 sample is not significantly different than in the 83-country sample in Figure 3. However,
among high-income countries, this negative coefficient moves toward zero and becomes
significantly different than the larger sample by 1980. By 1990, the coefficient in high-income
countries between female labor force participation and fertility is not significantly different
from zero. By 2000, the high-income country relationship between fertility and female
participation is upward-sloping.7 Figure 4 shows the relationship between female participation
rates and fertility rates in high-income countries for 1995, the last year with complete data. The
slope is 1.3 and is significant at the 5 percent level. Ireland is an obvious outlier. Dropping
Ireland from the sample increases the slope to 2.0 with a significance level of 0.5 percent; in
other words, a 10 percent increase in female labor force participation is associated with an
increase in total fertility of 0.20 births per woman.
         The underlying process here is that female labor force participation is rising in all high-
income countries from one decade to the next. The coincident changes in fertility suggest that
the relationship between fertility and female labor force participation is U-shaped over time
and that we just observe different pieces of the function in each decade. Below female labor
force participation rates of 50–60 percent, there is a steep negative relationship between female



7
  The relationship between fertility and female labor force participation for each of 1970, 1980, 1990, and
2000 is shown graphically in Appendix Figure A1, available on-line with this paper at <http://www.e-
jep.org>.


                                                                                                              9
labor force participation and fertility. Above 50–60 percent labor force participation for
women, fertility rises modestly with additional female labor force participation.8
         By the year 2000, women in countries like Denmark, Iceland, and Canada, faced
relatively attractive conditions both in the labor market and in child-raising, and thus they
supplied more market labor and more children relative to women in Japan and Italy. As Apps
and Rees (2004) note, within Europe the countries with the lowest fertility are among those
with the lowest rates of female labor force participation.


Male Partners and Child Care
         Our hypothesis is that social attitudes towards women, both in the labor force and with
regard to child-rearing, are affecting both labor force participation and fertility rates. Once the
labor force is freely open to women, cross-country differences in fertility are driven both by
social norms (specifically how much of the child-rearing burden falls on the mother) and by
societal priorities as expressed by the amount of federal and state subsidies that governments
provide to assist families and to encourage natality. The variables most positively correlated
with fertility rates across the high-income countries appear to be: 1) the share of child care
performed by male partners; and 2) the size of federal subsidies for day care. In other words,
the more help women receive in raising young children, the more children they are willing to
produce.
         Low-fertility countries like Italy and Japan are also the ones in which men contribute
the least in terms of child care relative to their spouses and partners. This pattern appears in a
variety of datasets using several different measures of men's effort in child rearing or attitudes
about the appropriate division of labor between mothers and fathers. Our results confirm those
of De Laat and Sevilla Sanz (2006), who also use the International Social Survey Program
(ISSP) data. Fernandez and Sevilla Sanz (2006) show with time use data that in Spain even
women who earn more than their husbands perform a disproportionate share of the child care.
Clearly, one needs to acknowledge the potential endogeneity of male production of child care
and the possibility of reverse causality. Changes in fertility may cause changes in attitudes or

8
  The direct effect of women entering the workforce (which means facing an increased opportunity cost of
their time relative to the increase for men) on fertility may be negative, but the total effect across countries
is positive when we consider that areas with higher status for women in the workplace also offer higher
status for women in the household.


                                                                                                              10
in male child care. In our view, two basic forces drive these societal changes in attitudes. First,
labor markets are evolving in female-friendly directions in all counties around the world. For
example, Galor and Weil (1996) argue that technological change has raised the relative market
wages of women over time. This trend leads to increasing female participation rates over time.
This change is related to the basic nature of work in technologically advanced societies and is
exogenous with respect to fertility. The second factor generating heterogeneity in outcomes is
longstanding attitudinal differences across countries.9 These differing attitudes generate the
observed variation in fertility across the high-income countries in Europe and North America.
         Figure 5 shows the share of “housework and caring for sick children” that is done
by men (as assessed by the female partner) on the horizontal axis and the total fertility
rate for the country on the vertical axis. Data on men’s share of housework/child care is
available in the 1994 International Social Survey Program. Because we are seeking to
focus on the share of housework/child care done by fathers as assessed by mothers, we
limit the sample in each country to women with children under age five. At the country
level, the “housework and caring for sick children” variable has a mean of 0.235 and a
standard deviation of 0.041. The high fertility countries in this group—the United States,
New Zealand, Denmark and Norway—are also the ones with the most equal division of
labor between genders when it comes to housework/child care.10
         One could also use time use data to measure how equally childcare responsibilities are
divided between men and women. Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (in this symposium) examine
time spent performing child care by gender, across countries. The pattern they see across
countries is broadly consistent with the ISSP measure we use. For example, their data imply
that in the U.S. men spend about 48 percent as much time doing child care as women. In
contrast, men in Germany spend about 37 percent as much time as women doing child care; the
same number for Italy is 39 percent.



9
  Time use data and participation rate data suggest that attitudes toward women are highly correlated over
time within counties. Female participation rate rankings among the rich countries are relatively static
between 1970 and 2000.
10
   The microlevel relationship between men’s percent of the housework/child care and family size goes
consistently in the opposite direction: families in which the man does only a small fraction of the
housework/child care are on average larger families. We interpret this pattern as reflecting sorting into
family types—for instance, families where men are working and women are staying home with many
children would contribute to this pattern.


                                                                                                         11
       In Table 1, we further investigate the connection between men’s housework/child care
and fertility. Column 1 of the table shows the regression coefficient from Figure 5. The
coefficient on men’s share of the housework/child care is 4.2, which implies that a one-
standard-deviation increase in men's share of housework/child care is associated with an
increase in the fertility rate of 0.17 children. In the second column, we use as the independent
variable the female labor force participation rate in the 30–35 age group. The coefficient is
positive but not significant.
       In the third column, we use per-child government spending on families as the
independent variable. For these data, we use the OECD Social Expenditure (SOCX) 2007
                                                                                         11
database, which measures governmental social spending on a variety of topics.                 We use
federal government spending on families, which includes both cash benefits, such as family
allowances and payments for maternity leave, and also in-kind benefits, including childcare
subsidies or state-provided child care. We convert these data from percent of GDP to dollars
per child in year 2000 (purchasing power parity) dollars. We use the log of spending per child
under 15 as our right-hand-side variable. Column 3 of Table 1 shows that in a regression where
log spending per child is the only regressor, a doubling of spending is associated with an
increase in the fertility rate of 0.15 children, which is marginally significant, at the 10 percent
level. This coefficient is consistent with the results of numerous (much more detailed) studies
which find that pro-natalist policies work. For example, Björklund (2006) finds that large
increases in family spending in Sweden during 1960–1980 raised completed fertility rates by
0.4 children per women relative to other Scandanavian countries. Milligen (2005) finds that the
elasticity of child subsidies to fertility rates in Quebec data is 0.107. In other words; in the long
run, a doubling of subsidies (a 100 percent increase) leads to a 10.7 percent increase in
birthrates, and hence total fertility rises by about 0.21 children. Whittington, Alm, and Peters
(1990) estimate a 12 to 24 percent increase in the birthrate from a doubling of the personal
exemption in the U.S. tax code, which corresponds to a 0.24 to 0.48 child increase in the total
fertility rate. For similar results, see Sundström and Stafford (1992) for Sweden and McNown
and Ridao-cano (2004) for Canada.



11
  This is available at
<http://www.oecd.org/document/9/0,3343,en_2649_34819_38141385_1_1_1_1,00.html>.


                                                                                              12
        When all three regressors are included (column 4 of Table 1), the share of
housework/child care done by men is more correlated with fertility than is female labor force
participation or family spending. Family spending and share of male housework/child care are,
however, very highly correlated with each other. Societies that are more effective at sharing the
burden of children across the genders also tend to be more generous in supporting children in
the public sphere.12
        We also investigated possible connections between fertility rates and societal attitudes
towards fathers performing child care and towards working mothers, using data from the
World Values Survey. For example, we ran a regression with countries’ total fertility rates as
the dependent variable and as the explanatory variable, the share of adults (men and women)
who strongly agreed with the statement that “fathers are as suited as mothers for childcare.”
We found a large and statistically significant relationship with fertility: a one-standard-
deviation increase in the percent of people in a country who agreed with that statement is
associated with a 0.13 child increase in total fertility. Similarly, we ran a regression with the
total fertility rate as the dependent variable and, as the explanatory variable, the percent of
people in a country who agreed or strongly agreed with the statement that “a working mother
can establish just as warm and secure a relationship with her children as a mother who does not
work.” A one-standard-deviation increase in the percent of respondents who agreed with that
statement is associated with a .17 increase in the total fertility rate. This coefficient is
statistically significant at the 5 percent level.




Types of Government Family Subsidies and Fertility
        In Table 2, we use the same OECD data to look more deeply at the effects of various
forms of government family subsidies on fertility. We have data on the number of legally
required weeks of paid maternity and paternity leave, as well as various forms of family-related
spending by the government as a percentage of GDP. Column 1 regresses the total fertility rate
on federally mandated full-time equivalent paid weeks of maternity and paternity leave. An
additional week of paid paternity leave is associated with a relatively small increase in total


12
  We ran similar regressions using data from the 1994 wave of the ISSP and found
similar results.


                                                                                        13
fertility of 0.03 children. The coefficient on weeks of maternity leave is negative and
statistically significant in the “wrong” direction, although the effect is small. This finding may
reflect the endogeneity of pro-child policies (countries with low fertility may respond by
increasing maternity leave). The correlation between maternity and paternity leave is
surprisingly small, but the general results are robust to including these coefficients separately.
       In column 2, we switch to examining the effects of government spending on families on
fertility. A one-percentage-point increase in spending as a percent of GDP (which would be
roughly equal to doubling the level of spending at the mean, or an increase of two standard
deviations) is associated with an increase of 0.12 children per woman. In column 3, we
experiment with separating government spending on families into cash subsidies, federally
provided services, and tax subsidies. The coefficients on all three categories are similar and
only the coefficient on cash subsidies is marginally significant. All three forms of pro-family
government spending appear to be associated with higher fertility, but we can't distinguish
among their effects.
       In column 4, we separate from the “services” category publicly provided preschool and
day care. “Publicly provided day care” has the largest coefficient (0.37) relative to the other
categories, although this variable is significant only at the 10 percent level. A doubling of
spending on day care (from 0.37 percent of GDP to 0.74) is associated with 0.13 more children
per woman. We take this as some evidence that publicly provided day care may be an effective
pro-natalist policy. This finding is consistent with Blau and Robins (1989) and with Del Boca
(2002), who finds large effects on fertility in Italy from increasing the availability of free day
care for young children.
       It may seem counterintuitive that modest levels of effort by men around the house,
federal subsidies of a few thousand dollars per year, or even free day care can have a large
effect on fertility, given that the time-related costs of raising a child remain very large. The
financial costs of raising a child may be on the order of $11,600 per year (Lino, 2006). It may
be that intuition is misguided here, and individuals’ fertility decisions are in fact very elastic
with respect to cash subsidies and low-cost day care. However, there may also be peer effects
or “social multipliers” in couples’ choices about number of children. It seems likely that people
use their friends, family, and neighbors as a cue to decide how many children to have. For
example, Fernandez and Fogli (2005) offer evidence on cultural effects on fertility, and Maurin



                                                                                           14
and Moschion (2006) present evidence on neighborhood effects. The post–World War II baby
boom in the United States was far larger than would be justified by catching-up delayed
fertility. Indeed, many of the cohorts of women who contributed to the baby boom were not
even of child-bearing age during World War II.
         In short, social attitudes and norms and subsidies to families, and day care in particular,
play an important role in determining levels of fertility and appear to have enough influence to
push developed countries above or below replacement level fertility.13 These norms directly
affect the opportunity costs that women face when they choose to have children, on both the
extensive and intensive margins.


Housing as an Equilibrating Mechanism for Fertility
         One additional hypothesis sometimes suggested to explain differences in fertility across
the high-income countries is that exogenous differences in housing costs might be driving
different preferences for family size. After all, land is comparatively plentiful in the United
States, and median housing sizes are much bigger in the United States than in Italy or Spain.
The hypothesis that housing costs affect fertility also suggests an equilibrating mechanism for
fertility. For example, low fertility could reduce the demand for housing, making housing less
expensive and thus encouraging greater fertility.
         However, using country-level data or regional data within the United States, there is no
evidence that housing prices have been a major driver of fertility. For the high-income
countries as a whole, looking at housing cost data obtained from the OECD, neither levels nor
changes in housing prices seem correlated with fertility rates. For regions within the United
States, we calculate state-level total fertility from the 1980 and 2000 Censuses using the
Individual Public Use Micro data, and gathered housing price data from the Office of Federal
Housing Oversight’s repeat sales index (available at <http://www.ofheo.gov/>). If anything,
the U.S. states and metropolitan statistical areas that have seen the largest increases in housing
prices have also seen the largest relative increases in total fertility.

13
   For example, a doubling of government spending on families is associated with an increase in the total
fertility rate of 0.13 child, and a one-standard-deviation increase in the fraction of household work done by
men is associated with an increase in the total fertility rate of 0.21 child. Combining these effects would be
enough to move France, Norway, or the United Kingdom from below replacement rate fertility to above.
However, Italy, Spain, Germany, and Japan had total fertility rates of 1.3 in 2005 and thus would not be
moved above replacement rate fertility in this calculation.


                                                                                                            15
        One can certainly argue that either the endogeneity of house prices and population or
omitted variables (like income) make these correlations (or the lack of such correlations
impossible to interpret. We suspect that the positive correlation between house price changes
and fertility changes across U.S. states is partly driven by convergence in fertility rates across
the states. The rural high fertility states in the Midwest (North Dakota), far West (Wyoming,
Alaska), and South (Oklahoma) have seen rapid convergence towards the lower fertility levels
of the Northeast and West Coast. Meanwhile the Northeast and California have had modest
increases in fertility. However, the large increases in housing costs on the West Coast and in
the Northeast likely have little to do with birth rates.


Will the Fertility Trend in Europe and Japan Reverse?


        The arguments of this paper suggest that, for a variety of reasons, high-income
countries with the lowest fertility rates are likely to see an increase in fertility in the coming
decades. If we think of labor force participation rates as a crude index of women’s status in the
labor market, many of the European countries with the lowest birthrates also have the lowest
levels of women’s labor force status. If the labor force status of women is gradually increasing
(and all indications suggest that it is), the U-shaped relationship between female participation
rates and fertility suggests that we should see modest increases in fertility in these high-income
countries over the coming decades.
        Similarly, we have identified two indicators of the degree to which society shares the
child-rearing burden with women: government spending on families (especially day care) and
men's share of time spent on child care. Both of these indicators have a steep positive
association with fertility and each appears to be trending upward in European countries. There
has been a steady increase in men’s share of child care throughout the high-income countries
during the last 25 years. Using the Multinational Time Use Survey, we compute the total hours
per week of child care for own children produced by both men and women. We included all
categories of child-related activities such as bathing children, cooking for children, caring for
sick children, reading to children, and so on. We limit the samples to men and women ages 25–
55 with children age five and under in the household. At the country level, we calculate the
fraction of such hours supplied by women. Figure 6 shows the results for five countries. In the



                                                                                         16
United States, for example, women were providing roughly 83 percent of the child care in
1975, falling to 62 percent by 2000. The time trend was similar in the United Kingdom, the
Netherlands, Canada, and Norway.
       In Italy in the 1990s, women were doing about 73 percent of the child care—about 10
percentage points more than U.S. women at the time. If Italian men were to increase their
fraction of child care to the level of the U.S. men (and if we take our coefficients in Table 1 to
represent a causal relationship), Italy would see a large 0.5 children per women increase in the
total fertility rate. This calculation is of course speculative. In fact, men doing housework is
probably not precisely the true variable of interest. Rather, it is a marker for how societies view
the burden of raising children. Low-fertility, high-income countries have considerable scope
for greater equality in the allocation of the burdens of child care between men and women.
       Public policy may play a role in raising birth rates as well. In general, government pro-
family spending has been trending upward over time. Average government spending on day
care in the high-income countries of the OECD has more than doubled over the last 20 years.
France appears to have generated a substantial increase in fertility in part by doubling child
subsidies over the past 20 years. If the voters in Spain and Italy want to affect the same
demographic transformation, it may be possible in these countries as well.
       Fertility rates in the high-income countries of the world appear to be determined by an
array of social processes that go beyond the effects of relative wages, income, and labor force
participation. A massive convergence in national fertility rates is leading to a world that looks
very much like the low-fertility European countries in terms of the number of children per
woman. However, in the lowest fertility European countries the progress of women is limited
both in the workforce and in the household relative to other high-income countries. We see this
as a temporary state. The social structure in these countries and the division of child care has
led women to choose to have fewer children than did their mothers, but we see no reason why
these social factors cannot also work in the other direction and lead to future increases in
fertility. However, we readily confess that much remains to be learned about the effects of
men’s and women’s allocation of childcare and household responsibilities and about the effects
of pro-family government subsidies on changes in fertility rates.




                                                                                          17
References




Alvarez, Begoña, and Daniel Miles. 2003.” Gender Effects on Housework Allocation:
Evidence from Spanish Two-Earners Couples.” Journal of Population Economics, 16(2): 277–
42.

Apps, Patricia, and Ray Rees. 2004. “Fertility, Taxation and Family Policy.” Scandinavian
Journal of Economics, 106(4): 745–63.

Becker, Gary. 1981. “A Treatise on the Family.” Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
pp. 93–112. (Revised and Enlarged in 1991.)

Björklund, Anders. 2006 “Does Family Policy Affect Fertility? Lessons from Sweden.”
Journal of Population Economics, 19(1): 3–24.

Blau, David M., and Philip K. Robins. 1989. Fertility, Employment, and Child-Care Costs,
Demography, 26(2): 287–99

Brewster, Karin L., and Ronald R. Rindfuss. 2000. “Fertility and Women’s Employment in
Industrialized Nations.” Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 26, pp. 271–96.

De Laat, Joost, and Sevilla Sanz, Almudena. 2006. “Working Women, Men’s Home Time and
Lowest-Low Fertility.” ISER Working Paper 2006-23, Institute for Social and Economic
Research, University of Essex.

Del Boca, Daniela. 2002. “The Effects of Child Care and Part Time Opportunities on
Participation and Fertility Decisions in Italy.” Journal of Population Economics, 15(3): 549–
73.

Dunn, Robert, Jr. 2003. “Subsidies for Childbearing and Fertility Rates.” Challenge, 46(5): 90–
99.

Fernández, Cristina, and Almudena Sevilla Sanz. 2006. “Social Norms and Household Time
Allocation.” ISER Working Paper 2006-38, Institute for Social and Economic Research,
University of Essex.

Fernández, R., and A. Fogli. 2005. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs,
Work, and Fertility.” NBER Working Paper 11268.

Fernández, R., and A. Fogli. 2006. “Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family
Experience.” Journal of the European Economic Association, April–May, 4(2–3): 552–
56.




                                                                                       18
Galor, Oded. 2005. “From Stagnation to Growth: Unified Growth Theory.” In Handbook of
Economic Growth, Volume 1A., ed. Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf. Amsterdam:
Elsevier.

Galor, Oded, and David Weil. 1996. “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth.” American
Economic Review, 86(3): 374–87.

Galor, Oded, and David Weil. 2000. “Population, Technology and Growth: From Malthusian
Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond.” American Economic Review, 90(4):
806–28.

Gatenio-Gabel, Shirley, and Sheila B. Kamerman. 2006. “Investing in Children: Public
Commitment in Twenty-one Industrialized Countries.” Social Service Review, 80(2): 239–63.

Gauthier, Anne Helene, and Jan Hatzius. 1997. “Family Benefits and Fertility: An Econometric
Analysis.” Population Studies, 51(3): 295–306.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2000. “Career and Marriage in the Age of the Pill.”
The American Economic Review, 90(2): 461–65.

Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2002. “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(4): 730–70.

Lino, Mark. 2006. “Expenditures on Children by Families, 2005.” U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Center for Nutritional Policy and Promotion, Miscellaneous Publication 1528-
2005. http://www.cnpp.usda.gov/Publications/CRC/crc2005.pdf.

Maurin, Eric, and Moschion, Julie. 2006. “The Social Multiplier and Labour Market
Participation of Mothers.” IZA Discussion Paper 2513, Institute for the Study of Labor.

McNown, Robert, and Cristóbal Ridao-cano. 2004. “The Effect of Child Benefit Policies on
Fertility and Female Labor Force Participation in Canada.” Review of Economics of the
Household, 2(3): 237–54.

Milligin, Kevin. 2005. “Subsidizing the Stork: New Evidence on Tax Incentives and Fertility.”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 87(3): 539–55.

Mira, Pedro, and Namkee Ahn. 2002. “A Note on the Changing Relationship between Fertility
and Female Employment Rates in Developed Countries.” Journal of Population Economics,
15(4): 667–82.

Moore, Molly. 2006. “As Europe Grows Grayer, France Devises a Baby Boom.”
Washington Post, Wednesday, October 18, p. A01.




                                                                                      19
Sevilla Sanz, Almudena. 2007. “Division of Household Labor and Cross-Country Differences
in Household Formation Rates.” Economics Series Working Paper 325, University of Oxford,
Department of Economics.

Sundström, Marianne, and Frank P. Stafford. 1992. “Female Labour Force Participation,
Fertility and Public Policy in Sweden.” European Journal of Population, 8(3): 199–215.

Whittington, Leslie A., James Alm, and H. Elizabeth Peters. 1990. “Fertility and the Personal
Exemption: Implicit Pronatalist Policy in the United States.” American Economic Review,
80(3): 545–56.




                                                                                       20
Table 1
Total Fertility Rate versus Male Housework/Childcare, Female Labor Force
Participation Rate, and Federal Government Spending on Children

                                               (1)                (2)               (3)                (4)

                                   Total fertility Total fertility Total fertiliy Total fertility
                                      rate 2002       rate 2002      rate 2002       rate 2002

  Male housework/child                      4.182                                                    5.23
  care
                                      (1.431)***                                               (2.207)**

  Female labor force                                           0.659                               -0.725
  participation rate, ages
  30–35
                                                             (0.564)                              (0.726)

  ln(spending per child)                                                        0.146               0.046
                                                                             (0.082)*             (0.106)

  Constant                                  0.025             1.148              0.511             -0.199
                                          (0.558)         (0.433)**            (0.634)            (0.643)
  Observations                                 18                18                 17                 17
  R-squared                                 0.348             0.079              0.176              0.425


Sources: Total fertility rate is from United Nations data. “Spending per child” is the federal government’s
family spending per child and is calculated from data at the OECD Social Expenditure Database. Female
labor force participation is from the OECD. The male housework and childcare variable is from the 2002
waves of the International Social Survey Program.
Notes: We limit the sample to women with children in the household. The relevant question asks what
portion of the housework and caring for sick children is done by their spouse or male partner. Standard
errors are in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                          21
Table 2
Total Fertility Rate versus Family Leave and Various Forms of Government
Spending on Families

                                                            (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)
                                                          Total            Total            Total            Total
                                                  fertility rate   fertility rate   fertility rate   fertility rate
                                                           2000             2000             2000             2000

  Federally mandated paid maternity leave               -0.024
  (full-time equivalent weeks)
                                                   (0.007)***
  Federally mandated paid paternity leave                0.030
  (full-time equivalent weeks)
                                                      (0.015)*
  Federal family spending                                                 0.122
  (as a percent of GDP)
                                                                      (0.046)**
  Cash subsidies                                                                           0.114
  (as a percent of GDP)
                                                                                        (0.061)*
  Federally provided family services                                                       0.137
  (as a percent of GDP)
                                                                                         (0.086)
  Tax subsidies to families                                                                0.122
  (as a percent of GDP)
                                                                                         (0.174)
  Publicly provided preschool education                                                                    -0.129
  (as a percent of GDP)
                                                                                                          (0.370)
  Publicly provided day care                                                                                0.367
  (percent of GDP)
                                                                                                         (0.180)*
  Constant                                               1.865            1.324            1.322            1.552
                                                   (0.099)***        (0.125)***      (0.135)***       (0.130)***
  Observations                                               23               23               23               22
  R-squared                                              0.404            0.254            0.256            0.203


Note: Standard errors are in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                                                                                  22
Figure 1
Total Fertility Rates over Time




       4




       3




                                                                             United States
       2
                                                                                         France

                                                         Germany Japan

                                                                                      Italy
       1
           1955   1960   1965   1970    1975   1980    1985    1990   1995    2000    2005




Source: Data are from the United Nations and are available at <http://unstats.un.org/unsd/default.htm>.




                                                                                                          23
Figure 2
Convergence in Fertility at the Country Level: Change in Total Fertility 1970–2000
versus Initial Level




Source: Total fertility rates and changes are from United Nations data.
Note: Points on graph are labeled using standard World Bank/UN country abbreviations available at
<http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm>.


eap- East Asia and Pacific, mena – Middle East and North Africa, we – Western Europe, ssa – Sub Saharan
Africa, eca – East Central Asia, sa- South Asia, na – North America, lac – Latin America and Carribean




                                                                                                    24
Figure 3
Total Fertility versus Female Labor Force Participation in 1995




Source: Total fertility rates are from United Nations data. Labor force participation rates are from the International
Labour Organization.
Note: Points on graph are labeled using standard World Bank/UN country abbreviations available at
<http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm>.




                                                                                                                  25
Figure 4
Total Fertility versus Female Labor Force Participation in High-Income Countries, 1995




Source: Total fertility rates are from United Nations data. Labor force participation rates are from the International
Labour Organization.
Note: Points on graph are labeled using standard World Bank/UN country abbreviations available at
<http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm>.




                                                                                                                  26
Figure 5
Total Fertility Rate versus Share of Housework/Child Care Done by Men in 2000




Sources: Total fertility rates are from United Nations data. Data on men's work are from the 2002 wave of the
International Social Survey Program.
Notes: Details on variable construction: We start with 4 survey question in which each household adult is asked
who usually performs the following activities: 1) laundry, 2) caring for sick family members, 3) cleaning, 4)
preparing meals. The possible responses in the raw data are 1) always me, 2) usually me, 3) about equal between
me and my spouse, 4) usually my spouse, 5) always my spouse. We limit the sample to households with children
under five and with both a man and woman present. We use the woman’s responses and convert the raw data to
the percentage done by the man, as assessed by the woman. We use the following recoding of the data: “always
the woman” = 0 percent done by the man; “usually the woman” = 25 percent done by the man; “about equal” = 50
percent done by the man; “usually the man” = 75 percent done by the man; and “always the man” equals 100
percent done by the man. We then average the percent done by the man across the four categories of housework.
Points on graph are labeled using standard World Bank/UN country abbreviations available at
<http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm>.




                                                                                                            27
Figure 6
Women's Share of Total Childcare Hours: Multinational Time Use Survey Data




       .8



       .75
                          Canada


       .7                 Norway                                               Netherlands


                                                                               UK
       .65


                                                                               US
       .6
         1975             1980            1985             1990            1995              2000



Source: Data are from the Multinational Time Use Survey.
Note: We limit the sample to men and women 25–55 who have children under five in the household. We calculate
hours per week spent on child care for men and women and we average at the country level to find the proportion
of those hours that are reported by women.




                                                                                                            28
Appendix

Table A1
Convergence in Fertility across Countries

                                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)
                                                                      Total          Total          Total
                                                                   fertility      fertility      fertility
                                                                 rate 2000      rate 2000      rate 2000

             Total fertility rate 1970                               0.499          0.531           0.53
                                                                (0.057)***     (0.054)***     (0.082)***

             Female labor force participation rate, age                             1.854          1.853
             30–34, 1970
                                                                               (0.553)***     (0.574)***

             ln(GDP per capita) 1970                                                              -0.001
                                                                                                 (0.186)

             Constant                                                 0.302       –0.556         –0.544
                                                                    (0.277)       (0.363)        (1.951)
             Observations                                                67            67             67
             R-squared                                                0.541          0.61           0.61



Note: Total fertility rate, labor force participation rate, and GDP per capita data are from the United Nations
database available at <http://unstats.un.org/>. Standard errors in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                  29
          Table A2
          Change in Completed Fertility Rate for Cohorts of Women Born 1940 and 1963,
          Extensive and Intensive Margins

                      Change in completed fertility 1940–1963                   Levels of completed fertility for 1940 and 1963 cohorts
                       Completed     Extensive        Intensive   Completed      Completed      Extensive       Extensive    Intensive    Intensive
                          fertility                                 fertility       fertility
                              rate                                      rate            rate
Country                   change          share         share          1940           1963          1940          1963          1940         1963

Ireland                     -1.37         -0.38         -0.99           3.69           2.32          0.95          0.84          3.87         2.76
Spain                       -1.36         -0.21         -1.15           2.94           1.58          0.92          0.84          3.19         1.89
Portugal                    -0.81         -0.08         -0.73           2.58           1.76          0.94          0.91          2.73         1.94
West Germany                -0.59         -0.54         -0.05           1.97           1.38          0.89          0.65          2.21         2.14
Belgium                     -0.59         -0.28         -0.30           2.17           1.58          0.91          0.78          2.38         2.02
United Kingdom              -0.52         -0.36         -0.16           2.36           1.84          0.89          0.75          2.65         2.45
France                      -0.49         -0.17         -0.32           2.41           1.92          0.92          0.85          2.64         2.27
Netherlands                 -0.45         -0.17         -0.28           2.21           1.76          0.88          0.81          2.52         2.19
Italy                       -0.39         -0.12         -0.27           1.91           1.51          0.87          0.81          2.18         1.86
Iceland                     -0.38          0.26         -0.65           2.90           2.52          0.89          0.98          3.25         2.56
Norway                      -0.29         -0.04         -0.25           2.36           2.07          0.91          0.89          2.60         2.33
Denmark                     -0.22         -0.04         -0.18           2.10           1.88          0.90          0.88          2.33         2.13
Finland                     -0.12         -0.17          0.04           2.03           1.91          0.86          0.79          2.37         2.43
Sweden                      -0.04         -0.05          0.01           1.98           1.94          0.87          0.85          2.28         2.29




          Note: “Extensive margin” is defined as the percentage of women in the cohort having at least one child. “Intensive
          margin” is defined as the average number of children for women with at least one child. Completed fertility rates
          are calculated from birth records data available from Eurostat at <http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu>. We take two
          cohorts of women (those born in 1940 and 1963) and calculate their completed fertility rates (children per
          woman). We decompose the change in completed fertility rate into the portions attributable to the extensive and
          intensive margins. We make use of the fact that “completed fertility rate” = “extensive margin” * “intensive
          margin.” We take logs and first-difference this identity to arrive at the decomposition.




                                                                                                                                     30
Figure A1
Total Fertility versus Labor Force Participation: 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000




Note: Points on graph are labeled using standard World Bank/UN country abbreviations available at
<http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm>.




                                                                                                    31
