NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FINANCIALLY CONSTRAINED FLUCTUATIONS IN AN EVOLVING NETWORK
ECONOMY
Domenico Delli Gatti
Mauro Gallegati
Bruce C. Greenwald
Alberto Russo
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Working Paper 14112
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14112

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

We are grateful for insightful comments and criticisms to participants to the Eastern Economic Association
meeting, New York City, February 2007, the Net-Work-shop at Catholic University in Milan, April
2007 and the Annual Meeting of the Italian Economists' Society in Turin, October 2007. Special thanks
to Duncan Foley, whose detailed comments have been especially useful. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro Gallegati, Bruce C. Greenwald, Alberto Russo, and Joseph
E. Stiglitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Financially Constrained Fluctuations in an Evolving Network Economy
Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro Gallegati, Bruce C. Greenwald, Alberto Russo, and Joseph E.
Stiglitz
NBER Working Paper No. 14112
June 2008
JEL No. E3
ABSTRACT
We explore the properties of a credit network characterized by inside credit - i.e. credit relationships
connecting downstream (D) and upstream (U) firms - and outside credit - i.e. credit relationships connecting
firms and banks. The structure of the network changes over time due to the preferred-partner choice
rule: each agent chooses the partner who charges the lowest price. The net worth of D firms turns out
to be the driver of fluctuations. U production, in fact, is determined by demand of intermediate inputs
on the part of D firms and production of the latter is financially constrained, i.e. determined by the
availability of internal finance proxied by net worth. The output of simulations shows that at the macroeconomic
level a business cycle can develop as a consequence of the complex interaction of the agents' financial
conditions. We can also reproduce the main stylized facts of firms' demography, i.e. the power law
distribution of firms' size and the Laplace distribution of firms' growth rates.

Domenico Delli Gatti
Istituto di Teoria Economica
Universita' Cattolica
Largo Gemelli, 1
20123 Milano
domenico.delligatti@unicatt.it
Mauro Gallegati
Dipartimento di Economia
Facolta' di Economia Giorgio Fua'
Universita' Politecnica delle Marche
Piazzale Martelli, 8
60121 Ancona
mauro.gallegati@univpm.it
Bruce C. Greenwald
Columbia University
611 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
bg7@columbia.edu

Alberto Russo
Dipartimento di Economia
Facolta' di Economia Giorgio Fua'
Universita' Politecnica delle Marche
Piazzale Martelli, 8
60121 Ancona
albrusso@univpm.it
Joseph E. Stiglitz
Uris Hall, Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Room 814
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
jes322@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Networks are the main subject of a rapidly growing literature which applies
the conceptual and analytical tools already developed in sociology, computer
science and physics to economics and/or provides new notions and methods
to be applied specifically to economic phenomena. Recent books by Jackson (2008), Vega-Redondo (2007) and Goyal (2007) describe the frontier of
research on economic networks.1
The complex pattern of credit relationships is a natural research issue to
be dealt with by means of network analysis. It is straightforward to think of
agents as nodes and of debt contracts as links in a credit network. There are
indeed influential examples of network analysis applied to credit networks.
Allen and Gale (2000), for instance, put forward a theory of “financial
contagion” in a network model of the interbank market. In this case, however,
the networks considered are very simple and easy to study because they
consist of few nodes organized in canonical forms. A non-negligible and
growing literature has developed from these premises on the network of the
interbank market (Freixas, Parigi and Rochet, 2000; Furfine, 2003; Boss,
Elsinger, Summer and Thurner, 2004; Iori et al., 2006; Nier et al., 2007).
A different but no less important line of network research (Boissay, 2006;
Battiston et al., 2007) focuses on the trade-credit relationships within the
corporate sector, i.e. among suppliers of intermediate goods and producers
of final goods along the “supply chain”.
These strands of network literature analyze specific credit relationships:
among banks on the interbank market or among firms along the supply chain.
Building upon ideas expounded first in Stiglitz and Greenwald (2003, chapter
7), in Delli Gatti et al. (2006) we have pursued a more general and “encompassing” line of research. We have modelled a credit network consisting of
households, firms and banks. Agents are linked by inside credit (i.e. credit
relationships connecting firms belonging to different layers of the same industry – the corporate sector – or connecting banks on the interbank market)
and outside credit (i.e. credit relationships connecting agents belonging to
different sectors, i.e. banks and firms).
In that paper, the network is static, i.e. its structure does not change
1

See also the extensive surveys on network formation by Jackson and on learning in
networks by Goyal in the the book edited by Demange and Wooders (2005). Caldarelli
(2007) analyzes networks from the physicist’s point of view. His book presents plenty of
applications to different fields, economics being only one of them.

2

over time. The specific contribution of the present paper is the introduction
of a mechanism for the endogenous evolution of the network structure, the
preferred-partner choice rule.
Jackson (2005) distinguishes between a random graph approach to network formation, borrowed from physics, and the game theoretic approach
specifically designed to deal with economic networks. The former is, in a
sense, “mechanical”: network formation is purely stochastic or the product
of an ad hoc algorithm. The latter focuses on “equilibrium” networks, where
links are formed as a consequence of cost-benefit analysis on the part of
self-interested agents.
The approach followed in the present paper is half-way between the two:
the preferred partner choice rule allocates links to nodes as a consequence
of the search for the lowest price. In every period, an agent in search of a
partner in a transaction – a customer in search of a supplier, a firm in search
of a bank – chooses the partner who posts the minimum price in a randomly
selected subset of agents; if the minimum price is lower than the price the
agent paid to the old partner in the previous period, he will switch to the
new partner, otherwise he will stick to the old one. The number of links
connecting the nodes changes over time so that the topology of the network
is also in a process of continuous evolution.
Central to this picture is information, not only about the conditions of the
parties in a credit relationship but also about the incentives that they face.
Lenders have to assess the risk involved in extending credit to borrowers,
i.e. their ability and willingness to fulfill debt obligations. But information is asymmetric so that such an assessment is at best incomplete: all the
issues crucial to modelling borrowers’ and lenders’ behaviour in an asymmetric information context are relevant also in designing the network of credit
relationships. In this context, a simple and easily available indirect sign
of the borrowers’ creditworthiness is a measure of their financial soundness
captured, for instance, by net worth.
In the credit network we consider, households are final consumers laboursuppliers. The corporate sector consists of two layers of firms. Downstream
(D) firms produce consumption goods, while upstream (U) firms supply intermediate inputs to D firms. Banks extend credit to firms in both layers. D
firms are pure borrowers: they borrow from U firms (trade credit) and from
banks (bank loans). Banks are pure lenders: they lend to D and U firms. U
firms are borrowers and lenders at the same time: they borrow from banks
and lend to D firms.
3

Adopting a financing hierarchy perspective, we assume that the scale of
production of D firms is constrained only by their net worth. Since U output
is determined by the input requirements of D firms, the net worth of D firms
turns out to be the main driver of fluctuations. Changes in the net worth of
D firms, in fact, brings about changes in the same direction of U production.
An unexpected shock to a D firm affects the credit relationship between the
firm and its supplier, on the one hand, and between the firm and the bank
on the other.
If the shock is large enough, the D firm may be unable to fulfill debt
commitments and may go bankrupt. The bankruptcy of a borrower would
be irrelevant if, so to speak, the agent were an “island”. In a networked economy, however, bankruptcy will not be an isolated and therefore insignificant
phenomenon.
Interdependence may assume different forms. For instance, the bankruptcy
of a D firm may bring about the default of the U firm with which it interacts
along the supply chain. Moreover “bad debt” – i.e. non-performing loans –
affect the net worth of banks, which can also go bankrupt. If they manage to
survive, they will react to the deterioration of borrowers’ financial conditions
increasing the interest rate. The interest rate hike leads to more bankruptcies and eventually to a bankruptcy chain: “the high rate of bankruptcy is
a cause of the high interest rate as much as a consequence of it” (Stiglitz,
Greenwald, 2003: 145).
Therefore, the default of one agent can bring about an avalanche of
bankruptcies which may be due to direct interaction between the bankrupt
firm and its supplier or to indirect interaction through the banking system.
In the latter case, in fact, while the proximate cause of the bankruptcy of
a certain firm in the middle of the avalanche is the interest rate hike, the
remote cause is the bankruptcy of a firm at the beginning of the avalanche
that forced the banks to push interest rates up.2
The endogenous evolution of credit interlinkages through the preferred
partner choice rule affects the extent of bankruptcies’ diffusion: the bankruptcy
of an highly connected agent increases the probability of bankruptcy diffusion
across the network.
2

Delli Gatti et al. (2005) emphasize the role of indirect interaction in the development
of an avalanche of bankruptcies. In the agent-based economy considered in that paper, in
fact there is no customer-supplier network so that bankruptcies due to direct interaction
cannot be observed by construction.

4

All in all, we consider four markets: consumption goods, intermediate
inputs, labour and credit. “Quantities”, i.e. the amount of consumption
and intermediate goods produced, labour employed and credit extended are
not directly affected by “prices”. They depend, instead, as we have already
pointed out above, on the financial conditions of the agents involved.
Prices, however, play an essential role in (i) shaping the evolving topology
of the network and (ii) determining the degree of agents’ financial vulnerability.
As to (i), in two of the markets considered, i.e. the markets for intermediate inputs and for bank loans, the preferred partner choice rule implies
that the price charged by a supplier to a customer – which incorporates the
interest rate on commercial paper – and the interest rate on bank loans affect
the number of clients of each U firm and the number of loan applications to
each bank respectively and therefore impacts upon the evolution of network
connectivity.
As to (ii), prices are important determinants of profits, which in turn
affect the accumulation of net worth and financial fragility. The financial
vulnerability of an agent therefore is affected by the dynamics of prices.
On the markets for consumption goods and on the labour market, “prices”
are exogenously determined and play a less relevant role. Following GreenwaldStiglitz (1993), we assume that on the market for consumption goods, prices
are governed by a random process (we elaborate a little bit on this issue
below). As to the labour market, we appeal to real rigidity of one sort or another so that we feel entitled to take the real wage as given and constant. In
these cases, for the sake of simplicity and clarity we have admittedly adopted
a very crude “theory” of prices. We will relax these assumption and enrich
the theory in further extensions of the present model. Our conjecture, however, is that qualitatively the main results of the model – in particular the
output of simulations – will not be remarkably affected by this relaxation.
We study the properties of the network by means of simulations, which
show that a business cycle at the macroeconomic level can develop as a
consequence of the complex interaction of the agents’ financial conditions. In
other words, statistical regularities emerge as a self-organised process at the
aggregate level. At the same time, the main facts of firms’ demography (such
as power law distribution of firms’ size and Laplace distribution of growth
rates) emerge endogenously. In the case of the preferred choice rule the firms’
size distribution and the degree distribution are much more asymmetric than
in the case of random matching.
5

The paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we sketch the main assumption concerning the economy under scrutiny. Sections 3 and 4 are devoted to
the price/quantity decisions of agents, i.e. firms and banks respectively. In
section 5 we explain the mechanism governing the choice of the partner. In
section 6 we analyze the main determinants of profits. Section 7 is devoted
to the relationship between profits, net worth and bad debt. In section 8 we
discuss the results of the simulations. Section 9 concludes.

2

The environment

We model a multi-sector economy in discrete time (t = 1, 2, . . . , T ) populated by a multitude of heterogeneous agents. The economy consists of
three sectors: a downstream sector consisting of I firms (labeled by the index i = 1, 2, . . . , I), an upstream sector with J firms (j = 1, 2, . . . , J) and a
banking sector consisting of Z banks (z = 1, 2, . . . , Z). In order to keep the
analysis simple, the number of firms and of banks is exogenous.3
There are two goods, a consumption good and an intermediate good. D
firms produce a perishable consumption good using labor and intermediate
goods. For simplicity and as a first approximation to a more realistic setting,
we assume that firms sell all the output they produce at a stochastic price.
U firms produce the intermediate good “on demand” with a technology
that requires only labor. Therefore U firms do not hold inventories of intermediate goods. We are ruling out by construction the possibility of avalanches
of output due to the mismatch of demand and supply of intermediate goods
along a supply chain à la Bak, Chen, Scheinkman and Woodford (1993).
The financial side of the economy is characterized by two lending relationships: (i) downstream and upstream firms obtain credit from banks; (ii)
downstream firms buy intermediate goods from upstream firms by means of
a commercial credit contract.
The structure of the network of expenditure, production and credit relationships evolves endogenously due to the decentralized interaction among
agents, on the basis of a simple incentive mechanism which we have labelled
the preferred-partner choice: in every period each D firm looks for the U
3

Since in our framework agents can leave the market due to bankruptcy, in order to
preserve constancy of the number of agents we have to apply a one-to-one replacement
procedure when an agent goes bankrupt.

6

firm with the lowest price of intermediate goods; at the same time each firm
searches for the bank with the lowest interest rate.

3

Firms

The core assumption of the model is that the scale of activity of the i − th
D firm at time t – i.e. the level of production Yit – is an increasing concave
function of its financial robustness, captured by net worth Ait :
Yit = φAβit

(1)

where φ > 1, 0 < β < 1 are parameters, uniform across D firms. The
equation above represents the financially constrained output function.
There are (at least) two rationales for (1). First, it can be thought of as
a simple rule of thumb in a world in which (i) bounded rationality prevents
the elaboration of optimizing decision-making processes and (ii) asymmetric
information between borrowers and lenders yields a financing hierarchy in
which net worth ranks first.
Alternatively one can think of equation (1) as the solution of an optimization problem on the part of the firm. According to Greenwald and
Stiglitz (1993) for instance the problem of the firm consists in maximizing expected profits E (πi ) net of bankruptcy costs Ci weighted by the probability of
bankruptcy Ωi . From the definition of profits follows that they are an increasing function of output Yi given net worth Ai : πi = π (Yi ; Ai ) . Bankruptcy
costs are assumed to be increasing with the firm’s size: Ci = C (Yi ). Finally,
from the definition of the probability of bankruptcy, it turns out that it is
increasing with the scale of activity, given net worth: Ωi = Ω (Yi ; Ai ). An
increase of financial fragility, in fact, captured by a reduction of net worth,
brings about an increase of the probability of bankruptcy. In the end the
Greenwald-Stiglitz characterization of the problem of the firm is:
maxV (Yi ; Ai ) = E (π (Yi ; Ai )) − C (Yi ) Ω (Yi ; Ai )
Yi

whose solution is
Yi = arg max V (Yi ; Ai ) = f (Ai )

(2)

with f 0 > 0. Equation (1) can be considered an element in the set of functional
forms consistent with (2).
7

By construction, the second interpretation of (1) is grounded on more
stringent requirements of rationality than those implicit in (i) above. However, it is still true that asymmetric information yields a financing hierarchy
as assumed in (ii).
The concavity of the financially constrained output function (1) captures
the idea that there are ”decreasing returns” to financial robustness: the
increase in output associated to a given increase of net worth is lower if
the firm is already financially robust. If the financially constrained output
function is the same for all D firms, by Jensen’s inequality an increase in
the variance of financial conditions brings about a reduction of average (and
therefore aggregate) output of D firms.
For simplicity we assume that the production function of each D firm
is of the Leontief type: Yi = min( δ1d Ni , γ1 Qi ) where Ni is employment and
Qi are intermediate inputs, δd > 0 and γ > 0. Therefore, each D firm has
the following labor and intermediate goods requirement functions: Nit =
δd Yit , Qit = γYit . Taking into account (1), in the end, both the demand for
labor and the demand for intermediate goods of D firms are increasing and
concave functions of their financial conditions: Nit = δd φAβit , Qit = γφAβit .
Final goods are sold at a stochastic price uit . For the sake of simplicity, we assume that uit is a random variable uniformly distributed on the
support (0,2). We can provide the following rationale for this apparently
restrictive assumption. Let the demand of the i − th commodity in period t
be d (uit , δit+1 ) where uit is the relative price of the i − th commodity and δit
is a stochastic demand disturbance specific to the market in question. Let
supply be sit . By assumption sit is made up of the quantities produced by
a “large number” of producers so that the contribution of each firm to total
supply is negligible. In equilibrium uit = f (δit , sit ) i.e. the relative price is
an increasing function of the demand disturbance, given the predetermined
supply. If demand is sufficiently elastic, changes in supply do not affect the
relative price significantly so that the relative price is essentially an increasing
function of random demand. A high realization of uit can be thought of as a
regime of high demand which drives up the relative price of the commodity
in question. In a regime of low demand, the realization of uit turns out to
be low and may push the firm out of the market if it is “too low”, i.e. if it
makes the net worth of the firm negative.
Upstream firms produce the intermediate good by means of a linear technology which employs only labor: Qjt = δ1u Njt where δu > 0. For simplicity,
we assume an asymmetric structure of the D-U network: many D firms can
8

be linked to a single U firm but each D firm has only one supplier of intermediate goods.
In each period the supplier – say the j − th firm – receives orders from a
set of D customers which will be denoted by Φj . Since each D firm looks for
the U firm with the lowest price of intermediate goods, by construction the
number of elements of Φj depends on the price pjt that the upstream firm
charges to its customers: the lower the price, the higher the number of D
customers of the j − th supplier of intermediate goods.
The price the supplier is charging is defined as pjt = 1 + rjt where rjt is
the interest rate on trade credit. We assume that the level of rjt depends on
the financial condition of the U firm:
rjt = αA−α
jt

(3)

with α > 0. In words, the interest rate on commercial paper charged
to each and every D firm belonging to Φj is decreasing with the financial
soundness of the U firm. If the U firm is in good shape from the financial
point of view, it will be eager to extend trade credit at more favourable terms
to its D customers.
In principle, the interest rate on trade credit charged by the j − th U
firm should be affected also by the financial conditions of the borrowers, i.e.
of the D firms in the set Φj . In order to keep the framework as simple as
possible, however, we have assumed that asymmetric information prevents
a correct assessment of the financial conditions of the borrowers. Therefore
the interest rate on trade credit incorporates only the financial condition of
the lender.
While the scale of production of D firms is financially constrained – i.e. it
is determined by their degree of financial robustness – the scale of production
of U firms is demand constrained, i.e. it is determined by the demand of
intermediate goods on the part of D firms. Therefore, the financial conditions
of D firms are the driving force also for the production of U firms. The more
robust, on average, D firms, the higher their scale of activity and the demand
for labour and intermediate goods so that the higher will be, on average, the
scale of activity of U firms. For instance, the demand of intermediate goods
– and therefore the scale of production – of the j − th U firm will be Qjt =
P
P β
P β
γ
Yit = γφ
Ait and the demand for labor will be Njt = δu γφ
Ait .
i∈Φj

i∈Φj

i∈Φj

9

4

Banks

Firms face a financing hierarchy in which internal finance ranks first and
bank loans second. Therefore, by assumption, the financing gap, i.e. the
difference between the firm’s expenditures and internal finance, is filled by
means of credit. For U firms, the financing gap is the difference between
the wage bill and net worth. As to D firms, expenditures consist of wages
and the cost of intermediate goods. In order to keep the analysis as simple
as possible, however, we assume that also for D firms the financing gap is
the difference between the wage bill and net worth. This means that the
acquisition of intermediate goods can be financed by means of trade credit,
not by bank loans.
Accordingly, the demand of credit is equal to Bxt = Wxt − Axt where
Wxt = wNxt is the firm’s wage bill (x = i for D firms, j for U firms).
We assume that the real wage w is constant and uniform across firms. By
assumption, moreover, labour is abundant so that firms do not face any
labour shortage at the pre-determined real wage.
Self-financed firms, i.e. firms with a level of net worth sufficient to finance
the wage bill, do not demand credit. From the expression above follows that
the demand for credit of the i − th D firm is
Bit = wNit − Ait = wδd φAβit − Ait

(4)
1

so that a D firm is self financed if it has net worth Ait ≥ Â ≡ (wδd φ) 1−β .
As to U firms, the demand for credit of the j − th U firm is
X β
Bjt = wNjt − Ajt = wδu γφ
Ait − Ajt
(5)
i∈Φj

so that a U firm is self financed if it has net worth Ajt ≥ Âj ≡ wδu γφ

P
i∈Φj

Aβit .

The higher the net worth of D customers of the U firm, the less likely it is
that the U firm will be self financed.
For simplicity, we assume an asymmetric structure of the firms-banks
network: many firms can be linked to a single bank but each firm has only
one supplier of loans. The set of customers of the z − th bank will be denoted
by Φz . We assume that each bank has a certain degree of market power. Since
each firm looks for the bank with the lowest interest rate, by construction
the number of elements of Φz depends on the interest rate the bank charges
10

to its customers: the lower the interest rate, the higher the number of firms
applying for loans to the z − th bank.
The z − th bank adopts the following rule in setting the interest rate on
loans to the x − th borrower (x = i for D firms, j for U firms):
θ
x
= σA−β
rzt
zt + θ (lxt )

(6)

where Azt is the net worth of the z − th bank and lxt = Bxt /Axt is the
leverage ratio of the x − th firm, σ and θ positive parameters. Accordingly,
the interest rate on bank loans is (i) decreasing with the financial soundness
of the bank (proxied by the bank’s net worth Azt ) and (ii) increasing with
the firms’ leverage ratio.
The rationale of (i) is obvious: if the bank is in good shape from the
financial point of view, it will be eager to extend credit at more favourable
terms. As to (ii), we simply assume that the firm penalizes financially fragile
firms. In a sense, we adopt the principle according to which the interest rate
charged by the lender incorporates an external finance premium increasing
with leverage and therefore inversely related to the borrower’s net worth.4
Notice that the leverage ratio of the i − th D firm is
lit = Bit /Ait = wδd

Yit
−(1−β)
− 1 = wδd φAit
−1
Ait

(7)

i.e it is decreasing with net worth. Therefore, in the end, the interest rate
charged by the z − th bank to the i − th D firm will be:
³
´θ
−(1−β)
i
rzt
= σA−β
+
θ
wδ
φA
−
1
d
zt
it

(8)

i.e. it will be a decreasing function of the net worth of the bank and of the
firm.
The situation is different in the case of U firms. The leverage of the j − th
U firm is
ljt = Bjt /Ajt = wδu

Qjt
wδu γφ X β
−1=
A −1
Ajt
Ajt i∈Φ it

(9)

j

4

In a sense in our model the bank behaves as a lender in a Bernanke-Gertler (1989,
1990) world characterized by asimmetryc information and costly state verification. See
Bernanke, Gertler and Gilchrist (1999) for a comprehensive exposition of the approach.

11

since Qjt = γφ

P
i∈Φj

Aβit as shown above. The leverage of Uj firm therefore is

decreasing with its own net worth but increasing with the net worth of the
downstream customers.
The interest rate charged by the z − th bank to the j − th U firm will be:
θ

X
j
 wδu γφ
rzt
Aβ − 1
(10)
= σA−β
zt + θ
Ajt i∈Φ it
j

i.e. it will be a decreasing function of the net worth of the bank and of the
j − th firm but an increasing function of the net worth of the D customers.
This may be counterintuitive but it is obvious in our context: the higher the
net worth of D customers, the higher their demand for intermediate goods,
the higher the debt – and therefore the leverage ratio, other things being
equal – that U suppliers have to accept in order to finance the wage bill
and production and the higher the interest rate charged by the bank to the
U-firm.

5

Partners

Each agent has to choose not only the quantity and the price of the good to
be exchanged but also the partner to exchange with: a D firm has to choose
a U partner and a bank; a U firm has to choose a bank.
Each D firm has a (productive and credit) relationship with a U firm.
Initially, i.e. at time t = 1, the network of firms is random, i.e. the links
among D and U firms are established at random. Therefore, for instance the
D firm indexed by i (Di ) ends up linked to the U firm indexed by j0 (Uj0 ). In
each of the subsequent periods, the network changes endogenously according
to a preferred-partner choice rule (with noise) which is defined as follows:
• with (a small) probability ε the D firm chooses a partner (i.e. a U
supplier) at random;
• with probability 1−ε the D firm chooses a partner looking at the prices
of a randomly selected number – say M – of U firms;
– if the miminum observed price – say the price of Uj1 – is lower
than the price of Uj0 , then Di will switch to Uj1 ;
12

– otherwise, Di will stick to Uj0 .
Therefore, the number of links connecting D nodes to a certain U node
changes over time due to the changing price charged by the U firm so that
the topology of the network is also in a process of continuous evolution. The
total number of nodes, however, is constant.
The preferred-partner choice rule applies also to the relationship between
(both D and U) firms and banks. At time t = 1 the links among firms and
banks are established at random. For instance, firm Di ends up linked to
bank z0 (Bz0 ). Afterwards, with probability 1 − ε each firm looks at the
interest rate charged by a randomly selected number – say N – of banks. If
the miminum observed interest rate – say the one charged by Bz1 – is lower
than the one charged by Bz0 ,then Di will switch to Bz1 ; otherwise, it will
stick to Bz0 .
The procedure to choose the partner is activated in every period – i.e.
with the same frequency of price/quantity decisions – but the partner is
changed less frequently, i.e. only when one of the prices the agent observes
is lower than the one charged by the existing partner. By construction,
therefore, the relationships between firms of different industries and between
firms and banks last longer than the transaction period.

6

Profits

i
The profit of the i − th D firm is πit = uit Yit − (1 + rzt
)Bit − (1 + rjt )Qit
i
where uit is the stochastic price, Yit is output, rzt is the interest rate charged
by Bz to Di , rjt is the interest rate charged by Uj and Qit is the amount of
intermediate input that Di has bought from Uj .
Recalling that Qit = γYit , output is financially constrained as shown in
(1) and Bit is defined as in (4) we can rewrite the equation above as:
£
¤
i
i
πit = uit − (1 + rjt )γ − (1 + rzt
)wδd φAβit + (1 + rzt
)Ait
(11)
i
and rjt are defined as in (8) and (3) respectively, in the end Di ’s
Since rzt
profit is a function of its own net worth and of the net worth of the U firm
and of the bank.
Other things being equal, an increase of Ait affects Di ’s profit for three
reasons:

13

• it makes output increase (scale effect);
• it makes leverage decrease so that the interest rate charged by the bank
decreases too (D leverage effect);
• it makes the financing gap decrease. This effect is captured by the last
term in the LHS of (11) (financing gap effect).
The scale effect can be either positive (if the expression in brackets is
positive, i.e. if the relative price is “sufficiently high” or the interest rates
are “sufficiently low”) or negative (if the opposite holds true). The D leverage
and the financing gap effects are unambiguously positive.
Di ’s profit is also affected by the financial conditions of the U supplier
and of the bank through the following externalities:
• an increase of Ajt makes Di ’s profit increase because it makes the interest rate charged by the supplier go down (U net worth effect);
• an increase of Azt makes Di ’s profit increase because it makes the interest rate charged by the bank go down (B net worth effect).
j
The profit of the j − th upstream firm is πjt = (1 + rjt )Qjt − (1 + rzt
)Bjt .
P β
Notice that Qjt = γφ
Ait , and Bjt is defined as in (5) so that in the end

we get:

i∈Φj

X β
£
¤
j
j
Ait + (1 + rzt
)Ajt
πjt = (1 + rjt ) − (1 + rzt
)wδu γφ

(12)

i∈Φj
j
Since rzt
is defined as in (10), Uj ’s profit is a function of the net worth of
the agents involved, i.e. the U firm itself, the set Φj of its D customers and
the bank.
An increase of Ajt affects Uj ’s profit for three reasons:

• it makes Uj ’s leverage decrease, so that the interest rate charged by the
bank decreases too (U leverage effect);
• it makes the financing gap decrease. This effect is captured by the last
term in the LHS of (12) (financing gap effect);
• it makes the price charged to D customers decrease (U net worth effect).
14

The U leverage and the financing gap effects are positive while the U net
worth effect is negative.
Uj ’s profit is also affected by the financial conditions of D customers and
of the bank through the following externalities:
• an increase of Azt makes Uj ’s profit increase because it makes the interest rate charged by the bank go down (B net worth effect);
P β
Ait affects U output
• an increase of the net worth of the D customers
i∈Φj

(scale effect).
The bank’s B net worth effect is positive while the scale effect can be
either positive (if the expression in brackets is positive, i.e. if the interest
rate on trade credit is “sufficiently high”and/or the interest rate on bank
loans is “sufficiently low”) or negative (if the
holdsP
true).
P opposite
j
i
(1 + rzt )Bit +
(1 + rzt
)Bjt
The profit of the z − th bank is πzt =
i∈Iz

j∈Jz

where Iz and Jz are, respectively, the set of D and U firms interacting
with bank z.5 Substituting (4) and (5) we get


´ X
³
X
X
j 
i
(1 + rzt
) wδu γφ
Aβit − Ajt 
πzt =
(1 + rzt
) wδd φAβit − Ait +
i∈Iz

j∈Jz

i∈Φj

(13)
An increase of Azt affects Bz ’s profit for the simple reason that it makes
the interest rate charged by the bank to both D and U firms go down (B net
worth effect).
Bz ’s profit is also affected by the financial conditions of D and U borrowers
through the following externalities:
• an increase of the net worth of D and U borrowers affects Bz ’s profit because it makes their leverage decrease so that the interest rate charged
j
i
and rzt
go down (D leverage
by the bank to these borrowers, i.e. rzt
and U leverage effects);
• an increase of the net worth of U borrowers affects Bz ’s profit because
it makes the volume of loans to U customers decrease (U scale effect);
5

Of course Iz ∪ Jz = Φz .

15

• an increase of Di ’s net worth makes the volume of loans to U customers
increase while the volume of loans to D customers increases only if
1
(wδd φβ) 1−β > Ait i.e. if the firm is not self financed (D scale effect).
Table 1 summarizes the effects of net worth of each type of agent on the
profit of the same agent (on the main diagonal) and on the profits of the
other agents (externalities, represented by off diagonal entries).
Table 1. The effects of net worth on profit
πj
πz
scale e. (±)
D scale (±)
D leverage e.(+)
scale e. (±)
D leverage e.(−)
D fin.gap e.(+)
U net worth e.(−)
U scale e. (−)
U leverage e.(+)
U net worth e. (+)
U leverage e.(−)
U fin.gap e.(+)
Bank’s net w.e. (+) Bank’s net w.e. (+) Bank’s net w.e.(−)
πi
Ai

Aj
Az

As will become clear in the following section, profits are an important
determinant of the flow of new net worth: the higher profits today, the
higher will be net worth tomorrow. Table 1 therefore provides a rich and
complicated picture of interactions among the financial conditions of the
agents involved (Di , Uj , Bz ).
For instance, the first column represents the impact of an increase of
net worth of Di , Uj, Bz on Di ’s profits. There are obvious self-reinforcing
mechanisms at work. If the net worth of Di is growing, it is likely to grow
bigger in the future due to the D leverage and D financing gap effects. Di
can also benefit, in terms of profits and net worth accumulation, from an
increase of Uj ’s and Bz ’s net worth, due to the U and B net worth effects.
There are, however, also self-stabilizing mechanisms, which work mainly
through the banking system. An increase of Uj ’s and Di ’s net worth, for
instance, tends to depress the accumulation of the bank’s net worth due to
the leverage effect and the U scale effect. The co-existence of self-reinforcing
and self-stabilizing mechanisms is the source of the oscillating behaviour of
aggregate time series generated by the simulations that we will review in
section 8.
16

7

Bad debt and net worth

In our framework, the U firms and the banks are lenders while both types of
firms can be borrowers (if they are not self-financed).
D firms therefore are pure borrowers. At the end of the period, the net
worth of the i − th D firm is defined as follows
Ait+1 = Ait + πit

(14)

i.e. profits are the flow of new net worth. The D firm goes bankrupt if
Ait+1 ≤ 0 i.e. if it incurs a loss (negative profit) and the loss is big enough
to deplete net worth:
πit ≤ −Ait
The net worth of D firms is the “engine” of fluctuations for the entire
economy. In fact, by means of (1) Di ’s net worth determines Di ’s output,
which in turn generates the demand for intermediate goods produced by U
firms. As a consequence also the demand for labour of the D and U firms
are determined by the net worth of D firms.
Substituting (11) into (14) we get:
£
¤
i
i
Ait+1 = Ait + uit − (1 + rjt )γ − (1 + rzt
)wδd φAβit + (1 + rzt
)Ait

(15)

The net worth of the D firm in t+1 Ait+1 depends in a non linear way on Ait
but also on the net worth of the U supplier – which determines rjt as defined
in (3) – and on the net worth of the bank, which enters into (8).
The net worth of the x − th lender (x = j for U firms, z for banks) is
defined as follows
Axt+1 = Axt + πxt − BDxt
where BDxt is “bad debt”. In fact, if a borrower cannot pay back the loan
obtained from the lender and goes bankrupt, the lender has a bad debt (nonperforming loan), that is accounted for as a reduction of its net worth. The
lender goes bankrupt if Axt+1 ≤ 0 i.e. if
πxt + Axt ≤ BDxt
In principle therefore, the lender can go bankrupt even profits are still
positive if non-performing loans are high enough to wipe out net worth.
17

Substituting (12) into the definition, Uj ’s net worth turns out to be
X β
£
¤
j
j
Ajt+1 = Ajt + (1 + rjt ) − (1 + rzt
)wδu γφ
Ait +(1+rzt
)Ajt −BDjt (16)
i∈Φj

In the case of U firms, bad debt is BDjt = (1 + rjt )γ

P

Yit i.e. the

i∈ΦB
j

amount of trade credit not reimbursed (intermediate goods not paid for) by
bankrupt D customers, which are grouped for convenience in the set ΦB
j .
The net worth in t+1 Ajt+1 depends in a non linear way on Ajt but also on
the net worth of the D customers, which determines output of the U firm
and bad debt (the set of bankrupt firms is a subset of D customers of the U
supplier) – and on the net worth of the bank, which enters into (10).
Substituting (13) into the definition,the net worth of the bank turns out
to be

Azt+1



´ X
³
X
X
j 
i
(1+rzt
) wδu γφ
Aβit − Ajt −BDzt
= Azt + (1+rzt
) wδd φAβit − Ait +
j∈Jz

i∈Iz

In the case of banks, “bad debt” is BDz =

P
i∈ΦB
z

i∈Φj
i
(1+rzt
)Bit +

P
j∈ΦB
z

j
(1+rzt
)Bjt

i.e. non-performing loans of bankrupt D and U firms, which are grouped for
convenience in the set ΦB
z . The net worth of the D and U borrowers codetermines the evolution over time of Azt+1 .
Finally, we assume a simple mechanism of entry-exit: bankrupt firms/banks
are replaced with new entrants on the basis of a one-to-one replacement.6

8

Simulations

We explore the dynamic properties of the network economy modelled above
by means of computer simulation. We consider an economy consisting of
I = 500 D firms, J = 250 U firms and Z = 100 banks over a time span of
6

Accordingly, the total number of agents in the economy is constant over time. New
agents are endowed with an initial amount of net worth drawn from a uniform distribution
with mean 1 and finite variance. We assume the entrant is small relative to the size of the
incumbent firms.

18

T = 1000 periods. There are 12 parameters in the model, which are set as
follows:

Table 2. Parameter setting
financially constrained output of D firms
φ = 1.5
labour requirement of D and U firms
δd = 0.5
intermediate goods requirement of D firms γ = 0.5
interest rate on trade credit
α = 0.1
interest rate on bank loans
σ = 0.1
real wage
w=1
number of potential partners
M =5
probability of preferred-partner choice
1 − ε = 0.99

β = 0.8
δu = 1

θ = 0.05
N =5

The net worth of each D and U firm and of each bank at the beginning
of the time horizon is set to 1.
Figure 1 shows the time series of aggregate D production obtained by
adding up the production of D firms. Aggregate U production follows the
same dynamic pattern since U suppliers produce intermediate goods for D
production “on demand”. As expected, in a complex adaptive system fluctuations are irregular. Amplitude and periodicity vary wildly from sub-period
to sub-period.
Starting from identical initial conditions firms become rapidly heterogeneous.7 Over time, a power law distribution of firms’ size emerges (see figure
2), a result roughly in line with the evidence on the empirical firms’size distribution (Axtell, 2001; Gaffeo et al.,2003). Once again this is not surprising
since the economy we are considering is characterized by heterogeneous interacting agents.
In addition, the distribution of the number of links (connectivity) for each
lender (U firm or bank) becomes asymmetric over time due to the preferredpartner choice governing the interaction among borrowers and lenders. In
7

In each period, each D firm is hit by a price shock because the relative price is stochastic
as explained in section 2. Therefore the accumulation of net worth on the part of each
D firm rapidly takes different routes. The accumulation of net worth on the part of U
firms and banks is determined as a consequence. Neither U firms nor banks, however, are
subject to individual shocks.

19

other words the degree distribution of the credit network suggests that the
number of customers of lenders in the right tail of the distribution is higher
than that generated by a normal distribution (see figure 3). The degree distribution, therefore, tends to a power law.
In the literature on evolving networks, a power law degree distribution is
generated when the choice of the partner is governed by preferential attachment (Barabàsi and Albert, 1999), which is based on the assumption that
nodes characterized by a relatively high number of links (“hubs”) attract
more new links than nodes with a small number of connections. Preferential
attachment plays the role of a self-reinforcing mechanism: the higher the
number of links of a certain node today, the higher will be the number of
new links attached to that node tomorrow.
We do not make this ad hoc assumption but the same outcome occurs in
our model due to the preferred-partner choice rule. Agents characterized by
more robust financial conditions, in fact, can charge lower prices and attract
more new partners. As a consequence, their profits go up and their financial
conditions improve, making room for even lower prices in the future and
attracting more new partners. In a sense the preferred-partner choice rule
makes preferential attachment endogenous, through a mechanism similar to
that described in physics as fitness model (Bianconi and Barabàsi, 2001).
Financially robust lenders can supply credit at better conditions and
therefore increase their market share, i.e. attract a higher number of links.
Financially sound U firms (resp. banks) set lower prices (interest rates), attract more D firms (borrowers), are more profitable and further increase their
financial robustness. The opposite holds true for financially fragile lenders.
Both the corporate and the banking sector therefore become polarized and
the degree distribution becomes asymmetric.
This polarization process increases the vulnerability of the network to a
shock – i.e. systemic risk – because the default of a highly connected agent,
albeit a relatively rare event, may generate an avalanche of bankruptcies.
The likelihood of this phenomenon depends on the structure of the network.
A typical story is the following. Suppose that Di belonging to Φj does not
fulfill its debt obligations towards Uj and goes bankrupt in t. Uj will record
a non-performing loan equal to the value of the intermediate goods not paid
for by Di so that its net worth will go down next period. If Uj were already
fragile and/or the loan extended to Di were big, Uj would go bankrupt in
t+1. If it survives the shock, the reduction in net worth will lead the bank to
20

j
charge a higher interest rate rzt+1
due to the U leverage and U financing gap
effect. Therefore also Uj can go bankrupt in one of the following periods.
The deterioration of the bank’s financial condition due to the borrowers’
bankruptcies may be absorbed if the size of the loans is small enough and/or
the bank’s net worth is high enough. If this is not the case, also the bank
goes bankrupt. An avalanche of bankruptcies will follow due to the positive
feedback of the bankruptcy of a single agent on the net worth of the “neighbours”, linked to the bankrupt agent by trade or credit links. For empirical
evidence on this phenomenon see Fujiwara (2007).
The extent of bankruptcy avalanches depends on the amount of bad debt
(see figure 4). Bankruptcy avalanches amplify business fluctuations. As a
consequence, the distribution of aggregate growth rates is far from being
Gaussian. It can be likened to a double exponential distribution with an
asymmetry for negative events (see figure 5).

In order to assess the robustness of our findings, we perform a series of
100 Monte Carlo (MC) simulations in the two following alternative scenarios:
• preferred-partner choice (PPC)
• random matching (RM).8
Figure 6 shows the degree distributions of the evolving (PPC) and the
random (RM) networks. When the PPC rule is at work the degree distribution is right-skew while this is not the case if the network evolves according
to a RM process. A similar result concerns the evolution of the firm size
distribution: the PPC rule yields a right-skew (power law) distribution of
firms’ size, while this is not the case when agents are linked at random (see
figure 7).
In table 3 we report some statistics on aggregate growth rates (GR), bad
debt (BD), the correlation between aggregate production (business cycle) and
debt-to-equity ratio (aggregate leverage ratio), bankruptcy probabilities, and
the correlation across sectors. Since distributions are generally non-normal,
we make use of robust statistics for the analysis of the location (median)
8

The RM scenario is obtained from the first one setting ε = 1. In the RM case the
interaction among agents is no longer due to the endogenous process described above;
instead, in each period, each agent interacts with another agent picked at random in the
population of potential partners.

21

and scale (median absolute deviation) parameters.9 We also compute robust
measures of skewness (Groeneveld and Meeden, 1984)10 and kurtosis (Moors,
1988).11 For each variable in the table we report the average value and the
standard deviation (in parenthesis) across MC simulations.
The average growth rate (GR) of aggregate production is 0.13% both in
RM and in PPC. The median of GR and the volatility of aggregate output –
measured by the standard deviation or the median absolute deviation of GR
– are slightly higher in PPC than in RM. In both scenarios the distribution
of GR is left-skew. The (negative) skewness, however, is higher in absolute
value in PPC. In other words, MC simulations show that there is a higher
incidence of negative events in PPC than in RM. Finally, in both scenarios
the kurtosis is not too far from that of a normal distribution. It is slightly
higher, however, in RM than in PPC.
It is worth noting that “traditional” and “robust” measures of aggregate
growth rates’ statistical properties provide similar qualitative results. The
only relevant difference between RM and PPC is due to the higher incidence
of negative events in the distribution of aggregate growth rates in PPC,
resulting in a higher (negative) skewness of GR in PPC.
The median of the aggregate bad debt (BD) – that is the sum of the bad
debt of upstream firms and banks – and the (robust) measures of skewness
and kurtosis are quite similar in the two settings.12 It is worth noting the
high level of skewness in both cases, signaling a right-skew distribution of BD,
with a relevant role of “extreme events”, potentially leading to bankruptcy
propagation across the network due to the incidence of non-performing loans
on agents’ balance sheets. Instead, the volatility of BD (e.g., the median
absolute deviation) is higher in PPC than in RM.
9

The median absolute deviation is the median of the absolute values of the deviations
from the data’s median.
10
The robust measure of skewness (SK) is calculated as follows: SK = (µ − Q2 )/E|yt −
Q2|, where yt represents the data, µ is the mean, and Q2 is the median. The SK statistic
has zero value for Gaussian data; the lower bound is -1 and the upper bound is +1.
11
The robust measure of kurtosis (KR) is calculated as follows: KR = [(E7 − E5 ) −
(E3 − E1 )]/(E6 − E2 ) − 1.23, where Ei is the i-octile of the distribution and 1.23 is the
value of KR for a normal distribution N(0,1). Accordingly, KR is equal to zero in the case
of Gaussian data.
12
In this case we do not report “traditional” measures, because of the relevant discrepancies, for example, between the mean and the median or the standard deviation and the
median absolute deviation. We report only robust statistics which are more accurate in
describing highly asymmetric non-normal distributions.

22

Differently from an “island” economy, in the case of “direct interaction”
the default of one or more agents in a sector can propagate to other sectors,
increasing the likelihood of bankruptcy avalanches and negative events at
the aggregate level due to the deterioration of financial conditions. In order
to investigate this point, we compute the correlation between the number
of bankruptcies in different sectors and the default probability for different
typology of agents.
From table 3 we infer that there are positive correlations between bankruptcies in different sectors: the coefficient of correlation between D and U defaults and between D and B defaults is a modest 0.2-0.3. Instead, the default
of U firms considerably affects the B bankruptcies: in this case the coefficient
of correlation is 0.7-0.8. Although the correlation coefficients are slightly different, the linking process across sectors seems to produce similar results in
PPC and RM, independently of the specific mechanism of interaction.
In general, the diffusion of bankruptcies originates in the defaults of one
or more D firms that yield a deterioration of the financial conditions of U
firms, spread bankruptcies among U firms and a propagation of the crisis to
the banking sector.
While the correlation structure across sectors is similar in PPC and RM,
bankruptcy probabilities vary significantly in the two settings. The total default probability (e.g., the probability that an agent fails in a given period)
is equal to 10% in RM and almost 11% in PPC. Also the bankruptcy probability of D firms is quite similar in the two setting (16-17%). Instead, the
bankruptcy probability of U firms is 1% in RM and more than 2% in PPC.
Furthermore, the bankruptcy probability of banks is 0.3% in RM and 3%
in PPC. Accordingly, the endogenous formation of the network produces a
configuration of productive and credit interlinkages that increases the probability of bankruptcy in the U sector (more than double with respect to RM)
and in the banking sector (ten times the RM level).
Even though the correlation among bankruptcies in different sectors is
similar in the two scenarios, as said above, the greater incidence of defaults
in the U and banking sectors means that the endogenous network emerging from agents’ choices increases the likelihood of bankruptcy propagation,
starting from idiosyncratic shocks regarding D firms. In general, the evolving
network economy seems to show a higher systemic risk with respect to a random network economy, as explained by the different effects of interlinkages
configurations on bankruptcy propagation across sectors.

23

Finally, the correlation between an average indicator of the aggregate
leverage ratio, that is the debt-to-equity ratio, and the business cycle, that
is aggregate production, is very different in the two scenarios: it is highly
positive in RM while it is not significant in PPC. In other words, in the PPC
scenario, differently from the RM case, the dynamics of the debt-to-equity
ratio seems decoupled from the dynamics of the business cycle. Hence, while
the random matching economy seems to be well described by an average
indicator of financial conditions, this is not the case for the evolving network economy. We think that this fact is related to the different topology of
the network governing agents’ interactions. In the RM scenario the partner
is picked at random, in each period of time, and the random network has
a characteristic scale, that is the average degree distribution represents the
typical scale of the number of links per agent; then, in this case the behaviour
of the economy could be described by a “representative agent” with an average number of links and certain financial conditions. In the PPC scenario,
instead, the endogenous choice of partners leads to a scale-free degree distribution. In this case there is no characteristic scale of the network. The
high asymmetry of the degree distribution (e.g., many agents with a small
number of links and few agents - hubs - with a very large number of links)
does not allow to reduce aggregate dynamics to the average behaviour of a
representative agent. However, this aspect requires further investigation.

24

Table 3. Monte Carlo simulations: RM vs. PPC.
RM
PPC
mean(GR)
0.0013 (0.0000)
0.0013 (0.0000)
standard deviation(GR)
0.0393 (0.0018)
0.0401 (0.0025)
skewness(GR)
−0.1238 (0.0838) −0.1393 (0.0696)
kurtosis(GR)
2.9386 (0.1510)
2.9132 (0.1657)
median(GR)
0.0022 (0.0010)
0.0025 (0.0010)
median absolute deviation(GR) 0.0266 (0.0014)
0.0273 (0.0020)
robust skewness(GR)
−0.0279 (0.0315) −0.0356 (0.0301)
robust kurtosis(GR)
0.0031 (0.0521) −0.0018 (0.0567)
median(BD)
37.2940 (1.5381) 36.8541 (3.8340)
median absolute deviation(BD) 12.0540 (1.2254)
16.49 (2.7380)
robust skewness(BD)
0.6612 (0.0681)
0.6518 (0.0880)
robust kurtosis(BD)
0.4279 (0.1523)
0.4031 (0.1918)
bankruptcy rate: corr(D,U)
0.2683 (0.0327)
0.2895 (0.0261)
bankruptcy rate: corr(D,B)
0.2044 (0.0324)
0.2196 (0.0295)
bankruptcy rate: corr(U,B)
0.7970 (0.0240)
0.7472 (0.0194)
bankruptcy rate: corr(D+U,B)
0.4320 (0.0327)
0.4200 (0.0284)
bankruptcy probability
0.1009 (0.0000)
0.1093 (0.0011)
bankruptcy probability: D
0.1656 (0.0000)
0.1670 (0.0000)
bankruptcy probability: U
0.0104 (0.0000)
0.0253 (0.0014)
bankruptcy probability: B
0.0035 (0.0000)
0.0310 (0.0022)
corr(Debt-to-Equity,Y)
0.6024 (0.1540) −0.0453 (0.2187)

9

Concluding remarks

We have explored the properties of a credit network characterized by inside credit (i.e. credit relationships connecting agents belonging to different
groups of the same sector, i.e. D firms and U firms) and outside credit (i.e.
credit relationships connecting agents belonging to different sectors, i.e. firms
and banks).
The network structure changes over time due to the preferred-partner
choice rule, which implies that endogenous changes of the interest rate on
trade credit and on bank loans affect the number of clients of each U firm and
each bank. This rule has the same implication for the evolution of network
topology as the preferential attachment rule but is not based upon an ad
25

hoc assumption. On the contrary, the preferred-partner choice rule captures
an important aspect of the agents’ decision making, i.e. the choice of the
partner offering the best bargain in terms of price. The changing topology of
the network affects the propagation of bankruptcies and the shape of business
fluctuations.
The borrower’s net worth is a proxy of creditworthiness. Hence credit
extended is increasing with the borrowers’ net worth. Since D output –
which consists of consumption goods – is constrained only by the availability
of funds, in the end, the supply of consumption goods is increasing with D
net worth. The net worth of D firms turns out to be the driver of growth and
fluctuations. U production, in fact, is determined by demand of intermediate
inputs on the part of D firms. Changes in the D net worth, therefore, yield
changes in the same direction of U production. Also banks are involved
because the interest rate that a bank charges is a function of borrowers’ net
worth.
If a D firm goes bankrupt, not only the supply chain can be disrupted
– involving U firms – but also an interest rate hike can follow due to the
change in attitude of lenders. More bankruptcies will follow in a bankruptcy
avalanche.
The output of simulations shows that a business cycle at the macroeconomic level can develop as a consequence of the complex interaction of the
financial conditions of the agents involved. We can also reproduce the main
facts of firms’ demography: power law distribution of firms’ size and Laplace
distribution of growth rates. The preferred choice rule affects essentially the
skewness of the firms’ size distribution and of the degree distribution of the
network.
This is a step in a complex and difficult quest for a “complete” credit
network. There are obvious restrictions on the conditions determining the
model environment which we plan to relax in the future. For instance, we
would like to extend the preferred choice rule also to the market for consumption goods and to the labour market. This will imply a more sophisticated
design of households’ behaviour, which so far has been essentially passive.
Another obvious extension is the introduction of an interbank market, which
will allow modelling the central bank and monetary policy.

26

References
[1] Allen, F. and D. Gale (2001), “Financial Contagion”, Journal of Political
Economy, 108:1-33.
[2] Axtell R. (2001), “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes”, Science,
293:1818-1820.
[3] Bak P., Chen K., Scheinkman J. and M. Woodford (1993), “Aggregate
Fluctuations from Independent Sectoral Shocks: Self-Organized Criticality in a Model of Production and Inventory Dynamics”, Ricerche
Economiche, 47:3-30.
[4] Barabàsi A.-L. and R. Albert (1999), “Emergence of Scaling in Random
Networks”, Nature, 286:509-512.
[5] Battiston S., Delli Gatti D., Gallegati M., Greenwald B. and J.E. Stiglitz
(2007), “Credit chains and bankruptcies avalanches in supply networks”,
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 31(6):2061-2084.
[6] Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1989), “Agency Costs, Net Worth and
Business Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, 79:14-31.
[7] Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (1990), “Financial Fragility and Economic
Performance”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105:87-114.
[8] Bernanke, B., Gertler, M. and S. Gilchrist (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in Quantitative Business Cycle Framework”, in Taylor, J. and
Woodford, M. (eds), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 1C, North Holland, Amsterdam.
[9] Bianconi G. and A.-L. Barabàsi (2001), “Competition and Multiscaling
in Evolving Networks”, Europhysics Letters, 54(4):436-442
[10] Boissay, F. (2006), “Credit chains and the propagation of financial distress”, European Central Bank Working Paper, #573.
[11] Boss M., Elsinger H., Summer, M. and S. Thurner (2004), “Network
Topology of the Interbank Market”, Quantitative Finance, 4(6):677-84.
[12] Bottazzi G. and A. Secchi (2003), “Why Are Distributions of Firm
Growth Rates Tent-Shaped?”, Economic Letters, 80:415-420.
27

[13] Caldarelli, G. (2007), Scale-free Networks, Oxford University Press.
[14] Delli Gatti D., Di Guilmi C., Gaffeo E., Gallegati M., Giulioni G. and
A. Palestrini (2005), “A New Approach to Business Fluctuations: Heterogeneous Interacting Agents, Scaling Laws and Financial Fragility”,
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 56:489-512.
[15] Delli Gatti D., Gallegati M., Greenwald B., Russo A. and J.E. Stiglitz
(2006), “Business Fluctuations in a Credit-Network Economy”, Physica
A, 370:68-74.
[16] Demange, G. and M. Wooders (2005), Group Formation in Economics:
Networks, Clubs and Coalitions, Cambridge University Press.
[17] Freixas, X., Parigi, B. M. and J.C. Rochet (2000), “Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations and Liquidity Provision by the Central Bank”, Journal
of Money, Credit and Banking, 32:611-38.
[18] Fujiwara Y. (2007), “Chain of Firm Bankruptcy”, mimeo, Kyoto University.
[19] Furfine, C.H. (2003), “Interbank Exposures: Quantifying the Risk of
Contagion”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35(1):111-28.
[20] Gaffeo E., Gallegati M. and A. Palestrini (2003), “On the Size Distribution of Firms. Additional Evidence from the G7 Countries”, Physica
A, 324:117-123.
[21] Goyal, S. (2007), Connections, Princeton University Press.
[22] Greenwald, B. and J.E. Stiglitz (1993), “Financial Market Imperfections
and Business Cycles”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108:77-114.
[23] Groeneveld R.A. and G. Meeden (1984), “Measuring Skewness and Kurtosis ”, The Statistician, 33:391-399.
[24] Iori, G., S. Jafarey, and F. Padilla. (2006), “Systemic risk on the interbank market”, Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization,
61(4):525-540.

28

[25] Jackson M.O. (2005), “The Economics of Social Networks”, in Blundell
R., Newey W. and T. Persson, Proceedings of the 9th World Congress
of the Econometric Society, Cambridge University Press.
[26] Jackson M.O. (2008), Social and Economics Networks, Princeton University Press.
[27] Moors J.J.E. (1988), “A Quantile Alternative for Kurtosis ”, The Statistician, 37:25-32.
[28] Nier E., Yang J., Yorulmazer T. and A. Alentorn (2007), “Network
Models and Financial Stability”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control, 31:2033-2060.
[29] Stanley M., Amaral L., Buldyrev S., Havlin S., Leschorn H., Maas P.,
Salinger M. and E. Stanley (1996), “Scaling Behavior in the Growth of
Companies”, Nature, 379:804-806.
[30] Stiglitz J.E. and B. Greenwald (2003), Towards a New Paradigm in
Monetary Economics, Cambridge University Press.
[31] Vega-Redondo F. (2007), Complex Social Networks, Econometric Society
Monograph Series, Cambridge University Press.

29

4

log(Y)

10

3

10

2

10

0

200

400

600

800

1000

t

Figure 1: Aggregate Production
3

10

2

log(rank)

10

1

10

0

10
−4
10

−2

10

0

10
log(size)

2

10

4

10

Figure 2: Firms size distribution (in terms of net worth)
30

3

10

2

log(rank)

10

1

10

0

10
0
10

1

2

10

10

3

10

log(size)

Figure 3: Degree distribution of the network
3

10

2

log(rank)

10

1

10

0

10
0
10

1

2

10

10
log(size)

Figure 4: The distribution of bad debt
31

3

10

3

10

2

log(rank)

10

1

10

0

10
−0.2

−0.15

−0.1

−0.05
0
aggregate growth rate

0.05

0.1

0.15

Figure 5: The distribution of aggregate growth rate
3

10

RM
PPC

2

log(rank)

10

1

10

0

10
0
10

1

2

10

10

3

10

log(size)

Figure 6: Degree distribution of the network: RM vs. PCC
32

3

10

RM
PPC

2

log(rank)

10

1

10

0

10
−4
10

−2

10

0

10
log(size)

2

10

Figure 7: Firm size distribution: RM vs. PCC

33

4

10

