NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREDIT RATIONING, RISK AVERSION AND INDUSTRIAL EVOLUTION IN
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Eric Bond
James R. Tybout
Hâle Utar
Working Paper 14116
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14116

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

This paper was funded by NSF grant SES 0095574 and the Pennsylvania State University. The opinions,
findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the National Bureau of Economic
Research. The authors are grateful to Marc Melitz, Chad Syverson, Gregor Matvos and participants
in numerous seminars for their comments. The corresponding author is James Tybout.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Eric Bond, James R. Tybout, and Hâle Utar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Credit Rationing, Risk Aversion and Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries
Eric Bond, James R. Tybout, and Hâle Utar
NBER Working Paper No. 14116
June 2008, Revised August 2010
JEL No. D24,L26,O16
ABSTRACT
Relative to their counterparts in high-income regions, entrepreneurs in developing countries face less
efficient financial markets, more volatile macroeconomic conditions, and higher entry costs. This paper
develops a dynamic empirical model that links these features of the business environment to cross-firm
productivity distributions, entrepreneurs’ welfare, and patterns of industrial evolution. Applied to panel
data on Colombian apparel producers, the model yields econometric estimates of a credit market imperfection
index, the sunk costs of creating a new business, and a risk aversion index (inter alia). Model-based
counterfactual experiments suggest that improved intermediation could dramatically increase the return
on assets for entrepreneurial households with modest wealth, and that the gains are particularly large
when the macro environment is relatively volatile.
Eric Bond
Vanderbilt University
Department of Economics
VU Station B #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235-1819
eric.bond@vanderbilt.edu
James R. Tybout
Department of Economics
Penn State University
517 Kern Graduate Building
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
jtybout@psu.edu

Hâle Utar
University of Colorado
Department of Economics
256 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0256
hale.utar@colorado.edu

I.

Overview
Relative to their counterparts in high-income regions, entrepreneurs in developing

countries face less efficient financial markets, more volatile macroeconomic conditions, and
higher entry costs.1,2, 3 This paper develops a dynamic empirical model that links these features
of the business environment to firm ownership patterns, firm size distributions, productivity
distributions, and borrowing patterns.
The model emphasizes several basic effects. First, borrowing constraints force
households with modest collateral to either forego profitable entrepreneurial activities or pursue
them on an inefficiently small scale. Second, since credit constraints limit households’ ability to
smooth their consumption streams, those with relatively less tolerance for risk shy away from
business ventures during periods of macro volatility.

4

Finally, in combination with substantial

entry costs and a significant spread between borrowing and lending rates, uncertainty about
future business conditions creates an incentive for entrepreneurs to continue operating firms that
generate sub-market returns. Combined, these effects make firms’ survival and growth less
dependent upon their owners’ entrepreneurial ability, and more dependent upon their owners’
1

Private credit is scarce (as a share of GDP), spreads between borrowing and lending rates are large, non-bank
intermediation is relatively unimportant, and equity markets are often almost non-existent. The literature
documenting these patterns of financial development is vast; Beck et al (2000) provide a cross-country data set that
reflect the characteristics mentioned here. Levine (2005) surveys the evidence linking these features of financial
sectors (among others) to countries’ aggregate growth rates. Djankov et al (2006) empirically link the poor
performance of credit markets in developing countries to their lack of legal creditor protections and informationsharing institutions.

2

Loayza et al (2007) survey the literature on macroeconomic volatility in developing countries and discuss its
causes and costs. Kaminsky and Reinhardt (1999) document patterns of banking and financial crises in developing
countries. Tybout (2000) provides additional references and notes that Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa stand
out among the developing countries as the most volatile, but all developing regions do worse than the industrialized
countries.
3

Surveying entry regulations in 85 countries, Djankov et al (2002) conclude that ―
business entry is extremely
expensive, especially in the countries outside the top quartile of the income distribution.‖ (p. 25)

4

Volatility can also change the types of capital goods that entrepreneurs invest in, as in Lambson (1991) and
Aghion, et al (2005). Our analysis does not deal with this phenomenon.

2

wealth and market-wide volatility.
We fit our model to plant-level panel data and macro data from Colombia, obtaining
econometric estimates of plant-level profit functions, the sunk cost of creating a new business,
and an index of credit market imperfections (inter alia). Then, using our estimated parameters,
we simulate industrial evolution patterns under alternative assumptions about credit market
imperfections. In particular, we explore the effects of credit market imperfections and volatile
macro environments on entry and exit patterns, cross-firm investment patterns, industry-wide
productivity distributions, and savings.
The simulations yield a number of findings. First, the credit markets in which small-scale
Colombian entrepreneurs operate are subject to severe contract enforcement problems. These
problems interact with macro volatility, substantial entry costs, and risk aversion to discourage
households with modest wealth from investing in proprietorships—even those with high earnings
potential. Second, if enforcement problems were eliminated so that entrepreneurs were less
dependent upon self-finance, those with relatively modest wealth but high earnings potential
would expand their businesses significantly relative to others. Also, the option value of
remaining in business would fall for firms with low earnings rates, and some of these would exit.
Combined, these two effects would increase the industry-wide overall rate of return on the
wealth portfolios of entrepreneurs by 2 percentage points and reduce the correlation between
entrepreneurs’ personal wealth and the size of their firms from 0.81 to 0.51. Third, the gains
from better contract enforceability are concentrated among entrepreneurial households with
promising business opportunities and modest wealth, many of whom would see the returns on
their asset portfolios more than double under perfect enforceability.Fourth, since debt allows
entrepreneurs to smooth consumption and quickly react to business conditions, credit market

3

imperfections are more costly in more volatile macro environments. Finally, if Colombia were to
reduce the spread between its borrowing rate and its lending rate, wealthy households would
shift their portfolios away from businesses investments toward the financial sector, increasing
the average return on wealth portfolios by 8 to 25 percentage points.
Our study is distinctive in that we econometrically estimate a dynamic structural model
of entrepreneurship with uncertainty and endogenous borrowing constraints. However, it shares a
focus on entrepreneurship, borrowing constraints and wealth heterogeneity with a number of
dynamic general equilibrium models, including Banerjee and Newman (1993, 2001), Aghion and
Bolton (1997), Lloyd-Ellis and Bernhardt (2000), Giné and Townsend (2004), and Cagetti and
De Nardi (2006). And it resembles Townsend and Ueda (2006) and Greenwood and Jovanovic
(1990) in that it characterizes the choices of risk-averse households between a risky business
venture that is subject to idiosyncratic shocks and a financial asset that is subject only to marketwide shocks.
The model we develop is also consonant with many of the main messages that emerge
from the micro empirical literature on entrepreneurship and credit market imperfections. These
include findings that small scale entrepreneurs in developing countries are credit-constrained
(Del Mel et al, 2007; Banerjee and Duflo, 2005; Paulson and Townsend, 2004), that wealthy
households are more likely to own businesses (Evans and Jovanovic, 1989; Evans and Leighton,
1989; Fairlie, 1999; Quadrini, 1999; Gentry and Hubbard, 2004; Hurst and Lusardi, 2004;
Cagetti and de Nardi, 2006), and that the correlation between wealth and entrepreneurship partly
reflects lower absolute risk aversion among the wealthy (Hurst and Lusardi, 2004).
Finally, our paper is related to several empirical models of industry dynamics. These
include Cooley and Quadrini’s (2001) model of risk-neutral firms’ investment behavior with

4

credit constraints (based on costly state verification), Bloom’s (2009) model of firms’ input
choices in the face of convex adjustment costs and uncertainty, and Buera’s (2008) deterministic
model of entrepreneurial behavior subject to a leverage constraint.

II.

The Model
Several basic assumptions underpin our model. First, securities markets are negligible

and households must hold their wealth as bank deposits and/or investments in proprietorships.
Second, households can borrow to finance some of their business investments, but their loans
must be sufficiently small that they consider default less profitable than repayment. Third,
households are forward-looking, infinitely-lived, and risk-averse. Fourth, households are
heterogeneous in terms of their ability to generate business income, which is subject to serially
correlated, idiosyncratic shocks. Fifth, all firms produce traded goods, so changes in the real
exchange rate result in changes in demand for their output. Finally, exchange rates and interest
rates evolve jointly according to an exogenous Markov process. We now turn to specifics.
A.

The Macro Environment
Three macro variables appear in our model: the real exchange rate, e, the real lending

rate, r, and the real deposit rate, r – μ. The interest spread  0 is parametrically fixed, so we

 et 
can summarize the state of the macro economy at any point in time by the vector st    ,
 rt 
which we assume evolves according to an exogenous Markov process:  (st 1 | st ) .
B.

The Household Optimization Problem
Households fall into one of three categories: incumbent owner-households (I), potential

owner-households (P), and non-entrepreneurial households (N). Incumbent owner-households
5

currently own firms, and must decide each period whether to continue to operating them or exit.
Those that exit become non-entrepreneurial households; those that remain in the industry must
further choose their output levels, capital stocks, and debt/equity ratios, subject to borrowing
constraints.
Potential owner households are not currently in the industry, but do have ―
ideas‖ of
various qualities on which they could base new firms.

After assessing the potential earnings

streams associated with their ideas, these households decide whether to create a firm in the
current period by paying a sunk entry cost and initiating production.

Non-entrepreneurial

households do not currently operate a firm or have a business idea, so they need only make a
consumption/saving decision in the current period. (They hold all of their wealth as bank
deposits, and since the deposit rate is less than the lending rate, they have no incentive to
borrow.) Next period, however, they may be struck with a new idea and become a potential
entrant—this happens with exogenously given probability. Possible transitions between the
household types are summarized by figure 1.
All households are characterized by a constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility
function, U (cit ) 

cit 1
1

, where cit is consumption by household i at time t. Each period,

households choose their savings rates, next-period types (if they are incumbent- or potentialowners), and business investments (if they are incumbent-owners). They make these decisions
with the objective of maximizing their discounted expected utility streams, Et



U (ci )    t ,

 t

subject to borrowing constraints. (Here Et is an expectations operator conditioned on information
available in period t, and  is a discount factor that reflects the rate of time preference.)
Outcomes are uncertain because the macro economy evolves stochastically, and because owner6

households experience idiosyncratic shocks to the return on their business investments.

Non-entrepreneurial households
The optimization problem faced by non-entrepreneurial households is the simplest, since
these households only decide how to allocate their current income between consumption and
savings. Let ait denote the wealth held by household i at the beginning of period t, and let its
exogenous non-asset income be y. Consumption by non-entrepreneurial household i in period t is
cit  y  rt     ait  (ait 1  ait ) . In the following period, the household becomes a potential

entrant household with probability p.
In period t, non-entrepreneurial household i maximizes the expected present value of its
utility stream by choosing its savings rate a   ait . The resulting expected present value of its
utility stream is
V N (ait , st )  max a   0 U  y  (rt   )ait  (a   ait )  



   ( s' | st ) pV P (a' , s' )  (1  p)V N (a' , s' )
s

'



(1)

Here VP (a, s) is the value function for a potential entrant household (discussed below), and the
constraint a '  0 reflects our assumption that households are unable to borrow against their nonasset income.
Incumbent owner households
Owner-households face a more involved optimization problem because they must
choose whether to continue operating their proprietorships andgiven that they continuehow
much of their wealth to hold as investments in their firms. The business income (before fixed
costs and interest payments) generated by household i’s proprietorship is:
7

 kit , et , it  ,  k  0,  kk  0,  e  0,   0 ,

(2)

where k it is the firm’s stock of productive assets and it is an idiosyncratic shock that captures
managerial skills and investment opportunities. We assume that it evolves according to the
discrete Markov process  ( it 1 |  it ) and that it is independent of the macroeconomic state
vector st.
Several features of the function (2) merit comment. First, business income is decreasing
in e because we treat an increase in the exchange rate as an appreciation, which intensifies
import competition and reduces the return to exporting. Second, firms’ incomes are not affected
by the behavior of their domestic competitors because we assume that each firm’s product has
many substitutes in foreign markets, making the effects of entry, exit or price adjustments by
domestic producers insignificant. Finally, diminishing returns to productive assets,  kk  0 ,
reflect finite demand elasticities for each product, and may capture span-of-control effects as
well.
Owner-households can invest all of, more than, or less than their entire wealth in their
business’s asset stock. If household i invests all of its wealth in its firm and borrows nothing,

ait  kit . If it invests less than all of its wealth, it holds the balance ait  kit as bank deposits,
which yield rt   . If it invests more than its wealth, it must satisfy the no-default constraint (to
be discussed), and it finances the excess kit  ait with a loan at rate rt .5 Combining these
possibilities, the ith household earns or pays out ait  kit   rt  Dit  in interest during period t,
where Dit  1ait  kit  0 is a dummy variable indicating whether households hold bank
5

Households never borrow to acquire bank deposits because, with  > 0, this amounts to giving money away to the
bank.

8

deposits.

Accordingly,

its

period

t

consumption

cit  y   (kit , et , it )  f 

is

rt  Dit   (ait  kit )  (ait 1  ait ) , where f is the per-period fixed cost of operating a business.
Given the above, the expected present value of owner-household i’s utility stream is
determined by its beginning-of-period wealth, ait , its idiosyncratic profitability shock,  it , and
the macroeconomic state, st . If the household sells off its productive assets, pays off its debts,
and shuts down its firm, it reaps the expected utility stream of a non-entrepreneur, V N (ait , sit ) .
Alternatively, if it continues to operate, it reaps current utility
U  y   (kit , et , it )  f  rt  Dit   (ait  kit )  (ait 1  ait )

and it retains the option to continue producing next period without incurring entry costs.
Accordingly, the unconditional expected utility stream for an owner-household in state

ait , st , it  when the firm is able to borrow as much as it wants at rate rt to finance its capital
investment is:



~
V I (ait , st , vit )  max V I (ait , st , vit ),V N (ait , st )



,

(3)

where

~
V I (ait , st , vit )  max a0,kit 0  U  y   (k it , et , vit )  f  (rt  Dit )(ait  k it )  (a   ait ) 

 




V I (a , s' , )  (s' , | st )   (v |  it ) .
s'



(4)
Owner-households face a borrowing constraint, however, so they may not be able to attain
the expected utility levels described by (1) - (4). Specifically, their choices of a’ and k must
9

satisfy:
~
V I (ait , st , it )  V N (kit , st ) ,

(5)

where   [0,1] is the fraction of their assets that owner-households are able to keep in the event
that they default. This constraint—which appears in Banerjee and Newman (1993, 2001) and
Cagetti and De Nardi (2006), among others—follows from the assumption that lenders are
perfectly informed about the current profitability of household i’s firm, it , but they are unable to
observe the uses to which household i puts its loans. It states that defaulting owner-households,
whose welfare matches that of a non-entrepreneurial household with assets  k it , do worse that
owner households in the same (ait , st , it ) state who continue to operate their businesses and pay
their debts.

6

The limiting cases of   0 and   1 correspond to perfectly enforceable debt

contracts and costless default, respectively. We interpret  to capture all of the monetary and
psychic costs of defaulting, including possible punishments.
This formulation captures two senses in which household wealth accumulation leads to
business financing. First, wealthy households satisfy (5) at higher borrowing (kit – ait ) levels
because they stand to lose more in the event of default. That is, household wealth acts as
collateral. Second, when ait  k it , the wedge  between the borrowing and lending rate makes
business assets more attractive than bank deposits as a use for new savings.
Potential owner-households
We conclude our description of our model by characterizing industry entry. Each period,
an exogenous number of households develop new business ideas and become potential owner6

Borrowing constraints of this type allow one to characterize contract enforceability problems without introducing
costly state verification. They thus make numerical solution of the model relatively quick, and thereby facilitate
econometric estimation.

10

households. Households’ ideas determine their initial profit shocks, which are independent and
identically distributed across potential-owners according to the density q0(ν).
Taking stock of its particular ν draw, each household decides whether to create a new firm
by paying start-up costs, F, and purchasing an initial capital stock k it .7 At the same time,
household that create new firms choose their savings levels, a   ait , subject to the relevant nodefault constraint. The return to entry when savings and capital stocks are chosen optimally,
given the household's productivity draw is

~
V P (ait ,s t , it )  max a0,kit 0 U  y  F   (k it , et , it )  f  (rt  Dit )  (ait  k it )  (a   ait ) 
  


V (a, s' , )  (s
s

'

'

| st )  (  |  it )

subject to
~
V P (ait , st , it )  V N (kit , st )

(6)

Potential entrant households that choose not to enter return to being non-entrepreneurial
households and allocate their current income of y + (rt -µ)ait between consumption and asset
accumulation in the form of bank deposits. The window for exploiting their particular idea closes,
and the quality of their future business ideas is independent of their current ν. Accordingly,
potential entrant households create new proprietorships when

~
V P (ait , st , it )  V N (ait , st ).

(7)

Note that they might choose not to enter for two reasons. One is that the current (s, ν) realization
makes entry unattractive. The other is low initial wealth holdings.
7

In the previous version of this paper we assumed that entrepreneurs did not learn their productivity until they had
paid the cost of creating a new firm. We switched to the current specification because it generates selection on
profitability at the entry margin, which seems more realistic. Also, since it increases the set of firms with high
productivity and low assets, it creates a larger role for credit constraints.

11

The expected value of being a potential entrant, prior to drawing its productivity level, is
~
V P (ait , st )   max[ V P (ait , st , ),V N (ait , st )] P ( )

(8)



where φP(ν) is the density function for a initial profit shocks . Since a non-entrepreneurial
household has a probability p of having an idea and becoming a potential entrant, the expected
return in (8) enters the return to a non-entrepreneurial household in (1).
In the absence of borrowing constraints, the functional equations (1), (4), (6), and (7) are
a contraction mapping that yield unique solutions VN*, VP* and VI* for the value functions of the
respective household types with perfect capital markets. When the borrowing constraint (5) is
imposed, however, the functional equations are no longer a contraction because the value
functions appear in the constraint. Multiple equilibria can arise because beliefs may be selffulfilling: the expectation of a low value for the firm will make the no default constraint more
binding, and will reduce the amount the firm can borrow.

To deal with this potential

multiplicity, we first solve this problem for the case of perfect capital markets. We then use the
first best value functions (VN*, VP*, VI*), as starting points for value function iteration of the
system where the borrowing constraint is imposed. The limit of this sequence is a solution to this
optimization problem.

We also verified that this solution yields the highest payoff to

entrepreneurs, given the equilibrium payoff to non-entrepreneurial households.8

8

Rustichini (1998) examines a class of incentive constrained dynamic programming problems where the sequence
of value functions generated by this procedure is non-increasing, and shows that the limit of this sequence is the
solution to the dynamic programming problem with the highest payoff. In our problem, it is not guaranteed that the
sequence of value functions will be non-increasing because the value functions appear on both sides of the incentive
constraint in (5). To address this concern, we took a two stage approach. In the first stage, we did a value function
iteration for the household payoff functions starting from the first best value functions. This process converged to
value functions that we denote
. In the second stage, we repeated the process from the first stage, but
using the fixed payoff function
to calculate the payoff to a deviating entrepreneur who does not repay the loan
(on the right hand of (5)). Since this payoff function is constant throughout the iterative process, the sequence of
value functions in the second stage will be non-increasing. The limit of the sequence of value functions in the
second stage, which we denote
, represent the highest payoff attainable to households when
is the
deviation payoff. If
for j = (N, P, I), then our first stage value functions represent payoff that are not

12

C.

Industry Evolution
The solution to the owner-household optimization problem (3)-(5) yields a policy function

a~(ait , st , it ) for incumbent households’ asset accumulation, and an indicator function

 (ait , st , it ) that is equal to one for those households that sell their businesses. Similarly, the
solution to the potential entrepreneur’s optimization problem (6)-(7) yields a policy function
a~ P (ait , st ) for potential owner-households’ asset accumulation and an indicator function

 N (ait , st ) that is equal to one for those potential-owner households that create new firms.
Once the model’s parameters have been estimated, these policy functions provide the basis for
simulations discussed in section IV below.

III.

Fitting the model to data
Our estimation strategy is dictated partly by data availability. Matched employer-

employee data are generally not available in developing countries, and the household surveys
that do exist are not very informative about the businesses that entrepreneurial households
operate. We therefore estimate our model using macro time series and plant-level panel data.
More precisely, we fit our model to macro data and micro panel data on apparel
producers in Colombia. The Colombian macro environment suits our purposes because it
exhibited major changes in real exchange rates and real interest rates during the past 25 years,
and thus should have induced the type of variation in behavior that is needed to identify
parameters. The Colombian regulatory environment suits our purposes because creditors have
Pareto dominated by any other equilibrium payoff. In our case, the first and second stage solutions differed by
= 7.022e-9 which is lower than our tolerance value 1e-8.

13

limited rights to seize collateral in this country, and bureaucratic barriers to entry are substantial.9
Finally, the apparel industry suits our purposes because apparel is highly tradable and because its
minimum efficient scale is relatively low. Tradability is necessary if prices are to be determined
in global markets, as the model presumes, and modest scale economies are necessary to ensure
monopolistic competition and large numbers of closely-held firms.
A.

Estimating the Markov process for macro variables
To estimate the joint transition density for interest rates and exchange rates,  (st 1 | st ) ,

we use the longest quarterly st series available, which spans the period 1982I through 2007II. As
figure 2 demonstrates, this period began with several years of low interest rates and a strong
peso; thereafter, the exchange rate regime collapsed, triggering a major devaluation and a sharp
increase in interest rates.10 During the ensuing post-collapse period the exchange rate gradually
regained strength. But shortly into the new century the peso lost value and interest rates appeared
to realign once again.
These trajectories suggest that a regime-switching model might do a good job of
approximating the transition density,  (st 1 | st ) . Such models presume that the time series of
interest obeys different vector autoregressions (VARs) at different points in time, with switches

9

The World Bank (2008) gives Colombia a score of 2 on a 10-point scale for the strength of the legal rights enjoyed
by its creditors. Out of 178 economies, including 24 OECD ―
benchmark countries,‖ this study ranks Colombia 84 th
in terms of credit access. In terms of ―
ease of starting a business‖ it ranks Colombia 88 th in the world. More
specifically, the Bank reports that ―
it requires 11 procedures, takes 42 days, and costs 19.32 percent of GNI per
capita to start a business in Colombia.‖ (p. 10).
10

Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) document similar patterns in their study of 20 crisis-prone countries: periods of
appreciation and low interest rates are followed by periods of depreciation with higher interest rates. In the
Colombian context, the major changes in the macro environment reflected associated changes in global coffee
prices, global oil prices, international credit conditions, and Colombian policy decisions. For descriptions of these
shocks and the associated policy responses, see Edwards (2001), Garcia and Jayasuriya (1997), and Partow (2003).

14

between the VARs governed by a function to be estimated. 11 Some switching models treat the
probabilities of regime changes as exogenous, some treat these probabilities as a function of
exogenous variables, and some treat regime changes as triggered by the movement of an element
of the VAR across a threshold. We opt for the latter type of model, known as a ―
self-exciting
threshold autoregression‖ (SETAR), because it allows the probability of a regime change to build
when macro conditions are unsustainable, as for example, when exchange rate policy leads to an
increasingly strong currency. Also, unlike the second type of switching mentioned above, the
SETAR model allows the triggering variable itself to switch processes.
To implement the SETAR model, we assume the economy is in one of two macro
regimes at any point in time. When regime m  1,2 prevails, st evolves according to


st   0m  1m st 1  tm , where E  tm tm    m . Regime switches are triggered when one of


the elements of the vector sthe interest rate, in our casecrosses an estimated threshold value.
Estimates of this specification are reported in Table 2. They imply that the economy is regime 1
when the real interest rate is below 0.125 (12.5 percent), and in regime 2 otherwise. Also, the
point estimates imply stable processes for in both regimes, but real interest rates are substantially
higher in the second regime, and the peso tends to be weaker.

12

Finally, simulations of the

estimated SETAR show that the unconditional variance of the exchange rate process is higher in
regime 1, while the unconditional variance of the interest rate process is roughly the same in both

11

Applications of regime-switching models to exchange rates include Engel and Hamilton (1990) and Bollen, et al
(2000). Applications to interest rate processes include Gray (1996). We are unaware of papers that apply switching
estimators to the joint evolution of exchange rates and interest rates, although Chen (2006) estimates an exchange
rate switching model in which the interest rate affects the probability of a regime switch but does not enter the VAR
directly. The methodology for estimating multivariate switching models is nonetheless well developed (e.g., Clarida
et al, 2003).
12

We have not performed unit root tests. Caner and Hansen (2001) develop unit root tests for univariate threshold
autoregressions, but we are unaware of tests for the case of vector autoregressions.

15

regimes. Thus, other things equal, risk aversion and reliance on business income will make
households prefer regime 2, while indebtedness will make households prefer regime 1. We
examine the question of which effect dominates for different types of households in section IV
below.
It remains to estimate the spread between the lending rate and the deposit rate, . We
identify this parameter as the mean difference between these two series over the sample period: 
= 0.060. This figure is not unusual for Latin American economies, but it is several percentage
points higher than the spreads typically found in high-income countries (Beck et al, 2000).
B.

Estimating the profit function
To obtain estimates of the operating profits function,  kit , et , it  , and the transition

density for profit shocks, f ( it 1 |  it ) , it is necessary to impose additional structure on the
model. First, let the production function for firm i be Qit  exp(uit )  kit lit  , where Qit is
physical output, u it is a productivity index and lit is an index of variable input usagelabor,
intermediates, and energy. Next, assume that each firm sells a single differentiated product in the
global marketplace, where it faces a demand function of the form Qitd  Ait pit . Here   1 is
the elasticity of demand, and Ait , which is exogenous from the perspective of individual
producers, collects all market-wide and idiosyncratic forces that shift demand for the ith firm’s
product.13 Finally, let the ith firm face exogenous price wit for a unit bundle of variable inputs,
and assume that it chooses the associated profit-maximizing quantity and output price.
Given these assumptions, total revenue ( Git ) and total variable cost ( Cit ) are:
13

This characterization of demand is consistent with CES preferences over product varieties, frictionless trade, and
the assumption that each firm supplies an insignificant fraction of the global apparel market.

16

 u (  1)    ( 1) /   ( 1) / 
,
Git    ( 1) /  Ait1 /  exp  it
kit
wit




(9a)

 u (  1)    ( 1) /   ( 1) / 
,
Cit    /  Ait1 /  exp  it
kit
wit




(9b)

where    (1   )   and  

 (  1)
. Conveniently, productivity shocks ( u it ), the demand


shifter ( Ait ), variable factor prices ( wit ), and capital stocks ( k it ) enter (9a) and (9b) in the same
way, so cross-equation restrictions help to identify parameters, and the ratio of variable costs to
revenues is simply  < 1.
Since the demand shifter, the productivity shock, and the factor price index are
 u (  1)   ( 1) / 
unobservable at the firm level, we treat Ait1 /  exp  it
as a Cobb-Douglas
 wit




function of the real exchange rate and serially correlated firm-specific shocks. Further, to allow
for discrepancies between book values and true values, we assume that the log of observed
variable production costs ( ln C m ) differs from the log of ―
true‖ costs (ln C) by the measurement
error  c .14 Then, defining  ( st , ait ) to be the minimum profit shock at which a firm continues
operating (as implied by the dynamic programming problem in section II above), the following
system of equations provides a basis for identification of profit function parameters and the
transition density f ( it 1 |  it ) :

ln Git  0  1 ln et   2 ln kit   it

(10a)

14

Among other things, this discrepancy reflects the fact that some wages are overhead expenses rather than variable
production costs, inventory accounting does not accurately reflect the opportunity cost of inputs, and some costs that
are recorded as overhead may vary with production levels. Since sales revenue (G) is straightforward to record and
much less subject to measurement error we do not allow for errors in the values of this variable.

17

ln Citm   0  ln   1 ln et   2 ln kit   it   itc

(10b)

 it   it 1   it

(10c)

 it  1[ it   (st , ait )]

(10d)

Here  it ~ N (0,  2 ) , and  itc ~ N (0,  2C ) are assumed to be independent, serially uncorrelated

shocks. Note that by equations (10a) and (10b), true operating profits before interest payments
may be written as:

 kit , et , it  = (1   ) exp  o  1 ln et   it   kit   kit ,
2

where δ is the rate of depreciation.
Selection bias and simultaneity bias complicate estimation of the parameters in (10a)(10d). The former problem arises because firms that draw very low productivity shocks shut
down (by 10d), and the shutdown point is different for entrepreneurs with different asset
stocks.15 The latter problem arises because current period capital stocks are chosen after the
current period productivity shock is observed.16 We develop a moments-based estimator related
to Olley and Pakes (1996) that deals with both problems. Details are provided in appendix 1.
Table 1 reports estimates of the profit function, the transition density f ( it 1 |  it ) , and
the rate of depreciation, δ. The profit function and transition estimates are obtained by fitting the
system (10a-d) to data on the population of apparel producers appearing in the annual
manufacturing survey for a least two consecutive years between 1981 and 1991. The
15

Big firms continue operating at relatively low  it values because the difference between firms’ continuation

values and their scrap values is increasing in  it and k it (Olley and Pakes, 1996).
16

This is true in Olley and Pakes (1996) as well, but they assume that output is a function of previous period capital
stocks, so they do not need to deal with this type of simultaneity bias.

18

depreciation rate is constructed as the simple average across all observations on active firms of
current depreciation expenses to capital stocks.
The estimates are generally quite plausible. At 0.61, capital’s marginal revenue product is
substantial, but it implies diminishing returns to capital investment—either because of finite
demand elasticities in product markets or span of control problems.17

The exchange rate

coefficient implies each percentage point of appreciation reduces earnings, costs and profits by
about 0.37 percent

points. Plant-specific profitability shocks exhibit strong serial

correlationthe root of this process is around 0.90, and is highly significant. Finally, the
difference between the revenue function intercept and the cost function intercept implies that
firms keep about 20 cents of each dollar of revenue as gross operating profit.

C.

Estimating the remaining parameters
Estimation strategy
A number of parameters remain to be estimated. These include the sunk entry cost, F, the

per-period fixed operating cost, f, the credit market imperfection index, , the probability that a
former entrepreneur encounters a new business opportunity, p, the risk aversion parameter, σ,
exogenous household income, y, the average log wealth among new entrepreneurial households,

a0 , the variance in wealth among new entrepreneurial households,  a20 , and the ratio of total
productive assets to fixed capital, .18 These parameters, hereafter collectively referenced as  =
17

Since Bloom (2009) assumes constant returns to scale and a mark-up of 0.33, the elasticity of revenue with respect
to scale in his model is approximately 0.75. Calibrating to U.S. data spanning all forms of business, and assuming
competitive product markets, Cagetti and Di Nardi (2006) estimate the elasticity of output or revenue with respect to
scale at 0.88.
18

We express asset stocks in logs to better deal with skewness. The parameter  is included in  because our survey
data only report fixed capital stocks, while conceptually, k includes all productive assets.

19

(F, f, , p, σ, y, a0 ,  a20 , ), are estimated using the simulated method of moments.19
The logic behind the estimator is as follows. Taking  kit , et , it  , f ( it 1 |  it ) and

 (et 1 , rt 1 | et , rt ) as given, one can numerically solve the optimization problem in section II at
any feasible  value. Then, using the resulting policy functions, one can simulate the cross-firm
distribution of capital, profits, productivity, and debt for the apparel sector as it evolves through
time. Defining m() to be a vector of moments that summarizes these joint distributions and their
evolution, the discrepancy between these simulated moments and their sample-based

m  m()W m  m() ,

where W =

is the efficient weighting matrix. Our estimator is

= arg min

counterparts, m , can be can measured as () 

Em  m()m  m() 

1

() . Defining Ω as the variance-covariance matrix of the data moments, we construct the

efficient weighting matrix as W=[(1+1/S)Ω]-1 where S denotes the number of simulations.20
Several issues arise in simulating m(). First, we must discretize the state space involved
in order to use standard solution techniques for solving firms’ dynamic optimization problems.
For the macro variables and the profit shocks, which are jointly normally distributed, we apply
Tauchen and Hussey’s (1991) quadrature rules to the estimated transition densities.21 For capital
stocks and asset values, we create a discrete grid based on observed distributions.22 Second, we
19

The discount factor  is fixed exogenously using the average interest rate implied by the SETAR process:  =
1/(1+0.142) = 0.875.
20

The first term in W represents the randomness in the actual data and the second term represents randomness
coming from the simulated data. Ω is calculated by block bootstrapping the actual data with replacement. We use
S=50 with each of these panels of firms having independent draw of macro shocks. Lee and Ingram (1991) show
variance-covariance matrix of simulated moments is (1/S)* Ω under the estimating null hypothesis.
21

In the case of macro variables, we also must convert quarterly transition probabilities to annual transition
probabilities by compounding the former.
22

We used 75 discrete points for each of capital and asset values. To make the model solve quickly enough for

20

need an algorithm for finding arg min () . The function () is neither smooth nor concave,
so gradient-based algorithms fail to identify global minima. We therefore use simulated
annealing, repeated using different initial values to ensure robustness. Third, we must construct
an initial cross-household distribution for the profitability shocks,  it . We base this distribution
on the steady state distribution for the profitability shocks from our estimated of profit function.
Fourth, since the data set does not report firms’ borrowing levels, we must impute total debt for
each observation. We do so using total interest payments (which are reported) divided by the
market lending rate. Finally, it is necessary to make some assumptions about the number of
households that might potentially start new apparel firms in each period. We assume that in the
initial period there are 300 owner-households and we assume that 250 new households appear in
the population of potential entrepreneurs each period. These figures essentially serve to fix the
number of active firms.23
We use 23 moments of general industry characteristics to estimate . These include
moments of the distribution of capital among entrants, aiming to identify entry costs and
entrants’ asset distribution parameters; moments that characterize cross-firm distribution of
debts; inter-temporal and cross-firm covariances, aiming to identify utility (risk aversion) and
econometric estimation, we use 10 discrete points for exchange rate, 10 for interest rate and 6 for profit shocks.
There is a little sensitivity in the solution to the capital and asset discretization, but qualitatively the solution does
not change.
23

Let I0 be the number of owner-households in period 0, and let N be the number of new households we add to the
population each period. Then if the fraction of new households that creates firms is e and the fraction of ownerhouseholds that shuts down its firms every period is x, the population of owner-households in period t is

 1  (1  x) t
I t  I 0 (1  x) t  eN 

x



 . Thus, with stable rates of entry and exit, the current population approaches eN/x



as
, and the size of the initial population becomes irrelevant. Similarly, the asymptotic entry rate and exit rate
depend only on e and x. Experiments show that, holding other parameters fixed, variations in the number of new
potential entrants per period have very little effect on the simulated moments.

21

credit market imperfection parameters; entry and exit rate moments; and moments of the
distribution of capital and operating profit, aiming to identify costs parameters.

Estimates
Table 3 reports  estimates in the upper panel; the simulated moments that they imply are
juxtaposed with corresponding data-based moments in the lower panel. Overall, the model does a
good job of replicating the main features of our panel of apparel firms, including their size
distribution, profit distribution, entry and exit rates, and borrowing patterns. All of the 23
simulated moments except for two have the same sign as their sample counterparts, and most are
close in magnitude.
Turning to the key parameters, sunk entry costs amount to 168,713 in 1977 Colombian
pesos, or $10,243 in current US dollars. 24 This figure is equivalent to13 percent of the value of
the fixed capital stock for a firm of average size. Entry costs reflect the bureaucratic costs
associated with creating a new firm, capital installation and removal costs, and any customizing
of equipment and facilities that does not add to their market value. Their magnitude seems
plausible, given the finding that bureaucratic costs alone amounted to 19 percent of Colombian
per capita income in 2007 (World Bank, 2008). 25 Fixed costs are estimated to be 26,279 1977
Colombian pesos, or $1,595 current U.S. dollars These expenditures are incurred every year,
regardless of production levels; they include various overhead expenses like insurance and

24

In 1977, there were 46.11 pesos per dollar. Also the U.S. GDP deflator was about 36 percent of its value in 2007.
We use these two statistics to translate 1977 Colombian pesos into current U.S. dollars.
25

By way of crude comparison, Hurst and Lusardi (2004) report that in 1984 the median start-up equity investment
among manufacturing business entrepreneurs in the United States was $47,300.

22

marketing.
We estimate non-asset household income (y) to be 4,058 in 1977 pesos, or $246 in
current dollars, and we estimate the average initial wealth of a new entrepreneur (assuming a
lognormal distribution) is estimated at a0 = 114,800 in 1977 pesos, or $6,970 in current dollars.
The average initial wealth of new entrepreneurial households suggests that new entrepreneurs
have to borrow in order to create a new business. However, since there is significant variation
around this mean (  a0 = 43,158), our results do not imply that those who actually create
businesses must leverage themselves heavily. With regard to household preferences toward risk,
our estimate of the utility function parameter, ˆ  1.85 , is within the ranges of values typically
obtained from studies of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and coefficient of relative
risk aversion.26
The estimated credit market imperfection index ( ˆ  0.97 ) is close to unity, implying that
creditors view themselves as unable to seize collateralized assets in the event of default. Put
differently, creditors view households as capable of absconding with nearly the entire value of
their firms’ productive assets if they choose to do so. One should bear in mind that, since θ is
identified by the borrowing levels of firms at different (υ,k) combinations, it will tend toward
unity whenever the data indicate that borrowing levels are low at small, highly profitable firms.
Hence, although information asymmetries and costly state verification are not part of our model,
they may well help explain the large θ value that we estimate. In any case, our finding is
consistent with the World Bank’s (2008) assessment that there are severe enforcement problems
in Colombian credit markets (refer to footnote 8). Further, as the simulated moments indicate,
26

Estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, which corresponds to 1/σ in our model, are typically
found to be in the range of .5 to 1 when household data on consumption is used (e.g. Blundell, Browning and
Meghir (1994), Attanaiso, Banks and Tanner (2002)).

23

the model does a reasonably good job of explaining the borrowing patterns observed in the data.
It predicts equilibrium borrowing at  = 0.97 because, by not defaulting, borrowers keep open
the option of operating a business in the future without incurring entry costs.
IV.

Industry Structure, Wealth Distributions and Credit Market Imperfections
Given all of the parameter estimates discussed above, we can now use simulations to

answer four basic questions. 27 First, how might industry and household characteristics change if
loan contracts were perfectly enforceable? Second, how do credit market imperfections affect
industry and household characteristics during regime 1 (strong but volatile exchange rate and
low interest rates) versus regime 2 (weak, relative stable exchange rate and high interest rates)?
Third, how do the effects of credit market imperfections depend upon the overall volatility of the
macro environment? And finally, how has the large spread between borrowing and lending rates
affected industry and household characteristics?
A.

Ability to Enforce Debt Contracts
To summarize industry characteristics under different credit market conditions, we

generate 50 simulations of the model under the ―
base case‖ assumption that  = 0.97, and 50
simulations under the ―
counterfactual‖ assumption that  = 0.28 The former implies that lenders
are almost completely unable to recoup any collateral from a defaulting borrower, while the

27

To perform these simulations, it is necessary to assume an initial distribution of potential entrant firms over asset
N
levels, h (ait ) , and an initial distribution of incumbent owner-households over asset levels and productivity
I
levels, h (ait , it ) . We let the former be lognormal with the estimated parameter values reported in table 3, and
we let the initial distribution of incumbents’ wealth distributed lognormally with mean 6 and variance 2. Since we
discard the first 30 years of simulated data, the results proved to be insensitive to the initial wealth distribution of
incumbents.
28

The same sets of draws for profit shocks (ν’s) and macro shocks (υ’s) are used in both sets of simulations, so the
only source of difference between our base case and counterfactual results is the associated difference in  values .

24

latter implies they can seize a defaulting borrower’s collateral and sell it at its full market value.
All simulations are for 130 periods. After discarding the first 30 periods of each (to eliminate
atypical ―bur
n-in‖ years), we construct cross-simulation average moments under each scenario.
Table 4 summarizes the results. Note first that reducing  from 0.97 to 0.0 increases the
average log debt-to-asset (leverage) ratio among borrowers from -0.79 to -0.51, or taking
antilogs, from .45 to .60. This extra borrowing reflects the expansion of firms owned by low-a,
high-ν households toward the size at which the marginal return on business capital (k) matches
the lending rate.
As households leverage their businesses they increase the rate of return on their asset
portfolio:

 it 

 kit , et , it   (rt  Dit )  (kit  ait )
ait

The wealth-weighted average of this statistic,

.

(11)

 a  / a
i

it

it

i

it

, rises from 0.42 to 0.44 when 

drops from 0.97 to zero, indicating a 2 percentage point improvement in the return on the pooled
wealth portfolios of entrepreneurial households (Table 4). 29 These gains are concentrated among
the low-a households, as evidenced by the dramatic increase in the unweighted average  value.
In fact, since the median  value is unresponsive to improvements in contract enforceability, it
appears that the return on wealth for the majority of entrepreneurs is unaffected.
In addition to increasing income among low-a owner-households, perfect contract
enforceability affects the aggregate economy in several respects. First, it induces higher savings
rates among the affected owner-households, causing the average log wealth level to rise from

29

The typical  value is above the interest rate, even when  =0, since operating profits must be large enough in
expectation to finance entry costs. Further, since entry costs are the same for all households,  is typically larger
among low-a entrepreneurial households, for whom the denominator of (11) is relatively small.

25

8.58 to 8.64 and the average log capital stock to rise from 6.41 to 6.86. Second, by moving
financial resources toward relatively high-return firms, it improves allocative efficiency. This is
apparent in the increased covariance between size and profit shocks and in the diminished
correlation between wealth and firm size.
Finally, as θ drops from 0.97 to 0.0, more low-a potential owner households find it
worthwhile to open businesses, and more low-a owner-entrepreneurs find it worthwhile to stay in
business. These adjustments are reflected in the number of active firms, which increases from
966 to 1227, in the average life span of firms, which rises from 9.03 years to 9.10 years, in the
average ν among owner-entrepreneurs, which falls from 0.90 to 0.80, and in the average profit
shock among exiting firms, which falls from -0.16 to -0.21.
B.

Loan enforcement effects under alternative Colombian macro regimes
Next we investigate whether the effects of credit market imperfections are similar during

the different macro regimes identified by our switching VAR. We do this by generating 50
simulations of our model, each for 130 periods, discarding the initial 30 periods as a burn-in.
Then we average values of the various statistics for all periods during which regime 1 prevailed,
and for all periods when regime 2 prevailed. Households are presumed to correctly perceive that
switching patterns are governed by the estimated switching threshold of r = 0.125.
The first two columns of table 5 summarize the regime 1 and regime 2 results for the base
case of θ = 0.97 and the last two columns do the same for the counterfactual case of θ = 0. Note
that the average log exchange rate and interest rate are 4.70 and 0.09, respectively, in regime 1,
while they are 4.59 and 0.16, respectively, in regime 2. Thus interest rates and exchange rates
move in opposite directions when regimes change, and their effects on businesses’ net earnings
after interest work in opposite directions. Nonetheless, on average entrepreneurs earn higher

26

returns on their wealth under the strong exchange rates and low interest rates of regime 1.
Further, since the payoff to low interest rates depends upon firms’ ability to borrow, the effects
of regime switches are highly dependent upon contract enforceability. The difference between
weighted average earnings rates on portfolios under the two regimes is only 3 percentage points
when credit markets function poorly (=0.97), but when contracts are perfectly enforceable
(=0) it is 17 percentage points.
Figure 3a depicts the percentage changes in welfare for different types of incumbent
owner-households as the economy moves from regime 2 to regime 1, presuming that θ = 0.97.
Clearly the net gains from switching to regime 2 tend to fall with productivity and rise with
household wealth. This pattern reflects the fact that regime 1’s high interest rates help
households that are net depositors, while regime 2’s favorable exchange rates increase the
operating profits of business owners. Since low- households don’t hold much of their wealth
in businesses and are relatively likely to trade their businesses for bank deposits in the future,
their primary concern is with deposit rates. High wealth households likewise hold relatively
large fractions of their wealth in banks and do well when deposit rates are high.
Among incumbents who are more dependent upon business income—that is, low-a, high entrepreneurs—several more effects come into in play. First, these entrepreneurs dislike the
extra exchange-rate-induced volatility in operating profits that comes with regime 1. This is
particularly true for incumbents with low wealth, who are relatively risk-averse. Second, at any
given wealth level, high-ν incumbents are less bothered by low interest rates because they hold a
relatively large share of their assets in the form of business investments. In fact, low-a, high-ν
households tend to be debtors, so they welcome the lower lending rates that regime 1 brings. The

27

interaction of these effects makes the welfare effects of regime switches non-monotonic in ν at
low a values.
Figure 3b shows how the surface in figure 3a would shift if contract enforceability were
perfect (θ=0). High-a, low- households are not affected by θ because these households selffinance their capital investments and are not credit constrained when contract enforcement is
weak. However, improvements in enforcement do help low-a, high-ν households in periods
when they would like to be borrowing more, i.e., when regime 1 prevails.30 This enforcementinduced shift in the value of low-a, high-ν households is associated with more regime-1 business
investment by households with modest wealth, and it is the reason that cov(a,k) is higher under
regime 2 than under regime 1 when θ = 0 (Table 5).
C.

Contract Enforcement and the Macro Environment: Argentina versus Colombia
Results in the previous section suggest that the effects of improved contract

enforceability depend partly upon the degree of macro volatility. To further explore this
relationship, we now ask how changes in θ would have affected Colombian households if they
had been somehow transplanted to the relatively volatile Argentine macro environment.
Figure 4 shows the evolution of Argentine real exchange rates and real interest rates over
the past 30 years. Juxtaposed with figure 1, it demonstrates that this country’s recent macro
history has been much more turbulent than Colombia’s. This impression is confirmed by
estimates of our SETAR switching model based on Argentine time series (Table 7). We
decisively reject a single regime, and we estimate a covariance matrix for the innovations in the
process that is roughly 10 larger than Colombia’s (compare Table 7 to Table 1).

30

This finding is similar to Gine and Townsend’s (2004), whose simulations imply that the primary beneficiaries of
improvements in the Thai financial sector are ―
talented would-be entrepreneurs who lack credit and cannot
otherwise go into business (or invest little capital).‖ (p. 269)

28

Table 7 repeats the counterfactual experiment that generated Table 4, replacing the
Colombian transition density for st from Table 1 with the Argentine transition density from Table
6. All other parameters are left unchanged. In a number of respects, we find that well-functioning
credit markets are more important when interest rates and exchange rates are volatile. Compared
to the findings for the Colombian macro environment, Argentine macro conditions induce larger
responses to perfect enforcement in terms of leverage rates, average firm life spans, average
portfolio returns, average log firm sizes, and average log wealth levels. The reason is that with
relatively dramatic macro shocks, households have stronger incentives to create or expand firms
during good times and to contract or shut them down during bad times. Well-functioning credit
markets allow them to do this.
Surprisingly, while the weighted average return on portfolios rises in response to
improved contract enforcement in the Colombian macro environment (Table 4), it drops when
Argentine macro conditions are assumed (Table 7). What might explain this contrast? When
improvements in contract enforceability make it easier to finance entry and expansion, more
firms avail themselves of the temporary profit opportunities created by the volatile Argentine
macro environment. Accordingly, marginally profitable firms are more numerous when θ = 0
than when θ = 0.97, and the weighted-average return on portfolios falls. This interpretation is
supported by the large drop in average profit shocks and average life expectancy of firms.

D.

The Effects of the Borrowing/Lending Spread
As a final exercise, we explore the effects of more efficient financial intermediation in a

different sense: lower spreads between borrowing and lending rates, μ. For non-entrepreneurial
households, it can be seen from (1) that the first order effect of a small reduction in μ is to raise

29

the value of current income by an amount proportional to the household’s asset holdings, a. For
owner-households with bank deposits, (4) show that a reduction in μ has the first order effect of
reducing consumption by an amount that is proportional to

. For owner-households with

debt, (4) shows that the reduction in the spread has no effect on income—all of the household’s
assets are invested in the firm and receiving a return of r. Thus, one of the effects of reducing
the spread should be to make exit more attractive for incumbent firms by raising the return on
assets held by non-entrepreneurial households.

This should raise the threshold value of ν

required for a firm to remain in the industry, with this effect more pronounced for wealthy
households.
To examine the impact of a reduction in μ on the Colombian apparel industry, we
simulate our model forward under a base case scenario (μ=0.06) and a counterfactual scenario
(μ=0.02). The reduction in spreads induces different savings patterns, and the associated changes
in wealth trajectories generate a gradual change in industry structure, so for this exercise we go
beyond before/after comparisons to explore transition dynamics. More precisely, we simulate the
first 50 periods with μ=0.06 and an additional 50 periods with μ=0.02, discarding an initial burnin period of 30 years. We assume that the reduction in spread is unanticipated, but once it has
occurred, households correctly understand that the reduction is permanent.
Figure 5a shows the adjustment in the number of firms that takes place after the spread
reduction in period 50. The higher deposit rate attracts wealth out of proprietorships and into
bank accounts, but the adjustment is gradual because it is accomplished mainly through reduced
entry rates during a transition period. This asymmetry in adjustment margins reflects the
presence of sunk entry costs, which induce some entrepreneurs to continuing operating firms
after the jump in deposit rates, even though they would not have created their firms if they had

30

known the change in μ was coming. The effect of higher deposit rates is more dramatic for the
case of well-functioning credit markets (θ =0) because, as discussed in section IVA above, these
credit conditions encourage exit among marginal firms.
As entrepreneurs move their wealth out of low-return establishments and into bank
deposits, the marginal product of business investment rises, driving up the average size-weighted
profit shock (ν) by roughly 0.05 and the unweighted return on owner-household portfolios by
0.08 (Table 8 and Figure 5b). Higher deposit rates drive down average firm size too, but only in
the case of poorly functioning credit markets (Table 8 and figure 5c). The reason, once again, is
that when credit markets function poorly, entrepreneurs have relatively strong incentives to avoid
leaving and re-entering. Thus, when confronted with higher deposit rates, entrepreneurs with
relatively unprofitable firms tend to scale them back rather than shut them down.
As with other counterfactual experiments, the effects of reforms are not distributed
evenly across different types of households. Figure 5d shows that the main adjustment in terms
of portfolio reallocations toward bank deposits comes among high-productivity firms held by
wealthy households. These households own businesses, and not being credit-rationed, they
equate returns at the margin between their business investments and bank deposits before the
reform. Accordingly, when the deposit rate rises, this group scales back its business investments
most dramatically.

V.

Summary
We have developed an empirical model that characterizes the effects of macroeconomic

volatility, poorly functioning credit markets, and substantial entry costs. Applied to panel data on
Colombian apparel producers, the model has yielded econometric estimates of a loan

31

enforcement index, the sunk costs of creating a new business, and various other parameters. It
has also provided a basis for counter-factual experiments that explore the effects of improved
contract enforcement and reduced spreads between borrowing and lending rates.
In particular, simulations of our model imply that perfect loan contract enforcement
substantially increases the ability of entrepreneurial households to pursue profitable business
investments. Accordingly, the average return on asset portfolios increases dramatically and the
number of active businesses rises. At the same time, firms’ sizes become less correlated with the
wealth of their owners and more correlated with their capacity to generate operating profits.
Further improvements in the return on portfolios come from reductions in the spread between
borrowing and lending rates.
The effects of financial reforms on entrepreneurial households depend upon the market
potential of their businesses, their wealth, and the macro environment. For example, the gains
from reductions in the borrowing/lending spread accrue to households that are wealthy enough to
hold savings deposits. On the other hand, the benefits of good contract enforcement accrue
mainly to households with good business ideas but modest wealth.

Further, as the macro

environment swings from low interest rates and a strong but volatile currency to low interest
rates and a weaker, more stable currency, the benefits of improved contract enforcement become
larger still for these households.
Finally, the efficiency gains from improved enforceability are larger when the macro
environment is volatile because well-functioning credit markets enhance entrepreneurs’ ability to
quickly adjust their firm size, and the returns to doing so are relatively large when market
conditions are unstable. In particular, if the Colombian macro environment were replaced with
the Argentine environment of the past 25 years, the effect of moving to perfect enforceability on

32

average leverage rates, average portfolio returns, average firm size, and average wealth of
entrepreneurs would be far more dramatic.

33

References
Aghion, Philippe and Patrick Bolton (1997), "A Theory of Trickle-Down Growth and
Development", Review of Economic Studies, 64, 151-172.
Aghion, Philippe, George-Mario Angeletos, Abhijit Banerjee, and Kalina Manova (2005)
―
Volatility and Growth: Credit Constraints and Productivity-Enhancing Investment,‖
NBER Working Paper 11349.
Attanasio, Orazio, James Banks, and Sarah Tanner, ―
Asset Holding and Consumption
Volatility,‖ Journal of Political Economy 110 (2002): 771-792.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo (2005). ―
Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit
Constraints Using a Directed Lending Program,‖ Working Paper, MIT.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew Newman (1993) ―
Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development,‖ Journal of Political Economy, 101, 274-298.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew Newman (2003) ―
Inequality, Growth and Trade Policy,‖ MIT
Working Paper, Cambridge, MA.
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine (2000), "A New Database on Financial
Development and Structure", World Bank Economic Review, 14, 597-605.
Bloom, Nicholas (2009) ―
The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,‖ Econometrica 77 (3), 623-686.
Blundell, Richard, Martin Browning, and Costas Meghir, ―
Consumer Demand and the LifeCycle Allocation of Expenditures,‖ Review of Economic Studies 61:1 (1994): 57-80.
Bollen, Nicolas, Stephen Gray, and Robert Whaley (2000). ―
Regime Switching in Foreign
Exchange Rates: Evidence from Currency Option Prices,‖ Journal of Econometrics, 94,
239-76.
Buera, Francisco (2008) ―
A Dynamic Model of Entrepreneurship with Borrowing Constraints:
Theory and Evidence.‖ Working paper, Northwestern University, Department of
Economics.
Cagetti, Marco and Mariacristina De Nardi (2006) ―
Entrepreneurship, Frictions and Wealth,‖
Journal of Political Economy 2006, 835-870.
Caner, M. and B. Hansen (2001). ―
Threshold Autoregression with a Unit Root,‖ Econometrica
69(6), 1555-1596.
Chen, Shiu-Sheng (2006), ―
‖Revisiting the Interest Rate-Exchange Rate Nexus: A MarkovSwitching Approach,‖ Journal of Development Economics 79, 208-224.

34

Clarida, Richard, Lucio Sarno, Mark Taylor, and Giorgio Valente (2003), ―
The Out-of-Sample
Success of Term Structure Models as Exchange Rate Predictors,‖ Journal of
International Economics 60 (1) 61-84.
Cooley, Thomas and Vincenzo Quadrini (2001), ―
Financial Markets and Firm Dynamics,‖
American Economic Review, 91 (5), 1286-1310.
Cooper, Russell and John Haltiwanger (2000) ―
On the Nature of Capital Adjustment Costs,‖
NBER Working Paper No. 7925.
De Mel, Suresh, David MacKenszie and Christopher Woodruff (2007) ―
Returns to Capital in
Microenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment,‖ World Bank Policy Research
Working Paper 4230, May 2007.
Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Scheifer (2002)
―
The Regulation of Entry,‖ Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(1), 1-39.
Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, and Andrei Shleifer (2007) ―Private Credit in 129
Countries,‖ Journal of Financial Economics, 84(2), 299-329.
Edwards, Sebastian (2001) The Economics and Politics of Transition to an Open Market
Economy: Colombia. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Engel, Charles and James Hamilton (1990), ―
Long Swings in the Dollar: Are They in the Data
and Do Markets Know It?‖ American Economic Review, 80 (4), 688-713.
Evans and Jovanovic (1989). ―
An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under Liquidity
Constraints,‖ Journal of Political Economy 97, 808-27.
Evans and Leighton (1989) ―
Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,‖ American Economic
Review 79, 519-35.
Fairlie, Robert (1999) The Absence of the African American-Owned Business: An Analysis of
the Dynamics of Self-Employment,‖ Journal of Labor Economics 17, 80-108.
Garcia Garcia, Jorge and Sisira Jayasuriya (1997) Courting Turmoil and Deferring Prosperity:
Colombia between 1960 and 1990. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.
Gentry, William and R. Glenn Hubbard (2004) ―
Entrepreneurship and Household Savings,‖ The
B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 4(1).
Giné, Xavier and Robert Townsend (2004). ―
Evaluation of Financial Liberalization: A General
Equilibrium Model with Constrained Occupation Choice,‖ Journal of Development
Economics 74, 269-307.

35

Gray, Stephen (1996) ―
Modeling the Conditional Distribution of Interest Rates as a RegimeSwitching Process,‖ Journal of Financial Economics, 42 27-62.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Boyan Jovanovic (1990) ―
Financial Development, Growth and the
Distribution of Income,‖ Journal of Political Economy 98, 1076-1107.
Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi (2004). ―
Liquidity Contraints, Household Wealth, and
Entrepreneurship,‖ Journal of Political Economy 112(2), 319-347.
Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart (1999), ―
The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and
Balance of Payments Problems,‖ American Economic Review, 89 (3), 473-500.
Lambson, Val (1991) ―
Industry Evolution with Sunk Costs and Uncertain Market Conditions,‖
International Journal of Industrial Organization, Vol. 9, No. 2, pp. 171-196.
Lee, Bong-Soo and Ingram, Beth Fisher (1991) ― Simulation Estimation of Time-Series
Models,‖ Journal of Econometrics, Vol.47, Issues 2-3, pp.197-205.
Levine, Ross (2005) ―
Finance and Growth: Theory, Mechanisms and Evidence‖, in P. Aghion
and S. Durlauf eds. Handbook of Economic Growth, Elsevier, 2005.
Lloyd-Ellis Huw, and Dan Bernhardt (2000), ―
Enterprise, Inequality, and Economic
Development,‖ Review of Economic Studies, 67(1):, pp. 147–168.
Loayza, Norman, Romain Ranciere, Lusi Serven and Jaume Ventura. ―
Macroeconomic Volatility
and Welfare in Developing Countries: An Introduction,‖ The World Bank Economic
Review, 21(3), 343-387.
Maddala, George (1983) Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics.
Econometric Society Monograph No. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olley, G. Stephen and Ariel Pakes (1996) ―
The Dynamics of Productivity in the
Telecommunications Equipment Industry,‖ Econometrica 64(6) 1263-1298.
Partow, Zeinab (2003). ―
Colombia: Macroeconomic and Fiscal Frameworks,‖ in Giugale,Marcelo-M.; Lafourcade,-Olivier.; Luff,-Connie, eds. Colombia: The economic
Foundation of peace. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 2003; 145-72.
Paulson, Anna and Robert Townsend (2004). ―
Entrepreneurship and Financial Constraints in
Thailand,‖ Journal of Corporate Finance. 10(2), 229-262.
Quadrini, Vincenzo (1999) ―
The Importance of Entrepreneurship for Wealth Concentration and
Mobility,‖ Review of Income and Wealth 45, 1-19.

36

Rustichini, Aldo. (1998). ―
Dynamic Programming Solution of Incentive-Constrained Problems,‖
Journal of Economic Theory 78(2), pp. 329-354.
Smith, A. (1993) ―
Estimating Non-Linear Time Series Models Using Vector Autoregressions,‖
Journal of Applied Econometrics 8, S63-S84.
Tauchen, George and Hussey, Robert (1991) "Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining
Approximate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models," Econometrica, Volume 59,
No. 2, pp. 371-396.
Townsend, Robert M and Kenichi Ueda (2006), ―
Financial Deepening, Inequality, and Growth:
A Model-Based Quantitative Evaluation‖ Review of Economic Studies, Volume 73, No.
1, pp 251-293.
Tybout, James (2000) ―
Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They Do,
and Why?‖ Journal of Economic Literature 38(1), 11-44.
Utar, Hâle (2008), ―
Import Competition and Employment Dynamics‖, Working Paper,
University of Colorado.
World Bank (2008) Doing Business 2008: Colombia. Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.

37

Appendix 1: The Profit Function Estimator
A.

Sources of identification
From (10c) in the text, the expectation of the profit shock  it conditioned on the macro state,

predetermined variables, and continuation (  it  1 ) is:
E( it | st , ait , vit 1,  it  1)   it 1  E( it | st , ait , it 1,  it  1)

Thus, using (10a) – (10c), the following errors have mean zero and are orthogonal to the vector
of conditioning variables:

 itR  ln Git  ( 0  1 ln et   2 ln kit )

(A1)

  it 1  E it | st , ait , it 1;  it  1

 itC  ln Cit*  ( 0  ln   1 ln et   2 ln k it )

(A2)

  it 1   itC  E it | st , ait , it 1 ;  it  1

 it   it  E it | st , ait , it 1;  it  12
,
 var it | st , ait , it 1;  it  1
2

(A3)

and the associated moment conditions provide a basis for identifying the profit function
parameters and the transition density, f ( it 1 |  it ) :

      0 .

itR  st , ait , it 1  ,  itC  st , ait , it 1  , E  itR  E  itC  E  it

2

To construct E ( it | st , ait , it 1 ,  it  1) and var( it | st , ait , it 1 ,  it  1) ,
we express the continuation probability as:

1
Pit = P it  1 | st , ait , vit 1   
 ( s t , a it )  

     it 1 
d 




 

  it 
d it ,
 ( s t , a it )   it 1  
 





1

 

38

where  () is the standard normal density function and (from section IIIB),  ( st , ait ) is the
minimum profit shock at which a firm continues operating. Then, given Pit , the standard
formulae for moments of truncated normal distributions imply (e.g., Maddala, 1983):
E ( it | st , ait , it 1 ,  it  1)    M it



(A4)



var( it | st , ait , vit 1 ,  it  1)   2 1  M it  [M it   1 ( Pit )]
,
where M it 



  1 ( Pit )
Pit

(A5)

 is the relevant Mills ratio and Φ( ) is the standard normal cumulative

distribution function. Parameterizing  ( st , ait ) as a flexible function in its arguments (with time
dummies controlling for the macro state), then substituting A4 into A1 and A2 and substituting
A5 into A3, one obtains moment expressions in terms of data and parameters.

B.

Dealing with unobserved asset stocks
To implement the estimation strategy sketched above, one must deal with several issues

concerning ait . The first is that ait is never observed for the firms exiting in period t. (Refer to the
time line in figure A1 below.) This problem is easily surmounted because, given the macro state,
st-1, all households with the same (ait-1, vit-1) values make the same capital choices and
consumption decisions, and begin period t with the same ait. Therefore, the vector (ait-1 vit-1, st-1)
implies (ait, vit-1) for any firm that is not rationed, and we can replace the latter vector of
conditioning variables with the former.

39

Figure A.1
Period t data
recorded, if χit =1

Period t
begins

Period t+1
begins
t

Given:
ait , vit, st
Household
chooses χt .
If χit =1, kit
, cit , dit
also chosen

If χit =0, the firm
exits and no data are
observed for period t.
If χit =1, production
and consumption take
place, cit, πit and ait+1
realized

Given:
at+1 , vt+1, et+1, rt+1
Household
chooses χt+1.
If χt+1 =1, kt+1 ,
ct+1 , dt+1 also
chosen

The second problem is that the data set does not directly report ait values for any period.
We deal with this problem in different ways for different types of firms. For all firms that carry
positive debt (dit ), our model implies ait = kit – dit because no household has an incentive to
simultaneously borrow and hold bank deposits. Thus when dit > 0, ait can be constructed as kit dit.31 Further, this is true even for firms with no debt, so long as their owners hold their entire
wealth as physical capital, which occurs when a firm’s marginal revenue product of capital
exceeds the deposit rate:
MRPit  (1   )  2  exp  0  1 ln et   it   kit  2 1   > rt   d ,

(A6)

We check this condition, observation by observation, to identify those instances where we can
assume ait = kit .
Finally, for observations where dit = 0 and (A6) fails to hold, ait cannot be inferred as kit .
But kit-1 helps to predict exit thresholds among these firms, since it bounds assets from below (ait31

Since dit does not appear directly in equations A1-A3, its presence in the continuation probit provides a basis for
identification of the parameters of interest.

40

1

> kit-1) and therefore contains information about their owners’ willingness to continue

operating proprietorships. We therefore express these firms’ threshold profit shocks as

  ~st , kit 1    it , where ~st , kit 1  is the projection of  st , ait  on a flexible function of

st , kit 1  , and

 it is the noise in this projection. That is, when (A6) fails to hold and a firm

holds no debt, we write the continuation probability as:
Pit 
 Pr it  ~st , k it 1    it   Pr it   it  ~   it 1 ,



 Pr it   st , k it  d it   Pr it      it 1 ,

d it  0,  it  b(k it , st )
otherwise

Then, further assuming that  it is normally distributed, (A4) and (A5) generalize to:
E ( it | st , kit  d it , vit 1 ,  it  1) =


 2
M it

  2   2

 M
  it


for d it 1  0,  it  b(k it , et , rt )
(A4’)

otherwise

var( it | et , rt , ait , vit 1 ,  it  1) 





( 2   2 ) 1  M it  [ M it   1 ( pit )]


 2
1
   1  M it  [ M it   ( pit )]





for d it 1  0,  it  b(k it , et , rt )

(A5’)

otherwise

 (r   d   )  
where bkit , st  ≡ ln  t
  (1   2 ) ln k it   0  1 ln et is the value of  it at which
  2 (1   ) 

equation (A6) holds with equality.
In sum, our estimator sorts firms according to whether assets can be inferred or not—i.e.,
whether the conditions dit = 0 and νit ≤ b(kit, st) hold. For observations where these conditions
41

apply, we use (A4’) and (A5’) in the calculation of the sample moments rather than (A4) and
(A5). At the estimated parameter vector, only 16 percent of the sample fell in this category. (That
is, 84 percent of the observations were on firms with positive debt levels, rationing, or both.)
Also, 24 percent of the observations were found to be rationed.

42

Table 1: SETAR Switching Model Parametersa
e

0

0.086
(0.231)

Regime 1
r
0.282
(0.111)

e

0.198
(0.174)

Regime 2
r

1

0.979
(0.046)
0.153
(0.251)

-0.053
(0.022)
0.597
(0.121)

0.954
(0.040)
0.044
(0.238)

0.034
(0.018)
0.674
(0.109)



2.06e-3 -4.56e-5
-4.56e-5 4.79e-4

1.55e-3
-1.58e-4

-1.58e-4
3.26e-4

Threshold r

0.125

2

χ (8) test statistic for single regime:
a

-0.106
(0.080)

17.48

Based on quarterly IFS data for Colombia, 1982-I through 2007-II. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

Table 2: Operating Profit Function Parameters, Colombian Apparel Producers*
Intercept, revenue equation (0)
Intercept, cost equation (0 + ln)
Exchange rate (1)
Capital stock (2)
Root of  process ()

2

Variance of innovation in process (   )
Depreciation rate (δ)**
Number of observations
*

Parameter
5.842
5.624
-0.357
0.629

Std. Error
0.317
0.317
0.050
0.033

Z-ratio
18.423
17.729
-7.124
19.010

0.893

0.008

111.878

0.418
0.093

0.011
0.004

38.811
23.650

10,340

GMM estimates of the system (11a), (11b), (11c), (11d).
**Estimated separately as the average (book value) depreciation rate.

Table 3:
Parameters Identified by the Dynamic Programming Problem ()
Parameter
Std. Error
Exogenous income (y)
4.058
8.948
Fixed costs (f)
26.269
7.2460
Sunk entry costs (F)
168.713
53.140
Credit market imperfection index ()
0.970
0.024
Risk aversion parameter (σ)
1.850
0.165
Average log assets, new entrepreneurs ( a0 )

Z ratio
0.454
3.625
3.175
40.417
11.212

114.800

21.188

5.418

1862.696

611.764

3.045

Ratio of total productive assets to fixed assets ()

0.104
7.086

0.012
0.038

8.667
186.474

Mean, log capital
Variance, of log capital
Mean, log capital, entrants
Variance, of log capital, entrants
Mean, log operating profits
Variance, log operating profits
Mean, log debt (given debt is positive)
Variance, log debt (given debt is positive)
Mean, growth in net capital stock
Variance, growth in net capital stock
Mean, entry rate
Mean, exit rate
Variance, entry rate
Variance, exit rate
Covariance, log capital, log operating profits
Covariance, log capital, lagged log operating
profits
Covariance, log debt, log capital
Covariance, log debt, log operating profits
Covariance, net capital growth, log operating
profits
Covariance, log capital, net capital growth
Covariance, log debt, lagged log capital
Covariance, log debt, lagged log operating profits
Covariance, log capital, lagged operating profits

Simulated
Moment
6.548
1.437
5.877
0.989
7.286
1.700
-0.819
0.370
0.074
0.240
0.102
0.101
0.000
0.001
1.475
1.265
-0.149
0.011
0.085
0.151
-0.239
-0.146
1.312

Variance in log assets, new entrepreneurs (  a2 )
Probability of new business opportunity (p)

0

Sample
Moment
6.193
2.102
5.947
1.705
6.801
2.048
-0.878
2.449
-0.067
0.208
0.147
0.156
0.007
0.003
1.143
1.948
-0.201
0.400
0.061
0.199
0.308
-0.151
1.174

Table 4: Industry Characteristics and Loan Enforcement

Number of firms
Entry/exit rate
Mean age of active firms
Mean profitability (ν)
Mean log capital (k)
Mean log(k)-weighted profitability
Mean ν of exiting firms
Mean portfolio return ()
Median portfolio return ()
Mean log(a)-weighted portfolio return
Covariance, υ and log(k)
Mean log leverage among borrowers
Log of mean wealth of firm owners
Correlation, wealth and capital

 = 0.97
966.33
0.10
9.03
0.90
6.41
0.99
-0.15
2.09
0.45
0.42

θ=0
1227.11
0.10
9.10
0.80
6.86
0.94
-0.28
3.38
0.45
0.44

0.09
-0.79
8.58
0.85

0.13
-0.51
8.64
0.51

Table 5: Loan Enforcement, Macro Conditions and Industry Characteristics
 = 0.97
Number of Firms
Entry rate
Exit rate
Mean profit shock (ν)
Mean log(k)-weighted profit shock
Covariance, υ and log(k)
Mean portfolio return ()
Median portfolio return ()
Mean log(a)-weighted portfolio return
Mean log capital
Mean log leverage among borrowers
Log of mean wealth of firm owners
Correlation, log wealth and log capital
Mean ν of exiting firms
Mean Exchange Rate
Variance Exchange Rate
Mean Interest Rate
Variance Interest Rate

=0

Regime 1
968.27
0.10
0.10
0.90
0.99

Regime 2
965.33
0.10
0.10
0.90
0.99

Regime 1
1237.98
0.11
0.10
0.80
0.93

Regime 2
1221.51
0.10
0.10
0.81
0.94

0.09
2.29
0.48
0.44
6.43
-0.78
8.58
0.84
-0.15
4.71
0.08
0.08
0.00

0.09
1.99
0.44
0.41
6.40
-0.80
8.58
0.85
-0.15
4.53
0.05
0.16
0.00

0.13
4.51
0.56
0.55
6.95
-0.50
8.65
0.40
-0.23
4.71
0.08
0.08
0.00

0.13
2.79
0.39
0.38
6.81
-0.51
8.64
0.56
-0.23
4.53
0.05
0.16
0.00

45

Table 6: SETAR Switching Model Parameters, Argentinaa
Regime 1
Regime 2
e
r
e
r

0

1

Threshold r

1.231
(0.342)

-0.687
(1.215)

0.254
(0.087)

-0.005
(0.259)

0.681
(0.086)

0.152
(0.307)

0.943
(0.021)

0.018
(0.061)

0.328
(0.132)

-0.717
(0.469)

0.013
(0.016)

0.086
(0.049)

0.0407
0.0337

0.0337
0.5152

0.0045
0.0004

0.0004
0.0397

χ 2 (8) test statistic for single regime:
a

0.034
184.28

Based on quarterly IFS data for Argentina, 1980-I through 2008-IV. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

Table 7: Industry Characteristics and Loan Enforcement
in an Argentine Macro Environment

Number of firms
Entry/Exit rate
Mean age of active firms
Mean profit shock (ν)
Mean log capital (k)
Mean log(k)-weighted ν
Mean ν of exiting firms
Mean portfolio return ()
Median portfolio return ()
Mean log(a)-weighted portfolio return
Covariance, υ and log(k)
Mean log leverage among borrowers
Mean log(a) of firm owners
Correlation, wealth and capital
Mean exchange rate
Mean interest rate

 = 0.97
1103.38
0.10
9.00
0.81
6.54
0.93
-0.22
4.94
0.49
0.45

θ=0
1373.67
0.11
7.47
0.67
7.47
0.83
-0.29
13.10
0.56
0.20

0.11
-0.89
9.26
0.81
4.11
0.10

0.16
-0.43
9.67
0.52
4.11
0.10

46

Table 8: Loan Enforcement, Interest Rate Spreads and Industry Characteristics
 = 0.97
Number of Firms
Entry rate
Exit rate
Mean profit shock (ν)
Mean log capital (k)
Mean k-weighted profit shock
Covariance, (υ,k)
Mean Portfolio Return
Weighted Mean Portfolio Return
Mean log capital
Log of mean wealth (a) of firm owners
Correlation, log wealth and log capital
Mean ν of exiting firms

=0

μ=0.06
1010.81
0.10
0.10
0.89
6.56
0.97

μ=0.02
880.30
0.11
0.12
0.95
6.47
1.02

μ=0.06
1183.61
0.10
0.10
0.81
7.02
0.94

μ=0.02
1144.42
0.11
0.11
0.84
7.01
0.96

0.08
2.02
0.40
6.56
8.68
0.86
-0.18

0.08
2.10
0.43
6.47
8.62
0.87
-0.09

0.13
3.37
0.45
7.02
8.71
0.50
-0.19

0.12
3.62
0.54
7.01
8.51
0.43
-0.18

Figure 1: Transitions between household types

Incumbent Owner
Households

Potential Owner
Households

Non-Entrepreneurial
Households

47

Figure 2: Colombian Exchange Rates and Interest Rates

Real Exchange Rate

4.2

4.4

4.6

lnrer

4.8

5

5.2

1982-2007

1980m1

1985m1

1990m1

1995m1
Time

2000m1

2005m1

Real Borrowing Rate

0

.1
-.1

lnrlr

.2

.3

1982-2007

1980m1

1985m1

1990m1

1995m1
Time

2000m1

2005m1

Source: International Monetary Fund, IFS Statistics, and calculations of the authors. An
increase in the exchange rate corresponds to an appreciation.
48

Figure 3a: Percentage Differences in Welfare of an Incumbent Firm Owner,
regime 1 – regime 2 (θ=0.97)

0.1

0.05

Value

0

-0.05

-0.1

-0.15

8.8321
1.3937
7.8284

0.6345
6.8248

0.1971
5.8211

-0.1971
4.8175

-0.6345
3.8138

-1.3937

Discrete Points of Wealth (in log)

Discrete Points of Productivity/Profitability (in log)

Figure 3b: Change in 4a when θ=0.97 is reduced to θ=0

0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12

Value

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

8.8321
1.3937
7.8284

0.6345
6.8248

0.1971
5.8211

-0.1971
4.8175

-0.6345
3.8138

Discrete Points of Wealth (in log)

-1.3937
Discrete Points of Productivity/Profitability (in log)

49

Figure 4: Argentina Exchange Rates and Interest Rates

Real Exchange Rate

3

3.5

4

log real exchange rate

4.5

5

1980-2008

1980q1

1990q1

2000q1

2010q1

t

Real Interest Rate

2
1
0
-1

log(1+ r)

3

4

1980-2008

1980q1

1990q1

2000q1

2010q1

t

Source: International Monetary Fund, IFS Statistics, and calculations of the authors. An
increase in the exchange rate corresponds to an appreciation.
50

Figure 5a: Changes in the Spread and the Number of Firms
Evolution of the Number of Firms
1200
Base Case
No Credit Constraint
1150

1100

mu=0.06

1050

mu=0.02

1000

950

900

850

800

0

10

20

30

40
50
60
Time Period (Year)

70

80

90

100

Figure 5b: Changes in Spread and Average Profit Shock
Average Profitability
0.98
0.96
0.94
Base Case
No Credit Constraint

0.92
0.9

mu=0.02

0.88
mu=0.06
0.86
0.84
0.82
0.8

0

20

40
60
Time (Year)

80

100

51

Figure 5c: Changes in Spread and Average Firm Size
Average Value of Capital
7.3
Base Case
No Credit Constraint

7.2
7.1
7
6.9
6.8
6.7

mu=0.06

mu=0.02

6.6
6.5
6.4
0

20

40
60
Time (Year)

80

100

Figure 5d: Changes in Spread and Average Firm Size

52

