                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  BANK GOVERNANCE, REGULATION, AND RISK TAKING

                                               Luc Laeven
                                               Ross Levine

                                          Working Paper 14113
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w14113


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2008




We received very helpful comments from Stijn Claessens, Francesca Cornelli, Giovanni dell'Ariccia,
Phil Dybvig, Radhakrishnan Gopalan, Stuart Greenbaum, Kose John, Eugene Kandel, Hamid Mehran,
Don Morgan, Gianni De Nicolo, Jose Luis Peydro, Anjan Thakor, and seminar participants at the Bank
of Israel, Harvard Business School, Indiana University, Wharton School, the Ninth Conference of
the ECB-CFS Research Network in Dublin, the University of Minnesota, Washington University in
St. Louis, and the World Bank. We would like to thank Ying Lin for excellent research assistance.
This paper's findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not represent
the views of the International Monetary Fund, its Executive Directors, the countries they represent,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Luc Laeven and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Bank Governance, Regulation, and Risk Taking
Luc Laeven and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 14113
June 2008
JEL No. G18,G2,G3

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper conducts the first empirical assessment of theories concerning relationships among risk
taking by banks, their ownership structures, and national bank regulations. We focus on conflicts between
bank managers and owners over risk, and show that bank risk taking varies positively with the comparative
power of shareholders within the corporate governance structure of each bank. Moreover, we show
that the relation between bank risk and capital regulations, deposit insurance policies, and restrictions
on bank activities depends critically on each bank's ownership structure, such that the actual sign of
the marginal effect of regulation on risk varies with ownership concentration. These findings have
important policy implications as they imply that the same regulation will have different effects on
bank risk taking depending on the bank's corporate governance structure.


Luc Laeven
Senior Economist
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20431
Llaeven@imf.org

Ross Levine
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
ross_levine@brown.edu
                                                                                                        1


1. Introduction

       In this paper, we analyze relationships among risk taking by banks, their ownership structures,

and national bank regulations. We focus on the potential conflicts between bank managers and

owners over risk, and assess whether bank risk taking varies with the comparative power of

shareholders within the corporate governance structure of each bank. Moreover, we examine whether

the relation between national regulations and bank risk depends on each bank’s ownership structure.

       Policy considerations motivate this research. As emphasized by Bernanke (1983), Calomiris

and Mason (1997, 2003a, b), Keeley (1990), and recent financial turmoil, the risk taking behavior of

banks affects financial and economic fragility. In turn, international and national agencies propose an

array of regulations to shape bank risk. Yet, researchers have not assessed how standard corporate

governance mechanisms, such as ownership structure, interact with national regulations in shaping

the risk taking behavior of individual banks. This gap is surprising because standard agency theories

suggest that ownership structure influences corporate risk taking (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; John,

Litov, and Yeung, 2008). This gap is also potentially serious from a policy perspective: The same

regulations may have different effects on bank risk taking depending on the comparative power of

shareholders within the corporate governance structure of each bank.

       Existing research further advertises the value of simultaneously examining bank risk,

ownership structure, and bank regulations. Studying non-financial firms, Agrawal and Mandelker

(1987) find an inverse relationship between risk taking and the degree of managerial control, while

John, Litov, and Yeung (2008) find that managers enjoying large private benefits of control select

sub-optimally conservative investment strategies. Yet, research on bank risk taking typically does not

incorporate information on each bank’s ownership structure (Keeley, 1990; Kroszner and Rajan,

1994; Hellmann, Murdock, and Stiglitz, 2000; and Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache, 2002). In an

influential exception, Saunders et al. (1990) find that owner controlled banks exhibit higher risk

                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                         2

taking behavior than banks controlled by managers with small shareholdings. They do not, however,

test whether ownership structure and regulations jointly shape bank risk taking, or whether their

results generalize beyond the United States to countries with distinct laws and regulations. Indeed, no

previous research evaluates theoretical predictions concerning the interactive effects of national

regulations and bank-specific ownership structure on the risk taking behavior of individual banks.

       We frame our empirical analysis around three theoretical keystones. First, diversified owners

(owners who do not have a large fraction of their personal wealth invested in the bank) tend to

advocate for more bank risk taking than debt holders and non-shareholder managers (managers who

do not have a substantial equity stake in the bank). As in any limited liability firm, diversified owners

have incentives to increase bank risk after collecting funds from bondholders and depositors (Galai

and Masulis, 1976; Esty, 1998). Similarly, managers with bank-specific human capital skills and

private benefits of control will tend to advocate for less risk taking than stockholders without those

skills and benefits (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Demsetz and Lehn, 1985; Kane, 1985). From this

perspective, banks with an ownership structure that empowers diversified owners will take more risk

than banks where owners play a more subdued governance role.

       Second, theory predicts that regulations influence the risk taking incentives of diversified

owners differently from those of debt holders and non-shareholder managers. For example, deposit

insurance intensifies the ability and incentives of stockholders to increase risk (Merton, 1977; Keeley,

1990). The impetus for greater risk taking generated by deposit insurance operates on owners, not

necessarily on non-shareholder managers. As a second example, consider capital regulations. One

goal of capital regulations is to reduce the risk taking incentives of owners by forcing owners to place

more of their personal wealth at risk in the bank (Kim and Santomero, 1994). Capital regulations

need not reduce the risk taking incentives of influential owners, however. Specifically, although

capital regulations might induce the bank to raise capital, they might not force influential owners to

                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                          3

invest more of their wealth in the bank. Indeed, capital regulation might increase risk taking. Owners

might compensate for the loss of utility from more stringent capital requirements by selecting a

riskier investment portfolio (Koehn and Santomero (1980) and Buser et al. (1981)), which would

intensify the conflicts between owners and managers over bank risk taking. As a final example, many

countries attempt to reduce bank risk taking by restricting banks from engaging in non-lending

activities, such as securities and insurance underwriting (Boyd et al., 1998). As with capital

requirements, however, these activity restrictions may reduce the utility of owning a bank,

intensifying the risk-taking incentives of owners relative to managers. Thus, the impact of regulations

on risk depends on the comparative influence of owners within the governance structure of each

bank.

        Third, while banking theory suggests that bank regulations affect the risk taking incentives of

owners differently from those of managers, corporate governance theory suggests that ownership

structure and shareholder protection laws affect the ability of owners to influence risk (Jensen and

Meckling, 1976). As argued by Shleifer and Vishny (1986), shareholders with larger voting and cash-

flow rights have correspondingly greater power and incentives to shape corporate behavior than

smaller owners. From this perspective, ownership structure influences the ability of owners to alter

bank risk in response both to standard risk shifting incentives and to incentives created by official

regulations. Shareholder protection laws also affect the ability of owners to adjust bank risk. Besides

empowering equity holders, effective shareholder protection laws reduce the need for the emergence

of a large shareholder to mitigate agency problems (Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002; John et al., 2000;

Castro et al., 2004). Accordingly, large shareholders will play a less prominent role in shaping

corporate behavior in economies with effective shareholder protection laws. Thus, we examine how

ownership structure interacts with both shareholder protection laws and bank regulation in shaping

the risk taking behavior of individual banks.

                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                         4

       These theoretical keystones combine to make three testable predictions. First, diversified

owners have stronger incentives to increase risk than non-shareholding managers, so banks with

powerful owners will tend to be riskier than widely-held banks, holding other factors constant.

Second, the role of large owners in shaping risk diminishes in economies with shareholder protection

laws that effectively empower small owners. Finally, bank regulations – such as capital requirements,

activity restrictions, and deposit insurance – affect the risk taking incentives of owners differently

from managers, so the actual impact of regulations on risk taking depends on the comparative power

of shareholder within each bank’s corporate governance structure. This framework, however, does

not consider optimal risk taking. Rather, our more modest goal is to provide the first empirical

assessment of theoretical predictions concerning how a banks’ ownership structure interacts with

national laws and regulations in shaping bank risk taking.

       To assess these predictions, we compile new data on individual banks from economies with

different regulations, yielding a database of almost 300 banks across 48 countries. On ownership, we

first measure whether the bank is widely-held, i.e., the bank does not have a large owner with at least

ten percent of the bank’s voting rights. We next distinguish among banks with a large owner by

computing the voting and cash-flow rights of the largest owner. We then collect bank-level data on

both owners and managers since theory stresses potential tensions between stockholders and

managers. If managers have accumulated bank-specific human capital or enjoy private benefits of

control, they will seek less risk taking than stockholders without those skills and benefits (Demsetz

and Lehn, 1985; Kane, 1985). Since tensions between owners and managers might be mitigated when

senior managers hold large equity stakes (Houston and James, 1995), we calculate and control for (i)

the voting and cash-flow rights of senior managers and (ii) whether large owners are on the board of

directors. Theory also suggests that the risk taking incentives of owners will be mitigated if the

owners have a large portion of their personal wealth invested in the bank. We would optimally like to

                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                          5

have information on each owner’s personal portfolio, but these data are unavailable. Instead, we

condition on the degree to which the bank is primarily family owned and also test whether there is a

nonlinear relationship between the cash-flow and voting rights of the controlling shareholder and

risk. We use three measures of bank risk taking: the bank’s z-score, which is inversely related to the

probability of bank insolvency, the volatility of equity returns equals, and the volatility of bank

earnings.

       The key findings are as follows. First, bank risk is generally higher in banks that have large

owners with substantial cash-flow rights. Consistent with theory, greater cash-flow rights by a large

owner are associated with more risk. This finding holds when conditioning on international

differences in bank regulations or when including country fixed effects. Ignoring ownership structure

provides an incomplete analysis of bank risk taking.

       Second, although more cash-flow rights by a large owner are generally associated with greater

bank risk, the importance of the large owner is weaker in economies with stronger shareholder

protection laws. This supports the view that an effective legal system reduces the need for a large

shareholder to advance the goals of shareholders. It is thus crucial to examine bank governance in

assessing the determinants of bank risk.

       Third, the relation between risk and regulation depends critically on each bank’s ownership

structure. Indeed, the relation between regulation and bank risk can actually change sign depending

on ownership structure. For example, the results suggest that deposit insurance is only associated

with an increase in risk when the bank has a large equity holder with sufficient power to act on the

additional risk taking incentives created by deposit insurance. The data also suggest that owners seek

to compensate for the utility loss from capital regulations and activity restrictions by increasing bank

risk. Stricter capital regulations and more stringent activity restrictions are associated with greater

risk when the bank has a sufficiently powerful owner, but stricter capital regulations have the

                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                        6

opposite effect in widely-held banks. Ignoring bank governance leads to erroneous conclusions about

the risk taking effects of banking regulations.

       To explore more fully the channels linking ownership, risk and regulation, we allow for the

joint determination of bank risk and valuation. Laws, regulations, and ownership structure might

influence bank risk primarily by altering bank valuations. We therefore allow for the simultaneous

determination of risk and valuation by extending the work of Keeley (1990) and John et al. (2008).

We confirm the paper’s results when endogenizing bank valuations. Thus, all of this paper’s findings

on ownership, shareholder protection laws, regulations, and risk hold beyond any indirect

connections operating through bank valuations.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the data. Section 3 presents initial

results. Section 4 assesses how the relation between risk and regulation varies with ownership

structure. Section 5 simultaneously estimates risk and valuation. Section 6 concludes.



2. Data and Summary Statistics

       We build a new database to examine (1) whether ownership structure affects bank risk, (2)

whether the relationship between ownership structure and bank risk depends on shareholder

protection laws, and (3) whether the impact of national regulations on bank risk depends on the

ownership structure of individual banks. Data permitting, we collect information on the 10 largest

publicly listed banks (as defined by total assets at the end of 2001) in those countries for which La

Porta et al. (1998) assembled data on shareholder rights. We exclude New Zealand because all its

major banks are subsidiaries of Australian banks, all of which are already included in the sample.

Since some countries have data on fewer than ten publicly listed banks, this yields information on a

maximum of 296 banks across 48 countries. Focusing on the largest banks enhances comparability

since they tend to comply with international accounting standards and have more liquid shares,

                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                        7

reducing concerns that accounting or liquidity differences drive the results. On average, our sample

accounts for over 80 percent of total banking system assets in each country. When eliminating

countries for which the sample covers less than 50 percent of total banking assets, the results hold.

       2.1 Ownership Structure: Control Rights and Cash-Flow Rights

       We start with the Caprio et al. (2007) data on bank ownership in 2001, which classifies a bank

as having a “large owner” if the shareholder has direct and indirect voting rights that sum to 10

percent or more. If no shareholder holds 10 percent of the voting rights, the bank is classified as

widely held. This paper’s results hold when using a 20 percent cut-off to define a large owner.

       While direct ownership involves shares registered in the shareholder’s name, indirect

ownership involves bank shares held by entities that the ultimate shareholder controls. Since the

principal shareholders of banks are frequently themselves corporations, it is necessary to find the

major shareholders in these entities. Often, this indirect ownership chain must be traced backwards

through numerous corporations to identify the ultimate controllers of the votes. For example, a

shareholder has x percent indirect control over bank A if she controls directly firm C that, in turn,

controls directly firm B, which directly controls x percent of the votes of bank A. The control chain

from bank A to firm C can be a long sequence of firms, each of which has control (greater than 10

percent voting rights) over the next one. If there are several chains of ownership between a single

shareholder and the bank, we sum the control rights across all of these chains to compute the control

rights of that shareholder. When multiple shareholders have over 10 percent of the votes, we define

the “large owner” as the owner with the greatest voting rights.

       The large shareholder may hold cash-flow (CF) rights directly and indirectly. For example, if

the large shareholder of bank A holds the fraction y of CF rights in firm B and firm B in turn holds

the fraction x of the CF rights in bank A, then the large shareholder’s indirect CF rights in bank A




                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                         8

equals the product of x and y. If there is an ownership chain, we use the products of the CF rights

along the chain. To compute total CF rights we sum direct and indirect CF rights.

       By focusing on the large shareholder’s CF rights, we capture both the incentives of owners

toward risk and the ability of owners to influence risk. On ability, we first measure whether the bank

has a large owner or whether the bank is widely held. Then, conditional on the bank having a large

owner, we measure the cash-flow rights of the shareholder with the largest number of voting rights.

CF rights are highly correlated with voting rights, so it provides additional information about the

power of the largest owner. On incentives, CF rights provide a more direct measure of the risk taking

incentives of owners than voting rights. Profitable outcomes are distributed to owners based on cash-

flow rights, not through control rights. In robustness tests, we examine the wedge between voting and

CF rights, which has been the focus of research on the private benefits of control.

       2.2 Management Structure

       We collect new data on each bank’s board structure and managerial ownership. First, we set

the dummy variable Large Owner on Mgt Board equal to one if the large shareholder has a seat on

the management board, and zero otherwise. Next, to assess theories about managerial shareholding

and risk, we compute the CF rights of executive managers and directors and refer to this variable as

Management Ownership. We collect data on the year the bank was founded and whether the founder

or the descendents of the founder are on the management or supervisory board. Data on these

variables are hand-collected using a variety of sources, including Bankers Almanac, Bankscope, 20-F

filings, annual reports, and company websites.

       2.3 Bank Risk Taking

       We primarily measure bank risk using the z-score of each bank, which equals the return on

assets plus the capital-asset ratio divided by the standard deviation of asset returns. The z-score

measures the distance from insolvency (Roy, 1952). Define insolvency as a state where losses

                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                         9


surmount equity (E<-π) (where E is equity and π is profits), A as total assets, ROA (=π/A) as return

on assets, σ(ROA) as the standard deviation of ROA, and CAR (= E/A) as the capital-asset ratio. The

probability of insolvency can be expressed as prob (-ROA<CAR). If profits are normally distributed,

then z = (ROA+CAR)/σ(ROA), which is the inverse of the probability of insolvency. Thus, z

indicates the number of standard deviations that a bank’s ROA has to drop below its expected value

before equity is depleted.

       A higher z-score indicates that the bank is more stable. Since the z-score is highly skewed, we

use the natural logarithm of the z-score, which is normally distributed. For brevity, we use the label

“z score” in referring to the natural logarithm of the z-score in the remainder of the paper.

       We have data to calculate the z-score for 288 banks across 48 countries. As listed in Appendix

1, the number of banks per country varies from ten to one. The paper’s results hold when excluding

countries with data on only one or two banks. We calculate the average return on assets, its standard

deviation and the capital-asset ratio over 1996-2001. The accounting data on banks are from

Bankscope, a commercial database on major international banks.

       We confirm our results when using the volatility of equity returns and the volatility of

earnings as alternative measures of bank risk. Volatility of equity returns equals the annualized

volatility of weekly equity returns in 2001, which is also used by Saunders et al. (1990) and Esty

(1998). We use the total return index (that includes reinvested dividends) from Datastream. One

advantage of the volatility of equity returns is that it is based on market, rather than accounting, data.

One disadvantage is that using equity volatility as a measure of risk reduces our sample because we

only have weekly data on stock market returns for 219 out of 288 banks. The Volatility of earnings

equals the standard deviation of the ratio of total earnings before taxes and loan loss provisions to

average total assets, computed over the period 1996-2001.




                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                       10

       Finally, we also confirm the results using risk measures computed after 2001, which is the

year in which we observe bank ownership. The advantage of this approach is that risk is measured

after ownership. The disadvantage is that we lose a large portion of our sample because of mergers,

acquisitions, and bank failures. The 2001-sample we focus on in the paper includes about 50% more

countries and 60% more banks than the smaller sample based on post-2001 risk measures.

       2.4 Investor Protection Laws

       RIGHTS is the La Porta et al. (1998) index of the statutory rights of shareholders. It ranges

from zero to six, where larger values indicate greater shareholder rights. The six components in this

index are: (1) the country allows shareholders to mail proxy votes; (2) shareholders are not required

to deposit shares prior to the General Shareholders’ Meeting; (3) cumulative voting or proportional

representation of minorities on the board of directors is allowed; (4) an oppressed minorities

mechanism exists; (5) the minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call for

an Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting is less than or equal to 10 percent; and (6) when

shareholders have preemptive rights that can only be waived by a shareholders meeting.

       2.5 Bank Regulations

       This paper evaluates theoretical predictions that key bank regulations interact with ownership

structure to shape each bank’s risk taking behavior. In selecting data on regulation from the Barth et

al. (2006) database, we use two criteria. First, we choose regulations stressed by the Basel

Committee. Second, we analyze regulations that theory highlights as affecting bank behavior. Thus,

we examine deposit insurance, capital regulations, and regulatory restrictions on bank activities.

       DI is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if the country has deposit insurance, and zero

otherwise, and is calculated from Demirguc-Kunt et al. (2008). Note, DI equals one both when the

country has explicit deposit insurance and when depositors were fully compensated the last time a

bank failed if the country did not have formal deposit insurance.

                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                         11

         CAPITAL is an index of regulatory oversight of bank capital from Barth et al. (2006). This

index includes information on whether the source of funds that count as regulatory capital can include

assets other than cash, government securities, or borrowed funds, and whether the authorities verify

the sources of capital. CAPITAL also includes information on the extent of regulatory requirements

regarding the amount of capital banks must hold.1

         RESTRICT is an index of regulatory restrictions on the activities of banks from Barth et al.

(2006). This index measures regulatory impediments to banks engaging in (1) securities market

activities (e.g., underwriting, brokering, dealing, and all aspects of the mutual fund industry), (2)

insurance activities (e.g., insurance underwriting and selling), (3) real estate activities (e.g., real estate

investment, development, and management), and (4) the ownership of nonfinancial firms.

         2.6 Other Country-Level and Bank-Level Control Variables

         We control for numerous country-level and bank-level characteristics. At the country-level,

we control for the level of economic development, aggregate economic volatility, institutional

development, the degree of competition in national banking markets, and whether the authorities have

taken over a failing bank since 1995. At the bank-level, product market conditions influence the

resolution of conflicting interests among stockholders, managers, and depositors. For instance,

Gorton and Rosen (1995) argue that intense competition that lowers the franchise value of incumbent

banks intensifies incentives for both stockholders and managers to increase risk. Consequently, we

control for bank growth, size, liquidity, loan loss provisions, and whether the bank accounts for more

than ten percent of the nation’s deposits.


1
  The index is based on the following questions: (1) Is the minimum capital-asset ratio requirement risk weighted in line
with the Basel guidelines?; (2) Does the minimum ratio vary as a function of market risk?; (3) Are market value of loan
losses not realized in accounting books deducted from capital?; (4) Are unrealized losses in securities portfolios
deducted?; (5) Are unrealized foreign exchange losses deducted?; (6) What fraction of revaluation gains is allowed as part
of capital?; (7) Are the sources of funds to be used as capital verified by the regulatory/supervisory authorities?; (8) Can
the initial disbursement or subsequent injections of capital be done with assets other than cash or government securities?;
and (9) Can initial disbursement of capital be done with borrowed funds?

                                                                                                                         11
                                                                                                        12

       As stressed above and discussed in more detail below, we pay special attention to bank

valuation. We measure bank valuation using the Tobin’s Q of each bank, which equals the market

value of equity plus the book value of liabilities divided by the book value of assets. We

simultaneously estimate risk and valuation to better assess the potential channels linking regulations,

ownership, valuations, and bank risk.

       2.7 Summary Statistics

       There is great variation in bank fragility across countries. Table 1 provides summary statistics

and Appendix 1 lists the averages of key variables for each country’s banks. Column (1) of Appendix

1 presents the average of z-scores across all banks for each country in the sample. The z-scores

indicate that profits have to fall by more than 66 times their standard deviation in Austria to deplete

bank equity, but profits only need to fall by less than one standard deviation in Thailand to eliminate

bank equity. Our estimates of equity volatility of banks display a similar variation (Appendix 1,

column 2). Volatility of equity returns vary from a low of 12 percent per annum in Austria to a high

of 118 percent in Peru. The average equity volatility is 40 percent.

       Ownership and management structure vary enormously. As shown in Table 1 and Appendix

1, the large owner averages more than 50 percent of the CF rights in 8 out of 48 countries, but in 5

other countries there is either no bank with a large owner or the average degree of CF rights is less

than five percent. Although more than 90 percent of the banks in Canada, Ireland, and the United

States (in our sample) are widely held, 22 out of 48 countries do not have a single widely held bank

(among their largest banks). Overall, the cross-country average for widely held is only 29 percent so

that in the average country, 71 percent of the largest, listed banks have a large owner. Furthermore,

there is considerable variability in managerial ownership. For 35 percent of banks, the large owner

(the largest owner with more than 10 percent of the voting rights) is also a senior manager. However,

on average, managerial ownership is only 6% of total bank shares. Indeed, for half of the countries in

                                                                                                        12
                                                                                                           13

our sample, no bank has managerial shareholdings of greater than 1%. The standard deviation of

managerial shareholdings is 15%. Finally, we find that the original founder of the bank continues to

manage the bank in 3 percent of the banks in our sample, and a descendant of the founder is a

manager in 14 percent of the banks. Thus, we consider a broad cross-section of countries to assess the

relation between risk and ownership.

       The simple correlation matrix in Table 2 shows that more stable banks (as measured by higher

z-score or lower equity volatilities) have lower CF rights, and are located in countries with fewer

activity restrictions. Furthermore, risk is higher in banks where the large shareholder is a senior

manager. As shown below, however, the relationship between these private governance mechanisms

and risk depends on national policies. Furthermore, the z-score and equity volatility are (negatively)

correlated with a statistically significant correlation coefficient of 38 percent, while the correlation

between z-score and earnings volatility is 37 percent and also statistically significant.



3. Bank Risk: First Results

       In this section, we begin by examining the relationship between risk taking by banks and their

ownership structures. The primary measure of ownership structure is the CF rights of the largest

owner, where CF rights equals zero if the bank is widely held. We examine whether greater CF

rights by the largest owner is associated with greater risk as suggested by Jensen and Meckling

(1976) and John, Litov, and Yeung (2008). In the next section, we extend the analysis by testing

whether the relation between risk and ownership structure varies with national laws and regulations.

Finally, in section 5, we also allow for the endogenous determination of the Tobin’s Q of each bank.

This is crucial because laws, regulations, and ownership may influence bank risk by influencing bank

valuations.

       More formally, we estimate the following equation:

                                                                                                           13
                                                                                                           14


       Zb,c = α*Xb,c + β*CFb,c + γ*Rc + δ*CFb,c*Rc + u b,c,

where Zb,c is the z-score of bank b in country c, Xb,c is a matrix of bank-level control variables, CFb,c

is cash-flow rights of bank b in country c, Rc are country-level measures of bank regulations and

shareholder rights, u b,c is the error term, and α, β, γ, and δ are vectors of coefficient estimates. As

noted, in this section we do not consider interactions between bank-level ownership structure and

national regulations and shareholder rights (CFb,c*Rc ). We examine these interactions in section 4.

We begin by using ordinary least squares (OLS) with clustering at the country level. Then, in section

5, we use a simultaneous equations system to allow for the joint determination of risk and valuation.

       3.1 Ownership Structure and Bank Risk: OLS and Country-Fixed Effects

       The overarching message from the regressions presented in Table 3 is that greater CF rights

by a large owner is associated with greater risk. In each of the ten bank-level regressions, the standard

errors are adjusted to control for clustering at the country-level. Regression 1 simply controls for

recent bank performance (Revenue growth) and the CF rights (CF) of the large owner, where CF

equals zero if the bank is widely-held. CF enters negatively and significantly at the one percent level,

indicating that the existence of a large owner with substantial cash-flow rights is associated with

greater risk. The economic size of the coefficient on CF is consequential. A one standard deviation

change in CF (0.28) is associated with a change in z-score of 0.42 (=0.28*1.5), where the mean of z-

score is 2.8 and the standard deviation is about one.

       These results are consistent with the following view: (1) Owners tend to advocate for more

bank risk taking than managers and debt holders (Galai and Masulis, 1976; Demsetz and Lehn, 1985)

and (2) Large owners with substantial cash-flow rights have greater incentives and power to increase

bank risk taking than small shareholders (Jensen and Meckling, 1976; John et al., 2008). Thus, CF is

positively associated with bank risk.



                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                          15

       The positive association between CF and risk holds when controlling for country traits and

even when including country-fixed effects. To control for the possibility that the relation between

ownership structure and bank risk primarily reflects cross-country differences, rather than cross-bank

differences, in ownership structure, we (a) control for many country-specific traits, including the

level of economic development in each bank’s country (Per capita income), and (b) include country

fixed effects. As shown in Table 3, the results are robust to conditioning on Per capita income and

numerous country characteristics (Regression 2). Furthermore, CF continues to enter negatively and

significantly at the six percent level when controlling for country fixed effects (Regression 3). While

the economic size of the coefficient on CF drops by about 50% when controlling for country fixed

effects, the analysis still indicates that more CF rights by a large owner is associated with more risk

taking. We also controlled for outliers. Specifically, exclude each country one-at-a-time to test

whether the banks from any single country determine the results. All of the results hold.

       These results suggest that the connection between risk and ownership structure does not

simply reflect the possibility that successful countries adopt good laws, regulations, and institutions

that (a) induce banks to behave prudently and (b) allow owners to diversify their holdings. Rather,

when only focusing on cross-bank variation, we find a strong association between ownership

structure and risk.

       3.2. Alternative Measures of Bank Stability

       Thus far, we have focused on the z-score of individual banks computed over the period 1996-

2001. We used alternative measures of risk: (i) Equity volatility equals the volatility of the bank’s

equity returns over the period 1999-2001, (ii) Earnings volatility equals the volatility of the bank’s

earnings over the period 1996-2001, and (iii) Z-score (02-04) equals the z-score computed over the

period 2002 to 2004, which measures the z-score a few years after we observe ownership structure.

As noted, however, this reduces the sample quite substantially. Since the volatility of equity returns

                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                         16

and the volatility of earnings are positively related to risk, we expect the opposite signs on the

estimated coefficients when these volatility measures replace z-score as the dependent variable.

        As shown in Table 3, Regressions 5 to 7, the key results on ownership are robust to using

alternative measures of bank risk taking. Higher CF is associated with greater risk taking. Though the

result are somewhat weaker with Earnings volatility, CF enters negatively and significantly with a p-

value of 0.06 even with this measure that can be subject to substantial manipulation by banks. In sum,

the Table 3 results emphasize a robust connection between risk and ownership structure.

        3.3 Additional Robustness Tests

        We conducted a series of additional robustness tests. We had concerns about the ownership

structure indicators. For instance, we are mixing firms with a large owner (CF>0) with widely-held

firms (CF=0). We restricted the sample to only firms with a large owner and confirmed the results.

We were also concerned about defining large owners using the ten percent voting rights cut-off. We

confirmed all of the results using a 20 percent cut-off. We were also concerned that the state is the

large owner in almost 20 percent of the banks. If the state has different attitudes toward risk from

those of private equity holders, then state controlled banks should be treated separately. When we

include a dummy variable for state banks, however, this dummy enters insignificantly and it does not

alter the other results.

        Critically, some theories suggest that owners with a very large proportion of their wealth tied

to the bank will take less risk (for example, Jensen and Meckling, 1976, Saunders et al., 1990, and

Kane, 1985). We included a dummy variable that takes on the value one if CF is above the sample

median and zero otherwise. Including this dummy variable does not change the results, and it does

not enter significantly. We also entered CF-squared to test for nonlinearities, but the quadratic term

did not enter significantly. Moreover, we also controlled whether the bank is family owned and

operated, which would suggest that the owners have a large amount of wealth and human capital

                                                                                                         16
                                                                                                       17

committed to the bank (Bennedsen et al., 2007, and Perez-Gonzalez, 2006). Specifically, we control

for whether the founder of the bank, or a descendent of the founder, is on the banks’ management or

supervisory board. Controlling for family ownership did not alter any of the results.

       Furthermore, considerable research focuses on pyramidal ownership structures in which

voting rights are much greater than CF rights. The “Wedge” between voting and CF rights is used to

gauge the degree to which owners have the power and incentives to expropriate bank resources

(Caprio et al., 2007; Laeven and Levine, 2007, 2008). In focusing on risk, theory suggests that CF

rights are crucial, not the Wedge. Indeed, Wedge does not enter this paper’s regressions significantly

and it does not affect our main results.

       In addition, this paper’s results hold when eliminating banks associated with major mergers

and acquisitions. We were concerned that banks about to experience a major event might behave

differently and these banks might drive this paper’s results. Consequently, we trace the ownership

history of each bank and identify whether the bank has undergone a major acquisition or merger

between 2001 and 2005. All of the findings hold when eliminating these banks.

       Finally, we computed ownership structure in 2005 for a sub-sample of 200 banks from the

2001 sample. Ownership structure is very stable over time. Except when banks experience a major

event, such as a merger or acquisition, ownership structure does not vary. This indicates that

ownership structure does not respond to short-run fluctuations in bank risk. It also implies that

changes in ownership structure do not account for high frequency changes in risk. While economic

and financial stability at low frequencies could influence ownership structure in the long-run, this

paper’s results hold when conditioning on the volatility of each country’s Gross Domestic Product as

we discuss below. In addition, since ownership structure does not change much unless a bank

experiences a merger or acquisition and since mergers and acquisitions generally make accounting

data incomparable over time, this reduces the value of panel studies in this context.

                                                                                                       17
                                                                                                         18


       3.4 Ownership Structure and Bank Risk: Identification and Many Controls

       We were concerned that the joint determination of risk and ownership structure could bias the

results. For instance, high risk banks might form concentrated ownership structures if diffuse

shareholders have difficulty monitoring risky investments. In the estimation equation, z = b*Z + e,

where z is the vector of bank z-scores, Z the matrix of all explanatory variables, e the error term, and

b the vector of estimated coefficients. OLS is consistent only if Cov{e, Zi} = 0 for each regressor i,

i.e., OLS is consistent only if there are no unobservable factors affecting both ownership and risk.

       We address this concern using a variety of strategies. While none is perfect, they all yield the

same conclusion: Larger CF is associated with greater risk. Nonetheless, we interpret the results very

cautiously: These results on the partial correlation between risk and ownership structure represent

some initial, descriptive findings that begin to integrate traditional corporate governance forces into

the study of bank risk taking. Furthermore, the paper’s major emphasis is on assessing whether the

relation between bank regulations and bank risk will vary in a theoretically predictable manner with

bank ownership structure. As we show in the next section, the empirical results are consistent with

these predictions.

       3.4.1 Many controls

       A commonly used strategy for reducing concerns that Cov{u, Xi} ≠ 0 is to “saturate” the

regression with a large number of bank and country characteristics to capture as much of the error

term u as possible (see also Demsetz and Lehn, 1985, and Bitler et al., 2005). We control for

numerous country- and bank-level traits in Regressions 8 to 10 of Table 3. Besides Per capita GDP,

we include indicators of capital regulations (Capital), activity restrictions (Restrict), deposit insurance

(DI), shareholder protection rights (Rights), and the degree to which the law is fairly and effectively

enforced in a country (Enforce). At the banking system level, we include a measure of banking

system concentration that equals the percentage of banking system assets held by the five largest

                                                                                                         18
                                                                                                        19

banks (Concentration) since many debate the link between concentration and risk (Allen and Gale,

2000, and Boyd and De Nicolo, 2005). We also condition on the mergers and acquisitions activities

of all firms in a country (M&A) since M&A activity might affect bank governance (Schranz (1993)

and Berger et al. (1998)). Furthermore, in unreported regressions, conditioned on measures of official

corruption, the degree to which the rule of law operates in the country, GDP volatility, and the return

on assets averaged across all banks in each country. These did not affect the conclusions.

       At the bank-level, we control for (1) the extent to which senior managers hold shares in the

bank (Managerial ownership) and (2) whether the large owner (if there is a large owner) is on the

management board (Large owner on mgt board). We also condition on revenue growth, size, loan

loss provisions, and the liquidity ratio. Moreover, in unreported regressions, we also find that the

results hold when including dummy variables of whether the bank holds more than ten percent of the

country’s deposits (to gauge if the bank is “too-big-to-fail”) and whether the bank was recently

intervened by the government.

       Even when conditioning on all of these country- and bank-level characteristics, CF rights are

positively associated with risk. In Table 3, Restrict and DI both enter negatively and significantly,

suggesting that activity restrictions and deposit insurance increase bank risk, confirming findings by

Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) and Barth et al. (2004, 2006). Critically, CF continues to

enter the z-score regression negatively and significantly, with the same coefficient size.

       3.4.2 Instrumental variables

       We use instrumental variables for each bank’s ownership structure. We primarily use the

average CF rights of other banks in the country, which captures industry and country factors

explaining CF. A positive feature of this instrument is that innovations in the risk of one bank will

not influence the cash-flow rights of other banks. If innovations in national bank risk affect bank

ownership across all banks, however, then this instrument will not reduce endogeneity bias. Yet, this

                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                                     20

seems unlikely because (i) we find that bank ownership changes extremely little over time and (ii) the

results hold when controlling for national economic volatility.2

        The instrumental variable results confirm that CF is negatively and significantly associated

with bank z-score, supporting the view that a large owner with sufficient incentives tends to increase

bank risk taking (Table 3, Regression 4). The instrument (i) enters the first-stage regression

significantly at the one percent level as demonstrated by the F-test of excluded instruments, (ii)

accounts for 17 percent of the variance of CF rights in the first-stage as indicated by the partial R-

squared of excluded instruments, and (iii) yields a different vector of coefficient estimates from those

obtained using OLS as shown by the Hausman test of endogeneity. The fact that the IV estimate of

the coefficient on CF is larger in absolute value terms than the OLS estimate suggests that OLS

underestimates the true causal effect of CF on bank stability.

        In unreported regressions, we confirm these findings using alternative instruments. As a

different instrument for CF, we identified the year in which the bank was founded (Founded). Older

banks have had more time to diversify ownership. Also, Founded is unlikely to affect bank risk

directly. Rather, by reducing CF of the largest owner, Founded affects the incentives of the owner to

influence risk. Founded enters the first-stage regression with a p-value of 0.059, accounting for 3

percent of the variation of CF. If the age of the bank is correlated with an unobserved bank-specific

trait that drives bank risk, however, then Founded is an invalid instrument; but, a test of the over-

identifying restrictions does not reject the validity of Founded as an instrument. Next, we include a

dummy variable denoting whether the founder of the bank is on the management or supervisory

board (Founder) as an instrument. If the founder of the bank is still on the management or

supervisory board, this implies a continuing large, controlling role with correspondingly high CF.

2
 For regressions using the average CF rights of other banks in the country as an instrumental variable, we exclude
countries with only one bank because we can only compute the CF instrument for countries with more than one bank,
which accounts for the drop in country coverage from 46 to 43 countries in regression 4.

                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                       21

The partial correlation coefficient between CF and Founder is 0.17. One concern with Founder is that

shocks to risk might affect the probability of the founder being on the board. Again, the over-

identifying restrictions test does not reject the validity of the instruments and we confirm the results

in Table 3.



         4. Bank Ownership, Shareholder Protection Laws, and Regulation

         Beyond yielding predictions about the bivariate relation between risk and ownership structure,

some theories suggest that the relation between bank risk and ownership structure will vary with

national laws and regulations (e.g., Shleifer and Vishny, 1986, Buser et al., 1981, John et al., 2000,

and John et al., 2008); theories do not simply yield predictions about the bivariate relation between

risk and ownership structure. Thus, now examine whether the relation between risk and ownership

structure depends on shareholder protection laws and bank regulations, consistent with theoretical

predictions. If the empirical results on these conditional relations are consistent with theory, then any

alternative explanation will also have to account for these interactive results, not simply the positive

partial correlation between risk and CF.

         Table 4 presents a series of regressions in which we examine the direct and interactive

associations among ownership structure, shareholder protection laws, regulations, and bank risk.

Specifically, we include Rights, Capital, Restrict, and DI in all five regressions.3 Then, we include the

interaction term of each of these national traits with bank-level ownership structure.

         Table 4 indicates that the relation between a bank’s risk and ownership structure depends on

shareholder protection laws. The Rights indicator does not enter significantly, indicating that

3
  Since we are examining individual banks, we were not very concerned that an individual bank’s risk will affect national
regulations. Nonetheless, these results hold when using instrumental variables for regulations. Based on Beck et al. (2003,
2006) and Barth et al. (2006), we use legal origin and the religious composition of each country as instruments for bank
regulation. Given that we condition on the level of income per capita, the most direct impact of religion and legal origin
on bank risk runs through bank regulations, rather than by altering bank risk through an alternative channel. Moreover, we
do not reject the hypothesis that the instruments only explain risk through their impact on regulation.

                                                                                                                       21
                                                                                                                           22

shareholder protection laws do not exert a direct effect on bank risk.4 This does not, however, imply

that shareholder protection laws are unimportant for bank risk taking. If the legal system protects

minority shareholder rights effectively, then ownership will not have to be as concentrated to induce

managers to act in the interests of shareholders.

         Consistent with theory predicting that investor protection reduces expropriation by controlling

shareholders (for example, Shleifer and Wolfenzon, 2002, and John et al., 2008), we find that a

marginal increase in CF is associated with a smaller increase in bank risk in countries with stronger

shareholder protection laws (Table 4, regression 1). Indeed, in countries with the highest level of

shareholder rights (Rights equals 5) a marginal increase in the CF rights of the largest shareholder is

not associated with a significant increase bank risk. Thus, ignoring shareholder protection laws yields

incomplete conclusions about the relationship between bank risk and ownership structure.

         Next, consider capital regulations, which have been the focus of international and national

regulatory approaches to promoting the safety and soundness of banking systems. To induce prudent

risk taking, capital regulations require bank owners to have more of their wealth at risk and to

increase the amount of capital at risk as a bank’s assets become more risky. Nonetheless, since

binding capital regulations reduce the utility of owning a bank, banks’ owners might seek to increase

risk in response to those capital regulations. Moreover, any adjustment to risk might depend on the

incentives and power of the owner, as measured by CF.

         Table 4 shows that the sign of the relationship between risk and capital regulations (Capital)

depends materially on each bank’s ownership structure. In the regressions that include the interaction

between CF and Capital, Capital enters positively and significantly. Consistent with standard

approaches to bank regulation, this finding indicates that the direct effect of capital regulations is to
4
  Furthermore, uninsured creditors of the bank might reduce bank risk. Thus, we also examined whether economies with
stronger legal protection of creditors, as measured by the La Porta et al. (1998) index of creditor rights, have lower levels
of bank risk. In unreported regressions, we do not find a significant relationship between the creditor rights index and
bank risk taking, and conditioning on this country-trait does not alter the findings on the other variables.

                                                                                                                           22
                                                                                                         23

enhance bank stability. The results, however, also indicate that the impact of capital regulations

depends on ownership structure. Note that the interaction term CF*Capital enters negatively and

significantly in regressions 2 and 5. This shows that the stabilizing effects of capital regulations

diminish when the bank has a large owner with the incentives and power to increase bank risk.

Indeed, with a sufficiently large owner, capital regulations will increase bank risk. Ignoring the

interactions between national policies and the ownership structure of individual banks will lead to

erroneous inferences about the impact of capital regulations on bank risk.

        In terms of the economic effects, capital regulations have very different implications for the

risk taking behavior of widely-held banks relative to banks with a majority owner. For instance, the

estimates in Table 4 regression 2 suggest that bank risk will fall by 0.3 standard deviations if there is

a one standard deviation increase in Capital (1.25) when the bank is widely-held (i.e., CF equals

zero). But, bank risk will rise by 0.2 standard deviations if there is a one standard deviation increase

in Capital when the bank has an owner where CF equals 50 percent. Both the reduction and increase

in risk are statistically significant.

        The association between risk and activity restrictions also depends crucially on the ownership

structure of individual banks. While many countries attempt to reduce risk by restricting banks from

engaging in non-lending activities, theory suggests that these regulations might have unintended

effects. Bank owners might seek to compensate for the utility loss from stricter restrictions by

increasing risk. Theory further suggests that owners will have greater incentives and power to

increase risk if they have larger CF rights. In the regressions that include the interaction between CF

and Restrict, Restrict enters negatively, though insignificantly at the five percent level. Thus, an

increase in Restrict is not associated with a significant change in a bank’s risk if the bank is widely-

held. However, the interaction term CF*Restrict enters negatively and significantly in regressions 3

and 5. When a bank has a large owner, activity restrictions boost risk. For instance, the estimates in

                                                                                                         23
                                                                                                        24

Table 4 regression 3 suggest that bank risk will rise by 0.4 standard deviations if there is a one

standard deviation increase in Restrict (2.40) and if the bank has an owner where CF equals 50

percent.

       The evidence on deposit insurance further emphasizes that ignoring the interactions between

national regulations and the ownership structure of individual banks leads to flawed conclusions

about the impact of regulations on bank risk. In particular, explicit deposit insurance has very

different implications for the risk taking behavior of a widely-held bank relative to a bank with a

majority owner. The estimates in Table 4 regression 4 suggest that bank risk will rise by a statistically

significant 0.4 standard deviations in response to a one standard deviation increase in DI (0.41) if the

bank has a large owner with CF equal to 50 percent. But, DI is not associated with a significant

increase in bank risk when the bank is widely-held. From this perspective, explicit deposit insurance

does not have much of an effect on bank risk in a country like the United States where all ten of the

largest banks are widely-held. In India and Indonesia where large banks tend to have concentrated

ownership, however, deposit insurance is associated with significantly greater risk.



5. Simultaneous Determination of Bank Valuation and Risk

       To assess more comprehensively the mechanisms relating bank ownership, shareholder

protection laws, regulation, and risk, we allow for the joint determination of bank risk and bank

valuations. Laws, regulations, and ownership structure might influence bank risk by affecting bank

valuations. If laws and regulations reduce a bank’s value, this could increase the risk taking

incentives of owners as argued by Koehn and Santomero (1980) and Buser et al. (1981). However,

regulation might affect risk through an assortment of other channels, including the response by

borrowing firms to changes in interest rates induced by regulation (Boyd and De Nicolo, 2005), the




                                                                                                        24
                                                                                                       25

screening incentives and capabilities of investors (Calomiris and Kahn, 1991), and the degree of

competition in banking (Hellmann et al., 2000).

       Following Keeley (1990), we control for the endogenous determination of risk and bank

valuation and test whether there is an association between risk and bank regulations independent of

bank valuation. In the second stage of a two-stage least squared system, Z-score is modeled exactly

as in Table 4, except that we also include Tobin’s Q. In the first stage, Tobin’s Q (Q) is modeled both

as a function of (1) the numerous bank-level and country-level control variables used in the risk

equation and (2) as a function of variables excluded from the second stage. These excluded variables

include (i) a dummy variable for whether the bank is listed on the New York Stock Exchange

(NYSE), (ii) a dummy variable for whether the country has entry restrictions that protect banks from

competition, and (iii) the bank’s market share as measured by assets. As in Keeley (1990), the

identifying assumption is that these excluded variables explain cross-bank differences in valuation

but the excluded variables only explain bank risk through their impact on Q.

       Keeley (1990) uses the liberalization of laws governing branch restrictions in the US as an

instrument for Q to assess the impact of exogenous changes in Q on bank risk taking. He argues that

these liberalizations are an “easily observed exogenous factor with respect to bank risk taking”. At

the same time, these regulatory entry barriers reduce competition between banks, enhancing the

market power and franchise value of banks, as captured by Q, and are thus a potentially valid

instrument for Q. Following Keeley (1990), we use a regulatory index of entry barriers at the

country-level as instrument for Q. We also include the bank’s market share of assets in the set of

instrumental variables to proxy for market power. The results are qualitatively similar when we use

the market share of deposits. The NYSE listing dummy variable is included to capture other valuation

trends not related to changes in market power, such as the liquidity enhancing effect of a NYSE

listing. Also, valuation may be enhanced by the strict disclosure requirements of NYSE listings.

                                                                                                       25
                                                                                                            26

           Table 5 presents the complete first-stage and second-stage results. Table 5 gives the partial R2

and the F-test of the excluded instruments in the first-stage to assess whether these instruments

explain cross-bank differences in Q. The three instrumental variables explain between 8 and 13

percent of the cross-bank variation in Q. The F-tests rejects the hypothesis that these instruments can

be excluded from the first-stage at the one percent significance level. Furthermore, in all of the

specifications, the overidentification test supports the hypothesis that the instruments are valid, i.e.,

we do not reject the assumption that the instruments only explain bank risk through their effect on Q.

Also, the first-stage results indicate that Q is higher in countries with stronger shareholder protection

laws, which is consistent with the findings in Caprio et al. (2007).

           Table 5 confirms all of this paper’s results while controlling for the endogenous determination

of Q.5 First, the relationship between risk and ownership structure depends on shareholder protection

laws. When the legal system protects minority shareholder rights effectively, a marginal increase in

the cash-flow rights of the largest shareholder is not associated with an increase in bank risk.

           Second, although capital regulations have a direct, positive association with bank stability,

they also increase the risk-taking incentives of bank owners. The net effect of capital regulations on

risk, therefore, depends on the ability of the owner to increase bank risk. We find that capital

regulations are actually associated with greater risk when the bank has a sufficiently large owner.

Ignoring the interactions between regulations and the ownership of individual banks yields invalid

conclusions about the impact of regulations on risk.

           Finally, the results are similar for deposit insurance and activity restrictions. To promote

stability, many countries restrict banks from engaging in non-lending activities. But, bank owners

might seek to compensate for the utility loss by increasing risk. This is what we find. When a bank

has a large owner, activity restrictions are associated with an increase bank risk, but activity

5
    The results also hold when simply including Tobin’s Q into the OLS regressions in Table 4.

                                                                                                            26
                                                                                                        27

restrictions are associated with an increase in risk when the bank is widely-held. Similarly, countries

adopt deposit insurance to eliminate bank runs, but deposit insurance intensifies standard moral

hazard problems. The ability of owners to act on these incentives depends on bank ownership

structure. Even when controlling for Q, we find that bank risk does not rise in response to deposit

insurance when the bank is widely-held. When a large bank owner has sufficient CF rights, however,

deposit insurance is associated with an increase in risk.



6. Conclusions

       In this paper, we conducted the first empirical assessment of theories concerning the

relationships among risk taking by banks, their ownership structures, and national bank regulations.

Theory highlights the potential conflicts between bank managers and owners over bank risk taking

and stresses that the same bank regulation will have different effects on bank risk taking depending

on the comparative power of shareholders in the governance structure of each bank. Besides

assessing theories from corporate finance and banking, this analysis is crucial from a public policy

perspective because bank risk taking affects economic fragility, business cycle fluctuations, and

economic growth.

       We find that banks with more powerful owners tend take greater risks, but the relation

between ownership and risk weakens in economies with stronger shareholder protection laws. This is

consistent with theories predicting that (i) equity holders have stronger incentives to increase risk

than non-shareholding managers and debt holders, (ii) large owners with substantial cash flows have

the power and incentives to induce the bank’s managers to increase risk taking, but (iii) effective

legal protection of small shareholders reduces the need for the emergence of large owners to mitigate

agency problems in order to boost bank risk taking.




                                                                                                        27
                                                                                                     28

       Furthermore, the impact of bank regulations on bank risk depends critically on each bank’s

ownership structure. Indeed, the effect of the same regulation on a bank’s risk taking can be positive

– or negative – depending on the bank’s ownership structure. Consistent with theory, we find that

ignoring ownership structure leads to incomplete and sometimes erroneous conclusions about the

impact of capital regulations, deposit insurance, and activity restrictions on bank risk taking.




                                                                                                     28
                                                                                                   29


References

Agrawal, A. and G. Mandelker, 1987, “Managerial Incentives and Corporate Investment and
Financing Decisions,” Journal of Finance 42, 823–838.

Allen, F. and D. Gale, 2000, Comparing Financial Systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Barth, J.R., G. Caprio, and R. Levine, 2004, “Bank Supervision and Regulation: What Works Best?”
Journal of Financial Intermediation 13, 205-48.

Barth, J.R., G. Caprio, and R. Levine, 2006, Rethinking Bank Regulation: Till Angels Govern. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine, 2003, “Law, Endowments, and Finance,” Journal of
Financial Economics 70, 137-181.

Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt and R. Levine, 2006, “Bank Supervision and Corruption in Lending,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 53, 2131-2163.

Bennedsen, M., K. Nielsen, F. Perez-Gonzalez and D. Wolfenzon, 2007, “Inside the Family Firm:
The Role of Families in Succession Decisions and Performance,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
122, 647-691.

Berger, A., A. Saunders, J. Scalise, and G. Udell, 1998, The Effects of Bank Mergers and
Acquisitions on Small Business Lending, Journal of Financial Economics, 50, 187-229.

Bernanke, B., 1983, “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great
Depression,” American Economic Review 73, 257-276.

Bitler, M., T. Moskowitz, and A. Vissing-Jorgensen, 2005, “Testing Agency Theory with
Entrepreneur Effort and Wealth,” Journal of Finance, 60, 539-576.

Boyd, J., C. Chang, and B.D. Smith, 1998, “Moral Hazard under Commercial and Universal
Banking,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 30, 426-468.

Boyd, J. and G. De Nicolo, 2005, “The Theory of Bank Risk Taking and Competition Revisited,
Journal of Finance, 60, 1329-1343.

Buser, S., A. Chen, and E. Kane, 1981, “Federal Deposit Insurance, Regulatory Policy, and Optimal
Bank Capital,” Journal of Finance, 36, 51-60.

Calomiris, C. and C. Kahn, 1991, “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal Banking
Arrangements,” American Economic Review 81, 497-513.

Calomiris, C. and J. Mason, 1997, “Contagion and Bank Failures during the Great Depression: The
Chicago Banking Panic of June 1932,” American Economic Review 87, 863-884.

Calomiris, C. and J. Mason, 2003a, “Consequences of U.S. Bank Distress during the Depression,”
American Economic Review 93, 937-47.


                                                                                                   29
                                                                                                   30

Calomiris, C. and J. Mason, 2003b, “Fundamentals, Panics and Bank Distress During the
Depression” American Economic Review 93, 1615-47.

Caprio, G., L. Laeven, and R. Levine. 2007. “Ownership and Bank Valuation.” Journal of Financial
Intermediation 16, 584-617.

Castro, R., G. Clementi, G. MacDonald, 2004, “Investor Protection, Optimal Incentives, and
Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 1131-1175.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. and E. Detragiache, 2002, “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking System
Stability? An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 1373-1406.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., E. Kane, and L. Laeven, 2008, Deposit Insurance around the World: Issues of
Design and Implementation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., L. Laeven, and R. Levine. 2004, “Regulations, Market Structure, Institutions,
and the Cost of Financial Intermediation,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 36, 593-622.

Demsetz, H. and K. Lehn, 1985, “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and Consequences,”
Journal of Political Economy 93, 1155-1177.

Esty, B., 1998, “The Impact of Contingent Liability on Commercial Bank Risk Taking,” Journal of
Financial Economics 47, 189-218.

Flannery, M., 1989, “Capital Requirements and Insured Banks’ Choice of Individual Loan Default
Risk,” Journal of Monetary Economics 24, 235-258.

Galai, D. and R. Masulis, 1976, “The Option Pricing Model and the Risk Factor of Stock,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 3, 53-81.

Gorton, G., and R. Rosen, 1995, “Corporate Control, Portfolio Choices, and the Decline of Banking,”
Journal of Finance, 50, 1377-1420.

Houston, J.F. and C. James, 1995, “CEO Compensation and Bank Risk: Is Compensation in Banking
Structured to Promote Risk Taking?” Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 405-431.

Hellmann, T., K. Murdock, and J. Stiglitz, 2000, “Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking, and
Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?” American Economic Review, 90, 147-65.

Jensen, M. and W. Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs, and
Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

John, K., L. Litov, and B. Yeung, 2008, “Corporate Governance and Managerial Risk Taking: Theory
and Evidence,” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

John, K., A. Saunders, and L.W. Senbet, 2000, “A Theory of Bank Regulation and Management
Compensation,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 95-125.

Kane, E., 1985, The Gathering Crisis in Federal Deposit Insurance, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.


                                                                                                   30
                                                                                                 31

Keeley, M., 1990, “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking,” American Economic
Review 80, 1183-1200.

Kim, D. and A. Santomero, 1994, “Risk in Banking and Capital Regulation,” Journal of Finance, 43,
1219-1233.

Koehn, M. and A. Santomero, 1980, “Regulation of Bank Capital and Portfolio Risk,” Journal of
Finance 35, 1235-1244.

Kroszner, R. and R. Rajan, 1994, “Is the Glass-Steagall Act Justified? A Study of the U.S.
Experience with Universal Banking before 1933,” American Economic Review, 84, 810-32.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1998, “Law and Finance,” Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Laeven, L. and R. Levine, 2007, “Is There a Diversification Discount in Financial Conglomerates?,”
Journal of Financial Economics 85, 331-367.

Laeven, L. and R. Levine, 2008, “Complex Ownership Structures and Corporate Valuations,” Review
of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Merton, R., 1977, “An Analytical Derivation of the Cost of Deposit Insurance and Loan Guarantees:
An Application of Modern Option Pricing Theory,” Journal of Banking and Finance, 1, 3-11.

Morrison, A. and L. White, 2005, “Crises and Capital Requirements in Banking,” American
Economic Review 95, 1548-1572.

Perez-Gonzalez, F., 2006, “Inherited Control and Firm Performance”, American Economic Review,
96, 1559-1588.

Roy, A.D., 1952, “Safety First and the Holding of Assets,” Econometrica, 20, 431-449.

Saunders, A., E. Strock, N.G. Travlos, 1990, “Ownership Structure, Deregulation, and Bank Risk
Taking”, Journal of Finance 45, 643-654.

Schranz, M., 1993, “Takeovers Improve Firm Performance: Evidence from the Banking Industry,”
Journal of Political Economy 101, 299-326.

Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny, 1986, “Large Shareholders and Corporate Control,” Journal of Political
Economy 94, 461-488.

Shleifer, A. and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, “Investor Protection and Equity Markets,” Journal of Financial
Economics 66, 3-27.




                                                                                                 31
Table 1. Summary statistics

This table reports summary statistics of the main variables. Z-score is the z score of the bank; the higher the score, the lower the probability of bank default. Equity volatility is
the 3-year period volatility of the equity returns of the bank. Earnings volatility is the 5-year period average standard deviation of the ratio of total earnings before taxes and
loan loss provisions to average total assets. CF is cash flow rights of the largest shareholder of the bank. Large owner on mgt board is a dummy variable that takes a value of
one if a large shareholder has a seat on the management board of the company. Managerial ownership equals the total cash-flow rights of senior management. Revenue growth
is the growth in total revenues of the bank over the past year. State is a dummy variable denoting whether the state is the largest shareholder in the bank. Market share is the
bank’s share in total deposits in the country. NYSE takes a value of 1 if the bank is listed or has an ADR on the NYSE. Size is the log of total assets. Loan loss provision ratio
is the ratio of the bank’s loan loss provisions to net interest income. Liquidity ratio is the bank’s liquid assets to liquid liabilities. Too-big-to-fail is a dummy variable that takes
a value of one if the bank’s share in the country’s total deposits exceeds 10%. Per capita income is the log of GDP per capita of the country. Rights is an index of anti-director
rights. Capital is an index of capital regulation. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. DI is a dummy variable indicating whether the country has explicit deposit insurance
(and/or has made depositors whole the last time a bank failed). Enforce is an index of enforcement of contracts. Law is a measure of law and order tradition. M&A activity is
the percentage of traded companies listed on the country’s stock exchange that have been targeted in completed mergers or acquisitions deals during the 1990s. GDP volatility
equals the standard deviation of the logarithm of real annual GDP growth over the period 1996-2001.

 Variable                               Number of banks         Mean       Std. Dev.        Min            Max
 Bank-level
 Z-score                                               287         2.85          0.99         -1.56             5.14
 Equity volatility                                     219         0.47          0.36          0.03             4.50
 Earnings volatility                                   263         0.86          1.45          0.03            12.17
 CF                                                    296         0.27          0.28          0.00             1.00
 Large owner on mgt board                              296         0.35          0.48          0.00             1.00
 Managerial ownership                                  292         0.06          0.15          0.00             0.68
 Revenue growth                                        269         0.02          0.23         -0.86             1.87
 State                                                 296         0.18          0.38          0.00             1.00
 Market share                                          254         0.14          0.21          0.00             1.84
 NYSE                                                  296         0.12          0.33          0.00             1.00
 Size                                                  271        16.19          2.08         10.94            20.77
 Loan loss provision ratio                             263         0.24          0.36         -2.56             2.64
 Liquidity ratio                                       260         0.04          0.05          0.00             0.50
 Country-level
 Per capita income                                      48         8.79          1.49          5.54            10.70
 Rights                                                 48         2.98          1.31          0.00             5.00
 Capital                                                41         3.12          1.25          0.00             5.00
 Restrict                                               41         9.02          2.40          5.00            14.00
 DI                                                     47         0.79          0.41          0.00             1.00
 Enforce                                                47         7.13          2.15          3.55             9.99
 Law                                                    48         6.78          2.62          1.90            10.00
 M&A                                                    44        23.90         18.65          0.00            65.63
 GDP volatility                                         48         0.03          0.02          0.00             0.12
                                                                                                                                                                                   33
Table 2. Correlation matrix

This table reports the correlations between the main variables. Z-score is the z score of the bank; the higher the score, the lower the probability of bank default. Equity volatility
is the 3-year period volatility of the equity returns of the bank. Earnings volatility is the 5-year period average standard deviation of the ratio of total earnings before taxes and
loan loss provisions to average total assets. CF is cash flow rights of the largest shareholder of the bank. Revenue growth is the growth in total revenues of the bank over the
past year. Large owner on mgt board is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if a large shareholder has a seat on the management board of the company. Managerial
ownership equals the total cash-flow rights of senior management. Per capita income is GDP per capita. Rights is an index of anti-director rights. Capital is an index of capital
regulation. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. DI is a dummy variable indicating whether the country has explicit deposit insurance. P-values denoting the significant
level of each correlation coefficient are in parentheses.

                                               Equity        Earnings                     Revenue      Large owner Managerial Per capita
                                 Z-score      volatility     volatility        CF          growth      on mgt board ownership  income               Rights       Capital       Restrict
Equity volatility              ***-0.329
                                 (0.000)
Earnings volatility            ***-0.695      ***0.282
                                 (0.000)       (0.000)
CF                             ***-0.377      ***0.265       ***0.392
                                 (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)
Revenue growth                    -0.036        0.002        ***0.317        **0.137
                                 (0.556)       (0.980)        (0.000)        (0.025)
Large owner on mgt board       ***-0.230      ***0.211       ***0.184       ***0.458        0.086
                                 (0.000)       (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.000)       (0.162)
Managerial ownership              -0.040      ***0.202         0.041        ***0.229         0.054       ***0.236
                                 (0.502)       (0.003)        (0.510)        (0.000)       (0.383)        (0.000)
Per capita income              ***0.306       ***-0.274      ***-0.337      ***-0.313     ***-0.191      ***-0.395      **-0.139
                                 (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.002)        (0.000)        (0.018)
Rights                         ***0.171       **-0.160       ***-0.192      ***-0.183       -0.048         -0.070        -0.059        0.040
                                 (0.004)       (0.018)        (0.002)        (0.002)       (0.431)        (0.228)        (0.313)      (0.492)
Capital                         **-0.155        0.008         **0.166         0.037        **0.135        *0.104         *-0.107       -0.077       0.052
                                 (0.014)       (0.915)        (0.012)        (0.555)       (0.039)        (0.095)        (0.088)      (0.213)      (0.407)
Restrict                       ***-0.329      ***0.347       ***0.325       ***0.235        0.097        ***0.343         0.049      ***-0.294     *-0.113      ***0.236
                                 (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.138)        (0.000)        (0.434)      (0.000)      (0.068)       (0.000)
DI                              **-0.151       -0.045         **0.146         0.031         -0.031         -0.070        -0.055      ***0.219      *-0.097      ***0.414     ***-0.162
                                 (0.010)       (0.508)        (0.018)        (0.595)       (0.615)        (0.231)        (0.351)      (0.000)      (0.096)       (0.000)      (0.009)




                                                                                                                                                                                   33
                                                                                                                                                                                  34
Table 3. Bank stability, ownership and bank supervision

Dependent variable is Z score, computed over the period 1996-2001, unless otherwise noted. Dependent variable in regression (5) is the volatility of equity returns over the
period 1999-2001 based on weekly total equity returns. Dependent variable in regression (6) is earnings volatility over the period 1996-2001 calculated as the 5-year period
average standard deviation of the ratio of total earnings before taxes and loan loss provisions to average total assets. Dependent variable in regression (7) is Z score, computed
as in Table 4 but over the period 2002-2004.The sample includes the 10 largest listed banks in the country in terms of total assets, if available. Revenue growth is the bank’s
average growth in total revenues during the last year. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash-flow rights held by the large owner (zero if no large owner). We use 10
percent as the criteria for control. Per capita income is the log of GDP per capita of the country. Rights is an index of anti-director rights for the country. Capital is an index of
capital regulation. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. DI denotes whether the country has explicit deposit insurance or not. Enforce is a country index of enforcement of
contracts. Concentration is the 5-bank concentration ratio in terms of total assets. M&A activity is the percentage of companies listed on the country’s stock exchange that have
been targeted in completed mergers or acquisitions deals during the 1990s. Size is the log of total assets. Loan loss provision is the ratio of loan loss provisions to net interest
income. Liquidity is the ratio of the bank’s liquid assets to liquid liabilities. Large owner on mgt board is a dummy variable that takes a value of one if a large shareholder has a
seat on the management board of the company. Managerial ownership equals the total cash-flow rights of senior management. Bank-level data are for the year 2001.
Regressions are estimated using OLS, except regression (4) which is estimated using instrumental variables. Regression (2) includes country fixed effects. As instrument for CF
in regression (4) we use the average CF of other banks in the country. In regression (4) we exclude countries with one bank. For regression (4) we also include the p-values of
the Hausman test of endogeneity and the F-test of excluded instruments. In addition we report the partial R-squared of excluded instruments. The Hausman test is based on
regressions that do not control for clustering. Standard errors that control for clustering at the country-level are reported in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at
5%; *** significant at 1%.

                                               (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)           (9)          (10)
                                                            Fixed                         IV         Equity      Earnings      Z score
                                                            effects                                 volatility   volatility    (02-04)
Revenue growth                               0.063          0.288           0.181        0.330        -0.063       1.555        0.836        0.180         -0.199        -0.199
                                            (0.528)        (0.293)         (0.527)      (0.456)      (0.107)      (1.190)      (0.570)      (0.396)       (0.337)       (0.337)
CF                                         -1.473***       -0.622*       -1.251***    -3.116***     0.239***      1.613*      -0.663**    -1.021***      -0.946**      -0.946**
                                            (0.407)        (0.327)         (0.391)      (1.051)      (0.085)      (0.851)      (0.311)      (0.373)       (0.417)       (0.417)
Per capita income                                                         0.125**        0.012      -0.052**     -0.185**       0.064      0.118**          0.333         0.333
                                                                           (0.051)      (0.085)      (0.022)      (0.085)      (0.065)      (0.058)       (0.215)       (0.215)
Rights                                                                                                                                       0.082          0.144        0.144
                                                                                                                                            (0.079)       (0.090)       (0.090)
Capital                                                                                                                                      0.029          0.044        0.044
                                                                                                                                            (0.082)       (0.093)       (0.093)
Restrict                                                                                                                                  -0.122***      -0.098**      -0.098**
                                                                                                                                            (0.036)       (0.041)       (0.041)
DI                                                                                                                                        -0.665***      -0.598**      -0.598**
                                                                                                                                            (0.233)       (0.245)       (0.245)
Enforce                                                                                                                                                    -0.091       -0.091
                                                                                                                                                          (0.118)       (0.118)
Concentration                                                                                                                                              -0.549       -0.549
                                                                                                                                                          (0.625)       (0.625)
M&A                                                                                                                                                       -0.001        -0.001

                                                                                                                                                                                  34
                                                                                                                        35
                                                                                                    (0.006)   (0.006)
Size                                                                                                -0.095*   -0.095*
                                                                                                    (0.053)   (0.053)
Loan loss provision                                                                                  -0.123    -0.123
                                                                                                    (0.198)   (0.198)
Liquidity                                                                                            -0.924    -0.924
                                                                                                    (1.197)   (1.197)
Large owner on mgt board                                                                                        0.148
                                                                                                              (0.215)
Managerial ownership                                                                                            0.335
                                                                                                              (0.705)

Hausman test of endogeneity (p-value)    --     --     --    0.001***    --     --     --     --      --        --
Partial R2 of excluded instruments       --     --     --      0.174     --     --     --     --      --        --
F-test of excluded instruments           --     --     --    0.000***    --     --     --     --      --        --
Number of countries                      46     46     46       43       42     46     39     40      37        37
Observations                            268    268    268       265     198    250    192    235     209       209
R-squared                               0.16   0.14   0.19       --     0.09   0.26   0.09   0.32    0.34      0.34




                                                                                                                        35
                                                                                                                                                                                   36
Table 4. Interactions between CF and Country Characteristics

Dependent variable is Z score. Revenue growth is the bank’s average growth in total revenues during the last 3 years. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash-flow rights
held by the large owner and zero if there is no large owner. We use 10 percent as the criteria for control. Rights is an index of anti-director rights for the country. Capital is an
index of capital regulation. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. DI denotes whether the country has explicit deposit insurance or not. Regressions are estimated using
OLS with clustering at the country-level. Standard errors that control for clustering at the country-level are reported in parentheses. * Significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%.

                                                 (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)
Revenue growth                                 0.267               0.289                0.392               0.162              0.462*
                                              (0.366)             (0.310)              (0.302)             (0.372)            (0.272)
CF                                          -2.694***             1.407**              1.875*              0.673*             2.265**
                                              (0.879)             (0.659)              (0.976)             (0.391)            (0.912)
Per capita income                            0.159***              0.112*              0.105*              0.103*             0.130**
                                              (0.052)             (0.058)              (0.060)             (0.056)            (0.052)
Rights                                         -0.046              0.066                0.087               0.077              -0.043
                                              (0.070)             (0.075)              (0.078)             (0.081)            (0.059)
Capital                                        0.039              0.257**               0.019               0.032             0.193**
                                              (0.070)             (0.101)              (0.073)             (0.075)            (0.086)
Restrict                                    -0.119***           -0.129***              -0.036            -0.130***            -0.072*
                                              (0.033)             (0.041)              (0.043)             (0.034)            (0.038)
DI                                          -0.660***            -0.732**            -0.635***             -0.208             -0.374*
                                              (0.206)             (0.274)              (0.223)             (0.235)            (0.221)
CF * Rights                                  0.588**                                                                         0.524***
                                              (0.234)                                                                         (0.185)
CF * Capital                                                    -0.773***                                                    -0.542***
                                                                 (0.214)                                                      (0.154)
CF * Restrict                                                                        -0.309***                               -0.204***
                                                                                      (0.107)                                 (0.073)
CF * DI                                                                                                  -1.961***           -1.348***
                                                                                                          (0.544)             (0.330)

Number of countries                             40                  40                   40                  40                  40
Observations                                   235                 235                  235                 235                 235
R-squared                                      0.35                0.39                 0.36                0.35                0.44




                                                                                                                                                                                   36
                                                                                                                                                                                   37
Table 5. Bank risk and valuation

Dependent variable is Z score. The sample includes the 10 largest listed banks in the country in terms of total assets, if available. Revenue growth is the bank’s average growth
in total revenues during the last year. CF is the fraction of the bank’s ultimate cash-flow rights held by the large owner and zero if there is no large owner. We use 10 percent as
the criteria for control. All bank-level data are for the year 2001. Per capita income is the log of GDP per capita of the country. Rights is an index of anti-director rights for the
country. Capital is an index of capital regulation. Restrict is an index of activity restrictions. DI denotes whether the country has explicit deposit insurance or not. Tobin’s Q is
the bank’s Tobin’s Q, calculated as the market value of equity plus the book value of liabilities divided by the book value of assets. Regressions are estimated using
instrumental variables with clustering at the country-level. As instruments for Tobin’s Q we use the bank’s market share in total deposits, a dummy variable that indicates
whether the bank is listed or has an ADR traded on the NYSE, and an index of entry regulation for the country. We report both the first and second stage regression. We also
include the p-value of the F-test of excluded instruments, the p-value of the overidentification test of excluded instruments, and the partial R-squared of excluded instruments.
Standard errors that control for clustering at the country-level are reported in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

                                                (1)                     (2)                      (3)                     (4)                      (5)
Second-stage: Z-score
Tobin’s Q                                       -5.004                   -1.515                   1.944                   1.671                  0.555
                                               (4.179)                  (3.549)                  (3.660)                 (3.442)                (3.286)
Revenue growth                                  0.224                     0.210                   0.304                   0.446                 0.535**
                                               (0.553)                  (0.409)                  (0.349)                 (0.282)                (0.272)
CF                                           -1.331***                -1.021***                -3.115***                 -0.407                 2.650**
                                               (0.366)                  (0.365)                  (0.964)                 (0.977)                (1.342)
Per capita income                                0.174                    0.132                   0.152                   0.125                   0.098
                                               (0.115)                  (0.103)                  (0.095)                 (0.090)                (0.093)
Rights                                         0.190*                    0.125                   -0.071                  -0.084                  -0.030
                                               (0.103)                  (0.106)                  (0.119)                 (0.105)                (0.096)
Capital                                                                  0.033                    0.034                 0.280**                 0.202**
                                                                        (0.086)                  (0.081)                 (0.118)                (0.094)
Restrict                                                              -0.119***                -0.113***               -0.128***                -0.069*
                                                                        (0.038)                  (0.034)                 (0.038)                (0.038)
DI                                                                    -0.610***                -0.671***               -0.717***                 -0.327
                                                                        (0.216)                  (0.212)                 (0.254)                (0.218)
CF * Rights                                                                                     0.751***                0.684***                0.509**
                                                                                                 (0.281)                 (0.244)                (0.248)
CF * Capital                                                                                                           -0.813***               -0.557***
                                                                                                                         (0.198)                (0.143)
CF * Restrict                                                                                                                                  -0.233***
                                                                                                                                                (0.090)
CF * DI                                                                                                                                        -1.386***
                                                                                                                                                (0.412)

First stage: Tobin’s Q

                                                                                                                                                                                   37
                                                                                            38

Revenue growth                         -0.000    -0.002      -0.005     -0.006    -0.007
                                      (0.013)   (0.013)     (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.015)
CF                                     0.006     -0.000    0.068**       0.047     -0.064
                                      (0.015)   (0.016)     (0.032)    (0.064)    (0.062)
Per capita income                    0.010***   0.010**     0.008**   0.008**    0.010***
                                      (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
Rights                               0.008**    0.008**    0.013***   0.013***   0.012***
                                      (0.004)   (0.004)     (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.004)
Capital                                           0.004       0.004      0.002     0.005
                                                (0.005)     (0.004)    (0.005)    (0.005)
Restrict                                          0.001       0.000      0.000     -0.001
                                                (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)
DI                                                0.009       0.009      0.010    -0.011
                                                (0.015)     (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.013)
CF * Rights                                                -0.025**    -0.024*    -0.018
                                                            (0.011)    (0.012)    (0.011)
CF * Capital                                                             0.006    -0.004
                                                                       (0.011)    (0.010)
CF * Restrict                                                                      0.006
                                                                                  (0.005)
CF * DI                                                                           0.080*
                                                                                  (0.041)
Market share                           0.010      0.012      0.015      0.015      0.014
                                      (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)    (0.014)
NYSE                                 0.050***   0.044***   0.039***   0.039***   0.042***
                                      (0.013)    (0.012)    (0.013)    (0.013)    (0.013)
Entry restrictions                     0.006      0.004      0.002      0.003       0.002
                                      (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)    (0.005)

Partial R2 of excluded instruments     0.134      0.104      0.082      0.083      0.094
F-test of excluded instruments       0.000***   0.001***   0.007***   0.007***   0.007***
Overidentification test (p-value)      0.495      0.862      0.821      0.921      0.758
Number of countries                      38         38         38         38         38
Observations                            216        216        216        216        216




                                                                                            38
                                                                                                                                              39
Appendix 1       Bank risk, Ownership structure, and Regulations by Country

                                  Equity      Earnings            Large owner    Managerial
Country                Z score   volatility   volatility   CF     on mgt board   ownership    Rights   Capital   Restrict   DI   # of banks
Argentina               3.47       0.56         0.65       0.47      1.00          0.00         4        3        8.75      1        1
Australia               3.54       0.23         0.27       0.01      0.00          0.00         4        3          8       0       9
Austria                 4.04       0.20         0.05       0.40      0.00          0.00         2        5          5       1       3
Belgium                 3.20       0.33         0.18       0.54      0.00          0.00         0        4          9       1       1
Brazil                  2.22       0.80         1.55       0.42      0.86          0.11         3        5         10       1       7
Canada                  3.80       0.31         0.19       0.00      0.00          0.00         5        4          7       1       7
Chile                   3.18       0.40         0.34       0.24      0.75          0.23         5        3         11       1       4
Colombia                2.67       0.39         1.59       0.32      0.40          0.00         3       n.a.      n.a.      1        5
Denmark                 3.32       0.19         0.33       0.15      0.00          0.00         2        2          8       1       10
Ecuador                 2.89       n.a.         1.52       0.52      1.00          0.17         2       n.a.      n.a.      1        5
Egypt                   3.14       0.44         0.49       0.19      0.86          0.00         2        3         13       0       7
Finland                 2.94       0.34         0.31       0.37      0.33          0.00         3        4          7       1       2
France                  3.11       0.28         0.15       0.40      0.00          0.00         3        2          6       1       6
Germany                 3.12       0.40         0.18       0.32      0.20          0.00         1        1          5       1       5
Greece                  2.60       0.56         1.03       0.33      0.88          0.02         2        3          9       1       8
Hong Kong               3.06       0.43         0.42       0.35      1.00          0.18         5       n.a.      n.a.      1        7
India                   2.73       0.40         0.42       0.62      1.00          0.00         5        3         10       1       9
Indonesia               0.72       0.82         5.73       0.75      1.00          0.06         2        5         14       1       7
Ireland                 3.21       0.37         0.40       0.00      0.00          0.00         4        1          8       1       6
Israel                  3.29       0.85         0.29       0.43      0.38          0.03         3        3         13       0       8
Italy                   3.05       0.36         0.28       0.13      0.00          0.00         1        4         10       1       10
Japan                   2.00       0.57         0.52       0.26      0.00          0.00         4        4         13       1       5
Jordan                  3.16       n.a.         0.51       0.23      0.57          0.13         1        5         11       1        7
Kenya                   2.33       0.41         1.63       0.18      0.25          0.02         3        4         10       1       4
Korea, Rep. of          1.61       0.76         1.20       0.26      0.30          0.01         2        3          9       1       10
Malaysia                2.28       0.53         0.54       0.30      0.33          0.11         4        3         10       0       6
Mexico                  3.01       0.67         0.60       0.58      1.00          0.58         1        4         12       1       1
Netherlands             3.40       0.32         0.20       0.17      0.00          0.00         2        3          6       1       2
Nigeria                 2.51       n.a.         1.54       0.15      0.14          0.01         3        5          9       1        7
Norway                  3.43       0.26         0.25       0.05      0.11          0.00         4       n.a.      n.a.      1        9
Pakistan                2.46       0.31         0.91       0.50      0.71          0.20         5       n.a.      n.a.      0        7
Peru                    3.09       0.86         0.87       0.55      0.00          0.06         3        3          8       1       3
Philippines             3.32       0.49         0.81       0.29      0.30          0.21         3        1          7       0       10
Portugal                3.54       0.25         0.23       0.24      0.29          0.22         3        3          9       1       6
Singapore               3.49       0.49         0.31       0.27      0.50          0.27         4        1          8       0       2
South Africa            2.54       0.40         1.33       0.15      0.00          0.00         5        4          8       1       10
                                                                                                                                              39
                                                                                                                                          40
                            Equity      Earnings            Large owner    Managerial
Country          Z score   volatility   volatility   CF     on mgt board   ownership    Rights   Capital   Restrict   DI     # of banks
Spain             3.52       0.26         0.23       0.18      0.20          0.00         4         4         7         1       10
Sri Lanka         3.14       0.44         0.41       0.14      0.40          0.00         3         0         7         0        5
Sweden            3.28       0.30         0.28       0.09      0.00          0.02         3         3         9         1        3
Switzerland       3.60       0.30         0.36       0.26      0.00          0.20         2         3         5         1        5
Taiwan            3.32       0.49         0.17       0.23      0.50          0.00         3         2        12         0       10
Thailand          0.46       0.60         1.58       0.52      1.00          0.08         2         4         9         1        7
Turkey            1.64       0.95         3.57       0.53      0.30          0.20         2         1        12         1       10
United Kingdom    3.64       0.40         0.21       0.02      0.00          0.00         5         3         5         1        6
Uruguay           3.14       n.a.         0.45       0.00      0.00          0.00        2        n.a.      n.a.      n.a.       1
USA               2.98       0.42         0.46       0.00      0.00          0.01         5         4        12         1       10
Venezuela         2.80       0.70         1.64       0.32      0.33          0.24         1         3        10         1        3
Zimbabwe          2.77       n.a.         2.08       0.06      0.00          0.00         3       n.a.      n.a.        0        1
Total             2.85       0.47         0.86       0.27      0.35          0.06       3.13      3.11      9.23      0.78      287




                                                                                                                                          40
