                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DIRECT DEMOCRACY AND LOCAL PUBLIC GOODS:
                 EVIDENCE FROM A FIELD EXPERIMENT IN INDONESIA

                                         Benjamin A. Olken

                                        Working Paper 14123
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14123


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




I thank Daron Acemoglu, Esther Duflo, Amy Finkelstein, Don Green, Michael Kremer, Katerina Linos,
and David Nickerson for helpful comments. Melissa Dell provided exceptional research assistance.
Special thanks are due to Susan Wong and Scott Guggenheim for their support and assistance throughout
the project. The field work and engineering survey would have been impossible without the dedication
of Suroso Yoso Oetomo and the SSK-PPK field staff. This project was supported by a grant from the
Indonesian Decentralization Support Facility, with support from DfID and the World Bank. All views
expressed are those of the author, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of DSF, DfID, the World
Bank, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia
Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 14123
June 2008
JEL No. D72

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper presents an experiment where 48 Indonesian villages were randomly assigned to choose
development projects through either representative-based meetings or direct election-based plebiscites.
Plebiscites resulted in dramatically higher satisfaction among villagers, increased knowledge about
the project, greater perceived benefits, and higher reported willingness to contribute. Changing the
political mechanism had much smaller effects on the actual projects selected, with some evidence
that plebiscites resulted in projects chosen by women being located in poorer areas. The results show
that direct participation in political decision making can substantially increase satisfaction and legitimacy,
even when it has little effect on actual decisions.


Benjamin A. Olken
Harvard Society of Fellows
78 Mt. Auburn St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bolken@nber.org
1. Introduction
      Recent years have witnessed a trend in the developing world towards local participation

in government decision making (Stiglitz 2002; World Bank 2004). What this trend means in

practice is that decisions about local public good provision are increasingly delegated to local

assemblies, such as the Gram Panchayat in India and the Conselho do Orçamento Participativo

in Brazil. Though these forums provide for local input, only a small fraction of the population

typically attends, leading to concerns that they may be prone to capture by local elites (Bardhan

2002; Bardhan and Mookherjee 2006).

       This paper investigates an alternative political mechanism for deciding on local pubic

goods: plebiscites, where citizens vote directly at an election for their most preferred projects.

Proponents of direct democracy argue that it has two main virtues (Matsusaka 2004). First, direct

democracy allows voters a way to circumvent representative institutions that may have been

captured by elites or other special interests. Second, compared with meetings, elections allow an

order of magnitude more citizens to participate directly in political decision making, and this

increased participation may enhance the legitimacy of political decisions even if the decisions

themselves do not change (Lind and Tyler 1988).

       To investigate these two hypotheses, I conducted a randomized, controlled field

experiment in 48 Indonesian villages, each of which were preparing to apply for infrastructure

projects as part of the Indonesian Kecamatan Development Program (KDP). Under KDP, each

village follows a political process that results in two proposed infrastructure proposals, one

“general project” proposed by the village at large and one “women’s project” project proposed

exclusively by women in the village. The experiment randomly allocated villages to choose their

projects either through a standard KDP decision making process, in which projects are selected



                                                  1
at representative village meetings, or through direct plebiscites, in which all villagers can vote

directly at an election for their most preferred projects. To mirror the meeting-based process, in

plebiscite villages two simultaneous votes were held, one in which all adults in the village were

eligible to vote for the general proposal and one in which all adult women in the village were

eligible to vote on the women’s-specific proposal. The list of potential projects to be considered

by the meeting process or by the plebiscite process was generated using an identical agenda-

setting process in both types of villages.

       In almost all naturally-occurring settings, political decision rules are chosen

endogenously through a complex political process, which makes evaluating the impact of

political rules challenging (Green and Shapiro 1994). In this case, however, the fact that political

mechanisms were randomly assigned allows me to evaluate their impact by simply comparing

outcomes across the two experimental conditions. In so doing, I build on a small-but-growing

number of randomized field experiments conducted to investigate political issues (e.g.,

Eldersveld 1956; Gerber and Green 2000; Wantchekon 2003; Chattopadhyay and Duflo 2004;

Druckman et al. 2006). To the best of my knowledge, however, the field experiment reported

here represents the first time the political process itself has ever been randomly assigned.

       Using this methodology, I examine the impact of moving from meetings to plebiscites

along two main dimensions. First, I examine the impact on elite capture by examining whether

the types of projects chosen move closer to the preferences of villages elites and whether the

location of projects move towards wealthier parts of the villages. Second, I examine the impact

on legitimacy by examining a wide range of measures of villagers’ satisfaction with, and

perceived fairness of, the KDP program.




                                                  2
        First, with regard to potential elite capture of the selected project, I find relatively little

impact of the plebiscite treatment on the general project, but substantial impacts on the women’s

project. For the general project, the type of project selected (i.e., road, irrigation system,

water/sanitation, etc) did not change whatsoever as a result of the plebiscite, and there were only

minor changes in the locations of these projects as a result of the plebiscite. For the women’s

project, by contrast, the plebiscite resulted in projects located in poorer areas of the village,

which seems to suggest that the plebiscite shifted power towards poorer women who may have

been disenfranchised in a more potentially elite-dominated meeting process. At the same time,

however, the plebiscite resulted in the types of projects being chosen for the women’s project

closer to the stated preferences of the village elites. One potential explanation for these

seemingly contradictory changes is, in the experimental design, the plebiscite treatment did not

affect how each area of the village selected its proposals, and elites were more dominant in the

agenda-setting process in poorer areas of the village. A shift in power towards poorer areas of the

village at the final decision-making stage might therefore result in projects that look closer to

elite preferences.

        Second, with regard to measures of legitimacy and satisfaction, I find that the election-

based plebiscite process resulted in substantially higher citizen satisfaction across a wide variety

of measures. For example, plebiscites substantially increased villagers’ overall satisfaction with

the KDP program. They also improved villagers’ perceptions of the fairness and legitimacy of

the selected project, and dramatically improved their stated satisfaction with the project selected.

Remarkably, these findings even hold for the general project, where the type of project selected

did not change at all, which suggests that these results are driven by increased legitimacy of the

political process through which projects were selected, rather than the political process resulting




                                                    3
in better projects being chosen. These effects are large, statistically significant, and seem to

occur no matter how the questions were phrased. Villagers also indicate that they are

substantially more likely to contribute voluntary labor or materials to KDP projects in villages

where plebiscites were held. The striking results on citizen satisfaction and legitimacy results

confirm the view of some democratic theorists that broad participation in the political process

can be a legitimizing force, even if the ultimate decisions taken do not change (Lind and Tyler

1988; Fishkin 1991; Benhabib 1996; Ackerman and Fishkin 2004).

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides basic information

on the KDP program and outlines the experimental design. Section 3 presents the results,

showing the impact of the plebiscites on the selected project type (roads, irrigation, education

programs, etc), project location, various measures of satisfaction and predicted utilization,

knowledge about the program, and public and private discussion of development issues. Section

4 concludes.


2. Setting, Experimental Design, and Data

2.1.   The KDP Program
       The Kecamatan (Subdistrict) Development Project, or KDP, is a national Indonesian

government program, funded through a loan from the World Bank. KDP began in 1998, and

currently finances projects in approximately 15,000 villages throughout Indonesia each year.

       In KDP, participating subdistricts, which typically contain between 10 and 20 villages,

receive an annual block grant for three consecutive years. Every year, each village in the

subdistrict makes two proposals for small-scale infrastructure activities. The village as a whole

proposes one of the projects (which I refer to as the ‘general project’); women’s groups in the

village propose the second (which I refer to as the ‘women’s project’). Once the village

proposals have been made, an inter-village forum, consisting of six representatives from each


                                                  4
village, ranks all of the proposals according to a number of criteria, such as the number of

beneficiaries and the project’s cost, and projects are funded according to the rank list until all

funds have been exhausted; typically, about 50-75% of villages have at least one project funded

each year. 1

         This study focuses on the process by which the village selects its two proposals. The

baseline process in KDP works as follows. All Indonesian villages are comprised of between 2

and 7 dusun, or hamlets. For a period of several months, a village facilitator organizes small

meetings at the hamlet level; for large hamlets multiple meetings might be held in different

neighborhoods within each hamlet. These meetings aim to create a list of ideas for what projects

the village should propose. These ideas are then divided into two groups – those that originated

from women’s only meetings and those suggested by mixed meetings or men’s meetings. The

village facilitator presents the women’s list to a women-only village meeting and the men’s and

joint ideas to a village meeting open to both genders. While these meetings are open to the

public, those that attend represent a highly selected sample, just as in Mansbridge’s (1983) study

of Vermont town meetings. In particular, government officials, neighborhood heads, and those

selected to represent village groups compose the majority of attendees. A typical meeting would

have between 9-15 people representing the various hamlets, as well as various formal and

informal village leaders, with on average about 48 people attending in total out of an average

village population of 2,200. The groups discuss the proposals, with substantial help from an

external facilitator (as in Humphreys, Masters and Sandbu 2006), deciding ultimately on a single

proposal from each meeting.




1
 At the inter-village forum, the general project proposals and the women’s project proposals are officially treated
equally.


                                                          5
2.2.     Experimental Design
         The results reported here come from field work conducted between September 2005 and

January 2006. The key intervention studied here is a change in the decision making mechanism:

instead of following the meeting-based process described above, some villages were randomly

allocated to choose their projects via a direct election-based plebiscite. The idea behind the

plebiscite was that it would move the political process from a potentially elite-dominated

meeting to a more participatory process that might be less subject to elite capture.

         The method for selecting the list of projects to be chosen (i.e., the agenda setting

procedure) was the same in both cases – the list of projects to be decided on at the meeting or the

list of projects on the ballot was determined from the results of hamlet level meetings, where

each hamlet was allowed to nominate one general project and one women’s project. 2

         The plebiscite was conducted as follows. Two paper ballots were prepared – one for the

general project and one for the women’s project. The ballots had a picture of each project along

with a description of the project. Village officials distributed voting cards to all adults in the

village who had been eligible to vote in national parliamentary elections held approximately six

months previously. The voting cards also indicated the date of the election and the voting place.

Voting places were set up in each hamlet (dusun) in the village. 3 When arriving at the voting

place to vote, men received one ballot (for the general project) and women received two ballots

(one for the general project, one for the women’s project). The selected project (for both the


2
  Note that in East Java and Southeast Sulawesi, the set of projects to be decided amongst – i.e., the agenda – was
already fixed at the time the randomization was announced. In North Sumatra, however, the agenda was selected
after the randomization was announced, so it is potentially endogenous with respect to the randomization. Appendix
A notes that the results are consistent among the two subsamples, suggesting that the results are not substantially
affected by the potentially endogenous agenda setting in the North Sumatra villages.
3
  If two hamlets were less than 15 minutes walk from one another, we combined them into one voting precinct with
a single voting station. In our sample, six hamlets – located in four villages – used voting stations in a nearby
hamlet. To ensure that this is not biasing results, I run two robustness checks. First I limit the sample to villages
where all hamlets had ballot boxes, and then I restricted it to hamlets where ballot boxes were located. Results (not
shown) remain virtually unchanged.


                                                         6
general and women’s project) was the proposal that received a plurality of the votes in the

respective vote. Turnout at these elections averaged 807 people, or over 60% of all eligible

voters in the village. 4 This means that roughly 20 times as many villagers participated in the

plebiscites as attended the village meetings in non-election villages. Participation in the

plebiscite was approximately balanced between men and women.

         The experiment was conducted in two phases. First, Phase I was conducted in 10 villages

in East Java Province and 18 villages in North Sumatra Province. Based on qualitative reports

from Phase I areas, the experimental protocol was changed slightly, and then run again in Phase

II in an additional 18 villages in Southeast Sulawesi Province. The key intervention studied here

– the plebiscite treatment – was run identically in both phases of the study; the modifications

between the two phases concern how the control group, the meeting-based decision processes,

was run. Details of these modifications, and robustness checks to ensure that they are not driving

the results, can be found in Appendix A.

         The randomization design is shown in Table 1. 5 In Phase I of the project, 25% of villages

were allocated to the plebiscite treatment, whereas in Phase II of the project, 45% of villages

were allocated to the plebiscite treatment. Given these different probabilities, in all specifications

I include phase fixed effects, to capture the fact that the treatment probability differed by phase.

         A natural question is the degree to which the randomization resulted in a balanced set of

villages in the two treatment conditions. To investigate this, I estimate the following Probit

specification:

4
  As I do not have data on the number eligible voters, I estimate the number of turnout by taking the total village
population and multiplying by 0.667, which is the average ratio of adult population to total population in similar
areas of Indonesia (author’s calculations).
5
  In Southeast Sulawesi, the treatment assigned to three villages was changed after the randomization was
determined. To maintain the exogeneity of the random assignment, in all analysis in this paper I use the results of
the original randomization, rather than the final treatment status, in conducting the analysis. The analysis should
therefore be interpreted as intent-to-treat effects (Angrist, Imbens and Rubin 1996); treatment-on-treated effects
would be slightly larger than the results reported here.


                                                          7
                                                          (
                               Pr ( ELECTION v ) = Φ α phase + X v' β     )                           (1)
where v is a village and phase refers to whether the villages was in Phase I or Phase II of the

project. The results are shown in Table 2. The vector X includes village population, the average

village agricultural wage, percent of village roads that are asphalt, hamlets per village, total

churches and mosques per village, distance to the subdistrict capital, and the age and educational

attainment of the village head. A test for joint significance gives a p-value of 0.28, indicating that

the assignment of treatments was, in fact, orthogonal to observable village characteristics.


2.3.    Data
        The analysis here uses three data sources. First, a panel household survey was conducted,

in which five households were randomly sampled in each village. This household survey was

conducted in two waves, one at the inception of the study and one after the project selection

process was concluded. 6 The household survey contains information on a standard set of

household characteristics, such as assets (used to predict expenditure). Respondents ranked

potential projects in order from most to least preferred. The same respondents were resurveyed in

the second wave, in which they also responded to a number of questions about their perceptions

of and satisfaction with the KDP project in their village.

        Second, a survey was conducted in which we asked the village head, and the head of

every hamlet, a number of background questions about the condition of the village. The survey

also elicited their preferences about types of projects, which I refer to in the analysis as ‘elite’




6
  Due to time pressures at the beginning of the project, the first wave of the household survey was contemporaneous
to the announcement of the randomization in East Java and Southeast Sulawesi. I therefore focus on results using the
second wave of the household survey.


                                                         8
preferences. 7 Third, detailed data (type and location) was collected about the list of projects on

the agenda, and about the projects actually selected.


3. Results
      This section discusses the main findings. Section 3.1 presents results on the impact of the

plebiscites on the types and location of projects selected. Section 3.2 shows the effect of the

plebiscites on subjective measures of satisfaction with the project. Section 3.3 discusses the

impact of the plebiscites on informal discussions about the project and on citizen knowledge

about the outcomes of the political process.


3.1.     Impacts on project selection

3.1.1. Project types
       Projects have two main attributes: project type – i.e., is the project a road, bridge,

irrigation system, etc. – and project location, i.e., in which areas of the village the project is

located.

         To begin, Table 3 presents summary statistics about types of projects. The first two

columns show the breakdown of project types that were actually selected by the program, for

both the general proposal (column 1) and the women’s proposal (column 2). The general project

is much more likely to be a road or bridge (64% for general project compared to 35% for

women’s project), whereas the women’s project is much more likely to be a drinking water

supply system (27% vs. 8%).

         The remaining columns of Table 3 show respondents’ most preferred project type, broken

down by various demographic characteristics, according to the responses from the first wave of

the household survey. Columns (3) and (4) break down preferences by gender. Note that the

7
  The time pattern of these surveys was identical to that of the first round of the household survey – i.e., before
randomization was announced in North Sumatra, and contemporaneous with randomization in East Java and
Southeast Sulawesi.


                                                            9
differential preferences by gender match almost exactly the differences in the actual project

selections – men are more likely to prefer roads or bridges (64% for men vs. 38% for women),

and women are more likely to prefer drinking water projects than men (23% to 3%). This

provides suggestive evidence that, in equilibrium, the project selected by the women’s process

reflects the opinions of women in the village, whereas the general project reflects the preferences

of men in the village. 8

         The next four columns, which split households by per-capita expenditure quartile (where

quartiles are constructed separately for each province), show that richer households are also more

likely to prefer roads, whereas poorer ones tend to prefer irrigation projects, which may reflect

the fact that the poor are more likely to be in agriculture than involved in trading or services.

Finally, the final two columns show that landowners prefer irrigation projects more often than

landless individuals.

         The first question about the impact of the plebiscites is their impact on the types of

projects selected. Figure 1 shows, for both the general project and the women’s project, the

composition of selected projects broken down by whether the village was a plebiscite village or a

meeting village. As is evident from Figure 1, there were no changes whatsoever in the types of

projects selected as the ‘general project’ across the two different treatment conditions. For the

‘women’s project,’ some differences emerge – the projects chosen by plebiscite were slightly

more likely to be roads and bridges (i.e., moving away from women’s stated preferences as

shown in Table 3) and water/sanitation systems (i.e., towards women’s stated preferences as

shown in Table 3), and substantially less likely to be irrigation projects.

8
  Note that this does not necessarily imply that women’s preferences would not be represented without the special
project reserved for women, as it is possible that the separate reservation for women turns the general project into
the ‘men’s project,’ a phrase we heard frequently in qualitative work in project villages. However, the experimental
evidence from India suggests that reservations for women can cause projects selected to more closely resemble
women’s preferences, at least in the setting studied there (Chattopadhyay and Duflo 2004).


                                                         10
        To estimate the statistical significance of the changes shown in Figure 1, I estimate a

conditional logit model via maximum likelihood (following McFadden 1974). Adapting the

standard conditional logit notation, denote by Pv the number of project types (i.e., road,

irrigation, etc.) in village v and Tv the total number of types selected in that village (which will

almost always be equal to 1). Denote dvp to be a dummy variable equal to 1 or 0, and denote by


                                          {           }
                                                                      Pv
Sv the set of all possible vectors d v = d v1 ,..., d vPv such that   ∑d
                                                                      p =1
                                                                             vp   = Tv . I then estimate the


following model:

                               Pv
            Pr(CHOSEN v | ∑ CHOSEN vp = Tv ) =
                               p =1

                            ⎡ Pv                                                      ⎤
                       exp ⎢ ∑ CHOSEN vp (α p× phase + β j ELECTION v × γ p ) ⎥         (2)
                            ⎣ p =1                                                    ⎦
                                   ⎡ Pv                                             ⎤
                          ∑ exp ⎢∑        d vp (α p× phase + β j ELECTION v × γ p ) ⎥
                         dv ∈Sv    ⎣ p =1                                           ⎦
where CHOSEN vp is a dummy variable equal to 1 if project type p was chosen in village v and 0

if not, and CHOSEN v indicates the vector of projects chosen in village v. ELECTION equals 1 if

the village chose its project proposal via plebiscite and 0 otherwise. I group the 8 project types

into four major categories – roads/bridges, irrigation, water/sanitation, and other – to preserve

statistical power. The omitted category in the regression is ‘other,’ which consists of educational

and health projects. Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the village level. The

key coefficients of interest are the interactions of the project types × election (i.e., the β j ’s),

which indicates the differential likelihood a particular type of project is chosen in plebiscite-

based villages relative to meeting-based villages.

        The results from estimating equation (2) are presented in Table 4. The first 3 columns

show the results when all options are considered; the last 3 columns restrict the sample to the



                                                     11
subset of types that were actually available as agenda items in that village. (The second

specification has more power, but I present both given that it is theoretically possible that there

was the potential for endogeneity in available project types in North Sumatra villages, given the

timing of the experiment.) The coefficients are interpretable as log odds ratios. The results

confirm the picture shown in the Figure 1. For the general project, the point estimates are

generally small, and highly statistically insignificant – a joint F-test has a p-value of 0.79 or 0.87,

depending on the specification. For the women’s project, the point estimates indicate substantial

increases in the probability of choosing either roads / bridges and water / sanitation projects,

though given the small sample sizes these shifts are not statistically significant (p-values from a

joint F-test of 0.55 and 0.18, depending on specification).

       While the overall preferences for different types of projects reported in Table 3 give some

indication of which project types were preferred by which types of people, I can estimate more

directly whether the project resulted in chosen projects that were more or less preferred by

different subsets of villagers. Recall that in the first household survey, respondents were asked to

rank each of the eight potential project types from most preferred (1) to least preferred (8). I can

therefore estimate the following conditional fixed-effects logit regression:

                        Pv
      Pr(CHOSEN vh | ∑ CHOSEN vhp = Tv ) =
                        p =1

                              ⎡                   ⎛ α p + γ 1 phase RANK vhp + γ 2 RANK vhp × X vi ⎞ ⎤
                              ⎢ Pv                ⎜                                                  ⎟⎥
                       exp ⎢ ∑ CHOSEN vhp ⎜ + β1 ELECTION v × RANK vhp                               ⎟⎥
                              ⎢ p =1              ⎜                                                  ⎟⎥     (3)
                             ⎣⎢                   ⎝ + β 2 ELECTION v × RANK vhp × X vi               ⎠ ⎦⎥
                                      ⎡         ⎛ α p + γ 1 phase RANK vhp + γ 2 RANK vhp × X vi ⎞ ⎤
                                      ⎢ Pv      ⎜                                                ⎟⎥
                          ∑       exp ⎢ ∑ d vhp ⎜ + β1 ELECTION v × RANK vhp                     ⎟⎥
                         dvh ∈Sv      ⎢ p =1    ⎜                                                ⎟⎥
                                      ⎢⎣        ⎝ + β 2 ELECTION v × RANK vhp × X vi             ⎠ ⎥⎦




                                                        12
where v is a village, p is a project type, and h is the respondent. Note that the coefficient γ1 is

allowed to vary by project phase, to take into account the fact that the probability of ELECTION

differed between phase 1 and phase 2 villages. CHOSEN vhp equals 1 if the project type p was

chosen by respondent h’s village v and 0 if it was not. RANK vhp is respondent h's rank of project

p in village v, where the top-project is ranked 1, the second project is ranked 2, etc. Robust

standard errors are clustered by village, to take into account the fact that there are multiple

respondents in each village.

         The key coefficients of interest are the interactions of ELECTION and RANK (i.e., β1 ),

and the triple interactions of ELECTION, RANK, and individual characteristics X (i.e., β 2 ). A

negative coefficient on the triple interaction indicates that the plebiscite made projects preferred

by individuals with the respective characteristic X more likely to be chosen.

        The results are shown in Table 5. The first column shows the overall impact of plebiscites

on the probability that low-ranked (i.e., preferred) project types are likely to be chosen; the

second column focuses on whether projects preferred by elites are more likely to be chosen when

elections are utilized, and the third column investigates a host of individual characteristics. 9 For

the general project, I find no effects, which is not surprising given the results above that show

that there was almost no impact of the plebiscite on the types of projects chosen as the general

project. For the women’s project, the negative coefficient on ELITE × RANK × ELECTION in

column (8) indicates that the plebiscites make the project chosen by the women’s process look

more like the preferences of the village elite and less like the preferences of ordinary villagers,

although the coefficient is of only borderline statistical significance (p = 0.096). Similarly, the


9
 Columns (2) and (3) are estimated separately, since the detailed X characteristics shown in column (3) are not
available for the elite sample.


                                                        13
negative coefficient on the triple interaction of log HH per-capita expenditure, RANK, and

ELECTION indicates that the relatively affluent are more likely to have their highly ranked

projects selected as the women’s proposal when plebiscites are utilized than when meetings are

used. These results are likely driven by the fact that roads are more likely to be chosen as the

women’s project in the plebiscite treatment, and roads are preferred by the elites, by men, and by

the wealthy.


3.1.2. Project Location
       In practice, qualitative evidence suggests that the key political question to be determined

in the KDP process is not the type of project, but rather where the project should be located.

Each area of the village may have their own preferred project type, but virtually everyone in the

village I interviewed reported that they would strongly prefer a suboptimal project type in their

own hamlet to their most preferred project type located somewhere else in the village where they

would not be able to use it.

       Under the assumption that everyone’s most preferred project is a project in their own

hamlet, moving from a meeting-based system to a plebiscite-based system has several clear

predictions. First, the representative meeting process allocates equal numbers of votes in the

meeting to each hamlet, whereas in the plebiscite, the number of votes likely depends on

population (assuming a uniform participation rate in elections). This suggests that one would

expect the plebiscite to favor hamlets with large populations relative to the meeting treatment

(Ansolabehere, Gerber and Snyder 2003).

       Second, the meeting is typically held in the village town hall. Although votes are

allocated in meetings equally to each hamlet, the meeting’s location in the village town hall

means that the number of attendees at the meeting is typically skewed in favor of hamlets located




                                                 14
close to the village town hall. To the extent that these people can influence the meeting even

though they cannot vote (for example, by dominating the conversation), one would expect that

the plebiscites would favor more outlying hamlets, given that polling stations were located in

each hamlet.

         The predictions on whether the plebiscite should locate projects in poorer areas are less

clear. To the extent that the number of attendees at meetings determines who attends meetings,

one might expect the poor to be less likely to attend meetings. Since the cost of voting in an

election is much lower than the cost of attending a meeting (10 minutes vs. 3 hours), it is

plausible that the poor might be relatively more likely to vote than to attend meetings, in which

case the plebiscite treatment would increase the power of the poor. 10 More generally, meetings

may be more easily captured by elites than elections, since elite individuals may be more vocal at

meetings than poorer villagers (Olken 2007).

         To examine these questions, I first plot the probability distribution of the selected project

according to various village characteristics. As can be seen in Figure 2, plebiscites did not

change the probability that the general project would be located in a poor relative to a wealthy

hamlet, but they did increase the likelihood that selected women’s projects would be constructed

in relatively impoverished hamlets. (Hamlets were ranked in terms of their poverty by the village

head before the project began.) Thus, while plebiscites may have led selected project types for

the women’s proposal to move closer to the preferences of the elite, they simultaneously

increased the likelihood that selected projects would be located in poorer areas of the village.




10
  Technically this relationship is ambiguous, since the poor have lower incomes (and thus a higher utility of money,
and more of a need to work) but also lower wages (and therefore a lower opportunity cost of time), and it is not clear
theoretically which effect dominates. Jayachandran (2006) finds evidence that income effects are particularly
important in the context of poor, rural villagers in developing countries.


                                                         15
        Plebiscites affect locations of projects in other ways as well. Figure 3 shows that,

contrary to the predictions outlined above, plebiscites also resulted in projects being more likely

to be located in less populous hamlets, rather than more populous hamlets. This is particularly

true for the general project. This goes directly against the hypothesis that the plebiscite should

help more populous areas. One possibility, suggested by the experience of several villages in

fieldwork, was that in a situation where there are more than two hamlets, no hamlet has an

outright majority. Large hamlets may be tempted to go it alone, hoping to win with a plurality,

whereas small hamlets may better foresee the need to form coalitions in order to win.

        Finally, as shown in Figure 4, plebiscites decreased the probability that projects selected

by both the general and women’s proposals would be constructed in isolated hamlets – i.e., those

hamlets that are located furthest from the center of the village (I group hamlets into quartiles

according to their distance from the center of the village). This is also surprising, given that

outlying hamlets tend to have fewer supporters at village meetings, but should have had an easier

time voting in the election, since the election was held in each hamlet.

        To investigate the impact on project location more systematically (and, in particular, to

control for these various factors simultaneously), I estimate conditional logit specifications of the

form:

                           Dv
          Pr(CHOSEN v | ∑ CHOSEN vd = Tv ) =
                           d =1

                                 ⎡ Dv                                                       ⎤
                          exp ⎢ ∑ CHOSEN vd ( γ phase X vd + β ELECTION v × X vd ) ⎥          (4)
                                 ⎣ d =1                                                     ⎦
                                          ⎡ Dv                                            ⎤
                              ∑       exp ⎢ ∑ d vd ( γ phase X vd + β ELECTION v × X vd ) ⎥
                            d vd ∈Sv      ⎣ d =1                                          ⎦
where v is a village and d is a hamlet (dusun). Once again the coefficients γ are allowed to vary

by project phase. CHOSEN vd equals 1 if the hamlet was chosen for project construction and 0 if




                                                 16
not. X indicates a group of hamlet characteristics. The coefficients of interest are β, which

represent the differential likelihood of a hamlet of type X receiving the project in election areas

vs. non-election areas. Robust standard errors are clustered by village.

         The results are presented in Table 6. These results confirm the qualitative patterns shown

in the Figures. For the women’s project, the results indicate that the plebiscites resulted in

projects that were more likely to be located in poorer hamlets. Particularly for the general

project, the plebiscite also resulted in projects that were located in less populous, but more

centrally located, hamlets. 11


3.1.3. Interpretation of results
       Overall, the data suggests that the main effect of plebiscites was limited to the women’s

project. For the women’s project, the plebiscites resulted in projects located in poorer hamlets,

but also in projects that looked closer to preferences of the village elites. One way of reconciling

these two results is to recall that, in the experimental design, the plebiscite process did not affect

the agenda setting within these hamlets. It is possible that in poorer hamlets, poor women were

less involved in the agenda setting stage, so the women’s projects proposed in these hamlets

were more elite dominated. When time came to vote, however, the newly enfranchised poorer

women may have preferred to vote for sub-optimal project type located in their area than in an

optimal project type located too far away to be useful. This suggests that while the plebiscite

process is successful to some degree at enfranchising poorer women in the final decision making

process, fully enfranchising poorer women would require increasing their participation at the

agenda-setting stage as well.


11
  As an aside, the overall coefficient (as opposed to the interaction) on hamlet poverty shows that, at least based on
the village head’s ranking of which hamlets are richest and which are poorest, poorer hamlets are more likely to
subsequently receive the general project, both with and without the direct elections. This pattern can also be seen in
Figure 3.


                                                          17
        An interesting question is why the change in political process affected the selection of

projects much more in the women’s project than in the general project. Qualitative evidence

from the study villages suggests one potential explanation for these differential results. In

particular, men – who often dominate the discussion surrounding the general project – may be

able to strike deals amongst themselves in which those who lose out from the political process in

one year receive benefits in a future year. If so, the change in political power induced by the

plebiscite treatment may have changed the allocation of these future promises, even if the project

chosen this year remained unchanged – i.e., this may be an empirical example of what has been

termed a Political Coase Theorem (Acemoglu 2003). 12 The elite men in the village are able to

make these types of dynamic commitments to one another because they are frequently involved

in village decision making, so promises can be sustained by their repeated future interactions.

For women, whose political power in the KDP process studied here is very much the exception

to village politics rather than the norm, the political process investigated here may have been

more of a one-shot game, making it difficult to offset the change in political power induced by

the plebiscite with promises of future transfers.


3.2.    Project Satisfaction and Support
        The previous analysis has shown that plebiscites had relatively little impact on the types

of projects chosen for the general project and served to move the selected women’s projects

towards the types of projects chosen by village elite. One might expect, given these results, that

the plebiscite process would not have been particularly popular in the villages.


12
   For example, in one village visited by the author, the village head explained that, prior to knowing about the
experiment, he had been planning on using his influence at the meeting to channel project resources towards a
section of his village known as Hamlet Five, which had not yet received a development project during his tenure as
village head and whose support he needed in the upcoming village head election. In response to the election
treatment, the village head convinced the citizens of the section of the village known as Hamlet Four to vote for
Hamlet Five’s project in the general project election by promising them that, in the future, he would lobby the
district government to bring an additional road project to Hamlet Four.


                                                        18
       However, the opposite is true. Table 7 shows the impact on responses, from the second

round of the household survey, of people’s perceptions about the KDP decision-making process

in their village. Each cell in Table 7 is the coefficient β from the following ordered probit

specification:

                                  (
        Pr (OUTCOMEvhj ) = Φ α phase + δ j +1 + βELECTION v + X ''vh γ −   )
                              (                                        )
                                                                                                (5)
                            Φ α phase + δ j + βELECTION v + X ''vh γ

For all outcomes, more ‘positive’ answers have been consistently coded as having higher ordered

response values. All shown variables have 4 possible response categories except for “will you

use the project,” which is binary. I cluster standard errors by village to take into account that

there are multiple respondents h in each village v. The vector X represents a set of respondent

control variables (gender, age, log per-capita expenditure, number of household members, and

occupation dummies). Table 7 presents both pooled results and results separated out by the type

of project (general and women’s) and gender of respondent.

       As can be seen in Table 7, the plebiscite process resulted in greater villager satisfaction

across a wide variety of measures. In the elections villages, villagers were more likely to report

that the project was chosen in accordance with their wishes, was more likely to benefit them

personally, and that they were more likely to use the project. They are also more likely to

respond that the project was fair, that the project was chosen in accordance with the ‘people’s

aspirations’ (aspirasi masyarakat – a broad measure of legitimacy), and that they were satisfied

with the KDP project overall.

       The magnitude of these changes in satisfaction is substantial. To interpret the magnitudes,

note that overall, the plebiscites resulted in an increase in 21 percentage points of people who

said that the project chosen was in either very much or somewhat in accordance with their




                                                 19
wishes, an increase of 18 percentage points of people who said they would benefit either very

much or somewhat from the project, an increase of 8 percentage points of people who said they

would use the project personally, and increase overall satisfaction with the KDP program by 13

percentage points.

       Several points are worth making about these results. First, note that for the general

project, reported satisfaction increased for both male and female respondents across a wide

variety of the measures. By contrast, for the women’s project, the increases in satisfaction came

only on the part of female respondents, who were the only ones to participate in the decision

making process for the women’s project. Thus the increases in satisfaction precisely mirror the

increases in participation – for both men and women for the general project, and for women only

for the women’s project – which suggests that participation itself may be responsible for the

increases in satisfaction. Second, there were marked increases in satisfaction with the general

project, despite the fact that – as shown above – the actual project chosen as the general project

barely changed as a result of the plebiscite treatment. Specifically, the results in Table 5 show

that the plebiscite did not change the probability that types of projects that were ranked higher by

respondents were chosen, and the results in Table 6 showed that for the general project, the

treatments resulted in projects in centrally located, but less populous hamlets – not necessarily

changes that one would have thought ex-ante would have led to dramatically larger

improvements in satisfaction. This also suggests that it is participation itself that may matter for

satisfaction, since the outcomes of the project barely changed. Together, these results suggest

that changes in the political process can affect satisfaction or legitimacy, even if those changes

do not necessarily affect the outcome of the process (e.g., Lind and Tyler 1988; Fishkin 1995).




                                                 20
         An interesting question is whether this increased stated support would translate into

increased material support for the project. Although the study did not cover the actual

construction phase, the second round of the household survey asked respondents about their

plans for making voluntary contributions to the project.13 Again estimating equation (5), Table 8

shows that plebiscites substantially increased villagers’ intentions to contribute to KDP project

construction, particularly for the general project. Specifically, plebiscites raised the probability

that individuals stated that they would contribute something (i.e. labor, money, food) to project

construction by 18 percentage points. The majority of this is driven by planned labor

contributions, which increase by 16 percentage points. 14 Perhaps surprisingly, the plebiscite

slightly decreased the probability that respondents would contribute money (7% of respondents

planned to contribute money when meetings were used, versus only 5% when plebiscites were

used.) Nevertheless, to the extent these stated intentions were subsequently manifested in actual

contributions, they would represent a substantial impact of the plebiscites on the general project.


3.3.     Knowledge and Discussions
         In political science, several theorists have argued that active discussions of issues among

citizens are important both to increase legitimacy and to help citizens discover the socially

optimal outcome (Fishkin 1991; Ackerman and Fishkin 2004). These types of discussions can

take place in public forums, but can also take place in a variety of private settings or informal

discussions outside the formal political process (Benhabib 1996). One might expect, in a

plebiscite that involved an order of magnitude more people, that than ordinary citizen’s

discussions of the project would increase in preparation for the plebiscite.
13
   Note that given the design of KDP, this question could not have been answered using actual contribution data
even if the study had included the construction phase, since which proposals were actually funded by the inter-
village council, and thus for which projects we would observe actual contributions, is endogenous.
14
   Note that 70% of those surveyed planned to contribute labor when meetings were utilized, whereas 84% did when
elections were utilized. This 14 percentage point increase is slightly different from the 16 percentage point estimate
in the Table because the estimate in the Table includes phase fixed effects.


                                                         21
       To investigate the degree to which the change in political process affected these

discussions, I use data from the second-round household survey in which households were asked

about the degree to which they had discussed village development issues in the period before the

survey. Table 9 reveals that plebiscites do not impact private and public dialogue about

development issues, at least not in the short timeframe within which this study was conducted.

Specifically, I detect no statistically significant difference in the probability that a respondent

discussed ‘development issues in the village’ in the last three months with anyone, with

household members, or with members of the village government. One possibility, however, is

that the increase in dialogue is on the intensive margin, rather than the extensive margin, in

which case it would not be detected by these questions. This is certainly possible given that the

baseline levels of these discussions were quite high to begin with. Nevertheless, it is remarkable

that the dramatic increases in participation associated with the plebiscites treatment did not result

in detectable additional discussions among citizens.

       A second important measure of civic engagement is the degree to which individuals are

knowledgeable about the outcome of the political process. To investigate this, Wave 2 of the

household survey also asked respondents to name the type and location of selected KDP

proposals in their villages. Table 9 shows, again by estimating equation (5), that plebiscites

substantially increase knowledge about the projects. When plebiscites are utilized, respondents

are 22 percentage points more likely to correctly identify the type and location of the selected

general proposal and 29 percentage points more likely to do so for the women’s proposal.

Female respondents are 37 percentage points more likely to be able to correctly identify the

women’s proposal in the plebiscite treatment. Thus, although there was little detectable increase




                                                  22
in whether citizens had any discussions about village development, villagers were certainly much

more aware of the outcomes of the political process in the plebiscite treatment.


4. Conclusion
     This project investigated two alternate mechanisms through which villagers could choose

how to spend money for infrastructure projects in their village: a representative meeting and a

plebiscite. Each village selected two projects, a general project, chosen by all villagers, and a

women’s project, chosen exclusively by the women in the village. These experimental

interventions affected only the final choice of which would be selected – the process of setting

the agenda, in which each hamlet in the village nominated one general project and one women’s

project through a series of hamlet-level meetings, was unchanged across the experimental

treatments.

       The experiment found very different results for the two projects considered. For the

general project, the plebiscite process resulted in substantially higher villager satisfaction with

the political process, even though it had very limited impacts on the actual projects selected. For

the women’s project, not only did women’s satisfaction increase, but the plebiscite process

resulted in women’s projects that were more likely to be located in poorer hamlets of the village.

       One potential explanation for the difference between the general project and the women’s

project is that, for the general project, promises of future transfers may have been used to undo

the change in political power from the plebiscite. These deals may have occurred in the general

project, but not in the women’s project, because male elites from different hamlets are involved

in village decision making every year, so their repeated interactions allow them to enforce

agreements over time. By contrast, the KDP project was unusual in the role reserved for women,

so women were in effect playing a one-shot game in which they could not credibly commit to




                                                 23
future transfers. The ability of elites to enforce these types of inter-temporal commitments

through their repeated interactions suggests a potentially beneficial role that elites may play in

local politics, and is consistent with the theoretical requirements for a Political Coase Theorem to

hold.

        An important caveat is that this study was conducted in only 48 villages. Therefore, while

the results that show large, statistically significant impacts on satisfaction and legitimacy are

clearly valid, some caution must be used in interpreting the relative lack of an impact on project

type and project location for the general project, as there might have been small effects that

would only have been detectable in a larger study. Nevertheless, if such effects existed, they

were of much smaller order of magnitude than the effects of the plebiscite on citizen perceptions

of fairness, legitimacy, and satisfaction with the project, which are large enough to be detected

even in this relatively small sample size.

        Although the experiment was conducted at the village level, the results speak to the

broader debate about participatory vs. deliberative approaches to democracy more generally. In

particular, the dramatically higher levels of citizen satisfaction with the plebiscite treatment, in

which citizens could vote directly on which proposal they wish to have, may help explain the

growth of citizen referenda and initiative petition systems, despite the many issues associated

with such systems (Matsusaka 2005a; Matsusaka 2005b). The striking results on citizen

satisfaction and legitimacy results confirm the view that broad participation in the political

process can be a legitimizing force, even if the ultimate decisions taken do not change.




                                                  24
References

Acemoglu, Daron (2003). "Why not a political Coase theorem? Social conflict, commitment, and
     politics." Journal of Comparative Economics 31(4): 620-652.

Ackerman, Bruce A. and James S. Fishkin (2004). Deliberation Day. New Haven, Yale
      University Press.

Angrist, Joshua D., Guido W. Imbens and Donald B. Rubin (1996). "Identification of Causal
       Effects Using Instrumental Variables." Journal of the American Statistical Association
       91(434).

Ansolabehere, Stephen, Alan Gerber and James Snyder (2003). "Equal Votes, Equal Money:
      Court-Ordered Redistricting and Public Expenditures in the American States." American
      Political Science Review 96(04): 767-777.

Bardhan, Pranab (2002). "Decentralization of Governance and Development." Journal of
      Economic Perspectives 16(4): 185-205.

Bardhan, Pranab and Dilip Mookherjee (2006). "Decentralization and Accountability in
      Infrastructure Delivery in Developing Countries." Economic Journal 116: 101-127.

Benhabib, Seyla (1996). Toward a Deliberative Model of Democratic Legitimacy. Democracy
      and Difference: Contesting the Boundaries of the Political. S. Benhabib. Princeton, NJ,
      Princeton University Press: 67-94.

Chattopadhyay, Raghabendra and Esther Duflo (2004). "Women as Policy Makers: Evidence
       from a Randomized Policy Experiment in India." Econometrica 72(5): 1409-1443.

Druckman, James N., Donald P. Green, et al. (2006). "The Growth and Development of
      Experimental Research in Political Science." American Political Science Review 100(4):
      627-635.

Eldersveld, Samuel J. (1956). "Experimental Propaganda Techniques and Voting Behavior."
       American Political Science Review 50(1): 154-165.

Fishkin, James S. (1991). Democracy and deliberation : new directions for democratic reform.
       New Haven, Yale University Press.

Fishkin, James S. (1995). The voice of the people : public opinion and democracy. New Haven,
       Yale University Press.

Gerber, Alan. S. and Donald P. Green (2000). "The Effects of Canvassing, Telephone Calls, and
       Direct Mail on Voter Turnout: A Field Experiment." American Political Science Review
       94(3): 653-663.




                                              25
Green, Donald P. and Ian Shapiro (1994). Pathologies of rational choice theory : a critique of
       applications in political science. New Haven, Yale University Press.

Humphreys, Macartan, William Masters and Martin E. Sandbu (2006). "The Role of Leaders in
     Democratic Deliberations: Results from a Field Experiment in Sao Tome and Principe."
     World Politics 58: 583-622.

Jayachandran, Seema (2006). "Selling Labor Low: How Workers Respond to Productivity
       Shocks in Developing Countries." Journal of Political Economy 114(3): 538-575.

Lind, E. Allan and Tom R. Tyler (1988). The Social Psychology of Procedural Justice. New
       York, Plenum Press.

Mansbridge, Jane J. (1983). Beyond Adversary Democracy. Chicago, University of Chicago
      Press.

Matsusaka, John G. (2004). For the Many or the Few: The Initiative, Public Policy, and
      American Democracy, University Of Chicago Press.

Matsusaka, John G. (2005a). "Direct Democracy Works." Journal of Economic Perspectives
      19(2): 185-206.

Matsusaka, John G. (2005b). "The eclipse of legislatures: Direct democracy in the 21st century."
      Public Choice 124(1): 157-177.

McFadden, Daniel (1974). Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior. Frontiers in
     Econometrics. P. Zarembka. New York, Academic Press.

Olken, Benjamin A. (2007). "Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in
       Indonesia." Journal of Political Economy 115(2): 200-249.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2002). "Participation and Development: Perspectives from the
        Comprehensive Development Paradigm." Review of Development Economics 6(2): 163-
        192.

Wantchekon, Leonard (2003). "Clientelism and Voting Behavior: Evidence from a Field
      Experiment in Benin." World Politics 55(3): 399-422.

World Bank (2004). World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work For Poor People.
      Washington, DC, World Bank.

Appendix A
        As discussed in the text, in addition to the main plebiscite / meeting-based system
discussed at length in the paper, several additional experimental sub-treatments were run in both
Phase I and Phase II of the experiment. This Appendix discusses briefly these additional sub-
treatments and robustness exercises that show that these sub-treatments are not driving the main
results discussed in the paper.



                                               26
        In Phase I of the experiment, there were three sub-versions of the meetings treatment:
open meetings, in which all villagers who attended meetings were eligible to vote, representative
meetings, in which each hamlet (in North Sumatra) or neighborhood (in East Java) elected a
representative to each meeting, and limited representative meetings, in which each hamlet (in
North Sumatra) or neighborhood (in East Java) elected a representative and in which the
representatives (or immediate family members) were not allowed to have had any previous
government experience. The idea of these additional sub-randomizations was to investigate how
different attendees at the meetings affected the results of the meetings.
        In addition, meetings were randomized into a) using either a single round plurality voting
system (as in the plebiscites) or a multiple round voting system where votes would continue until
a single project received a majority of votes and b) using either public or private ballots.
        In Phase II of the experiment, different sub-treatments were run in the meeting treatment:
a) to investigate commitment issues, the meeting villages were randomized into deciding
whether to plan for 1 or 2 year’s worth of projects and b) participants held 15-minute discussions
in which they were grouped either within-hamlet or across-hamlets.
        For the main results of the paper, I group all of these results into the category ‘meetings.’
However, I have repeated the main results of the paper dropping each of these sub-varieties of
meetings one-by-one, and the main qualitative results of the paper (in particular, on location of
project and satisfaction with project) are robust to dropping each of these sub-treatments. This
ensures that the results reported here really are being driven by the plebiscites treatment, rather
than one of the sub-varieties of the meeting experiment.




                                                 27
Table 1: Experimental Design

Province                          Plebiscite         Meetings
Phase I
North Sumatra                5                  13
East Java                    3                  7

Phase II
Southeast Sulawesi           9                  11

Notes: Each cell displays the number of villages in each treatment.




Table 2: Randomization Test
                                                     (1)

Village population (1000 inhabitants)            0.011
                                                (0.048)
Agricultural wage (1000 rupiah)                 -0.013
                                                (0.015)
Percent village roads that are asphalt          -0.117
                                                (0.325)
Number of hamlets per village                   -0.103**
                                                (0.051)
Number of churches and mosques                  -0.018
per village                                     (0.063)
Distance to subdistrict capital (km)             0.020
                                                (0.021)
Village head age                                 0.015
                                                (0.012)
Village head years of education                 -0.007
                                                (0.039)
Phase fixed effects                            YES
Observations                                    42
P-value from joint test                          0.28

Notes: Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Column (1) presents marginal
effects from a Probit regression. The unit of observation is the village, and the
dependent variable is a dummy equal to one if the village received the plebiscite
treatment. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                           28
Table 3: Project types
               (1)      (2)           (3)          (4)             (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)         (10)
               Project Type                                           Most Preferred Project Type
                  Chosen                    Gender                  Per-Capita Expenditure Quartile        Land Owner
            General Women’s
            Proposal Proposal        Male         Female           Q1        Q2       Q3        Q4         No          Yes
Road          54%       35%          61%           38%             33%       47%      57%       63%        59%         34%
Bridge        10%        0%           3%            1%              4%        2%       2%        2%         2%          3%
Clean water     8%      27%           3%           23%              9%       20%      11%        9%        15%          3%
Irrigation    19%       22%          22%           20%             35%       20%      16%       11%        15%         36%
Sanitation      4%       4%           2%            2%              2%        5%       2%        0%         1%          4%
Schools         4%       8%           2%            4%              5%        2%       4%        2%         3%          3%
Scholarship     0%       0%           4%            7%              7%        2%       5%        6%         3%          8%
Health          0%       2%           1%            5%              5%        2%       2%        2%         2%          5%
Other           2%       2%           2%            1%              0%        0%       2%        6%         1%          4%

Obs              52       49         137          101              55        55       55        55        164          73

Notes: Data in columns (1) and (2) show the project types chosen by the village, for the general and women’s
project respectively. Number of observations can be greater than the number of villages because several projects fell
into multiple types. Columns (3) through (10) give preferred project of respondents to wave I of household survey
type broken down by respondents’ gender, estimated per capita household expenditure, and whether or not the
respondent owns land. Q1 refers to the poorest income quartile and Q4 to the wealthiest.



Table 4: Impact of Plebiscites on Project Type
                                            (1)    (2)         (3)                    (4)         (5)          (6)
                                               Whole Sample                             Available Project Types
                                        Both     General    Women's                  Both      General     Women's
                                      Proposals Proposal    Proposal               Proposals Proposal       Proposal
Road/bridge × election                  0.601            -0.156           1.264     0.859       -0.173       1.730
                                       (0.839)           (1.112)         (1.141)   (0.835)      (1.116)     (1.098)
Water/sanitation × election             0.353            -0.371           0.796     0.172       -0.380       0.488
                                       (0.779)           (1.327)         (1.345)   (0.759)      (1.326)     (1.342)
Irrigation × election                   0.504             0.687           0.157     0.417        0.854      -0.502
                                       (0.978)           (1.195)         (1.291)   (1.124)      (1.466)     (1.680)
Phase × project type fixed effects       YES               YES             YES       YES          YES         YES
Observations                             384               192             192       306          159         147
P-value from joint test                  0.85              0.79            0.55      0.46         0.87        0.18

Notes: Results from conditional fixed-effects logit regression, where each observation is a project type in a village.
Robust standard errors in parentheses adjusted for clustering at the village level. The dependent variable is a dummy
equal to 1 if the respective project type was chosen by the village. In columns 1 through 3 all four project types are
included as alternatives, whereas in columns 4 through 6 only project types available in the respective village are
included. Other (education and health projects) is the omitted category. Phase is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the
village’s treatment was assigned during Phase I of the study (see Table 1). The conditioning variable in columns 1
and 4 is village × general/women's project and in columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 is village.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                              29
Table 5: Impact of plebiscites on project rank
                                 (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)      (9)
                                        Whole Sample                  General Proposal                 Women's Proposal
Rank × election                  -0.233    -0.217     8.654* -0.220       -0.215      4.349     -0.099     -0.081 17.142**
                                 (0.218) (0.207) (5.213) (0.235) (0.235) (5.813) (0.215) (0.214) (7.832)
Elite × rank                               -0.079*                        -0.003                           -0.089
                                           (0.041)                        (0.050)                          (0.066)
Elite× rank ×election                      -0.117                         -0.108                           -0.214*
                                           (0.108)                        (0.128)                          (0.129)
Male × rank                                          -0.106*                         -0.036                        -0.154
                                                     (0.057)                         (0.120)                       (0.124)
Male × rank ×election                                -0.387                          -0.357                        -0.613
                                                     (0.276)                         (0.275)                       (0.505)
HH p.c. expend. × Rank                               -0.003                           0.034                         0.128
                                                     (0.072)                         (0.175)                       (0.177)
HH p.c. expend. × rank                               -0.769*                         -0.396                        -1.513**
× election                                           (0.465)                         (0.524)                       (0.687)
Time to village office (%)                            0.171                           0.080                         0.158
×rank                                                (0.122)                         (0.236)                       (0.347)
Time to village office (%) ×                         -0.043                          -0.155                         0.780
rank × election
                                                     (0.610)                         (0.727)                       (0.784)
Hamlet poverty score (%)                              0.247                           0.018                         0.470*
× rank                                               (0.175)                         (0.270)                       (0.267)
Hamlet poverty score (%)                              0.064                           0.383                        -0.285
× rank × election                                    (0.308)                         (0.348)                       (0.437)
Minority HH × rank                                   -0.152                           0.127                        -0.614**
                                                     (0.206)                         (0.303)                       (0.307)
Minority hh × rank                                    0.085                          -0.088                         0.358
× election                                           (0.328)                         (0.406)                       (0.488)
Project type fixed effects         YES       YES       YES       YES        YES        YES        YES        YES      YES
Rank × phase controls              YES       YES       YES       YES        YES        YES        YES        YES      YES
Sample                           HH only HH, Elite HH only HH only HH, Elite HH only HH only HH, Elite HH only
Observations                       965      2190        819       420       961         343       560       1295      491
P-value from joint test of                             0.150                           0.830                         0.000
rank * election interactions
Notes: Results from conditional fixed-effects logit regression, where each observation is a project type for a
particular respondent in the household and / or elite survey. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for
clustering at the village level. The dependent variable is a dummy equal to 1 if the respective project type was
chosen by the village. In columns 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 9, the sample includes household respondents and in columns 2,
5, and 8, it includes both household and elite respondents (village heads, village parliament heads, and hamlet
heads). The individual's most preferred project receives a rank of 1. Phase is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the
village’s treatment was assigned during Phase I. Male is a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent is male, HH p.c.
expend. gives estimated household per capita expenditure, time to village office gives time from the respondent’s
hamlet to the village office and is measured as a percentile among hamlets within the village, poverty score is a
ranking of hamlets by poverty and is measured as a percentile, and minority household is a dummy equal to one if
the household is a minority in its village, Relatively central hamlets and relatively wealthy hamlets correspond to
low percentiles. The p-value is from a Chi2 test of the joint significance of the election rank interactions. The
conditioning variable is respondent × general/women's project in columns 1 through 3, and respondent in columns 4
through 9. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                         30
Table 6: Impact of Plebiscites on Project Location
                                         (1)         (2)                   (3)
                                                   General              Women's
                                   Whole Sample   Proposal              Proposal
Hamlet affluence (%)                -1.048       -3.104***              1.052
                                    (0.654)      (1.147)               (0.894)
Hamlet affluence(%) × election      -2.357*      -2.333                -5.386**
                                    (1.276)      (2.229)               (2.210)
Hamlet population share              2.414        8.064**              -2.568
                                    (2.077)      (3.855)               (2.972)
Population share × election         -8.478*     -16.217*                2.484
                                    (5.092)      (8.454)               (7.319)
Time to village office (%)           0.626        1.665                -0.087
                                    (0.665)      (1.152)               (0.977)
Time to vill. office(%) × elect     -3.460**     -6.365**              -1.346
                                    (1.508)      (2.627)               (1.965)
Minority hamlet                     -0.835       -0.450
                                    (0.917)      (1.445)
Minority hamlet × election           1.042       -1.420
                                    (1.327)      (1.657)
Hamlet characteristic ×
                                          YES               YES             YES
phase fixed effects
Observations                          318              172             158
P-value from joint test of              0.10             0.13            0.11
election interactions
Notes: Results are from conditional fixed-effects logit regression. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted
for clustering at the village level. The hamlet affluence measure is the village head’s ranking of hamlets in his
village by poverty. Population share gives the hamlet’s share of village population. A high percentile corresponds to
relatively affluent hamlets and distant hamlets. Phase is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the village’s treatment was
assigned during Phase II (i.e., the village is located in Southeast Sulawesi). The p-value gives the/joint significance
of the hamlet characteristic*election interactions. The conditioning variable is village × general/women's project in
column 1 and village in columns 2 and 3. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                          31
Table 7: Impact of Plebiscites on Perceptions of KDP process
                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)        (5)
                                                                    General Project           Women’s Project
                                                    Pooled         Men        Women           Men      Women
Questions
Was the project chosen in accordance with           0.464**       1.031***      0.667**       0.159        0.754**
your wishes?                                       (0.188)       (0.311)       (0.329)       (0.303)      (0.335)
Will the proposal benefit you personally?           0.484**       0.587*        1.069***      0.180        0.383
                                                   (0.191)       (0.319)       (0.298)       (0.255)      (0.312)
Will you use the project?                           0.970**       0.809          .            0.794        1.003*
                                                   (0.381)       (0.644)         .           (0.638)      (0.557)
Was the chosen proposal fair?                       0.431**       0.756***      0.833***      0.102        0.636**
                                                   (0.186)       (0.265)       (0.321)       (0.287)      (0.287)
Is the chosen proposal in accordance with           0.405**       0.605**       0.932***      0.091        0.534
the people’s aspirations?                          (0.189)       (0.256)       (0.282)       (0.282)      (0.367)
Are you satisfied with KDP?                         0.625**       0.691**       0.528*         .            .
 (not project specific)                            (0.263)       (0.271)       (0.314)         .            .

Notes: Each cell is the coefficient on the plebiscite dummy from a different regression. All questions except ‘will
you use the project’ are multiple-ordered response questions estimated using ordered probit models; ‘will you use
the project’ is a binary response question estimated using a probit model. Robust standard errors in parentheses,
adjusted for clustering at the village level. In column 1, the sample includes both the general and women’s
proposals, whereas in column 2 it is limited to the general proposal and in column 3 to the women’s proposal. All
dependent variables are 0/1 dummies, with the higher outcome (more satisfied, fairer, etc) receiving a score of 1. All
regressions include phase fixed effects and controls for gender, age, log per capita expenditure, number of household
members, and occupation. Cells indicated with a ‘.’ could not be estimated as the elections variable perfectly
predicts the outcome.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                            32
Table 8: Impact of plebiscites on KDP voluntary contributions
                                                       (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)        (5)
                                                                      General Project             Women’s Project
                                                     Pooled          Men        Women             Men      Women
If the project happens, will you contribute…?
Labor                                               0.164**        0.207*       0.271***      0.127          0.087
                                                   (0.062)        (0.079)      (0.088)       (0.077)        (0.100)
Money                                              -0.043*        -0.104*      -0.002          .            -0.02
                                                   (0.021)        (0.047)      (0.017)         .            (0.019)
Anything                                            0.178***       0.192*       0.304***      0.116          0.145
                                                   (0.055)        (0.075)      (0.073)       (0.072)        (0.084)

Notes: Each cell is the marginal effect of the plebiscite dummy from a different probit regression. Robust standard
errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at the village level. Dependent variables are 0/1 dummies, with “yes”
receiving a score of 1 and “no” a score of 0. All regressions contain phase fixed effects and controls for gender, age,
log per capita expenditure, number of household members, and occupation. See also Notes to Table 7.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 9: Impact of plebiscites on knowledge and dialog
                                                                                (1)
Knowledge:                                                                   Pooled        Men          Women
Did the respondent correctly identify the type and location of the           0.218*      0.212*         0.255*
selected general proposal?                                                  (0.108)     (0.109)        (0.148)
Did the respondent correctly identify the type and location of the           0.288***    0.240**        0.370***
selected women's proposal?                                                  (0.086)     (0.089)        (0.126)

Discussions:
Did you discuss development issues with anyone?                             -0.013        .            -0.132
                                                                            (0.031)       .            (0.147)
Did you discuss development issues with any household                        0.015       0.039         -0.121
members?                                                                    (0.076)     (0.059)        (0.147)
Did you discuss development issues with anyone in government?               -0.003      -0.011         -0.039
                                                                            (0.078)     (0.130)        (0.075)

Notes: See Notes to Tables 7 and 8.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.




                                                             33
Figure 1: Project Type Selected
                                                                                                       Project Type
                                                               General Project                                                                                              Women’s Project
                               100




                                                                                                                                            100
                               80




                                                                                                                                            80
               % of Projects




                                                                                                                       % of Projects
                        60




                                                                                                                                60
              40




                                                                                                                      40
                               20




                                                                                                                                            20
                               0




                                                                                                                                            0
                                                       elec.                              meet.                                                                     elec.                              meet.

                                                         road/bridge                   water/sanitation                                                               road/bridge                   water/sanitation
                                                         irrigation                    other                                                                          irrigation                    other



.
Figure 2: Plebiscites and Project Location, by Hamlet Poverty Rank
                                                                                                       Project Location
                                                                 General Project                                                                                              Women’s Project
                 60




                                                                                                                              60
    % Construction in Hamlet




                                                                                                                 % Construction in Hamlet
                       40




                                                                                                                                    40
    20




                                                                                                                 20
                 0




                                                                                                                              0




                                     elec.     meet.                  elec.    meet.           elec.     meet.                                    elec.     meet.                  elec.    meet.           elec.     meet.
                                         Poorest                         Moderate                  Richest                                            Poorest                         Moderate                  Richest



Notes: Poorest refers to the poorest hamlet in the village, richest to the wealthiest hamlet, and moderate to the
hamlets in between, where hamlet affluence is ranked subjectively by the village head.




                                                                                                                                  34
Figure 3: Plebiscites and Project Location, by Hamlet Population
                                  Project Location
                                                 General Project                                                                        Women’s Project
                50




                                                                                                        50
                           40




                                                                                                                   40
  % Construction in Hamlet




                                                                                          % Construction in Hamlet
               30




                                                                                                       30
    20




                                                                                            20
                10




                                                                                                        10
                0




                                                                                                        0
                                 elec. meet.   elec. meet.   elec. meet.    elec. meet.                                  elec. meet.   elec. meet.   elec. meet.    elec. meet.
                                Small Ham.     Med. Ham.     Pop. Ham. Very Pop. Ham.                                   Small Ham.     Med. Ham.     Pop. Ham. Very Pop. Ham.




Figure 4: Plebiscites and Project Location, by Hamlet Centrality
                                  Project Location
                                                 General Project                                                                        Women’s Project
                80




                                                                                                        80
                          60




                                                                                                                  60
  % Construction in Hamlet




                                                                                          % Construction in Hamlet
           40




                                                                                                   40
                20




                                                                                                        20
                0




                                                                                                        0




                                 elec. meet.   elec. meet.   elec. meet.    elec. meet.                                  elec. meet.   elec. meet.   elec. meet.    elec. meet.
                                Very Central    Central       Distant      Very Distant                                 Very Central    Central       Distant      Very Distant




                                                                                                   35
