                      NUER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    A BUPERGANE-TKEORflIC f'K)Dfl OF
                    BUSINESS CYCLES ARD PRICE WARS
                             DURING BOOt.E


                          Julio 3. Rotemberg
                            Garth Saloner


                        Working   Paper No. 12t12




                NATIONAL BLThEAU OF !EONOMIC RESEARCH
                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                         Cambridge, Mk 02138
                             August 198b




Sloan School of Management and Department of Economics respectively.
We are very grateful to James Poterba and Lawrence Sunners for many
helpful conversations. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation (grants SES—8209266 and SES—8308782 respectively) is
gratefuL].y acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau   of Economic Research.
                                                          NBER Working Paper #1412
                                                          August 1984



                           A Supergame—Theoretic Model of
                           Business Cycles and Price Wars
                                    During Booms


                                           ABS TRACT




      This paper studies implicitly colluding oligopolists facing fluctuating
demand. The credible threat of future punishments provides the discipline that
facilitates     collusion. However, we find that the temptation to unilaterally

deflate      from the collusive outcome is often greater when demand is high. To
moderate this temptation,        the optimizing oligopoly reduces its profitability at

such times,     resulting in    lower   prices. If the oligopolists' output is an input
to   other sectors, their output may increase too. This explains the co—movements

of outputs which characterize business cycles. The behavior of the railroads in

the 1880's, the automobile industry in the 1950's and the cyclical behavior of

cement   prices and   price—cost margins support our theory. (J.E.L. Classification

nuzjzbers:    020, 130, 610).


Julio 3.       Rotemberg                                 Garth Saloner
Alfred P. Sloan School                                   Department of Economics
of Management, E52—250                                   E52—262B
50 Memorial Drive                                        M.I.T.
M.I.T.                                                   Cambridge, MA 02139
Cambridge, MA 02139
I. INTRODUCTION

       This   paper has two objectives.    First   it is an   exploration of the

way in which    oligopolies behave over the business cycle. Second, it
considers     the possibility that this behaviour itself is a cause of

business cycles and of sticky prices. We        examine implicitly colluding
cligopolies that attempt to sustain above competitive profits by the
threat of reverting to competitive behavior to punish firms that do not
cooperate. The basic point of the paper is that the oligopolists find
implicit collusion of this kind more difficult when their demand is high.
In other words when an industry faces a boom in its demand, chiseling
away from the collusive level of output becomes more profitable for each
individual firm and thus the oligopoly can only sustain a less collusive
outcome. This suggests that when demand for goods produced by
oligopolists is high, the economy produces an allocation which is
'closer" to the competitive allocation and thus        nearer the production

possibility    frontier. Insofar as the allocation in which the oligopoly
acts   collusively is inside the production possibility frontier, a shift

in   demand towards the oligopolistic sector can increase the output of all
goods. The fact that the outputs of all goods tend to move together is,
of   course, the hallmark of business cycles. Thus we can interpret booms

in aggregate economic activity as being due to a shift in demand towards

the oligopolistic sectors and    busts    as shifts towards the competitive

sectors.

       This analysis still leaves unexplained the causes of the shifts in
sectoral demands. To make sense of actual business cycles one would have
to relate these shifts in demand to changes in the money supply and
interest rates which are highly correlated with cyclical fluctuations.
                                      2



tile the connection between financial variables and shifts         in demand    is
beyond    the   scope of this paper it must be noted that these shifts form

part of the popular discussions of the early stages of recoveries. At
that point consumers desire for cars and other durables usually picks
up.
        The oligopolies we   consider know that   deviations from some agreed

upon strategy lead to punishments. Unfortunately there are usually a
multitude    of equilibria in such settings. These equilibria differ in the

mechanics by which reversion to punishing behavior takes place, by the

length and intensity of the punishment interval as well as by the amount

of collusion that takes place when the firms are not punishing each

other. One standard technique for choosing among these equilibria (see,

for example, Porter (1983a)) is to concentrate on the equilibrium that is

optimal from the point of view of the oligopolists.

        Unfortunately it is often very difficult to characterize these

optima. Even Porte?s paper considers only linear demand and optimizes

only over a subset of all the possible strategies. In particular, he

considers    only punishments in which firms   act   as if they were involved in
a sequence of one—shot noncooperative games. Thus the most firms can do
to each other when they are punishing and being punished is to compete as
if they   were   playing a sequence of static games. This considerably
simplifies the analysis. Our      otherwise optimal supergames also embody

this assumption which is not essential in all cases.

       In our model the reversion to competitive behaviour occurs for a

period   of infinite length. This length is optimal since it is the

biggest   credible threat and since, along the equilibrium path, firma
never    find themselves punishing each other. Instead for each state of
                                     3



demand we focus on the outcome closest to monopoly that the oligopoly can
sustain given the threat. Any outcome closer to monopoly would lead to a
breakdown in discipline. Any outcome further from monopoly would simply
result in lower oligopoly profits. We show that when demand rises, the
best sustainable outcome generally becomes more competitive. Our
strongest results are for the case in which prices are the strategic
variable and there are constant marginal costs. Then an increase in
demand actually towers the oligopoly's prices monotonically after a
certain point. This occurs because keeping the oligopoly's price
constant when demand increases raises the payoff to a single firm from
towering its price slightly and thus capturing alt of demand. To deter
each firm from doing this the oligopoly must actually lower its price.
     The paper proceeds as follows. Section II presents the optimal
supergame for both the cases in which the oligopoly treats prices and the
case in which it treats outputs as the strategic variable. Ye also

discuss   simpler games in   which, as in Breshnahan (1981), Green and    Porter
(1964) and Porter (1983b) the oligopoly can      only   behave either

monopolistically or competitively. It is then in general more likely to

behave competitively when demand is high. Section III establishes the

connection with macroeconomics. It describes a simple two        sector   general

equilibrium   model in which oRe sector is    oligopolistic and the other

sector is competitive. The oligopolistic sector's output is purchased

both by consumers and by the competitive sector. When demand shifts

towards the oligopolistic sector, this sector lowers its prices. This,

in turn, leads the competitive sector to increase its purchases from the

oligopolistic sector and     thus increase   its output as well. So both
                                           4



 sectors grow, only to shrink when demand moves back towards the
 competitive sector or when the punishment period is over.
        Any theory whose foundation is that competitive behaviour is more
likely to occur in booms must confront the tact that the industrial
organization folklore is that price wars occur in recessions. This
folklore is articulated in Sherer (1980) for example. Our basis for
rejecting this folklore is not theoretical. We concede that tt is
possible to construct models in which recessions induce price wars.
Instead     our rejection is     based on facts. First, at a very general level,
it    certainly appears that business cycles are related to sluggish

adjustment of prices (see Rotemberg (1982) for example). Prices rise too

little in booms and       fall   too little    in   recessions. If recessions tended

to produce massive price wars this would be an unlikely finding. !€ore

specifically we analyze some other sources of data capable of shedding

light on the folklore. That we find is that              both   Scherer's evidence and

our   own   study   of the cyclical properties of price cost margins supports

our theory. Our theory is also supported by an analysis, of the price

wars purported to have happened in the automobile industry (Bresnahan

(1981)) and the railroad industry (Porter (1983a)). These wars have

occurred    in periods of high demand. Finally, since Sherer singles out
the cenent industry as having repeated break—ups of its cartel during
recessions,    we study the cyclical properties of cement prices. To our

surprise, cement prices are strongly countercyclical even though cement,

as construction as a whole, has        a   procyclical level of output. These

empirical regularities are discussed in Section IV. We conclude with

Section V.
                                         5




II.     aQUILIBRIUM IN OLIGOPOLISTIC SUPERGAMES WITH DEMAND FLUCTUATIONS

       We consider   an oligopoly of N symmetric firms in en infinite—horizon setting
for both    the case where the firms use price as the strategic variable and that in

which    the strategic variable is output. It is well—known that   in   such models
even            cannot sign binding contracts, i.e. noncooperating firms in the
        firws that

usual sense, are usually able to sustain outcomes in any period that strictly
dominate    the outcorte in the corresponding one—period game.
       In order to achieve this the equilibrium strategies must involve a mechanism
that deters    an individual firm from "cheating" (by expanding output or by shading
prices). One such mechanism and one that has been fruitfuilly employed in
theoretical models2, is the use of punishments against the defecting firm       in

periods   following the defection. If such punishments are large enough to
outweigh the gain from a single period defection the collusive outcome is
sustainable.
       In order for the equilibrium strategies to be sequentially rational3,
however, it must be the case that if a defection actually occurs the non—
defecting firms are willing to mete out the proposed punishment. One way to
ensure this is for firms that defect from the punishment to be punished in turn,
and   so on. Rules which lead to optimal outcomes for the firms are provided by
Abreu(1982). A simpler way to ensure sequential rationality and the one usually
employed (see Green and Porter (1984), for example) is for punishments to Cnvolve
playing the equilibrium strategies from the one—period game for some fixed period
of time. In the sequel we restrict attention to strategies of this kind. As ye
will see shortly, in addition to their simplicity and conformity with the
literature they are also optimal punishments when price is the strategic
variable.
                                                6



              The major departure of our model from those that have previously      been

studied is that we allow for observable shifts in industry demand, We denote the
inverse demand         function by         where      is the industry output in period        t

and       c   is the random variable denoting the observable demand     shock   (with
realization            in period t). Ye assume that increases in St      result   in higher

prices for any t' that £ has domain [,              ] and   a distribution function F( c) and

that these are the same across periods (i.e. shocks are i.i.d.). Ye denote firm

i's output in period t by             so that

      —
          ii 1'
          The timing of events is as follows: At the        beginning of the period all
firms         lean the realization of    (more precisely s becomes common knowledge).

Firms then simultaneously choose the level of their choice variable (price or

 uantity). These choices then determine the outcome for that period in a way

that depends on the choice variable: in the case of quantities the price clears

the market given             in the case of prices the firm with the lowest price sells

as much as it wants at its quoted price, the firm with the second lowest price

then supplies as much of the remaining demand at its quoted price as it wants,

and so         on. The strategic choices of all the firms then become common knowledge
and this one—period game         is repeated.

          The    force of the obsenability of St    and   the key to the difference between
the model and its predecessors is the following: The punishments that firms face
depend on the future realizations of c. The expected value of such punishments
therefore depends on the expected value of c. However the reward for cheating in
any   period       depends on the observable s. We show that      for a wide variety of

interesting cases the reward for cheating from the joint profit—maximizing level
                                            7



is    nonotonically   increasing in        If     is   large enough, the temptation to

cheat    outweighs the punisbaent." Being cognizant of this fact, an
implicitly    colluding oligopoly settles on a profit below the fully collusive

level in periods of high demand so as to adequately reduce the temptation to

cheat. Such moderation of its behavior tends to lower prices below what they

would otherwise be, and may indeed cause them to be lower than for states with

lower demand. Ye illustrate this phenomenon for both prices as well as for

quantities as strategic variables.

(a) Price as the strategic variable

        We begin with an analysis of the case in which            are equal to a
                                                              marginal   costs

constant c. We demonstrate that the baste characteristics of our analysis are
not   dependent on this assumption by means       of   an example below.
    Let us point out at the outset that there always exists an equilibrium in
which all the firms set P=c in all periods. In this competitive case firma
expect    future   profits   to be zero whether they cooperate at time t or not.
Accordingly the game at time t is essentially a one—shot game in which the unique
equilibrium has all firms setting Pc. In what follows we concentrate instead on
the equilibria that are optimal for the firms in the industry.
       We begin by examining joint profit—maximization and the benefits to
unilateral defections from it. Define rf(Q(e),e)               to   be the profit of an
individual firm in state          if the firms each produce qa which equals 1/N of the
joint    profit—maximizing output, qm If a firm         deviates from this proposed
outcome it can earn approximately NI? by cutting price by an arbitrarily small

amount   and supplying the entire market demand. Firm i would therefore deviate
from joint profit—maximizing output if
NrIm(Qt(et),ct) —             >                 i.e.   if d(Q(e),e)        >
                                                                               K(ct)/(N_1)
                                                8



where K1(t) is the punishment inflicted on firm i in the future if it deviates

at time t.

        The value of K±(s) depends on both the expected level of             future   profits if

there is no deflation at time t and on the nature of the punishment. Since we
want to concern ourselves with equilibrium strategies that are optimal for the
oligopoly and hence are interested in maintaining profits that are as large as
possible, we concentrate on punishments that are as large as possible; namely
those that have Pc for all t following a defection. While infinite punishment
periods are extreme they are subgaxne perfect and need not actually be implemented
in equilibrium. If the industry members change over time, however, infinite
length punishments are not compelling. To moderate the effect of this assumption
in the calculation of specific examples, we use reduced levels of the discount
rate, 8.
     Suppose that the level of firm profits that can be sustained in a period
with state  is         K(ct)) when the punishment is K(e). Then using infinite
length punishments, the discounted future value of profits, and hence the
punishment, is

                        f flS(S K(c'fldF(&).                                                 (I)


Since   the right hand side of (i)         is independent of Ct. the punishment is

independent     of   the state and can be written merely as K.

     Since
                       4)   >
                                        4) for all 4   >
                                                           4, TI(Q, 4)
                                                                         =
                                                                                      4)_c)Q >
         4)_c)Q —                c). Therefore, for given K, there is some highest level

of demand shock, c(K),                which (N_1)?(Q(et),c). K.

This means      that for        !   Ct, the monopoly outcome is sustainable so that
         K) —
                flm(Q(),               By contrast, for e .?.     an individual
                                                       9



firm has          an incentive to cheat unless
             K)   —
                            — t(Q(e),       e).                                                               (2)

Of    course IC in turn depends on                   from Euatton (1). In particular we have

                       •-g [f &Qt(ct).            s)dF(t) +        (i+r("Dif(q"(€'),         t)I.s            (3)


Thus we have a mapping from the space of possible punishments                            into itself: a
given    punisbment impliei a cutoff e which                   in turn    implies a new punishment from

(2).    An equilibrium is a tired point of this mapping.

        It   remains        to    provide sufficient     conditions   for      the existence   of   such a

fixed   point i.e., to show there exists an c E (c,                        )   for   which
                                                               t

Um(Qm(;),
                   e) — K(s)/(N—1)          —   us (e,     ICce:)). Let
                   a
       g(4)            (N_1)r?(Qt(4), 4)
                                                 —
                                                     Ic(4)                                                   (4)


where a is o/(i—o).

We need to show there exists an 4                      (e, D such     that g(4) — 0.

       Equations (2) and (3) imply that

        —
              ft ?4).                  4)dF(et) +
                                                      a(1—F(c'flK(c')
                                                             (N—I)

                            C,
                       a    ft ?(Q(e), e)dF(e)
or,    K(4) =          (1        a/(N—i) — aF(e')/(N—I))
                                                                                                             (5)

                                                                                             rP(Q(e), e)
                                                                                             ___________
Therefore,         using (4) and (5) liii e(4)                  (n—i) ?(Q(). ) —
                                            C t.!
which is negative if N < (i÷o)/((i—o) (Condition (i)).

At the other extreme,

       g(t) —         (N—1)tf'(Q(t), ) —        a f:!r1(Q(C),C)dF(C) >0
                                                10




if nm(Q(),        -/f: I?     (Q,   £t)dP(tt)   > WO'—i) (condition Cii)).

       If   Conditions ft) and (ii) hold, we have:

(a) g(4) is continuous, (b) g() > 0, and Cc) urn g(e') C 0, which imply the


existence of an 4€ Ce, ) such that g(4) 0 as required.

                             have intuitively appealing interpretations.
       Conditions Ci) and (ii)

Condition Ci) ensures that the firms are not tempted to "cheat" from the joint
profit—maximizing output in all states. This               requires that N not be "too" large

relative    to the discount rate. the larger is the discount rate (so that the
future is more important and hence the effect of the punishment is greater) the
larger the nwnber of firma the industry is able to support without a complete
breakdown in discipline.
       Condition (ii)    ensures    that the monopoly outcome is not the only solution in
every state. This follows when there is sufficient dispersion in the
distribution or profit maximizing outputs. Clearly if there is no dispersion,
then for large enough punishments there is never any incentive to cheat. The LHS
of condition (ii) is a measure of the dispersion of profits.
    Although g(c') is continuous it is not necessarily monotone. As a result

there may be multiple values of e' for which g(e')               0. Since we are concerned
with optimal schemes from the point of view of the firms in the industry, we
concentrate on the greatest such value.
     There are several interesting features of this equilibrium. First note that
             *            5              El  Ut *   •
fore
       t
           )c
con8trained,
             t
                 we have liCe, Ic)
                               t                tt
                                        il((Q Ce), c ). Yhen r?(e,
                                                       t
                                                                          K)   is so
                     must be as high as possible without reducing firm         profits   below

the sustainable level. By the definition of the lf( .),             if    is lower
                                            Ii

and   P is higher an individual firm has an incentive to shade price slightly and
supply the industry demand. When Ct goes up, Q must            go   up if     Ct)
                                                                                    is to
remain    constant since P is increasing in Ct and       decreasing in Q. Moreover, if
is   held constant at a level above a, the profits from deviating increase.

Therefore P must fall. Beyond c, prices fall monotonical].y as              increases.

Below         the oligopoly charges the monopoly price thus P tends to increase with



        The   model behaves as intuition would suggest     with respect to changes in the

relevant      parameters. Note firstly that the equilibrium value of IC is decreasing
in   N. Therefore, given (2) ?(Q(e),              is also decreasing in N. Thus the set

of states in which the monopoly outcome is sustainable is strictly decreasing in

N. In contrast to traditional models of oligopolistic interaction in which

oligopolies of all sires are always unable        to   achieve perfect collusion, the

firma   in    this model are usually able to do so for a range of states of demand.

However,      as   in Stigler's model (1964) the degree of implicit collusion varies

inversely     with N.
      As & decreases so that the future becomes less important, the equilibrium
value of K decreases and hence the sustainable level of profits and the set of
states in which monopoly profits are sustainable also shrinks.
      As was mentioned above, punishments are never observed in eauilibrium. Thus
the oligopoly doesn't fluctuate between periods of cooperation and noncooperation
as   in the models of Green and Porter (1984) and Porter (1983b). This arises

because   of the complete observability of Ct. To provide an analagous model to
those just mentioned, we would have to further restrict the strategy space so

that the oligopoly can choose only between the joint monopoly price and the
                                             12




competitive price. Such a restriction is intuitively appealing since the

resulting strategies are much simpler and less delicate. With this restriction

on   strategies the firras know      that when demand is high the monopoly outcome cannot

be   maintained. They therefore assume that the competitive outcome will emerge,
which is    sufficient to fulfill their prophecy. In many        states of the world the
oligopoly will earn lower        profits than   under the optimal scheme we have analyzed.
As a result, since punishments are lower, there will be fewer collusive states
                                                        *
than before. There       will still be some cutoff, e, that      delineates   the
cooperative and noncooperative regions. In contrast to the optimal model,
however, the graph of price as a function of state will exhibit a sharp decline
after       with P      c thereafter.
        The above models impose no restrictions on the demand function except that
it be downward sloping and that demand shocks move it outwards. However the
model does assume constant marginal costs. The case of increasing marginal cost
is more complex than that of constant marginal costs for three reasons: (i) A
firm that cheats by price—cutting does not always want to supply the industry
demand at the price it is charging. Specifically, it would never supply an
output at which its marginal cost exceeded the price. So whereas before cheating
paid off   when (N_1)1f'(s, K) > K now it pays off when if(c, K) > ri'(s, KP) —         IC


where   It"(et, IC, )   is   the profit to the firm that defects when   its opponents

charge P; (2) If a firm is to be deterred from cheating it must be the case that

ri5(e, K, I') —   &'(c,,        i.e., the sustainable profit varies by state (in
                             IC, P) — K

contrast to the marginal cost case). (3) With increasing marginal cost cheating
can occur by raising as well as by lowering prices. If its opponents are
unwilling to supply all of demand at their quoted price a defecting firm is able
to sell some output at higher prices.
                                                      17



      A   few results can nonetheless be demonstrated. First suppose that               deviating

firms do not meet all of demand. Instead the output which equates the monopoly
price to their marginal cost is less than demand. this occurs when N is large
and when marginal            costs      rise steeply. Then the deviating firms equate P(Q,
and
      o(q) where c' is                  the derivative of total costs with respect to output     By
the   envelope theorem the change in the deviants profit from an increase in                        is
                                                                                It
 d        in

_____________ .
     d
                            The   change in profits from going along ii     ctet.
                                                                            in

                                                                              d                It
       Ct                                                                         ct
is thus smaller, ensuring that deviations become more tempting as Ct rises.
However, in this case, if the oligopoly keeps its price constant in response to
the increase in the desire to deviate actually falls. This occurs because
when the price is constant the profits from deviating are constant. Instead,
since the oligopoly price exceeds marginal cost, an increase in s accompanied by
a constant price raises the profits from going along.
      When deviating firma meet all of demand the analysis is zore difficult. For
this case we consider an example in which demand and marginal costs ate linear:
      Pa+ et_bct                                                                               (6)
                    —
                              + dq/2                                                           (7)
      Then     monopoly output and price are: 6

      Qat(a+c_c)/(2b+d/N)                                                                      (a)
           = E(a        +
                            c)(bN
                                    +   d) + bNc]/(2bN     •       d)                          (9)
      If deviating firms could sell all they wanted at a price a shade below

they would equate (c+dq) to P. This would lead to output equal to

      it
               -   [(a +       - c)(b     +   d/N)]/[d(2b      +    a/N)]                   (10)
                                                  ¶4



The actual output of the deviating firm,                  is the minimum    of q   and qm• So the
deviating firm meets demand as long as b is bigger than or equal                to (N—OdIN.

Marginal coat must not rise too rapidly and N must not be too big.
        When the deviating fin meets demand its profits              are:
                rn + Nd(1—N)(q"52/2                                                            (ii)

The change in I?' from a change in                is simply qm• Therefore using (a)      the
change in the benefits from deviating is:

        d([Id_[ld)   —   (N-i )q(2bN —   d(N—1)
                                                                                               (12)
              act              (2bNtd)

which is positive when demand is met, Cheating becomes more desirable as

rises. If the oligopoly is restricted to either collude or compete, high

will generate price wars. Alternatively the oligopoly can pick prices p5 which

just deter potentially deviating firms. These prices equate U5, the profits from

going along, with            — K where K is the expected present value of            minus the

profits obtained when all firms set price equal to marginal cost.

        Since q'1 is linear in p8 whether deflating firms meet demand or marginal
          d                       a.                     ii.                         S
cost,    11 is quadratic in P in both cases. U is also quadratic in P .                  For a

given IC one can then find               in the states that do not support monopoly by

solving       two quadratic equations. The        relevant root is the one with the highest

value    of [j8 which is consistent with the deviating firms         planning to meet demand

or   marginal cost. The resulting P5'a then allow one to find a new value for K.

One can thus iterate numerically on K starting with a large number. Since larger

values of K induce more cooperation the first K which is a solution to the

iterative      procedure is the best equilibrium the oligopoly can enforce with
competitive punishments. Figure 1 graphs these equilibrium prices and compares
              PRICE AS A STRATEGIC VARIABLE
                    Parameters;   a=60,b=1,c=O,d=1/3.&.7,N5
     75
     70
     65
     60
     55
4)
U
     50
0L
     45
     40
     35
     30
     25
          0    10      20         30    40     50    60       70   80
                                       State
                                                   15



theTA to the monopoly         prices   as a function of states for a specific configuration
of parameters. In particular c is uniforlrLly destributed over (o,i,... ,ao}.
     As before the price rises monotoni.oally to St and then falls. The majOr

difference here is that eventually the price begins to rise again. The
explanation for this is straightforward. For high values of                     the equilibrium
value of P is such that a deviating firm would increase its output only until P
equals its marginal cost; it is not willing to supply all that is demanded at its
lower price. An improvement in demand from this level accompanied by a constant
price actually reduces the incentive to cheat. Thus the oligopoly can afford to
increase its prices somewhat.


b)   Quantities as      strategic     variables.

       There are two differences between the case in which quantities are used as

strategic variables and the case in which prices are. First, when an individual

firm   considers   deviations from the behavior favored       by the   oligopoly, it     assumes
that   the other firms will keep their quantities constant. The residual demand
curve is therefore obtained by shifting the original demand curve to the left by
the amount of their combined output. Second, when firms are punishing each other
the outcome in punishment periods            is the Cournot equilibrium.

       The   results   we    obtain   with quantities as strategic variables are somewhat

weaker than     those   we obtained with prices. In particular it          is   now not true that

any increase in demand even with constant marginal costs leads to a bigger
incentive to deflate from the collusive level of output. However, we present
robust examples in which this is the case. We also show with an example that
increases in demand can, as before, lead monotonically to "more competitive"
                         -
behavior.
                                                16




       We    show that increases in demand do not- necessarily increase the incentive
to deviate by means of a counterexample. Suppose that deaand is characterized by
constant elasticity and           that   a demand shock moves it horizontally from state 4
to   state 4.        In this setup the collusive price is the same in both states.
Therefore any firm that produces the collusive output sells more in state                   than
in state 4.          The    residual demand curves the firm faces are therefore as
represented in Figure 2. A deviating firm chooses output to maximize profits
given these residual demand curves. Suppose that this maximum is achieved at
output D and        price   d for state c. For this to be a worthwhile deviation it
must be the case that the revenues from the extra sales due to cheating (CD) are

greater      than   the   loss in revenues on the old sales from the decrease in price
from
             a
       P(Q ,.)      to Pd• But    (except   for a horizontal translation) the firm faces the
same residual demand curve in both states. Thus by               selling at d, the extra
sales due to cheating are the same at 4               (As) than at   s (CD). Moreover the loss
in   revenue on old sales is strictly smaller at 4.              Therefore the firm has a
strictly greater incentive to deviate in state 4 than in state 4.

       The   above counterexanple exploits the assumption of the constant elasticity
of demand only to establish that the collusive price is the same               in both states.

We   have therefore also proved a related            proposition: if the oligopoly keeps its

price constant when             increases (thus supplying all the increased demand), the

incentive to cheat is          reduced   when demand shifts horizontally. Thus in the

examples we provide below, the oligopoly is able to increase the price as the

state improves.

       Suppose that, instead, demand and costs are linear as in (6) and (7). Then

an increase in c always leads to a bigger incentive to deviate from the

collusive output. This can be seen as follows. Suppoee that in this case the
                               FIGURE 2
                      The Incentive to Deviate with
                  Quantities as the Strategic Variable




     P




P(Qm..)




                              (Qm,s)




          0   A     B     C        D                     Q
                                                             17


oligopoly agrees that each firm should produce q. The deviating firm therefore
maximizes:
        rid —    q [a +                 —c    —
                                                  b((N—1)q
                                                             +
                                                                  q)J — dq/2                     (t)
with    respect to                      So its output is:

             —    [a   +        —   c   —
                                             b(N—1)q]/(2b     +   d)                             (14)
                           Ct
The derivative of                   at the optimum with respect to             is
Therefore, using (a), the derivative of the benefit from deviating from the
collusive output in any one period is:
        d(t1" —   If')     —
                                [b(N_l)]2(a+c_c)
           det                      (d+2bu)2(2b+ d)
which is always poBitive. Deviating becomes more tempting as                        increases,

independently of b and                  d,   as tong as both are finite. Therefore in the repeated

setting as long as the discount rate is not too large or N too small, individual

firms   will deviate from the collusive outcome when demand is high. This leads to
price wars when the only options for the oligopoly are to either compete or
collude.
       Alternatively the oligopoly can choose a level of output q5 that will just
deter fins from deviating when demand is high. These levels of output can be
obtained numerically in a manner analogous to the one used to obtain the                          in
the previous subsection. These outputs equate fl0, the profits from going along,
to crid — K) where K is the expected discounted difference between us and the
profits from the Cournot equilibrium. By substituting (16) in (13) 11d becomes
quadratic in q5. Since     is also quadratic in q8 the q°'s are obtained as
solutions to quadratic equations for given IC.7 The resulting q8's allow us to
compute a new value of K. By iterating in a manner analagous to the one used to
                                     Ia


derive Figure 1 we obtain the best equilibrium for the oligopoly. Figure 3 plots
the ratio of this ui1ibrium price to the monopoly price as a function of
While a variant of the argument made earlier guarantees that equilibrium price
rises as c rises, it can be seen that beyond a certain Ct the ratio of
equilibrium price to monopoly price falls monotonically.
                      Monopoly Price/Oligopoly Price
             000000000
            PooD(Dco
            (0   fJ    (,   4   0'   0'   '4
                                                (0
                                                (0     ..a
                                                             bO
                                                             —

      0
                                                                       0
                                                                       C
      -a
      0
                                                                       H

      0




C')
      cJJ
      0
                                                                  vr
                                                                  II


CD




      (1'
      0


      0                                                           I!
                                                                  '2J
      —I
      0
                                                                       oJ
                                                                       E
                                                                       rn
      a
                                                 19




III. BUSINESS CYCLES

          So far we have considered only the behavior of an oligopoly in

isolation.           For this behavior to form the foundation of business cycles
we need to model the rest of the economy, While the principle which
underlies these business cycles is probably quite general we illustrate
it with a simple example. Ye consider a "real" two sector general
equilibrium model in which the first sector is competitive while the
other is oligopolistic. There is also a competitive labor market.                 To

keep      the model simple it is assused that workers have a horizontal supply
of labor at a wage equal to                  the price of the competitive good. Since
the model is homogeneous of degree zero in prices, the wage itself                can be

normalized         to equal one. So the price of the good produced      competitively

must also equal one. This good can be produced with various combinations

of labor and         good 2. In particular the industry—wide production function
of good 1 is given by:

lt    —
           21t —          2
                              +
                                  yLit
                                         —
                                             2
                                                                                   (13)

where              is the output of the competitive sector at t,         is the

amount of good two employed in the production of good 1 at t and
                                                                  Lit is
the   amount of labor used in the production of good 1. Since the sector
is competitive the price of each factor and its marginal revenue product
are equated. Thus:
Lit
      —    (1 +    y)/                                                             (14)
               —
                   2lt'                                                            (15)

          On   the other hand the    demand for good 2 by consumers is given by:

2t — n         —
                   2ct    +
                                                         20


where 20t is the quantity of good 2 purchased by consumers, n and in are
parameters and e is an i.i.d. random variable. Therefore total demand

for good 2 is given by:

2t — a         +       — bQ2t

a —   (lip     + my)/(m • p)                             a        +   p)                              (6)
b - mp/(m + p)

          Note that equation (16) is identical to equation (6). To continue

the parallel           with our sections on partial equilibrium we assume                      that the

labor      requirement            to produce 2t is:

L
 2t
      — cQ
           2t
              +        '    /      2t
which implies that, as                    before,      marginal cost is    c +
                                                                                 dQ2t.
                                                                                          The model
would be unaffected if                    good    1 were also an   input into      good 2 since         is
always     equal       to the wage.              If   sector 2 behaved competitively marginal
cost would equal                          Then output of good 2 would be                 while price
would be
      —    (a +         —       c)/(b/2    + d)

      —
          ((a      +            + bc/2)/(b/2          + d)
                       c)d
          An   increase         in        raises both the competitive price and the
competitive quantity of good 2. By (15) less of good 2 will be used in
the   production of good I thus                       leading to a fall in   the output of good 1.

      a shift in tastes raises the output of one good and lowers that of

the other. The economy implicitly has, given people's desire for

leisure, a production possibility frontier.

          Similarly, if sector 2 always behaves like a monopolist, output and

price are given equations (s) and (9) respectively. Therefore increases

in        raise both 2t and 2t thus lowering Q• Once again shifts in
                                      21




demand are unable to change the levels of both outputs in the same
direction. On the other hand if the industry behaves like the oligopoly
considered in the previous sections, an increase in etoan easily lead to
a fall in the relative price of good 2. This occurs in three out of the
four scenarios considered in previous sections. It occurs when the
unsustainability of monopoly leads to competitive outcomes whether the
strategic variable is price or output as long as increases in               make

monopoly harder to sustain. It also always occurs when the strategic
variable is prices and the oligopoly plays an optimal supergame. The

decrease    in     in turn leads firms in      the first sector to demand wore     of
good   2 as an input and to increase their output. So, a shift in demand
towards    the oligopolistic goods raises all outputs much as all outputs

move together during    business   cycles.

       A number of comments deserve to be made       about   this model of business

cycles.     First our assumption that the real wage in terms of good I is
constant does not play an important role. In equilibrium            the   reduction
in        raises real wages thus inducing workers to work more even if they

have an upwardly sloping supply schedule for labor. Thether this

increased supply of labor would be sufficient to meet the increased

demand for employees by sector 2 is unclear. If it wasn't the wage would

have to rise in terms of good 1. Nore interestingly if the increased

supply of labor was large,         would have to rise thus increasing

employment also in sector I •      This    would lead to an expansion even if

good 2 was not an input into good 1. This pattern of price movements is

consistent with the evidence on the correlation between product wages and

employment   presented below.
                                           22




     Second,   the model can easily       be    made consistent with the procyclica].
variation of profits. Even though sector 2 reduces the margin between
price and marginal cost as output expands, the difference between
ravennes and total costs can increase as long as there are fixed coats.
     Third, it is luite plausible that changes in financial variables
like the money stock and interest rates lead shifts in the composition of
demand. For instance increases in the money stock might be associated
with lower interest rates and a higher demand              for   durable goods. As
shown below, durable good industries appear to be more oligopolistic than

other industries. These shifts in demand form a large part of the

informal discussion surrounding the ¶983 recovery in the US ,               for
example.

       Random   shifts in demand have          already been showed to cause movements

in   employment in the asymetric information model of Grossman, Hart and
Maskin    (ige3).       However,   contrary to the claims of Lilien (1982) such
random sectoral shifts do not appear to be correlated with agregate
fluctuations. Instead Abraham and Katz (1984) show that different
sectors    only have distinct correlations with agregate output. Moreover
the    sectors whose output is more correlated with agregate output appear

to   have a higher rate of growth on average. This leads to the
statistical illusion that when output grows faster, as in a recovery,
there is more intersectoral variance in output growth then when output
growth is      small,    as   in a recession. Note that Abraham and Katz's        finding
that   some sectors are more          "cyclic" than others accords well with our
theory that      shifts       towards oligopolistic sectors are necessary to expand
aggregate      output.        This finding also appears to be somewhat at odds with
the    literature on real business cycles (Long and Plosser (1983) and King
                                    23



and Plosser (1984)). In this literature expansions are caused by

favorable    unobservable technological shocks. Aside from the   fact that

there   is no independent evidence for the importance of these shocks and
that they do not appear in the casual discussions of the poop1. who are
directly affected by    business cycles it is somewhat peculiar that these
favorable    shocks always recur in the same "cyclic" industries.8

      Our   model also sheds light on some slightly unfashionable concepts
of Keynesian economics. One of the most pervasive facts about increases
in the money supply is that they are not accompanied by equiproportional
increases in prices. Prices appear to be sticky (of Rotemberg (1982)).
Suppose that, increases in St are correlated with increases in the money
supply. Then increases in output are correlated with increases in the
money supply. As long as increases in output raise the demand far real
money balances, increases in the money supply will be correlated with

increases in real money balances. Prices do not rise equipropor—

tionately. A second concept we can usefully discuss in the context of

our model is that of a multiplier. This concept reflects the idea that
increases in demand lead output to rise which then leads to further
increases in demand. Here a shift in demand towards an oligopolistic
sector can    raise that sector's output, lower its prices and thus raise

national    income. In turn this increased national income can    tq
                                                                 lead

increases in the demand for other goods produced in oligopolistic markets
thus lowering their prices and raising their output as well. This
process can continue until almost all oligopolistic markets have lower
prices.
                                   24



IV. SOME RELEVMJT FACTS

a) The folklore
    The theory presented in section II runs counter to the industrial
organization folklore.    This folklore is best articulated in Scherer

(1980 p.208) who says: "Yet it is precisely when business conditions

really turn sour that price cutting runs     most rampant among oligopolists
with high fixed costs". Our    attempt   at finding the facts that     support
this folklore has, however, been unsuccessful. Scherer cites three

industries whose experience is presented as       supporting   the folklore.

These are rayon, cement   and steel.     For rayon he cites a study by Narkha

(1952) which shows mainly that the nominal price of rayon fell during the
Great   Depression. Since broad price indices fell during this period this
is hardly proof of a price war. Rayon has since been replaced by other
plastics making it difficult to use postwar data to check whether any
real price cutting took place during postwar recessions. For steel
Scherer in fact admits the following: "...       up   to 1968 and except for some
episodes during the 1929—38 depression,     it   was 'sore successful than
either cement or rayon in avoiding widespread price deterioration, even
when operating at less than 65% capacity between 1958 and 1962 (p. 210).
  This leaves cement. Ye study the cyclical properties of real ceient
prices below. To do this we collected data on the average price of
portland cement from the Minerals Yearbook published by the Bureau of
Mines. We then compare this price with the Producer Price Index and the
price index of construction materials published by the Bureau of Labor
statistics. Regressions of the yearly rate of growth of real cement
prices on the contemporaneous rate of growth of OTU' are reported in Table
                                       25



1.    The coefficient of the rate of growth of GUI is always meaningfully

negative. A 1% increase in the rate of growth of ON? leads to a 0.5—1.0%

fall in the price of cement. To test whether the coefficients are

significant   the regression equations must be quasi—differenced since
their Durbin—Yatson statistics are small. Indeed the coefficients are
all significantly different from zero at the five percent level. More
casually,   the real price of cement        rose in the recession year 1954 while
it   fell in the boom year 1955. similarly, it rose during the recession

year 1958 and fell in 1959.

      These results show uniformly that the price of cement has a tendency

to move countercyclically as our theory predicts for an oligopoly. These

results are of course not conclusive. First, it might be argued that the

demand   for cement might be only     weakly related to ON?. Without a

structural    model, which is well beyond the scope of this paper, this
auestion cannot be completely settled. The rate of growth of the output
of the cement industry has a correlation of .69 with the rate of growth
of   ON? and of .77 with the rate of growth of construction       activity
which is    well known to be procyclical. However, these correlations are

not   sufficient to prove that    cement is "more procyclical" than the

tical sector included in GNP. Second our regressions do not include
all the variables one would expect to see in a reduced form. Thus the
effect of GNP might be proxying for an excluded variable like the
capacity    of cement   mines which Scherer would probably expect to exercise
a    negative effect on the   real   price of cement. While this is indeed a

possibility it must be pointed out that capacity itself is an endogenous

variable which also responds to demand. It would thus be surprising if

enough    capacity were built in a boom to more than offset the increase in
                                         Table I
                        THE CYCLICAL PROPERTIES OF CEMENT PRICES

                              Yearly Data from 1947 to 1981
      Dependent             pC/pp         PC/PPI       pC/pCOE     pC/pOOfl
             Variable
Coefficient


     Constant                .025          .025         .038        .037
                            (.010)        (.012)       (.007)      (.008)

     GNP                    —.438         —.456        —.875       —.816
                            (.236)        (.197)       (.161)      (.149)


       p                                   .464                     .315
                                          (.173)                   (.ia)
       1t2                   .10           .15          .48         .52

       D.W                  1.07          1.73         1.28        1.92




 C                                                                        con
P is the price of cement, PH is the producer price index and P is
the price index of construction materials. Standard errors are in
parenthesis.
                                     26



demand.     If anything, the presence of costs of adjusting capacity would
make capacity relatively unresponsive to increases in GNP.
b) Actual price wars
    There have been two recent studies showing that some industries
alternate beetween cooperative and noncooperative behavior. The first is
due to Bresnahan (1981). Ne studies the automobile industry in 1954,

1955 and 1956.    He tries to    evaluate the   different   interpretations of the
events    of 1955. That year production of automobiles climbed by 45% only

to fall 44% the following year. Bresuahan formally models the automobile

industry as carrying out two sequential games each          year. The first
involves    the choice of models and the second the choice of prices. He

concludes that the competitive model of pricing fits the 1955 data taken

by themselves while the collusive model fits the 1954 and 1956 data.

Those two years exhibited at be8t sluggish GNP growth. GNP fell. 1% in

1954 while it rose 2% in 1956. Instead 1955 was a genuine boom with GNP

growing 7%. Insofar as cartels can only sustain either competitive or

collusive outcomes, this is what our theory predicts. Indeed, in our

model, the competitive outcomes will be observed only in booms.

    Porter (1983b) studies the railroad cartel which operated in the

1880s on the Chicago—New York route. He uses time series evidence (as

opposed to the cross section evidence of Bresnahan) to show that some

months were collusive while others were not. His theory which is

developed in Green and Porter (1984) is that the breakdowns from the

collusive output ought to occur in periods of unexpectedly low demand.

He finds no support for this theory from the residuals of his estimated

equations.     Instead, we will argue his results support out theory. Table
2 presents the relevant facts. The first three columns are taken          from

Porter's    paper. The   first
                                 Table 2
                      RAILROADS IN THE 1680's


                    Rail                          Total Grain
       Estimated     Shipaents      Fraction      Production    Days Lakes
       Nonadherence (Million        Shipped       (Billion      Closed from
                       Bushels)       by Rail        Tons)      4/I — 12/3t


1880      0.00          4.13               22.1        2.70          35

1881      0.44          7.68               50.0        2.05          69

1882      0.21          2.39               13.8        2.69          35

1883      0.00          2.59               26.8        2.62          58

1884      0.40          5.90               34.0        2.98          58

1885      0.67          5.12               48.5        3.00          61

1886      0.06          2.21               17.4        2.83          50
                                     27


column shows an index of cartel nonadherence estimated by Porter. He
shows this index paralells quite closely the discussions in      the   Railway
Review and in the Chicago Tribune which are reported by IJien (1978). The

second column reports rail shipments of wheat from Chicago to New

York. The third column shows the percentage of wheat shipped by rail

from Chicago relative to the wheat     shipped by both   lake and rail. The

last two columns are from the Chicago Board of Trade Annual Reports. The

fourth column presents the national production of grains estimated by the

Department    of Agriculture. This total is constructed by    adding the

productions    ot' wheat, corn, rye, oats and barley in tons. This
aggregation    is not too difficult to justify since the density of

different grains is fairly similar. Finally the last column represents

the   number of days beetween April 1 and December 31 that    the Straits of

Mackinac    remained closed to navigation. (They were always closed
beetween January 1 and   March   31.) Such closures prevented lake shipments
of grain.
        As can readily be seen from the table the three years in which the

most severe price wars occurred were 1881, 1884 and 1885. Those are also

the years in which rail shipments are the largest both in absolute terms

and relative to lake shipments. This      certainly does not suggest that
these   wars occurred in periods of depressed demand. However, shipments

may have been high only because the railroads were competing even though

demand was low. To analyze this possibility we report the values of two

natural determinants of demand.     The first is   the length of time   during
which the lakes were closed. The longer these lakes remained closed the
larger was the demand for rail transport. This is the only demand

variable included in Porter's study. The lakes were closed the longest
                                              28



in   1881   and 1885. These are also the years in which the index of cartel
nonadnerence is       highest.    In   1883    and 1884 the lake, remained closed only
slight].y less time than in 1885 and yet there were price wars only in
1884. The second natural deterainant of demand, total grain production,
readily explains the anomalous behaviour of 1883. This was also the year
in which the total grain production was the second lowest in the entire
period and in particular, was 12% lower than in 1884. This must have
depressed demand so much that, in spite of the lake closings, total
demand for rail      transport was low enough to warrant cooperation.           A

number      of objections can be raised against this interpretation of
Porter's      facts. First, Porter used weekly data instead of our annual

aggregates and        it might be thought that weekly data provide a stronger
basis for accepting or njeoting our theory. In fact, however, the                   price
wars followed a seasonal time pattern. The first price war started

around      January 1881 and lasted      for the whole year. The second price war

started     around January 1884 and ended at the end of 1885. Ye suspect
that around midwinter agents could form a fairly accurate prediction of
the opening of the lakes by studying the thickness of the ice. If they
expected the lakes to be closed for a long period they naturally expected
a price war to develop. Once the individual railroads predicted a war
for the future they were tempted to cut their prices loediatly for two
reasons.       First, the penalties for deviating wore         reduced since in the
future      the outcome will be competitive in any         event.   Second, individuals

who had      the   capacity to   store grain would postpone shipments if they        knew

a price war was imminent         thus lowering even the monopoly price. The
presence      of such storage facilities would also seem to make

identification        of the weekly changes in demand difficult. On the other
                                       29



hand years with high grain production or with a short lake shipping
season    will nonetheless be years of high demand.
       The second objection      to our analysis   is that we use aggregate

production   in the entire United States as our proxy for grain production

in the Chicago region. The reason for this is that it is very difficult

to define the Chicago region. It clearly includes more than the state

of Illinois but less than our proxy. In any event the movements in total

production figures represent mostly movements in the production of the

grain belt which includes Illinois.

c)   Price—cost margins
      One natural test of our theory        is whether there is substantial price
cutting    by oligopolists when demand is high.       What is difficult about

carrying out this test is that prices must be compared to marginal            costs
and that   data   on marginal   costs at the firm or even at the industry level
is   notoriously scarce. Traditionally researchers in Industrial

Organization have focused on price—cost margins which are given by sales

minus payroll and material costs divided by sales. This is a crude

approrimation to the Lerner Index which has the advantage of being easy

to compute. Indeed Scherer cites a number of studies which analyzed the

cyclical variability of these margins in different industries. These

studies have led to somewhat mixed conclusions. However Scherer

concludes on p.35?: "The weight of the available statistical evidence

suggests that     concentrated   industries do exhibit somewhat different

pricing propensities over tine than their atomistic counterparts. They

reduce   prices (and more importantly) price—cost margins by        less in

response   to a demand slump and increase them by less in the boom phase".
This does not fit well with the       folklore which would    predict that on
                                     30


average prices would tend to fall more in recessions the more
concentrated is the industry. Our theory would explain these facts as
follows. It repiires that prices fall relative to marginal cost in
booms. This is consistent with rising price cost margins as long as some
of   the expenditure on labor is in fact a   fixed cost. this           can be seen as

follows: Suppose that price and marginal        cost   are   constant   and that

there   are some fired costs. Then if the labor costs include some fired

costs an increase in output will lower the importance of these fixed

costs   thus raising price—cost margins. The key        is that   price—cost

margins   rise by less in concentrated industries. So either the fixed
costs are less important in the concentrated industries, which seems a
priori unlikely, or the concentrated industries tend to reduce prices
relative   to marginal   cost.
      We also study some independent evidence on margins. Thirds (1984)
reports correlations between employment and real product wages in various
two digit   industries. These real product wages are given by the average

hourly wage paid by the industry divided by the value added deflator for

the industry. They can      be interpreted as   a different crude        measure   of

marginal   cost over, prices. Their disadvantage over the traditional
price—cost   margin is that, unlike the latter, they not only require that

materials   be proportional to output but also that materials costs be
simply passed on as they would in a competitive industry with this cost
structure. On the other hand, their advantage over the traditional
measure    is that   they remain valid when some of the payroll expenditure is
a fixed cost as long as, at the margin, labor has a constant marginal

product. Moreover it turns out that if the marginal product of labor
                                         31




actually      falls as employment rises our evidence provides even stronger

support for our theory.

       The correlations reported by Burda for the real    product wage and
employment using detrended yearly data from 1947 to 1978 are reported in

Table 3      which also reports the average four firm concentration ratio for
each   two digit industry. This average is obtained by weighting each four
digit SIC code industry within a particular 2 digit SIC code industry by
its   sales in 1967. These weights were then applied to the 1967 four firia

concentration indices for each 4 digit SIC code industry obtained from

the Census.9




                                     PASLE 3
                CONCEN'TRATION MTh THE CORRELATION BEETYEEN REAL
                              •.tAGES   MID E)LOfXENT


      SIC#      INDUSTRY DESIGNATION                    CORREL. CONCEN.

                DURABLES MANUFACTURING
      24        Lumber and wood products                  —.33     17.6
      25        Furniture and fixtures                    —.18     21.6
      32        Stone, clay and glass                      .39     37.4
      33        Primary metals                             .32     42.9
      34        Fabricated metal industries                .23     29.1
      35        Machinery except electrical                .12     36.3
      36        Electrical and electronic equipment        .34     45.0
      371       Motor vehicles and equipment               .19     80.5
      372—9     other transportation equipment             .02     50.1
      38        Instruments and related products          —.36     47.8
                NONDURABLE MMIUYACTURING
      20        Food and Kindred products                —.30      34.5
      21        Tobacco manufactures                     —.64      73.6
      22        Textile mill products                      .04     34.1
      23        Apparel and related products             —.53      19.7
      26        Paper and allied products                —.42      71.2
      27        Printing and publishing                    .40     18.9
      28        Chemical and allied products             —.03      49.9
      29        Petroleum and coal products              —.48      32.9
      30        Rubber                                     .16     69.1
      31        Leather and leather products             —.44      24.5
                                    32


       At first glance it is clear front the table that more concentrated
industries like motor vehicles and electrical machinery tend to have
positive    correlations while lees concentrated   industries like leather,
food and wood products tend to have negative correlations. Statistical
testing of this correlation with the concentration index is, however,

somewhat delicate. That is because our theory does not predict that an

industry   which is 5%   more concentrated than another will reduce prices

more   severely in a boom. On the contrary a fully fledged monopoly will
always charge the monopoly price which usually increases when demand
increases, All our theory says is that as soon as an industry becomes an
oligopoly it becomes likely that it will cut prices in booms. Naturally
the   concentration index is not a perfect measure of   whether an industry
is    an oligopoly. Indeed printing has a 1.0w concentration   index   even

though its large components are newspapers, books and magazines which are

in fact highly concentrated once location in space or type is taken into

account. Nonetheless higher concentration indices are at least

indicators of a sinner number of      important sellers. Glass is undoubtely
a   more oligopo]istic industry than shoes. So we decided to classify the

sample into relatively unconcentrated and relatively concentrated and

chose, somewhat arbitrarily, as the dividing line the median            -




concentration   of 35.4. This lies between food and nonelectrical

machinery. We can then construct the following 2X2 contingency table:
                                  33




                                  PABIiE 4

                        Unconcentrated        Concentrated     Total


    Negatively
    correlated             7                     3               10




    Positively
    correlated              3                    7               10



    Total                  10                   ¶0               20




     An alternative table can be obtained by neglecting the three
observations   whose correlations are effectively zero. These are sectors

22, 28 and 372—9. Their correlations are     at most equal in abeolute value
to a third of the next lowest correlation. Then the contingency table
has, instead of the values 7:3:3:7, the values 7:2:2:6.
     It is now natural to test whether concentrated industries have the
same ratio of positive correlations to negative ones against the
alternative that this ratio is significantly higher. The x2 test       of

independence   actually only tests whether the values are unusual under the
hypothesis of independence without focusing on our particular
alternative. It rejects the hypothesis of independence with 92%
confidence using the values of Table 4 and with 97% confidence using the
values 7:2:2:6. This test is, however, likely to be flawed for the small
sample we consider. Fisher's test would appear more appropiate since it
i8 an exact test against the alternative that more concentrated sectors
have more positive correlations. With this test the hypothesis that the
ratio of positive correlations is the sane can be rejected with 91%
                                    34



confidence using the data of Table 4 and with 96% confidence using
7:2:2:6.
     there   is thus a   fair amount of evidence for the hypothesis that more
concentrated   sectors are more likely to have positive correlations. We

interpret this by imagining a world in which technology is subject to

technological   progress at a constant rate and in which capital is
accumulated smoothly. The deviations of employment from its trend then
occur only in response to increased demand. Then if the firms behave
monopolistically the real product wage will tend to fall when demand
increases. The same will occur if the firms are competitive and the
marginal product of labor falls as employment rises. Particularly when
there are diminishing returns to labor the finding that the product wage
rises when employment rises suggests the widespread price cutting our
theory   implies.

     There are alternative explanations for our findings, however. The
first is that the positive correlations are due to monopolistic pricing
in the face of increasing returns to labor in the short run. The
existence of such increasing retuns strike us as unlikely. When
production is curtailed this is usually done by temporary closings of
plants or reductions of hours worked. These reductions would always
start with the most inefficient plants and workers thus suggesting at
most constant returns to labor in the short run. The second alternative
explanation relies on technological shocks. These shocks can, in
principle    either increase or decrease the demand for labor by a

particular    sector. If they increase the demand and the sector faces an
upwards sloping labor supply function, employment and real wages can both
increase. The difficulty with this alternative explanation is that the
                                    35



sectors   with   positive correlations do not appear to be those which a

casual   observer would characterize as having many technological shocks of
this type. In particular stone, clay and glass, printing and publishing
and rubber appear to be sectors with fair]j stagnant technologies. On the
other hand instruments and chemicals may well be among those whose
technolo- has been changing the fastest.
                                     36



V. CONCLUSIONS



   This paper basically consists of three parts. The first is a somewhat
novel theory of oligopolies in situations in which demand fluctuates.
The second is an analysis of the business cycles that such oligopolies
can induce, while the third is   a   study of the plausibility of the idea
that oligopolistic industries tend to behave more competitively in booms.
Since the data appear consistent With this    idea they conaitute    fairly
direct evidence in favor of both our theory of oligopoly and that of
business cycles. This suggests that both theories and their empirical

validation deserve to be extended.

   The theory of oligopoly   might be extended to   include also

imperfectly    observable demand shifts, prices and outputs. This type of
imperfect observability is the main concern of Green and Porter (1984)
who study markets with no observable shifts in demand. The advantage of
introducing unobservable shifts in demand is that these can induce
reversions to punishing behavior even when all firms are acting
collusively.    A natural question to ask is whether reversions to

punishing behavior that result from unobservable shocks are more likely

when everybody expects the demand curve to have     shifted   out.

Unfortunately this appears to be a very    difficult   question to answer.

Even the features of the optimal supergame without      observable shocks
discussed   in Porter (1983a) are hard to characterize. Adding the

complication    that both the length of the punishment period as well as the
price that triggers a reversion depend on observable demand is a
                                       37


formidable    task.

     In this paper we considered only business cycles which are due

to the tendency of oligopolists to act more competitively when

demand    shifts towards   their products. An     alternative   and commonly held

view   is that business cycles are due to changes in aggregate demand which
do not get reflected in     nominal   wages. In that case a decrease in
aggregate demand raises real wages thereby reducing all outputs. In our
theory    of oligopoly, firms    tend to collude more in these periods. Hence
recessions    are not only bad   because    output is low but also because

mioroeconomic    distortions are greater.       This suggests that stabilization

of output at a high level is desirable because it reduces these
distortions.
     On the other hand, the busine8s cycles discussed here do not
necessarily warrant stabilization policy. While models of real
business cycles merely feature ineffective stabilization policies
hers such policies might actually be harmfull. Booms occur because,
occasionally, demand shifts towards oligopolistic products. In these
periods the incentive to deviate from the collusive outcome is greatest
because the punishment will be felt in periods which, on average have
lower demand and hence lower profits. If instead future demand were also
known to be high, the threat of losing the monopoly profits in those good
periods might well be enough to induce the members of the oligopoly to
collude   now. So, if demand     for the goods produced by oligopolies were
stable    they might collude always, leaving the economy in a permanent

recession.   10 Therefore the merits of stabilization policy hinge
crucially on whether business cycles are due to shifts in demand
                                   38


unaccompanied by nominal rigidities or whether they are due to changeB in
aggregate demand accompanied by such rigidities. Disentangling the
nature of the shifts in the demand faced by oligolopies therefore seellia
tQ be a promising line of research.
   Much work also remains to be done empirically validating our
model itself. In section iv    presented a variety of simple tests
                              we

capable of discriminating between the Industrial Organization folklore
and our theory. Since none of them favored the folklore it may well be
without empirical content. On the other hand, our theory desenee to be
tested more severely. First a more disagregated study of the cyclical
properties of price—cost margins seems warranted. Unfortunately, data on
valued added deflators does not appear to exist at a more disagregated
level so a different methodology will have to be employed. Second our
theory has strong implications for the behaviour of structural models of
specific industries. Th. study of such models ought to shed light on the
extent to which observable shifts in demand affect the degree of
collusion.
                                  39


                                 FOOTNOTES



11f firms find borrowing difficult, recessions might be the ideal
occasions for large established firms to elbow out their smaller
competitors.

2See, for example, Friedman (1971), Green and Porter (1984) and Radner
(1980).

3sequentially rational strategies are analysed in gaines of incomplete
information by Kreps and Wilson (1952). For the game of complete
information that we analyse we use Selten's concept of subgame perfection
(1965).

kIn an informal discussion, Kurz (1979) recognizes the link between
short—run profitability and the sustainability of collusive outcomes.
However, the relationship between profits, demand, and costs is not make
explicit.
5The argument of K, 4, in (3) should not be confused with that in (I).
The latter represents the realization of the shock at t whereas the
former is the state beyond which monopoly becomes unsustainable.

61n this case an increase in    can directly be interpreted as either a
shift outwards in demand or a reduction in c, that part of marginal cost
which is independent of q. This results from the fact that the profit
functions depend on s only through (a+ st—c).

7The   relevant root is the one with the highest profits for the
oligopoly;
8The interoectoral pattern of output movements can be independent of the
sector which has a technological shock if (as seems unlikely) goods are
consumed in fixed proportions which depend on the level of utility only.
Otherwise "normal" substitution effects will make the expansion biggest
in the sector which has the most favorable technological shock.
en constructing these aggregate concentration indices we
systematically neglected the 4 digit SIC code industries which ended
in 99. These contain miscellaneous or "not classified elsewhere" items
whose concentration index does not measure market power in a relatiely
homogeneous market.

10For the examples in Figures 2 and 3 this occurs as long as 5>0.8 when
prize is the strategic variable or 8>0.25 when quantities are the
strategic variable.
                                         4$)




                                       Ref erences




Abraham, G. and F. Katz, "Cyclical Unemployment: Sectoral Shifts or Aggregate
    Disturbances" Sloan School of Management Working Paper No 1579—84, June
    1984.

Abreu,      ,   "Repeated Games with Discounting: A General Theory and an Application
    to   Oligopoly",   Princeton University, December 1982, mimeo.

Bresnahan, hF., "Competition and Collusion in         the American Automobile Industry:
    The 1955 Price War", February 1981 • mimeo.

Burda, M.C., "Dynamic Labor Demand Schedules         Reconsidered:   A Sectoral
    Approach", June 1984, mimeo.

Friedman, J.V., "A Non—Cooperative Equilibrium for Supergarnes," Review of
    Economic Studies, 28(1971), 1—12.

Green, E.J. and LII. Porter, "Noncooperative Collusion Under Imperfect Price
    Information", Econometrica, 52 (January 1984), 87—100.

Grossman, S.J., 0.1). Hart, and E. S. Maskin, "Unemployment with Observable
    Aggregate Shocks", Journal of Political Economy, 91 (December 1983) 907—28.

Lilien, D.M., "Sectoral Shifts and Cyclic Unemployment", Journal of Political
    Economy, 90 (August 1982). 777—93.

Long, J.B. Jr; and C.I. Pleaser, "Real Business Cycles" Journal of Political
    Economy, 91 (February 1983), 79—69.

icreps, D. and R. Wilson, "Sequential Equilibrium", Econometrica, 50(1982), 863—
    894.

King, E.G. and C.I. Pleaser, "Money, Credit and Prices in a Real Business Cycle",
    American Economic Review 74 (June 1984), 363—80.

Kurz, M., "A Strategic Theory of Inflation", INSSS Technical Report No. 283,
    April 1979.

Markham, J.W., Competition in the Rayon Industry, Harvard University Press,
    Cambridge, 1952.

Porter, R.H., "Optimal Cartel Trigger—Price Strategies", Journal of Economic
    Theory, 29(1983a), 313—338.

Porter, R.H., "A Study of Cartel Stability: The Joint Economic Committee, 1880—
    1886", The Bell Journal of Economics, 14 (Autumn 1983b), 301—14.

Raduer, R. "Collusive Behavior in Noncooperative Epsilon—Equilibria of
    Oligopolies with Long but Finite Lives", Journal of Economic Theory,
    22(1980), 136—154.
                                         41




Rotemberg, .1.3., "Sticky Prices in the United States", Journal of Political
    Economy, 90 (Deosiaber 1982), 1187—211.
Scherer, F.M., Industrial Market Structure and        Economic Performance (2nd Ed.)
    Houghton—Mifflin, Boston, 1980.
Selten, Ii. •   "Spieltheoretische Behandlung sines   Oligopolsrnodel].s mit
    Naclifragetragheit", Zeitsebrift fur die Gesante Staatswisaenschaft,
    121(1965), 301—324 and 667—689.
Stigler, Gd. "A Theory of Oligopoly", Journal of Political Econo2ny, 72 (February
    1964), 44—61.
'Jlen, T.S., Cartels and Regulation, unpublished PH.D. Dissertation, Stanford
     University, 1978.
