NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGES, UNEMPLOYMENT AND INEQUALITY WITH HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS
AND WORKERS
Elhanan Helpman
Oleg Itskhoki
Stephen Redding
Working Paper 14122
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14122

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

The work on this paper started when Redding was a Visiting Professor at Harvard University. Helpman
thanks the National Science Foundation for financial support. Redding thanks the Centre for Economic
Performance at the London School of Economics for financial support. We thank Larry Katz, Steve
Pischke and seminar participants at CIFAR and Harvard for helpful comments and suggestions. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen Redding. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wages, Unemployment and Inequality with Heterogeneous Firms and Workers
Elhanan Helpman, Oleg Itskhoki, and Stephen Redding
NBER Working Paper No. 14122
June 2008
JEL No. D21,D24,D31,D43,J31,J64
ABSTRACT
In this paper we develop a multi-sector general equilibrium model of firm heterogeneity, worker heterogeneity
and labor market frictions. We characterize the distributions of employment, unemployment, wages
and income within and between sectors as a function of structural parameters. We find that greater
firm heterogeneity increases unemployment, wage inequality and income inequality, whereas greater
worker heterogeneity has ambiguous effects. We also find that labor market frictions have non-monotonic
effects on aggregate unemployment and inequality through within- and between-sector components.
Finally, high-ability workers have the lowest unemployment rates but the greatest wage inequality,
and income inequality is lowest for intermediate ability. Although these results are interesting in their
own right, the main contribution of the paper is in providing a framework for analyzing these types
of issues.

Elhanan Helpman
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ehelpman@harvard.edu
Oleg Itskhoki
Department of Economics
Harvard University
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
itskhoki@fas.harvard.edu

Stephen Redding
London School of Economics
and Yale School of Management
Department of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE, England
s.j.redding@lse.ac.uk

1

Introduction

One of the striking features of micro data sets on firms is the large heterogeneity in employment,
output, wages and productivity even within narrowly—defined industries. No less striking are the
large diﬀerences in employment and wage outcomes experienced by individual workers. A key challenge for theoretical research is to identify mechanisms that can generate this type of heterogeneity
and to understand their implications for economic outcomes. To make progress in this direction is
the main aim of this paper.
We develop a multi-sector general equilibrium model with worker and firm heterogeneity and
labor market frictions, and we explore its implications for resource allocation, welfare, unemployment, and wage and income inequality. Although we shall relate our theoretical results to various
empirical findings at diﬀerent points of the analysis, we wish to emphasize from the outset that the
main contribution of the paper is theoretical, and our discussion of the empirical findings is merely
intended to illustrate points of contact between the theory and the evidence. As rich as the model
is in some dimensions, it is quite simple in others. For this reason it may require modifications and
extensions for addressing other questions of interest.
In our model, observed diﬀerences in economic outcomes across firms and workers are the result
of an interaction of firm and worker heterogeneity with labor market frictions. On the one hand,
workers with the same unobserved ability experience diﬀerent labor market outcomes. On the other
hand, diﬀerences in unobserved ability across workers generate heterogeneity in unemployment
experiences and wage inequality. We use the structure of the model to characterize the distribution
of productive resources across firms and sectors and the distribution of income across workers as
a function of model parameters. In this model, heterogeneity in product and labor markets are
closely intertwined, with workers sorting across firms according to worker and firm characteristics.
As a result, the firm-size and wage distributions are both influenced by the distributions of firm
and worker characteristics, as well as features of labor and product markets.
Income inequality in our framework has two components: wage inequality and unemployment.
As changes in labor market frictions can have conflicting eﬀects on these two components, measures of income inequality and wage inequality can behave quite diﬀerently. Similarly, aggregate
inequality and unemployment have within and between-sector components, which are also aﬀected
diﬀerently by labor market frictions. As a result, changing the magnitude of labor market frictions
can have non-monotonic eﬀects on aggregate inequality and unemployment.
One of the novel features of our analysis is a distinction between two dimensions of labor market
frictions: “search frictions” that influence the costs of hiring and firing workers and “screening
frictions” that influence the costs of distinguishing between workers with diﬀerent levels of ability.
Firms experience search costs in matching with potential employees, and once matched, engage in
a costly process of screening these potential employees to determine whether their ability is above
or below an endogenously-chosen threshold. This distinction between search and screening frictions
enriches firm recruitment policies. As firms often use considerable resources in trying to distinguish
between job candidates, this distinction also adds greater realism to the model and enables it to
1

explain a variety of stylized facts from the emerging empirical literature on recruitment.1
The setup of the model is as follows. We consider a framework with many diﬀerentiated goods
sectors that can diﬀer in terms of demand, production technology and labor market frictions.
Within each diﬀerentiated sector, firms are heterogeneous in terms of their productivity and workers are heterogeneous in terms of an unobserved ability. Worker ability is unknown ex ante for
both firms and workers. One interpretation of this unobserved worker ability is match-specific
productivity that is realized, but not costlessly observed, when a worker is matched with a firm.
Each firm in a diﬀerentiated sector incurs a search cost to match with workers and a screening cost
to determine whether each of these workers has an ability above or below an endogenously-chosen
threshold. Firm output depends on firm productivity, the number of workers hired, and the average
ability of the workers hired. We assume that there are diminishing marginal returns to the number
of workers hired. As a result of these diminishing returns, the increase in output from excluding
the least able workers and raising average worker ability may outweigh the loss in output from a
reduction in the number of workers hired. Each firm therefore chooses a screening ability threshold
trading oﬀ the increase in output from raising average worker ability against the costs incurred
by screening. In equilibrium more productive firms screen to a higher ability threshold, employ
workers with a higher average ability, and pay higher equilibrium wages.2
In addition to the diﬀerentiated goods sectors, we assume that there is a homogeneous numéraire
sector, in which there are no labor market frictions. As we also assume quasi-linear preferences,
the presence of this numéraire sector considerably simplifies the characterization of equilibrium in
the model, enabling us to capture changes in sectoral composition in a tractable way and derive
closed-form solutions. Output in the homogeneous numéraire sector is produced from labor with
a unit labor requirement under conditions of perfect competition, and therefore workers in this
sector receive a certain wage of one. In contrast, the presence of labor market frictions in each
diﬀerentiated sector gives rise to equilibrium unemployment. As a result the expected return to
entering a diﬀerentiated sector is equal to one minus the probability of being unemployed times
the expected wage conditional on employment. In equilibrium, this expected return has to be
equalized with the certain wage of one in the homogeneous numéraire sector. While the ex ante
expected wage is therefore the same for all workers, the ex post wage received by a worker varies
substantially within and across sectors depending on the productivity of the firm with which the
worker is matched and the worker’s unobserved ability draw. Workers with higher unobserved
ability are less likely to be unemployed, because they are more likely to have an ability above the
screening cutoﬀ for the firm with which they are matched. Wage inequality is also greater for
workers with higher unobserved ability, because a firm’s screening ability cutoﬀ is increasing in its
productivity, which implies that workers with higher unobserved ability draws are hired by more
1

Jackson et al. (1989) and Terpstra and Rozell (1993) provide evidence that firm recruitment policies vary systematically with firm size as suggested by our model, with larger firms adopting more sophisticated recruitment policies.
See also Autor and Scarborough (2007) for additional evidence on the role of screening in firm recruitment.
2
As more productive firms are larger, pay higher wages and have higher profits, the model’s predictions are in line
with the large empirical literatures establishing a positive employer-size wage premium (see for example the survey
by Oi and Idson, 1999) and providing evidence of rent sharing (see for example Van Reenen, 1996).

2

productive firms that pay higher wages.3 This combination of a lower unemployment rate and
higher wage inequality for workers with higher unobserved ability leads to a non-monotonicity of
income inequality in worker ability. Specifically, workers with low and high unobserved ability face
high income inequality, while workers with intermediate unobserved ability draws enjoy the lowest
income inequality.
Our model yields a variety of new predictions. First, the two dimensions of labor market frictions
have quite diﬀerent eﬀects on labor market outcomes. On the one hand, sectors with higher search
costs have less tight labor markets and so have higher equilibrium unemployment. On the other
hand, firms in sectors with higher screening costs screen less intensively and retain a higher fraction
of the workers with whom they match, which implies lower equilibrium unemployment rates in such
sectors. In contrast, sectoral wage inequality is unaﬀected by levels of search and screening frictions,
because these frictions aﬀect firms of all productivities symmetrically. Search and screening frictions
do nevertheless aﬀect sectoral income inequality, which depends on both the unemployment rate
and wage inequality. Sectors with higher search frictions and lower screening frictions have higher
unemployment rates and hence greater income inequality. While the two dimensions of labor market
frictions have these quite diﬀerent eﬀects on labor market outcomes, their eﬀects on welfare are
the same: increases in either search costs or screening costs distort the allocation of workers across
firms and so reduce welfare.
Second, there is interdependence between heterogeneity in the product and labor markets. In
product markets, the firm—size distribution depends not only on the distribution of firm productivity but also on the endogenous sorting of workers across firms. Increases in the dispersion of
either firm productivity or worker ability lead to greater inequality in firm sizes. In labor markets,
unemployment and wage inequality depend on the dispersion of both firm productivity and worker
ability. Increases in firm productivity dispersion raise both unemployment and wage inequality, because more productive firms have higher screening ability cutoﬀs and pay higher wages. In contrast,
increases in worker ability dispersion can either raise or reduce unemployment and can either raise
or diminish sectoral wage inequality. These ambiguous eﬀects of worker ability dispersion reflect
two counteracting eﬀects. On the one hand, an increase in worker ability dispersion raises the
relative employment of more productive firms, which pay higher wages, and so increases sectoral
wage inequality. On the other hand, an increase in worker ability dispersion reduces the relative
wages paid by more productive firms, which reduces wage inequality. The net eﬀect on sectoral
wage inequality depends on parameters of the firm productivity distribution, the worker ability
distribution, screening costs and the production technology.
Third, within our general equilibrium framework, changes in parameter values can have quite
diﬀerent eﬀects on within—industry and between—industry inequality. Using the structure of our
3

This prediction that wage inequality is increasing in unobserved ability draws is consistent with empirical findings
that residual wage inequality (wage inequality unexplained by observable characteristics) is greater for workers with
higher wages. A substantial component of the increase in U.S. wage inequality over the last three decades has been
attributed to an increase in residual inequality, with some debate about the role of changes in workforce composition
between groups with diﬀerent levels of residual inequality (see for example Lemieux, 2006 and Autor et al., 2005).

3

model we derive closed—form expressions for standard measures of inequality such as the Gini
coeﬃcient and the Theil index as a function of the model’s structural parameters. We adopt the
Theil index as our preferred measure of inequality, because it permits an exact decomposition of
aggregate income inequality into the contributions of within and between—group inequality. In
our framework, sectoral inequality can be decomposed in this way using employed and unemployed
workers as groups, while aggregate inequality can be decomposed in an analogous way using sectors
as groups.
As noted above, sectoral wage inequality is unaﬀected by the level of search and screening costs,
since these costs aﬀect firms of all productivities symmetrically. However, the overall contribution
of within—sector wage inequality to aggregate wage inequality does depend on these costs, because
they influence the relative importance of sectors in aggregate employment. As search and screening
costs in a diﬀerentiated sector rise, the number of workers seeking employment in that sector
falls, and these workers are reallocated to the homogeneous numéraire sector within which there
is complete wage equality. Therefore an increase in either search or screening costs reduces the
contribution of within—sector wage inequality to aggregate wage inequality, because of the change
in employment shares of sectors with diﬀerent levels of within—sector wage inequality.
In contrast, search and screening costs have an ambiguous eﬀect on between—sector wage inequality, which is due to average wage diﬀerences across sectors. In an incomplete specialization
equilibrium, the expected return to entering each sector is equal to the certain wage of one in the
homogeneous numéraire sector, which implies that average wages in a sector are positively related
to the sectoral unemployment rate. A change in search or screening costs in a diﬀerentiated sector can aﬀect both unemployment and hence average wages within the sector and can alter the
sectoral composition of employment in such a way as to either increase or reduce between—sector
wage inequality. Furthermore, when an increase in between—sector wage inequality occurs, it can
be large enough to outweigh the reduction in within—sector wage inequality, so that the eﬀects of
search and screening costs on aggregate wage inequality are ambiguous.4
Our paper is related to recent theoretical work on firm heterogeneity in industrial organization
and international trade, including Hopenhayn (1992), Jovanovic (1982), Melitz (2003), Bernard et
al. (2003), Helpman et al. (2004) and Bernard et al. (2007) among others. In these theories, the
modelling of the labor market has traditionally been highly stylized. Workers are typically assumed
to be identical and reallocation across firms is assumed to be costless. As a result these theories
predict that firms pay workers with the same observed characteristics the same wage irrespective of
the productivity of the firm, which sits awkwardly with the empirical literature discussed above that
finds a positive employer—size wage premium and rent—sharing within firms.5 In contrast, in our
framework rent sharing leads to diﬀerences in wages across firms for workers with the same observed
4

Our model features variation in wages both within between industries, which is consistent with the large literature
on inter-industry wage diﬀerentials (see for example Katz and Summers, 1989), and with the evidence of substantial
wage variation within industries in Davis and Haltiwanger (1991).
5
While wages vary across heterogeneous firms in Yeaple (2005), this variation arises because firms employ workers
with heterogeneous observed characteristics.

4

characteristics, which is consistent with the observed employer—size wage premium. Moreover,
consistent with recent evidence from matched employee—employer data sets, the employer—size
wage premium is driven by the endogenous sorting of workers across firms according to unobserved
worker characteristics.6
Our paper is also related to the large labor and macroeconomics literature concerned with
search frictions in the labor market, following the pioneering work of Mortensen (1970), Pissarides
(1974), Diamond (1982a,b), Mortensen and Pissarides (1994) and Pissarides (2000), as reviewed
in Rogerson et al. (2005). Our work is most closely related to Helpman and Itskhoki (2007), who
introduce search frictions into a model of firm heterogeneity and examine the general equilibrium
relationship between unemployment, labor market institutions and international trade.7 Our main
point of departure from their work is the introduction of worker heterogeneity, which leads to
wage variation across firms and workers within sectors. In our framework, both the probability of
unemployment and the distribution of wages conditional on employment vary endogenously with
unobserved worker ability.
One strand of the search frictions literature examines models of labor market search with firm
and worker heterogeneity, including Shimer and Smith (2000) and Postel—Vinay and Robin (2002).8
Whereas these theories assume that firms costlessly observe the ability of workers once matching
occurs, firms in our framework must undergo a costly process of screening in order to obtain information about worker ability. More generally, these existing theories develop sophisticated models
of the labor market, but in the interests of tractability keep the modelling of the product market
more sparse. In contrast, the tractability of our framework allows us to combine the modelling
of search in labor markets with a rich specification of product markets and to embed individual
sectors within a general equilibrium structure for the economy as a whole. Thus, in product markets, we determine the measure of firms, the equilibrium distribution of productivity across active
firms, and the firm size distribution. Similarly, in labor markets, our analysis determines the total
number of individuals seeking employment in an industry, the size and composition of employment
for individual firms, the unemployment rate as a function of worker ability, and the distribution
of wages and income as a function of worker ability. We are therefore able to examine the interrelationship between heterogeneity in labor and product markets and to determine the roles of
within and between-group inequality in influencing aggregate inequality.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines the model and solves for
general equilibrium. Section 3 examines variation in sectoral production and unemployment, the
distribution of production across firms within sectors, and the distributions of wages and income
6
For example, using French matched employee-employer data, Abowd et al. (1999) find that around 90 percent of
the employer-size wage premium is accounted for by unobserved worker fixed eﬀects. See the Abowd and Kramatz
(1999) survey for a discussion of similar findings from other countries.
7
Other research on labor market imperfections and international trade includes Brecher (1974), Copeland (1989),
Davidson et al. (1988, 1999), Davis and Harrigan (2007), Egger and Kreickemeier (2006), and Felbermayr et al.
(2008).
8
A related literature has examined two-sided search with non-transferable utility, as for example in Burdett
and Coles (1997). Another line of research in Ohnsorge and Trefler (2007) has examined two-dimensional worker
heterogeneity within the context of the Roy model.

5

across workers within sectors as a function of structural parameters. Section 4 examines the contribution of within—sector and between—sector variation to aggregate unemployment and inequality.
Section 5 characterizes the role of unobserved worker ability in shaping unemployment prospects,
wage inequality and income inequality. Section 6 concludes, while the Appendix contains detailed
derivations and formal proofs of the results.

2

The Model

This section lays out the model and characterizes its general equilibrium. We start by specifying
preferences, technologies and market structures. We proceed by solving the partial equilibrium
problem of the firm which determines optimal hiring policies, bargained wages and profits. This
puts us in a position to characterize sectoral equilibrium in product and labor markets. We then
describe the general equilibrium allocations within and between sectors. Finally, we close the section
by summarizing the imposed parameter restrictions.

2.1

Preferences and Demand

Consider an economy with a representative agent with quasi—linear preferences over consumption
of a homogenous product q0 and a number of diﬀerentiated products Qi :9
I
X
1 ζi
U = q0 +
Q ,
ζi i

0 < ζ i < 1.

i=1

We assume that the consumer has a large enough income level to always consume positive quantities
of the homogeneous good q0 , in which case it is convenient to choose it as numéraire and normalize
its price to p0 = 1.
The consumption index for each of the diﬀerentiated products takes the constant elasticity of
substitution form:
∙Z
¸1
βi
βi
qi (ω) dω
,
ζ i < β i < 1,
(1)
Qi =
ω∈Ωi

where qi (ω) represents consumption of variety ω, Ωi denotes the set of varieties available for
consumption in sector i, and β i is a parameter that controls the elasticity of substitution between
varieties within sector i.10 Additionally, we denote by pi (ω) the price of variety ω in sector i and
by Pi the ideal price index for sector i associated with the consumption index (1).
−1/(1−ζ i )
and the
With these preferences, the demand for sector i’s diﬀerentiated good is Qi = Pi
demand for a diﬀerentiated variety in a sector can be written solely as a function of the consumption
9

While we adopt the quasi-linear functional form for tractability, the analysis can also be undertaken with a
homothetic upper-tier utility over q0 and Qi ’s.
10
The restriction β i > ζ i ensures that varieties within a sector are better substitutes for each other than for the
homogeneous good or for varieties in other sectors.

6

index for this sector and the variety price:
qi (ω) =

−
Qi

β i −ζ i
1−β i

1
− 1−β

pi (ω)

i

.

(2)

Tighter product market competition–reflected in a low sectoral price level Pi –leads to higher
aggregate sectoral demand, Qi , but to lower demand for each individual variety in the sector, qi (ω).
Finally, the indirect utility function is a quasi—linear function of expenditure, E, and the price
indices for each of the diﬀerentiated products:11
V=E+

I
X
1−ζ
ζi

ζ

i

i
− 1−ζ
i
Pi

i=1

=E+

I
X
1−ζ
ζi

i

ζ

Qi i ,

(3)

i=1

where the final expression uses the equilibrium relationship between Pi and Qi and will prove to
ζi
i
be most convenient for our further analysis. Note that 1−ζ
ζ i Qi is the consumer surplus generated
by sector i so that social welfare is the sum of income and consumer surpluses in all diﬀerentiated
sectors.

2.2

Technologies and Market Structure

The economy is populated by a continuum of identical families of measure one. A family’s preferences are those of the representative consumer described above and each family includes a measure
of L̄ workers who maximize the family’s utility.12
Each worker is endowed with one unit of raw labor and an unobservable ability a. Workers are
heterogeneous in terms of their ability, which is distributed according to the cumulative distribution
function Ga (a). We assume that worker ability is Pareto distributed, so that Ga (a) = 1−(amin /a)k ,
a ≥ amin , where k > 2 ensures that the variance of worker ability is finite.
Unobservable worker ability has two possible interpretations in the model: general skills that are
equally applicable across all firms or specific skills that are drawn upon matching with a particular
firm.13 While these two alternative treatments of a are formally equivalent, the interpretation of
variation in labor market outcomes with a is somewhat diﬀerent. We will largely adopt the second
interpretation in the discussion below. As this implies that worker ability is specific to a firm—
worker match, it is natural to allow the parameters of the worker ability distribution (amin i , ki ) to
vary across sectors depending on the nature of the production technology.14
S
−ζ /(1−ζ i )
The condition for positive consumption of the homogeneous good can be written as q0 = E− Ii=1 Pi i
> 0.
We introduce families with a measure of workers so that the idiosyncratic risk faced by an individual worker is
completely diversified at the family level. As a result, each worker acts as a risk-neutral agent. An equivalent analysis
can be undertaken without the family assumption if we switch to a homothetic preference specification (see Helpman
and Itskhoki, 2007).
13
While these two extremes are convenient special cases, one can consider intermediate cases, i.e., when the productivity of a match has a worker eﬀect so that high ability workers tend to generate high productivity matches but with
some noise. For a given worker the correlation of match productivities across diﬀerent firms can be taken as a measure
of skill generality and can vary continuously between 0 and 1. This constitutes the most general interpretation of
ability in our model.
14
Even if worker ability captures general skills, the eﬀective contribution of these skills to production could vary
11
12

7

The homogeneous good is produced with raw labor alone and therefore all workers have the
same productivity in the homogeneous good sector. There are no labor market frictions in this
sector and the product market is competitive. The production technology is the same for all firms
with one unit of labor required to produce one unit of the homogeneous good.
The production of each of the diﬀerentiated products i occurs under monopolistic competition.
Without loss of generality, we consider one of these diﬀerentiated sectors and hence omit the
dependence of variables on i to simplify notation. There is a competitive fringe of potential entrants,
who can choose to enter a given diﬀerentiated product sector by paying a sunk entry cost fe in
units of the homogeneous good. Once the sunk entry cost is paid, the firm observes its productivity
θ, which is drawn from a known distribution with cumulative distribution function Gθ (θ). Firm
productivity is also assumed to be Pareto distributed, so that Gθ (θ) = 1 − (θmin /θ)z , θ ≥ θmin ,
where z > 2 ensures that the variance of firm productivity is finite. As all firms with the same
productivity behave symmetrically, firm—specific variables are from now on indexed by θ alone.
Production of a diﬀerentiated variety involves a fixed production cost fd in terms of the homogeneous good. The amount of output of the variety produced, y, depends upon the productivity of
the firm, θ, the number of workers hired, h, and the average ability of these workers, ā, according
to the following production technology:
y (θ) = θh (θ)γ ā (θ) ,

0 < γ < 1.

Therefore doubling a firm’s productivity, θ, or the average ability of its workers, ā, doubles the
firm’s output. There are however diminishing marginal returns to hiring additional workers, h, as
a result of a factor of production in fixed supply at the level of the firm.
Our production function can be justified in two diﬀerent ways. First, one can think about
production in teams in which the productivity of a worker depends on the average productivity of
his team. In an extreme version, a worker’s productivity aﬀects output only through its contribution
to the team’s productivity.15 Second, one can think about managerial time as a constraint on the
organization of production.16 Our specification can be derived from a Rosen (1982) style model in
which managerial attention is equally allocated to each worker (see Appendix).
Firms in each diﬀerentiated sector face labor market frictions. There are costs of searching for
workers to be considered for employment in the firm and also costs of screening those workers to
ascertain their ability. A firm that pays a search cost of bn in terms of the homogeneous good can
randomly sample n workers, where the search cost b is endogenously determined by the tightness
diﬀerentially across sectors depending on the nature of the production technology. Therefore the general skill interpretation is also consistent with a sector-specific distribution of worker ability in some eﬀective units. However, in
this case the interpretation of parameter k is diﬀerent; it measures inversely how sensitive the production technology
is to the ability of workers.
15
Lucas (1988) introduced human capital externalities into a growth model and Moretti (2004) provides evidence
of human capital externalities within plants.
16
See the discussion in Lucas (1978), Rosen (1982), and Weiss and Landau (1984). See also Garicano (2000) and
Garicano and Rossi-Hansberg (2006) for models in which complementarities between worker and managerial ability
arise from the processing and communication of information within the firm.

8

of the labor market as discussed below. The firm can also screen the sampled workers and identify
those with an ability below ac (with ac ≥ amin ) by paying a screening cost of caδc /δ units of the
homogeneous good, where c > 0 and δ > 0.17 These screening costs capture the costs of designing
a test to identify workers with an ability below ac , and are therefore assumed to be independent of
the number of workers screened.18 The screening costs are however increasing in the ability cutoﬀ
ac chosen by the firm, because a more complex and therefore costlier test is required for higher
ability cutoﬀs.
As search is random, the ability distribution among workers sampled by a firm is still described
by the ex ante distribution function Ga (a). With a Pareto distribution of worker ability, the
number of workers hired with abilities greater than the cutoﬀ is h = n (amin /ac )k , and the average
ability of these hired workers is ā = kac /(k − 1). Therefore an increase in ac has two opposing
eﬀects on output: the fraction of sampled workers that are hired falls, which reduces output, while
the average ability of the hired workers rises, which increases output. Using these expressions for
h and ā, the production technology can be written as follows:
y (θ) =

kaγk
min
θn (θ)γ ac (θ)1−γk .
k−1

(4)

We further impose a parameter restriction 0 < γ < 1/k so that a firm’s output in (4) is increasing
in both the number of workers sampled, n, and the ability cutoﬀ, ac . The intuitive interpretation
of this inequality is that there are suﬃciently strong diminishing returns to the number of workers
hired (low γ) relative to the dispersion of worker ability (high 1/k) that firm output can be increased
by not hiring the least productive workers.19

2.3

Wages, Employment and Profits

There are no labor market frictions in the homogeneous—product sector, which implies that workers
can be replaced there at no cost. Therefore the labor market is competitive in this industry and all
firms pay the same wages. Since the product market for the homogeneous good is also competitive
and the value of the marginal product of labor equals one, the wage rate in this industry equals
one.
The presence of labor market frictions in the diﬀerentiated product sectors implies that workers
inside the firm are not interchangeable with workers outside the firm. Of the n workers sampled,
the firm hires h = n (amin /ac )k workers with abilities above the cutoﬀ ac , and the remaining
17

In this formulation, there is a fixed cost of arranging a screening test, even one that is uninformative about worker
ability, ac = amin . We focus on interior equilibria in which firms of all productivities choose screening tests that are
informative, ac > amin , and so the fixed cost of arranging a screening test is always incurred.
18
There are therefore increasing returns to scale in screening. All results generalize immediately to the case where
the screening costs are separable in ac and n and linear in n.
19
In contrast, when γ > 1/k, no firm wants to screen workers because employing even the least productive worker
raises the firm’s output and revenue, while screening is costly to the firm. As a result, the model reduces to a model
without the possibility of screening as studied in Helpman and Itskhoki (2007), and thus we do not discuss this case
here.

9

h
i
1 − (amin /ac )k n workers become unemployed. We show in the Appendix that the marginal
product of every worker with ability below ac is negative when γ < 1/k, and therefore the firm has
no interest in employing these workers even at a wage of zero, which is the income of an unemployed
worker.
Following Stole and Zwiebel (1996a,b), we assume that the firm and hired workers engage in
strategic bargaining, and as a result divide the revenue from production according to Shapley
values. At the bargaining stage, the search and screening costs have been sunk by the firm, and the
outside option of hired workers is unemployment whose value is normalized to zero. Furthermore,
the only information revealed by screening about worker ability is that each of the hired workers
has an ability above the cutoﬀ ac , so that as discussed further in the appendix neither the firm
nor workers know the individual abilities. Therefore, the outcome of this bargaining game is that
fraction 1/(1+βγ) of the revenue is retained by the firm while each worker gets fraction βγ/ (1 + βγ)
of the average revenue per worker.20
From the expression for equilibrium demand (2) for a variety of a diﬀerentiated product, firm
revenue depends on aggregate demand conditions as captured by the consumption index, Q, and
firm output, y:
(5)
r (θ) = Q−(β−ζ) y (θ)β .
Given the division of revenue from the bargaining game, a θ—type firm decides whether to remain
in the industry by comparing its variable profits to the fixed production cost fd . Only those firms
with a productivity above a zero—profit cutoﬀ θd generate suﬃciently large variable profits to cover
the fixed production cost. Each firm that enters with a productivity above θd chooses the number
of workers to sample and the ability cutoﬀ at which to screen those workers to maximize its profits.
Formally, using the production technology (4) and revenue (5), the firm’s problem can be written
as:
⎧
⎫
"Ã
#β
!
γk
⎨ 1
⎬
kamin
c δ
,
(6)
Q−(β−ζ)
a
−
bn
−
−
f
θnγ a1−γk
π(θ) ≡ max
d
c
⎭
n≥0, ⎩ 1 + βγ
k−1
δ c
ac ≥amin

where π(θ) is the profit of the firm. The presence of a fixed production cost implies that there is
a zero—profit productivity cutoﬀ, θd , below which firms exit. We concentrate on interior equilibria
in which all entering firms choose to screen workers, so that ac (θ) > amin for all θ ≥ θd . This
condition is satisfied for suﬃciently small screening costs, c, and the explicit parameter restriction
ensuring it is provided in Table 1 below. In such an interior equilibrium, the first—order conditions
for the firm’s profit—maximization problem given in the Appendix imply the following relationship
20

For details of the derivation see Acemoglu, Antràs and Helpman (2007). Note that the share of revenue received
by workers is endogenous and depends only on the curvature of demand and the production technology. The less
concave are demand and the production technology, the lower the rate of diminishing returns as workers are added
and, as a result, workers are able to negotiate a larger share of revenue. Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003) prove a
similar result in a model with Nash bargaining and endogenous worker bargaining power. It is straightforward to
incorporate an exogenous worker bargaining power parameter into our analysis.

10

between the number of workers sampled and the screening cutoﬀ:
(1 − γk) bn (θ) = γcac (θ)δ .

(7)

In words, firms that sample more workers also screen to a higher ability cutoﬀ and therefore hire
workers with greater average abilities. Intuitively, as a firm samples more workers, the marginal
product of those workers for a given value of average ability declines, which increases the firm’s
return to screening to a higher ability cutoﬀ and hiring fewer low ability workers.
From the division of revenue in the bargaining game and the first—order conditions to the firm’s
profit maximization problem,21 the equilibrium wage of hired workers, w (θ), is increasing in the
ability cutoﬀ, ac (θ):
∙
¸
¸
∙
βγ r (θ) ac (θ) k
ac (θ) k
βγ r (θ)
=
=b
.
w (θ) ≡
1 + βγ h (θ)
1 + βγ n (θ) amin
amin

(8)

In contrast to standard models of heterogeneous firms, in which there is a common wage across all
firms independent of their productivity, our model features wage variation across firms as a result
of endogenous diﬀerences in workforce composition.
Further, the number of workers hired by a firm that samples n (θ) workers and chooses an ability
cutoﬀ ac (θ) is h (θ) = n (θ) [amin /ac (θ)]k . Combining this expression with equation (7), we obtain
an equilibrium relationship between the number of workers hired and the ability cutoﬀ:
(1 − γk) bh (θ) = γcakmin ac (θ)δ−k .

(9)

On the one hand, the number of workers hired is increasing in the number of workers sampled for
a given value of the ability cutoﬀ. On the other hand, according to (7), firms that sample more
workers screen to a higher ability cutoﬀ, which reduces the fraction of the workers sampled that are
hired. Under the assumption δ > k, the first of these two eﬀects dominates, and firms that sample
more workers both screen to a higher ability cutoﬀ and hire more workers.
Combining (8) and (9), we see that when δ > k, larger firms in terms of employment are also
those that pay higher wages. Formally, the elasticity of the wage rate with respect to firm size is
given by
k
∂ log w(θ)
=
,
∂ log h(θ)
δ−k
which is the proper measure of the size—wage premium in our model since workers’ ability diﬀerences
are unobservable. Therefore, assuming δ > k makes the model consistent with the empirical
literature that finds a positive relationship between employer size and wages (see for example the
survey by Oi and Idson, 1999). Our model also features wage variation across industries in line with
the extensive literature on inter—industry wage diﬀerentials (see for example Katz and Summers,
1989). From equation (8), diﬀerences in average wages across industries arise because of diﬀerences
21

Specifically, the first order condition for (6) with respect to n(θ) implies: βγ/(1 + βγ)r(θ) = bn(θ).

11

in labor market frictions, b, and endogenous diﬀerences in workforce composition linked to the
screening ability cutoﬀ, ac . While our model captures wage variation across firms and industries,
our assumption on the unobservable nature of worker heterogeneity implies that wages are the same
across all workers within a firm.22
From the first—order conditions to the firm’s profit maximization problem, equilibrium profits
are equal to a constant proportion of firm revenue minus the fixed production cost:
π (θ) =

Γ
r (θ) − fd ,
1 + βγ

where
Γ ≡ 1 − βγ −

(10)

β
(1 − γk) > 0
δ

and the firm’s revenue is:23
h
i1/Γ
r (θ) = κr b−βγ c−β(1−γk)/δ Q−(β−ζ) θβ
.

(11)

This expression implies that the relative revenue of two firms with diﬀerent productivity levels
¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡
¢β/Γ
.
depends solely on their relative productivities: r θ0 /r θ00 = θ0 /θ00

2.4

Sectoral Equilibrium

Sectoral equilibrium is referenced by a set of five variables: (i) the zero—profit productivity cutoﬀ
below which firms exit, θd ; (ii) the real consumption index, Q; (iii) the measure of entering firms,
M ; (iv) the measure of workers seeking employment, L; and (v) the tightness of the labor market,
denoted by x ≡ N/L, where N is the measure of workers sampled by the sector’s firms. We explain
the role of x below.
2.4.1

Product Markets

We begin by determining the zero—profit productivity cutoﬀ, the real consumption index and the
mass of firms in each diﬀerentiated product sector. The productivity cutoﬀ below which firms exit,
θd , is defined by the following zero—profit cutoﬀ condition:
h
i1/Γ
π(θd ) = κπ b−βγ c−β(1−γk)/δ Q−(β−ζ) θβd
− fd = 0,

(12)

where the constant κπ ≡ κr Γ/(1 + βγ) and its explicit expression is provided in the Appendix. This
condition implies a positive equilibrium relationship between θd and Q; it also allows to express
22
Nevertheless average wages conditional on ability vary across workers because higher ability workers are more
likely to be hired by more productive firms, as discussed further below. An extension of the model to allow a
component of worker ability to be observed upon matching would generate wage variation within firms.
23
The constant factor in this expression, κr , is derived in the Appendix; it depends on the following parameters of
the model: β, γ, δ, k, amin . Explicit solutions for other firm-specific variables can also be found in the Appendix.

12

the profit of a θ—type firm as:
π(θ) = fd

"µ

θ
θd

¶β/Γ

#

−1 .

Finally, to determine the equilibrium value of θd , we use the free entry condition that equates the
sunk entry cost and the expected value of entry:
fe =

Z

∞

Z

π (θ) dGθ (θ) = fd

θd

∞

θd

"µ

θ
θd

¶β/Γ

#

− 1 dGθ (θ) .

(13)

The free entry condition (13) pins down a unique equilibrium value of θd as a function of parameters
alone. We assume that in equilibrium some firms exit, so that θd > θmin , which is satisfied for
suﬃciently large fd and the explicit condition is provided in Table 1 below.
With θd uniquely determined by the free entry condition (13), the zero—profit cutoﬀ condition
(12) pins down a unique equilibrium value of the real consumption index, Q. With Q determined,
the equilibrium mass of firms can be solved from the goods market clearing requirement that
aggregate expenditure in each diﬀerentiated sector equals aggregate revenue. Specifically, combining
the definition of the real consumption index in (1) with goods market clearing (q (θ) = y (θ)) and
the expression for equilibrium firm revenue in (5), which implies y (θ)β = Qβ−ζ r (θ), we obtain:
1 + βγ
M
Q = fd
Γ
ζ

Z

∞µ

θd

θ
θd

¶β/Γ

dGθ (θ) ,

(14)

where we have used the relationship between relative firm revenues, r (θ) /r (θd ) = (θ/θd )β/Γ , and
the zero—profit productivity cutoﬀ condition, which implies r (θd ) = fd (1 + βγ)/Γ. Therefore, the
left—hand side of (14) is the total consumer spending on the diﬀerentiated good in the sector,
R∞
Qζ = P Q, while the right—hand side is the total revenue of the firms, M θd r(θ)dGθ (θ).
2.4.2

Labor Markets

We next determine the tightness of the labor market, x ≡ N/L, and the measure of workers seeking
employment, L. The measure of workers sampled by firms is N < L due to the labor market frictions. Following the standard Diamond-Mortensen-Pissarides model of search and unemployment,
the search cost, b, is assumed to depend on the tightness of the labor market, x. Specifically, we
follow Blanchard and Gali (2008) and Helpman and Itskhoki (2007) in assuming
b = α0 xα1 ,

α0 > 1,

α1 > 0.

As shown in their papers, this relationship can be derived from a constant returns to scale CobbDouglas matching function and a cost of posting vacancies. The parameter α0 is larger the higher
is the cost of posting vacancies and the less productive is the matching technology,24 while α1
24
Helpman and Itskhoki (2007) also show the equivalence of hiring and firing costs in this framework. Additionally,
they show that higher worker bargaining power has the same eﬀects as a higher labor market friction parameter α0 .

13

depends on the weight of vacancies in the Cobb-Douglas matching function.
In equilibrium workers must be indiﬀerent between employment in the homogeneous sector and
searching for a job in each of the diﬀerentiated product sectors. As there are no search frictions in
the homogeneous sector, workers entering that sector receive a wage of one with certainty. In each
of the diﬀerentiated product sectors, the presence of search frictions implies that workers can be
unemployed either as a result of not being sampled by firms or of not being hired once sampled by a
firm, because their ability is below the ability cutoﬀ of that firm. Workers are unaware of their own
ability when they decide which sector to enter. Therefore the condition for workers to be indiﬀerent
across sectors is that the probability of being sampled times the expected wage conditional on being
sampled in each diﬀerentiated product sector equals the certain wage of one in the homogeneous
good sector.25
The expected wage conditional on being sampled by a firm is equal to the wage paid by the
firm times the number of workers hired divided by the number of workers sampled. Noting that
the number of workers hired is the fraction [amin /ac (θ)]k of the number of workers sampled, and
using the expression for the firm’s equilibrium wage (8), we obtain:
w (θ) h (θ)
= b.
n (θ)
On the one hand, the higher the screening ability cutoﬀ of a firm, the lower the probability of being
hired conditional on being sampled. On the other hand, the higher the screening ability cutoﬀ of
a firm, the greater the average ability of the firm’s workforce, and the higher the wage paid to the
workers hired. In equilibrium these two eﬀects exactly oﬀset one another to leave the expected wage
conditional on being sampled the same across all firms and equal to the search cost b. Therefore,
in equilibrium there is no incentive for workers to try to direct their search across firms within a
diﬀerentiated product sector.
The requirement that workers are indiﬀerent between receiving a certain wage of one in the
homogeneous good sector and entering a diﬀerentiated product sector therefore becomes 1 = xb,
where labor market tightness x = N/L is also the probability of being sampled in that diﬀerentiated
sector. Together with the definition of b ≡ α0 xα1 from the matching technology, where α0 is assumed
to exceed one, we obtain:
1
1+α1

b = α0

>1

1
− 1+α

and

x = 1/ b = α0

1

< 1.

(15)

Therefore, as b is uniquely determined by exogenous parameters of the model, we treat it in our
discussion below as a parameter that summarizes the degree of search frictions in a sector, including
25
This equilibrium condition is similar to Harris and Todaro (1970). Moreover, while individual workers entering
a diﬀerentiated product sector have an uncertain income, this idiosyncratic risk is perfectly diversified at the level of
the family. Therefore families require no risk premium in order to supply workers to a diﬀerentiated product sector.
A model with homothetic preferences that exhibit constant relative risk aversion and no family networks, will feature
a constant risk-premium in every sector, with the risk premium depending on the probability of finding a job and the
probabilistic distribution of wages conditional on finding employment.

14

hiring and firing costs (see footnote 24).
To determine the mass of workers searching for employment in a diﬀerentiated product sector,
L, we again use the requirement that workers are indiﬀerent between sectors. This requirement
implies that the total wage bill in each diﬀerentiated product sector equals L, which ensures that
the ex ante expected wage of every worker equals one. This yields the following expression for
equilibrium L:
Z ∞
Z ∞
βγ
M
w (θ) h (θ) dGθ (θ) =
r(θ)dGθ (θ),
L=M
1 + βγ
θd
θd
where the second equality follows from the first—order conditions for the firm’s profit—maxmization
problem given in the Appendix. Using (14), the mass of workers searching for employment in a
diﬀerentiated product sector can be expressed as
L=

βγ
Qζ .
1 + βγ

(16)

This expression can be interpreted as the identity between the sectoral wage bill, L, and the share
of sectoral revenues, Qζ , that goes to the workers.
2.4.3

Equilibrium Allocations

Equations (12)—(16) yield five equations that determine the equilibrium vector (θd , Q, M, x, L) for
a given diﬀerentiated product sector. This equilibrium vector varies across diﬀerentiated product
sectors with the values of parameters. From equation (15), the equilibrium tightness of the labor
market x is uniquely determined by the labor market friction parameters summarized by b. For
the Pareto distribution of productivity, the remaining elements of the equilibrium vector can be
expressed in closed form as:
⎛

⎞

⎛ h³

β
zΓ−β

´

fd
fe

i1/z

θmin
θd
⎜
⎟ ⎜
£
⎜
⎜ Q ⎟ ⎜ κ b−βγ c−β(1−γk)/δ ¤1/(β−ζ)
Q
⎜
⎟
£
¤
⎜ M ⎟=⎜
⎜
⎝
⎠ ⎝ κM b−βγ c−β(1−γk)/δ ζ/(β−ζ)
£
¤ζ/(β−ζ)
L
κ b−βγ c−β(1−γk)/δ
L

⎞

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟,
⎟
⎠

(17)

where the constants κQ , κM and κL are functions of the model’s parameters other than b and c and
the Appendix provides explicit expressions for these constants. Note that the search and screening
costs, b and c, do not aﬀect the zero—profit productivity cutoﬀ, but reduce sectoral output (and,
hence, consumer surplus), the sectoral number of firms and the sectoral supply of workers.
With the equilibrium vector determined, firm—specific variables within a diﬀerentiated product
sector can be solved for as a function of firm productivity. To determine the firm—specific variables,
we use two sets of relationships. First, the expression for a firm’s revenue (11) implies r (θ) =
(θ/θd )β/Γ r (θd ), while the zero—profit productivity cutoﬀ condition (12) implies r (θd ) = fd (1 +
βγ)/Γ. Second, the first—order conditions to the firm’s profit maximization problem (6) imply that

15

the number of workers sampled, the number of workers hired, the screening ability cutoﬀ and the
wage can be each written in terms of firm revenue. Combining these two sets of relationships
yields explicit solutions for all firm variables as functions of firm productivity, the zero—profit
cutoﬀ productivity and various parameters (see Appendix). Additionally, we introduce a standard
revenue—based measure of labor productivity t (θ) ≡ r (θ) /h (θ). Taken together, the firm—specific
variables can be expressed as:
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝

r(θ)
n(θ)
h(θ)
ac (θ)
w(θ)
t (θ)

⎞

⎛

1+βγ
Γ fd

³ ´β/Γ
θ
θ
´dβ/Γ

⎟ ⎜
³
⎟ ⎜
βγ fd
θ
⎟ ⎜
Γ b
θd
⎟ ⎜
⎜
h
i
³ ´
⎟ ⎜
⎟ ⎜ βγ fd β(1−γk) fd −k/δ θ β(1−k/δ)/Γ
⎟ ⎜ Γ b
Γ
θd
caδmin
⎟=⎜ h
⎟ ⎜ β(1−γk) fd i1/δ ³ θ ´β/δΓ
⎟ ⎜
Γ
c
θ
⎟ ⎜
i d³ ´
⎟ ⎜ h
⎟ ⎜ b β(1−γk) fd k/δ θ βk/δΓ
⎟ ⎜
Γ
θd
caδmin
⎠ ⎝
h
ik/δ ³ ´βk/δΓ
β(1−γk) fd
θ
b 1+βγ
βγ
Γ
θd
caδ
min

⎞

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟,
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠

(18)

and the explicit solution for θd with a Pareto productivity distribution is given in (17).
It follows that more productive firms–with higher values of θ–are larger in terms of revenue,
output, the number of workers sampled and the number of workers hired than less productive firms.
Additionally, more productive firms have a higher screening ability cutoﬀ, which raises the average
unobserved ability of their workforce, and leads them to pay higher wages than less productive
firms.26 Workers with the same observed characteristics therefore receive diﬀerent wages depending
on the productivity of the firm with which they are matched. As the wage per worked hired is
proportional to revenue per worker hired, the endogenous diﬀerences in workforce composition that
induce wage variation across firms also lead to diﬀerences in measured labor productivity.27

2.5

Parameter Restrictions

Before analyzing the model’s comparative statics, we summarize the assumed parameter restrictions
in Table 1, where sectoral subscripts are again omitted to simplify notation. The first restriction
ensures that products within a sector are better substitutes for each other than for products in
other sectors; it also ensures that the elasticities of substitution are larger than one. The second
restriction ensures that a firm’s output is rising in the number of sampled workers and in the ability
cutoﬀ of the retained workforce. As screening is costly, firms will only screen workers if not hiring
the lowest ability workers increases revenue and hence profits. This second parameter restriction
26

As our model features wage bargaining, the higher average worker ability of more productive firms does not lead
to higher wages directly, but rather indirectly by increasing the opportunity cost for the firm of finding a suitable
substitute for its average employee.
27
In our model, this variation in measured productivity across firms exists even without taking into account fixed
costs of production. In contrast, in heterogeneous firm models with homogenous labor (e.g. Melitz 2003), revenue
per worker hired is the same across firms unless the resources utilized in the fixed costs of production are taken into
account.

16

ensures that this is the case, and implies that the marginal product of workers with abilities strictly
less than ac (θ) is negative for a firm with productivity θ, as discussed further in the appendix.
The first restriction in the third line ensures that a firm that samples more workers also hires
more workers, despite the fact that it screens them to a higher ability cutoﬀ. Additionally, the
two restrictions in this line ensure a finite variance of the distribution of ability and productivity
respectively. The restriction in the fourth line ensures that the labor market frictions are binding
and there is slack in the labor market (i.e., x < 1) as compared to the frictionless allocation.
Table 1: Parameters
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

0<ζ<β<1
0 < γ < 1/k
2 < k < δ, z > 2
α0 > 1
zΓ > 2β
βfd > (zΓ − β) fe
β (1 − γk) fd > cΓaδmin

Before discussing the remaining restrictions, recall that the derived parameter Γ is given by
Γ = 1 − βγ −

β
(1 − γk).
δ

By construction Γ < 1 and the parameter restrictions in lines 1 through 4 of Table 1 ensure that
Γ > 1/2 > 0.28 The parameter restriction in the fifth line of Table 1, as will become clear later,
ensures finite values of the means and variances in the cross—firm distribution of wages, revenue
and employment.29 It is useful to introduce here another derived parameter, μ, which will be an
important statistic for characterizing income inequality in the following sections:
μ≡

βk/δ
.
zΓ − β

(19)

Importantly, the restriction that zΓ > 2β also ensures that 0 < μ < 1.
The sixth and seventh restrictions ensure an interior equilibrium, i.e., that θd > θmin and
ac (θd ) > amin , respectively, and follow directly from (17) and (18). In words, these conditions
ensure that some firms find their productivity to be too low to profitably operate in the industry
and every remaining firm actively screens workers. Given the other parameters, the former condition
is satisfied when the fixed cost fd is high enough, while the latter is satisfied when the screening
cost c is low enough.
28

Note that Γ is increasing in δ and decreasing in γ. Therefore, the lower bound for Γ is approached when we send
γ to its highest possible value of 1/k and send δ to its lowest possible value of k: Γ > 1 − β/k > 1 − β/2 > 1/2.
Moreover, (1 − β/k) is the greatest lower bound for Γ.
29
As follows from footnote 28, the previous parameter restrictions ensure only that zΓ > z(1 −β/k). This is enough
to guarantee zΓ > β, which ensures finite means of the across-firm wage, revenue and employment distributions, but
is not enough for zΓ > 2β, which ensures finite variances of these distributions.

17

3

Variation Across Sectors

Having developed the model, we now examine how product and labor market outcomes vary across
sectors. One of our central concerns is how firm heterogeneity, worker heterogeneity and labor
market frictions interact to influence the distribution of economic activity across firms, the level of
unemployment, and the distribution of income across workers. For this reason, we focus on sectoral
variation in the parameters determining firm heterogeneity, worker heterogeneity and labor market
frictions, holding constant the other parameters of the model. In analyzing firm and worker heterogeneity, we focus on the shape parameters k and z respectively, which with a Pareto distribution
are suﬃcient statistics for standard measures of dispersion, as will be seen below. In analyzing
labor market frictions, we concentrate on the parameters determining the level of search costs, b,
and screening costs, c, treating the screening cost elasticity δ as a fixed technological parameter.

3.1

Sector Aggregates

The equilibrium allocation (17) implies systematic diﬀerences across sectors in the number of firms
M , the number of workers seeking jobs L, and real output Q. It is evident from this equation that
the levels of the b and c do not aﬀect the sectoral productivity cutoﬀ θd , but higher values of these
costs reduce the real consumption index, the mass of firms, and the mass of workers seeking jobs
in the industry. These findings are summarized in the following proposition:
Proposition 1 The search cost b and screening cost c do not aﬀect the productivity of the least
productive firms in the industry θd . Yet real consumption of the diﬀerentiated product Q, the mass
of firms M , and the mass of workers seeking employment L, are all lower in sectors with higher
levels of search cost b or screening cost c.
Proof. The proposition follows immediately from the equilibrium conditions (12)—(16) as summarized in the equilibrium vector (17).
The intuition for this result is that a higher search cost b or screening cost c reduces the revenue
of all firms by the same proportion (see (11)) and, therefore, has no eﬀect on the zero—profit cutoﬀ
productivity below which firms exit. However, as the search cost or the screening cost rise, the
revenue required to break even rises (equations 6 and 12). Therefore the mass of firms in the
diﬀerentiated product sector must fall in order to diminish product market competition and raise
firm revenue. This decline in the mass of firms leads to a reduction in real output and the number
of workers seeking jobs in the diﬀerentiated product sector.30
An important implication of the result for Q is that lower frictions, i.e., lower search or screening
costs, raise welfare, independently of the sector in which they take place and independently of their
30

In contrast, an increase in the elasticity of the screening cost with respect to the ability cutoﬀ, δ, increases the
relative profitability of low productivity firms that screen to a low ability cutoﬀ. Therefore, from equation (13), the
zero-profit productivity cutoﬀ below which firms exit, θd , falls.

18

impact on unemployment and inequality as characterized below. We therefore state the following
proposition:
Proposition 2 Welfare is decreasing in the search cost b and screening cost c in any diﬀerentiated
product sector.
Proof. The proposition follows immediately from equations (12)—(16) and from the indirect utility
function (3), noting that in equilibrium aggregate spending E equals aggregate income, which in
turn is given by L̄.
Intuitively, the presence of search and screening costs distorts the allocation of workers across
sectors on the one hand and across firms within every sector on the other, and higher values of
either b or c reduce welfare. Interestingly, the negative welfare eﬀects of each one of these cost
parameters depends on the level of the other cost parameter. In particular, the marginal negative
welfare eﬀect of a rise in b is lower in absolute value the larger c is, and the negative marginal
welfare eﬀect of c is lower in absolute value the larger b is.31 This results from the fact that an
initially high cost leads to a low level of economic activity and a small consumer surplus, so that
further cost increases have a smaller impact on welfare.

3.2

Distributions of Firm Size and Labor Productivity

The distributions of firm size and measured labor productivity depend on the interaction of firm
heterogeneity, worker heterogeneity and the screening technology. From the solution of firm—specific
variables in equation (18), employment, revenue and measured labor productivity are power functions of firm productivity, which is itself Pareto distributed. Therefore these variables are also
Pareto distributed with the following cumulative distribution functions (see Appendix):
¶ zΓ
hd β(1−k/δ)
Fh (h) = 1 −
h
³ r ´ zΓ
d β
Fr (r) = 1 −
r
µ ¶ zδΓ
βk
t
Ft (t) = 1 − d
t
µ

h

β(1−γk) fd
Γ
caδmin

for

h ≥ hd ≡

βγ fd
Γ b

for

r ≥ rd ≡

1+βγ
Γ fd ,

for

t ≥ td ≡ b 1+βγ
βγ

h

⎫
i−k/δ ⎪
⎪
, ⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬

ik/δ
β(1−γk) fd
Γ
caδmin

.

⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭

(20)

The shape parameters for employment and revenue are increasing in z and k. In contrast, the
shape parameter for measured labor productivity is increasing in z but decreasing in k. Therefore
we have:
Proposition 3 The dispersion of firm size–as measured by employment or revenue–is larger in
sectors with more productivity dispersion (lower z) or more ability dispersion (lower k). In contrast,
31

This follows directly from the zero-profit productivity cutoﬀ condition (12) or from the equilibrium expression
for Q in (17). Formally, this statement is equivalent to ∂ 2 Q/∂b∂c > 0. In addition, ∂ 2 Q/∂b2 > 0 and ∂ 2 Q/∂c2 > 0.

19

the dispersion of measured labor productivity is larger in sectors with more productivity dispersion,
but smaller in sectors with more ability dispersion.
Proof. The proposition follows immediately from equation (20), because the shape parameter
of a Pareto distribution is a suﬃcient statistic for standard measures of dispersion such as the
coeﬃcient of variation, the Gini coeﬃcient and the Theil index, as shown in Section 3.4 below.
Each of these measures of dispersion is monotonically decreasing in the shape parameter of the
Pareto distribution.
More productive firms are larger in terms of employment and revenue and have higher measured
labor productivity. Therefore sectors with greater productivity dispersion (lower z) have greater
dispersion in employment, revenue and measured labor productivity. The eﬀects of greater dispersion in worker ability (lower k) are more subtle. As the dispersion of worker ability increases, the
dispersion of revenue, r(θ), and the number of sampled worker, n(θ), rises proportionally (equation
(18)). However, the increase in the dispersion of worker ability induces all firms to screen to a
lower ability cutoﬀ (ac (θ) falls as k falls in equation (18)). Hence the fraction of workers hired,
h(θ)/n(θ) = [amin /ac (θ)]k , rises for all firms. More productive firms experience larger reductions in
the screening ability cutoﬀ and so exhibit larger increases in the fraction of workers hired. Therefore the dispersion of the number of workers hired, h (θ), rises more than proportionately than the
dispersion of n(θ) and r(θ), which reduces the dispersion of measured labor productivity, t (θ).
The dispersion of both firm size and measured labor productivity depend not only on firm
characteristics (productivity θ) but also on worker characteristics (unobserved ability a) and the
properties of product and labor markets that shape the allocation of workers across firms (δ and
the other parameters that determine Γ). Inferring information about the distribution of firm productivity from observed endogenous outcomes, such as firm size and output per worker, is therefore
problematic. In particular, changes in model parameters, such as the screening cost elasticity δ and
the extent of diminishing returns to the number of workers γ, induce endogenous changes in the
distribution of firm size and output per worker across firms, even though the distributions of firm
productivity and unobserved worker ability do not change.32

3.3

Unemployment

The presence of search frictions in the diﬀerentiated product sectors gives rise to equilibrium unemployment. As noted above, workers can be unemployed either because they are not sampled, or
because once sampled they are not hired as a result of their ability being below a firm’s ability cutoﬀ. The rate of unemployment u in a given diﬀerentiated product sector can therefore be expressed
as one minus the product of the sectoral tightness of labor market, x ≡ N/L, and sectoral hiring
rate σ ≡ H/N , where H is the mass of employed workers, N is the mass of workers matched with
32
For example, sectors with higher γ have more dispersion of firm size, because a higher γ implies a lower rate
of diminishing returns to the number of workers hired, and hence greater worker bargaining power, which impacts
disproportionately on less-productive smaller firms.

20

the firms before the screening stage and L is the mass of workers searching for a job in the sector:
u=

HN
L−H
=1−
= 1 − σx,
L
N L

(21)

where we again suppressed everywhere the sectoral identifier i.33 The rate of unemployment in the
homogeneous sector equals zero.
The sectoral tightness of the labor market, x, was determined above, while the sectoral hiring
rate, σ, can be expressed as:
R∞
R∞
k
M θd h (θ) dGθ (θ)
H
θ n(θ) [amin /ac (θ)] dGθ (θ)
R∞
R∞
=
= d
.
σ≡
N
M θd n (θ) dGθ (θ)
θd n (θ) dGθ (θ)

Using (18) and the Pareto distribution of firm productivity, this expression can be evaluated to
yield:
¸k/δ
∙
caδmin
1
Γ
.
(22)
σ=
β (1 − γk) fd
1+μ
Recall from (19) that μ = βk/[δ(zΓ − β)] and that the parameter restrictions in Table 1 ensure
0 < μ < 1. Moreover, in an interior equilibrium in which all firms screen, ac (θ) ≥ ac (θd ) > amin
and using (18) the term in parentheses in equation (22) equals [amin /ac (θd )]k < 1. It follows that
σ < 1 and u = 1 − σx > 0.
The impact of parameters on sectoral unemployment can be determined from their eﬀects
on tightness of the labor market, x, and the hiring rate, σ. From equation (15), x is uniquely
determined by the search cost parameter b. In contrast, σ in equation (22) depends on a wide range
of factors that influence the selectivity of firms’ recruitment policies. These include the parameters
of the screening technology (c, δ), the distribution of worker ability (amin , k), the distribution of
productivity (z), consumer preferences (β), and the production technology (γ).
Whereas lower search or screening costs raise welfare (see Proposition 2), the two forms of
friction have diﬀerent eﬀects on the sectoral rate of unemployment. On the one hand, sectors
with higher search costs b have less tight labor markets x and have, as a result, higher sectoral
unemployment (see (21)). On the other hand, sectors with higher screening costs c retain a higher
fraction of sampled workers σ and have, as a result, lower sectoral unemployment. An implication of
this second comparative static is that improvements in technology that make it easier to determine
worker ability can increase equilibrium unemployment.
The sectoral rate of unemployment also depends on the shape parameters of the distributions
of firm productivity and worker ability, z and k respectively. Although these dispersion measures
33
While sectoral unemployment in the model is defined in terms of workers who were unsuccessful in their search
for employment in a sector, the empirical measures constructed by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) are defined
in terms of workers who are currently unemployed and were previously employed in a sector. In a dynamic model
with job destruction and a constant labor force in each sector, these measures would coincide. The BLS data reports
significant variation of unemployment across sectors. For example, in 2007 Mining had an unemployment rate of
3.4%, Construction had 7.4%, and Manufacturing had 4.3% (see http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaat26.pdf, accessed on
April 25, 2008).

21

Sectoral Unemployment Rate, u

0.31

0.309

0.308

0.307

0.306

0.305
2.1

2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
Shape Parameter of Ability Distribution, k

2.6

Figure 1: Sectoral rate of unemployment u as a function of sectoral k.
do not aﬀect tightness in the labor market, x, they influence the fraction of workers retained after
screening, σ. In particular, equation (22) implies that σ is increasing in z (is decreasing in the
dispersion of firm productivity), because μ is decreasing in z. In contrast, σ can either rise or fall
with the parameter k that determines the dispersion of worker ability.34 We provide an illustration
of this non-monotonicity in Figure 1.35
The above findings are summarized in:
Proposition 4 (i) Sectors with a higher search cost b have higher unemployment while sectors with
a higher screening cost c have lower unemployment. (ii) Sectors with more productivity dispersion
(lower z) have higher unemployment while sectors with more ability dispersion (lower k) may have
higher or lower unemployment.
Proof. The proposition follows immediately from equation (22).
The intuition for the impact of productivity dispersion on unemployment is that more productive
firms have more selective recruitment policies. While these recruitment policies lead to higher profits
and wages in more productive firms, they reduce a worker’s chance of being hired conditional on
34
The parameter k has an ambiguous eﬀects on both terms in expression (22) for σ. On the one hand, an increase
in k reduces σ through the exponent of the square bracket in (22)–because the term in the square bracket is smaller
than one–while it increases σ through the term in the square bracket itself. On the other hand, an increase in k
may raise or reduce μ (see Proposition 5 in the next subsection).
35
For this figure we choose z −1 + δ−1 + γ = β −1 , which guarantees that changes in k have no aﬀect on μ (see Propo
k
sition 5). Therefore, all variation in the unemployment rate comes from the first component of (22), amin /ac (θd ) ,
which as illustrated may increase or decrease in k.

22

being sampled. More productivity dispersion therefore reduces the employment prospects of workers
seeking jobs in a diﬀerentiated product sector.
In contrast, more dispersion in unobserved worker ability has an ambiguous impact on sectoral
unemployment. On the one hand, as the dispersion in worker ability increases (k falls) the probability of being hired conditional on being sampled, [amin /ac (θ)]k , rises for a given value of the
screening ability cutoﬀ. As a result, the hiring rate increases and sectoral unemployment falls. On
the other hand, as the dispersion in worker ability increases, all firms become more selective (ac (θ)
is decreasing in k in equation (18)), with the greatest proportional increases in selection occurring
in the most productive firms. As a result of this response in firm recruitment policies, the hiring
rate falls and sectoral unemployment rises.36 Therefore, the impact of greater dispersion in worker
ability on sectoral unemployment can be positive or negative on net, as illustrated in Figure 1.

3.4

Inequality of Wages

While all workers have the same ex ante expected income of one, the equilibrium features ex
post wage inequality across firms within sectors. Workers with the same observed characteristics
receive diﬀerent ex post wages depending on the employer with whom they are matched. In this
section we characterize the distribution of wages within a sector, while in the next section we take
account of unemployment and characterize the distribution of income among all individuals seeking
employment in a sector.
The sectoral distribution of wages can be derived from the solution of firm-specific variables in
equation (18). The wage rate, w (θ), and employment, h(θ), are power functions of productivity
θ and productivity is Pareto distributed. Therefore, as shown in the Appendix, the distribution
of wages across workers within a sector is also Pareto, with the cumulative distribution function
Fw (w) that has the shape parameter 1 + μ−1 ; that is,
Fw (w) = 1 −

³ w ´1+μ−1
d

w

∙

β(1 − γk) fd
for w ≥ wd ≡ b
Γ
caδmin

¸k/δ

> 1,

(23)

where μ is given in (19). The parameter restrictions in Table 1 ensure that 0 < μ < 1. Therefore the
wage distribution has both a finite mean and a finite variance. The lowest wage in the industry is
wd , and it is earned by workers employed by the least productive firms. This wage rate exceeds b > 1
and is increasing in the cost of search b and decreasing in the cost of screening c. The intuition is
that higher b and lower c raise sectoral unemployment. Therefore wages in the diﬀerentiated sector
must rise in order for expected income to equal the certain wage of one in the homogeneous sector,
as is required for workers to be indiﬀerent between sectors.
The shape parameter of the wage distribution is 1 + μ−1 , and therefore wage dispersion depends
neither on the search cost b nor on the screening cost c. These parameters impact all firms propor36

There is an additional compositional eﬀect from an increase in the dispersion of worker ability. From equation
(18), a reduction in k increases the number of workers sampled, n (θ), but has a larger eﬀect on the number of workers
sampled by more productive firms. As more productive firms are more selective, this additional eﬀect also decreases
the sectoral hiring rate and increases sectoral unemployment.

23

tionately, and therefore aﬀect the level of wages but not the shape parameter of their distribution.
In contrast, a higher value of the screening cost elasticity, δ, raises screening costs for more productive firms relative to less productive firms. This change in relative costs leads to less variation
in screening ability cutoﬀs, smaller diﬀerences in average unobserved ability, and hence less wage
dispersion across firms (smaller μ).
The distributions of wages and employment can be used to derive explicit expressions for standard measures of wage inequality as a function of the structural parameters of the model. As the
wage distribution is Pareto, the parameter μ is a suﬃcient statistic for sectoral wage inequality.
Standard measures of wage inequality such as the Theil index, the Gini coeﬃcient and the coefficient of variation are therefore all fully determined by μ and yield the same predictions for the
determinants of sectoral wage inequality. To illustrate this, we begin by constructing a sectoral
Lorenz curve. Let sh (θ) be the fraction of workers employed by firms with productivity below θ
and let sw (θ) be the fraction of wages earned by these workers. Since wages are higher in more
productive firms, the ordering of workers by the productivity of employers is the same as ordering
them by income, which is the required ordering for the construction of the Lorenz curve. These
shares can be expressed as (see Appendix):
³ ´z−β(1−k/δ)/Γ ⎫
⎪
, ⎬
sh (θ) = 1 − θθd
³ ´z−β/Γ
⎪
⎭
sw (θ) = 1 − θθd
.

(24)

Varying θ between θd and infinity and plotting the resulting share sw against the share sh traces
out the sectoral Lorenz curve.37 The Lorenz curve can therefore be expressed as
sw = Lw (sh ) ≡ 1 − (1 − sh )1/(1+μ) .

(25)

The function Lw (·) depends on neither the search cost b nor the screening cost c and is fully
determined by the suﬃcient statistic μ. The Gini coeﬃcient is therefore also uniquely determined
by μ.38
Sectoral wage inequality varies intuitively with parameter values. An increase in z–which
represents a decline in the dispersion of productivity–reduces the value of μ, shifts the entire
Lorenz curve upwards, and so reduces sectoral wage inequality. Therefore sectors with greater
firm productivity dispersion (lower z) are characterized by greater inequality in the distribution of
wages. In contrast, an increase in k–which represents a decline in the dispersion of ability–shifts
down the Lorenz curve and raises wage inequality if and only if z −1 + δ −1 + γ < β −1 .39 This
ambiguous eﬀect stems from the fact that dispersion in worker ability influences the distribution
37
The parameter restrictions in Table 1 imply that sh (θ) and sw (θ) are increasing in θ and the Lorenz curve is
convex.
U1
38
The Gini coeﬃcient of the wage distribution is Gw = 1 − 2 0 Lw (s) ds = μ/ (2 + μ) and is increasing in μ.
s
Similarly, the coeﬃcient of variation of the wage distribution is CVw = μ/ 1 − μ2 , which is also increasing in μ.
39
The partial derivative of μ with respect to k has the same sign as z −1 + δ −1 + γ − β −1 , which–given the
parameter restrictions in Table 1–can be either positive or negative.

24

of wages through two channels. On the one hand, an increase in k reduces relative employment in
more productive firms, which pay higher wages, thereby reducing wage inequality. On the other
hand, an increase in k increases relative wages paid by more productive firms, thereby raising wage
inequality.40 The latter eﬀect dominates when the above condition is satisfied.
We adopt the Theil index as our main inequality measure because this index is convenient
for decomposing inequality into within—group and between—group components (see for example
Bourguignon, 1979). This type of decomposition is important for us because there are two groups
of workers in each sector with diﬀerent wage distributions–the employed and the unemployed–and
the overall wage distribution in the economy depends on the distribution of wages within sectors
and the composition of economic activity across sectors. For a set W of individual incomes, the
Theil Index is defined as:
Z
³ ´
ln
dΦ ( ) ,
(26)
T =
¯
∈W ¯

where
is income, ¯ is the mean income in W, and Φ ( ) is the cumulative income distribution
function. This expression has an intuitive interpretation, as dΦ ( ) / ¯ is the income share of the
-type individuals, while ln ( / ¯ ) is approximately equal to the proportional deviation between
individual ’s income and mean income. Applying this formula to the sectoral distribution of
wages (23) yields the following expression (see Appendix):
Tw = μ − ln (1 + μ) ,

(27)

which is increasing in μ. The parameters z and k aﬀect the Theil Index through μ, and therefore
these parameters have the same eﬀects on the Theil Index as on the Lorenz curve and the Gini
coeﬃcient. We summarize these findings in the following proposition:
Proposition 5 (i) The sectoral distribution of wages is more equal in sectors with lower firm
productivity dispersion (higher z). (ii) The sectoral distribution of wages is more equal in sectors
with higher ability dispersion (lower k) when z −1 + δ −1 + γ < β −1 and less equal otherwise.
Proof. The proposition follows immediately from the definition of μ ≡ βk/[δ(zΓ − β)], as this
derived parameter is a suﬃcient statistic for sectoral wage inequality.
More productive firms pay higher wages because they choose a higher screening ability cutoﬀ and
have a workforce with higher average ability. Therefore greater dispersion in firm productivity
(lower z) results in greater sectoral wage inequality. This relationship between productivity dispersion and sectoral wage inequality is mediated by the product and labor market parameters
(β, γ, δ) that influence the equilibrium allocation of workers across firms, as can be seen from
∂μ/∂z = βkΓ/[δ(zΓ − β)2 ]. Sectoral wage inequality therefore depends on both the underlying
dispersion in firm productivity and the ways in which firms’ decisions depend on product and labor
market conditions.
40
Note from (18) that the ratio of employment h (θ0 ) /h (θ00 ) declines with k for θ0 > θ00 and the ratio of wages
w (θ0 ) /w (θ00 ) rises with k for θ0 > θ00 . These ratios do not depend on z, however.

25

More dispersion in unobserved worker ability has an ambiguous impact on sectoral wage inequality for the reasons discussed in the context of the Lorenz curve above. The parameter restrictions
in Table 1 ensure z −1 + δ −1 + γ < β −1 for all β < 2/3, which implies that inequality in worker
ability reduces wage inequality whenever the elasticity of substitution across varieties is small. An
important implication is that an increase in the dispersion of worker ability that is common to
all sectors can have diﬀerential eﬀects on wage inequality across sectors depending on the values
of these parameters. For example, a change in national education systems that increases worker
ability dispersion can increase wage inequality in some sectors and reduce it in others.
It has been argued that in recent decades technological change, driven by information technology (IT), has not only raised average productivity, but has also increased productivity dispersion.
From the first part of Proposition 5, an increase in the dispersion of productivity across firms in our
model leads to an increase in between—firm wage inequality within industries. Consistent with this,
Davis and Haltiwanger (1991) and Faggio, Salvanes and Van Reenen (2007) find that a substantial
component of the increase in individual wage inequality in recent decades in the United Kingdom
and United States has occurred between firms within industries and is associated with an increase
in the inequality of productivity between firms within industries.

3.5

Inequality of Income

The sectoral distribution of income depends not only on the distribution of wages across employed
workers but also on the probability of being unemployed. Recall that only a fraction H/L = σx of
the workers seeking employment in a sector are hired, while the remaining fraction 1 − σx become
unemployed and receive zero income. To characterize the sectoral distribution of income across
these two groups of employed and unemployed workers, we use the Theil index.41 As noted above,
the advantage of the Theil index is that it allows for an exact decomposition of overall inequality
into the contributions of income inequality within and between diﬀerent population groups:
T = TW + TB =

X µ φj ¯ j ¶
j

¯

Tj +

X
j

φj

µ

¯j
¯

¶

ln

µ

¯j
¯

¶

,

(28)

where j indexes groups, φj is the population weight of group j, ¯ j is the average income in group j,
¯ is the economy—wide average income, and Tj is the Theil index for group j computed according
to (26).42
The within and between—group components, TW and TB , also have an intuitive interpretation.
The within—component, TW , is the income-weighted average of the Theil Index within groups.
Therefore within-group inequality can increase either because of an increase in income inequality
within groups or because of an increase in the share of income accruing to groups with higher
income inequality. The between-component, TB , on the other hand, corresponds to the Theil index
41

In the appendix, we also derive the sectoral Lorenz curve and Gini coeﬃcient for income and verify that the
predictions from the analysis of the Theil index generalize to these other inequality measures.
42
A direct calculation confirms that the two alternative definitions of the aggregate Theil index, (26) and (28), are
equivalent and consistent with each other (see also Bourguignon, 1979).

26

for an income distribution in which income takes the values ¯ j with probabilities φj ; in other
words it measures income inequality in a corresponding economy without any income variation
within groups.
As unemployed workers all receive the same income of zero, they make zero contribution to
within-group income inequality. Specifically, income inequality among the unemployed is Tu = 0
and they account for a fraction of zero in total income. As a result, the within component of sectoral
income inequality is TιW = 0·Tu +1·Tw = Tw , where Tw is the Theil index of sectoral wage inequality
(or income inequality among the employed) defined in (27). Moreover, we show in the Appendix
that between-group income inequality can be expressed as TιB = − ln (1 − u) = − ln(σx) ≥ 0.
Intuitively, the larger is the sectoral unemployment rate, the higher is the average wage rate in the
sector (in order to satisfy workers indiﬀerence condition between the sectors), which leads to more
inequality between employed and unemployed within the sector.
Combining these results together, the Theil index of sectoral income inequality can be written
solely as a function of the Theil index for sectoral wage inequality and the sectoral unemployment
rate:43
Tι = TιW + TιB = Tw − ln(1 − u) = μ − ln (1 + μ) − ln (1 − u) .
(29)
Comparing (27) and (29), Tι > Tw , so that the distribution of income is less equal than the
distribution of wages. Moreover, the gap in the two measures of inequality is larger the higher the
sectoral rate of unemployment; that is, the smaller σx is. From (29), the vector (μ, u) is a suﬃcient
statistic for sectoral income inequality and inequality is increasing in both μ and u. Search and
screening costs, b and c, do not aﬀect μ and therefore have the same eﬀect on income inequality
as on unemployment. That is, income inequality is greater in sectors with higher search costs and
lower screening costs (see Proposition 4).
Heterogeneity in firm productivity and worker ability, as determined by z and k respectively,
aﬀects income inequality through both wage inequality and unemployment. Greater productivity
dispersion (lower z) raises both wage inequality and unemployment (see Propositions 4 and 5).
Therefore greater productivity dispersion increases the Theil index through both its within and between group components. In contrast, greater dispersion of worker ability (lower k) has ambiguous
eﬀects on wage inequality and on unemployment and therefore has ambiguous eﬀects on income
inequality. We summarize these findings in:
Proposition 6 (i) Income inequality is higher in sectors with a higher search cost b or lower screening cost c. (ii) Income inequality is higher in sectors with more productivity dispersion (lower z).
(ii) Income inequality may be higher or lower in sectors with more ability dispersion (lower k).
Proof. From (29) and the definition of σ in (22), we have:
∙
¸
Γ
caδmin
k
+ ln b.
Tι = μ − ln(1 + μ) − ln(σx) = μ − ln
δ
β (1 − γk) fdi
43
A similar relationship holds between the Gini coeﬃcients for sectoral income and wage inequality, as shown in
the appendix.

27

Therefore Tι is increasing in b, decreasing in c and decreasing in z (through its eﬀect on μ).
To see that Tι can be either increasing or decreasing in k consider the following example: Set
z −1 +δ −1 +γ = β −1 which according to Proposition 5 shuts down the eﬀect of k on μ (i.e. ∂μ/∂k = 0
in this case). Then the response of Tι to k is the same as that of the sectoral unemployment rate,
u, and Figure 1 shows that under this parameter restriction, sectoral unemployment rate can be
both increasing and decreasing in k.

4

Aggregate Outcomes

While our analysis so far has focused on the inequality of outcomes across firms and workers within
industries, our framework also yields predictions for the allocation of resources across sectors and
hence for aggregate outcomes. In this section we examine the relationships between aggregate
unemployment, wage inequality and income inequality and model parameters. A change in parameter values influences these aggregate variables both through their sectoral counterparts and
through endogenous changes in sectoral composition. We first consider aggregate unemployment,
follow with a discussion of aggregate income inequality, and close the section with an analysis of
aggregate wage inequality. In the interests of brevity we concentrate on the relationship between
aggregate outcomes and the values of search and screening costs.

4.1

Aggregate Unemployment

The aggregate rate of unemployment u equals a weighted average of the sectoral unemployment
rates, where the weights are the shares of workers searching for employment in each sector:44
I

u≡

I

X Li
1X
(Li − Hi ) =
ui ,
L̄ i=0
L̄
i=1

(30)

where recall from (21) that the sectoral unemployment rate is ui = 1 − σ i xi and the unemployment
rate in the homogeneous good sector is u0 = 0, since all workers searching for a job in that sector
find one (H0 = L0 ).
To evaluate the impact of sectoral characteristics on the aggregate rate of unemployment, we
combine equation (30) with the comparative statics for the labor force, Li , and unemployment rate,
ui , in a diﬀerentiated sector from Section 3. Our analysis is made tractable by the presence of the
homogeneous good sector, which implies that a change in search or screening costs, ci and bi , in
one diﬀerentiated sector i does not aﬀect the labor force, Lj , and unemployment rate, uj , in other
diﬀerentiated sectors j 6= i. Instead changes in the number of workers searching for employment
in a diﬀerentiated sector are achieved through changes in employment in the homogeneous good
sector.
44

We use bold letters to represent aggregate variables, in order to distinguish them from similar variables at the
sectoral level. Thus u is the sectoral rate of unemployment when we discuss a particular sector and do not use
subscript i to indicate which sector it is, and we use u to denote the aggregate rate of unemployment.

28

We find that search and screening costs have quite diﬀerent eﬀects on aggregate unemployment.
Higher screening costs, ci , unambiguously reduce aggregate unemployment through changes in both
sectoral composition and sectoral unemployment. First, higher screening costs reduce the number
of workers searching for employment in a diﬀerentiated sector and increase employment in the
homogeneous good sector (Proposition 1), which reduces aggregate unemployment. Second, higher
screening costs also reduce sectoral unemployment in the diﬀerentiated sector by increasing the
hiring rate σ i (Proposition 4).
In contrast, the eﬀects of higher search costs, bi , on aggregate unemployment are ambiguous.
On the one hand, higher search costs, bi , reduce the number of workers searching for employment
in a diﬀerentiated sector and increase employment in the homogeneous good sector, which reduces
aggregate unemployment (Proposition 1). On the other hand, higher search costs raise sectoral unemployment in the diﬀerentiated sector by reducing equilibrium labor market tightness (xi = 1/bi ).
Taking the derivative with respect to bi in (30), higher search costs reduce aggregate unemployment
if and only if (see Appendix):
β − ζi
ui
> i
,
1 − ui
γiβiζ i

where ui = 1 − σ i /bi .

(31)

Thus the negative eﬀect of higher search costs on aggregate unemployment through sectoral composition dominates for high values of the sectoral unemployment rate, ui (i.e., high bi or low σ i ),
for which case the inequality in equation (31) is satisfied.
Proposition 7 An increase in a sector’s screening cost c reduces aggregate unemployment while
an increase in a sector’s search cost b reduces aggregate unemployment if and only if condition (31)
is satisfied.
Proof. See Appendix.
This result can generate an inverted U-shape relationship between the aggregate rate of unemployment and a sector’s search cost. That is, u can be rising in bi for low values of bi and declining
in bi for high values of bi , as in Helpman and Itskhoki (2007). Intuitively, for very high values of
search costs, the size of a sector is small, and so this sector has a negligible weight in aggregate
unemployment. Therefore the reduction in sectoral unemployment caused by lower search costs
makes a small contribution towards the change in aggregate unemployment, and the primary impact of the reduction in search costs is to raise aggregate unemployment through an expansion in
the size of the sector. As search costs fall further, the size of the sector and its weight in aggregate
unemployment increase, and the eﬀect of reduction in the sectoral unemployment rate becomes
more and more important and can eventually dominate.
In Helpman and Itskhoki (2007) this inverted U—shape relationship necessarily exists, whereas
in our framework its existence depends on the level of screening costs.45 For suﬃciently small
45
In Helpman and Itskhoki (2007), σ = γ = 1 in the analogous inequality to equation (31), so that this inequality
is always violated as b approaches 1 and hence u approaches 0.

29

Aggregate Unemployment Rate,

0.35

0.3
Low c
0.25

0.2
High c
0.15

0.1
1

2

3
4
Search Cost, b

5

6

Figure 2: Aggregate rate of unemployment u as a function of sectoral b.
values of σ i (i.e., for suﬃciently high values of ci ), the inequality in (31) can be satisfied even
as bi approaches one. In this case, the eﬀect of higher search costs on aggregate unemployment
through sectoral composition always dominates, and the aggregate unemployment is monotonically
decreasing in search costs. Therefore the eﬀect of a change in search costs (e.g., as a result of
labor market reforms that reduce hiring and firing costs) on aggregate unemployment varies with
other dimensions of labor frictions that influence the ease of distinguishing between workers with
diﬀerent levels of ability.
Figure 2 illustrates this interaction between search and screening costs. The figure plots the
aggregate unemployment rate as a function of search cost, bi , for a high and a low value of screening
costs, ci . For high values of screening costs an inverted U—shaped relationship is observed, whereas
for low values of screening costs the relationship is monotonic. The figure also illustrates that a
reduction in screening costs leads to an increase in aggregate unemployment independently of the
size of search costs.

4.2

Aggregate Income Inequality

Our model yields a rich set of predictions for aggregate income inequality, which depends on the
composition of the labor force across sectors, the composition of the labor force between unemployed
and employed within sectors, and the composition of employment across firms within sectors. We
measure aggregate income inequality with the Theil index, which can be decomposed into a within—

30

sector component, TιW , and a between—sector component, TιB :46
Tι = TιW + TιB .
In equilibrium, workers in all sectors receive the same expected income, which is equal to the
certain wage of one in the homogeneous good sector. As a result the between-sector component of
aggregate income inequality is equal to zero, TιB = 0.47 Aggregate income inequality is therefore
equal to the within-sector component, which is a weighted average of the Theil indices for sectoral
income inequality:
Tι = TιW =

I
X
Li
i=1

L̄

Tιi ,

Tιi = μi − ln (1 + μi ) − ln (1 − ui ) ,

(32)

where the weights are equal to the sectoral shares in aggregate income (or aggregate wage bill),
Tιi ’s are the Theil indices of sectoral income inequality introduced in (29) and Tι0 = 0 since there
is no income inequality in the homogeneous good sector.
Our analysis of the eﬀects of search and screening costs on aggregate income inequality parallels that for aggregate unemployment. An increase in either search or screening costs, bi or ci ,
reduces the number of workers searching for employment in a diﬀerentiated sector (Li falls), and
increases employment in the homogeneous good sector. As there is complete income equality within
the homogeneous good sector, this change in sectoral composition reduces average within—sector
inequality, and so reduces aggregate income inequality in (32). Higher screening costs also reduce
sectoral unemployment and sectoral income inequality (Tιi falls), while higher search costs have the
opposite eﬀect (see Proposition 6). Combining these eﬀects on sectoral income inequality with the
changes in sectoral composition, higher screening costs always reduce aggregate income inequality,
whereas the eﬀect of higher search costs is ambiguous. Taking the derivative with respect to bi in
(32), higher search costs reduce aggregate income inequality if and only if (see Appendix):
Tιi >

βi − ζ i
.
γiβiζ i

(33)

Hence an increase in search costs reduces aggregate income inequality for suﬃciently high initial
levels of sectoral income inequality. The intuition is that, for Tιi ≈ 0, changes in the size of the
sector, Li , have only a marginal eﬀect on aggregate income inequality. As a result, the positive
eﬀect of higher search costs on sectoral inequality dominates the negative eﬀect from the change in
sectoral composition, and aggregate income inequality is increasing in search costs.
An implication of this result is that aggregate income inequality, like aggregate unemployment,
can exhibit an inverted U—shaped relationship with respect to search costs. From proposition 6,
sectoral income inequality, Tιi , is monotonically increasing in search costs, bi , because higher search
46
47

The bold symbols (T) again represent economy-wide indices, while regular letters (T ) denote sectoral indices.
See the Appendix for a formal derivation of all the results in this section.

31

costs increase sectoral unemployment. Therefore, for suﬃciently high values of bi (and hence Tιi ),
the inequality in (33) is necessarily satisfied and aggregate income inequality is decreasing in search
costs. However, for suﬃciently small values of bi (and hence Tιi ), the inequality in (33) may not be
satisfied, in which case aggregate income inequality is increasing in bi .48 In sum, aggregate income
inequality, like aggregate unemployment (see Figure 2), is either monotonically decreasing in search
costs or exhibits an inverted U—shape relationship.
Proposition 8 An increase in a sector’s screening cost c reduces aggregate income inequality, while
an increase in a sector’s search cost b reduces aggregate income inequality if and only if condition
(33) is satisfied.
Proof. See Appendix.
Note the analogy between Propositions 7 and 8. A higher search cost reduces both aggregate
unemployment and aggregate income inequality when
min

½

ui
, Tιi
1 − ui

¾

>

βi − ζ i
.
γiβiζ i

In contrast, a higher search cost raises both aggregate unemployment and aggregate income inequality when
¾
½
β − ζi
ui
max
, Tιi < i
.
1 − ui
γiβiζ i
Finally, when neither of these conditions is satisfied, a higher search cost may increase unemployment but reduce inequality or vice versa.49
Taken together, there is a nuanced relationship between aggregate variables and search and
screening costs. These two dimensions of labor market frictions may have diﬀerent eﬀects on
aggregate unemployment and income inequality: While higher screening costs always reduce unemployment and income inequality, the direction of the eﬀect of search costs on these variables
typically depends on particular details of the economic environment. Furthermore, search costs
can have one eﬀect on aggregate unemployment and the opposite eﬀect on aggregate income inequality. At the same time, as discussed in the context of Proposition 2 above, increases in either
search or screening costs necessarily reduce welfare.

4.3

Aggregate Wage Inequality

While our analysis in the previous section was concerned with the distribution of income across
employed and unemployed workers, in this section we concentrate on employed workers and examine aggregate wage inequality. The distinction between aggregate income and wage inequality
48

As with the aggregate unemployment rate, this range of bi exists only if σi is high enough and additionally μi
is low enough. Specifically, note that for any σi and bi , Tιi > μi − ln(1 + μi ). Therefore, inequality in (33) may be
satisfied for all values of bi provided that μi is large enough.
49
Note that in general ui /(1 − ui ) may be both smaller or larger than Tιi = μi − ln(1 + μi ) − ln(1 − ui ).

32

is important, as we show below that search and screening costs can have quite diﬀerent eﬀects on
these two measures of inequality. In particular, search and screening costs have eﬀects on aggregate
wage inequality that are in general ambiguous. The key complication, as compared to our analysis
of aggregate income inequality, is that between—sector inequality now plays a role. Recall from
the previous subsection that between—sector income inequality is equal to zero, because workers
receive the same expected income across all sectors. In contrast, between—sector wage inequality
is positive because of variation in average wages across sectors, which is positively correlated with
the variation in sectoral unemployment rates, as is required for expected income to be equalized
across sectors.
To make progress in the analysis of aggregate wage inequality, we decompose the aggregate
Theil index for wages into its within and between—sector components:
Tw = TwW + TwB .

(34)

We first consider the within—sector component, TwW , which is equal to the weighted average of
sectoral wage inequality, Twi , with weights equal to sectoral shares in the aggregate wage bill:
TwW =

I
X
Li
i=0

L̄

Twi =

I
X
Li
i=1

L̄

[μi − ln (1 + μi )] ,

(35)

where we have used Tw0 = 0.
From our earlier analysis in Section 3.4, changes in search or screening costs have no eﬀect on
sectoral wage inequality, Twi , and so only influence the within—sector component, TwW , through
changes in sectoral composition, Li /L̄. As higher search or screening costs reduce the number
of workers searching for employment in a diﬀerentiated sector and increase employment in the
homogeneous good sector, they shift the composition of the labor force towards sectors with lower
within—sector wage inequality, and therefore reduce the within—sector component of aggregate wage
inequality in (35).
We next consider the between—sector component, TwB , which can be written as follows:
TwB =

I
X
Li
i=0

L̄

I

ln

w̄i X Li
=
ln
w̄
L̄
i=0

µ

1−u
1 − ui

¶

= ln(1 − u) −

I
X
Li
i=1

L̄

ln(1 − ui ),

(36)

where the second equality comes from the worker’s indiﬀerence condition between the sectors,
which implies (1 − ui )w̄i = (1 − u)w̄ = 1.50 Also recall that u0 = 0 and ui = 1 − σ i xi > 0 in all
diﬀerentiated sectors.51
50

More formally, w̄i = Li /Hi = 1/(1 − ui ), since Li equals both the number of job seekers in the sector and the
total wage income in the sector. At the aggregate level, w̄ = L̄/H = 1/(1 − u) for the same reason.
51
Combining (34)-(36), we can rewrite the Theil index of aggregate wage inequality as Tw = Tι − ln(1 − u), where
we have used expression (32) for the Theil index of aggregate income inequality. Note that in response to a change
in c, both aggregate income inequality and aggregate unemployment rate move in the same direction, which results
in ambiguous comparative statics for aggregate wage inequality (as will be discussed below).

33

The expression for the between—sector component (36) can be rewritten as:
¡ ¢
TwB = ln Eξ − E (ln ξ) ,

where E is the expectations operator using the probability weights Li /L̄ and the random variable
ξ takes the values ξ i ≡ 1 − ui . The logic of Jensen’s inequality suggests that an increase in the
dispersion of ξ should lead to an increase in TwB . Note, however, that both the probability weights
and the values of ξ aﬀect the dispersion of TwB . Therefore, because changes in search and screening
costs aﬀect both Li and ui , their overall eﬀect on the between—sector component of aggregate wage
inequality is in general ambiguous. Below we describe suﬃcient conditions that allow us to sign the
eﬀect of increases in search and screening costs on aggregate wage inequality, while the Appendix
derives the general conditions for signing these comparative statics.
First, consider an increase in the screening cost ci . This leads simultaneously to a reduction in
the size of the sector, Li , and in the sectoral unemployment rate, ui . If ui is suﬃciently large relative
to the aggregate unemployment rate, u, both of these eﬀects reduce the between—sector component
of aggregate wage inequality. The reason is that high unemployment sectors are characterized by
high average wages (w̄i = 1/(1 − ui )). Therefore, the fall in Li shifts the composition of the labor
force away from sectors with above average wages, while the fall in ui brings the average wage in
a sector closer to the average wage across all sectors. Both of these eﬀects make the distribution
of wages across sectors more even. We show in the appendix that ui > 2u is suﬃcient (though
not necessary) for an increase in ci to reduce the between—sector component of aggregate wage
inequality.52 Since higher screening costs ci necessarily reduce the within—sector component of
aggregate wage inequality, the condition ui > 2u is also suﬃcient for higher screening costs to
reduce aggregate wage inequality.
In contrast, if ui . u, an increase in the screening cost ci raises the between—sector component
of aggregate wage inequality, as shown formally in the Appendix. The reasoning is similar: the fall
in Li redistributes employment from the diﬀerentiated sector to the homogeneous sector in which
wages are lowest (since there is full employment in that sector), while the fall in ui lowers the average
wage in the diﬀerentiated sector further below the average wage across all sectors. Furthermore,
it is possible for this increase in the between—sector component of aggregate wage inequality to
exceed the reduction in the within—sector component discussed above, in which case the increase in
the screening cost raises aggregate wage inequality.53 Additionally, we show in the Appendix that
52

We show in the Appendix that TwB increases in ui if and only if ui > u: in this case increasing ui leads to
an increase in w̄i which is already initially greater than w̄ and thus contributes to greater between inequality. The
condition for TwB to increase in Li is more subtle. Consider an economy with only one diﬀerentiated sector and one
homogeneous good sector. Then u = u1 L1 /L̄ < u1 and TwB necessarily increases in u1 . TwB can fall however in L1
if this sector is very large to begin with. Specifically, L1 > L̄/2 ensures that shifting additional weight towards this
sector reduces inequality. Note that this condition is equivalent to u1 < 2u. The Appendix shows that ui > 2u is in
general suﬃcient for TwB to increase in Li .
53
There exist parameter values for which the within component of aggregate wage inequality is close to zero. This
occurs when Twi ≈ 0 for all i, or equivalently μi ≈ 0 for all i. Note that we can set μi = 0 independently of the values
of ci and bi . See the Appendix for more details.

34

Theil Index of Aggregate Wage Inequality

0.26
0.24
0.22
0.2
High b
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1

Low b
0.3

0.5
0.7
Screening cost, c

0.9

1

Figure 3: Theil index of aggregate wage inequality Tw as a function of sectoral c.
both aggregate wage inequality and its between component are more likely to decrease in ci when
the sectoral unemployment rate is high and the aggregate unemployment rate is low. As a result,
aggregate wage inequality generally has an inverted U-shape as ci increases since this leads to a
reduction in ui (as well as in ui /u). We illustrate this in Figure 3.
Second, consider an increase in the search cost bi , which reduces Li and increases ui . As for the
analysis of screening costs above, these changes in Li and ui have ambiguous eﬀects on the between—
sector component of aggregate wage inequality depending on the value of ui relative to u, as shown
formally in the Appendix. Therefore, taking the within and between—sector components together,
higher search costs like higher screening costs have an ambiguous overall eﬀect on aggregate wage
inequality. We summarize these findings as follows:
Proposition 9 An increase in search or screening costs reduces the within—sector component of
aggregate wage inequality, but may increase or reduce the between-sector component of aggregate
wage inequality. Moreover, the increase in the between—sector component can be large enough to
raise aggregate wage inequality.
Proof. See Section D.3 of the Appendix.
Figure 3 illustrates the ambiguous eﬀects of search and screening costs on aggregate wage inequality.54 However, despite the general ambiguity of the eﬀects of both search and screening costs on
54

In Figure 3 aggregate wage inequality has a U shape as a function of the screening cost: as described above,
aggregate wage inequality falls in ci when ui is high (for low initial ci ) and increases in ci when ui is low (for high
initial ci ). The figure also illustrates that the response of aggregate wage inequality to search costs, bi , is ambiguous.

35

wage inequality, the two types of labor market frictions influence wage inequality quite diﬀerently.
An increase in the screening cost ci leads to a reduction in both the sectoral unemployment rate ui
and the size of the sector Li with both shifts inducing a reduction in wage inequality whenever the
aﬀected sector has a high enough average wage rate relative to the rest of the economy and vice
versa. In contrast, an increase in the search cost bi raises the sectoral rate of unemployment ui and
reduces the size of the sector Li which unleashes two in general opposing pressures on inequality,
independently of whether the sector is characterized by high or low average wages.
It is interesting to compare and contrast Propositions 9 and 8. First, recall that both types
of labor market frictions–search and screening costs–reduce the within—sector component of aggregate wage inequality, and therefore only have an ambiguous eﬀect on aggregate wage inequality
because they have an ambiguous eﬀect on the between—sector component for wages. Second, recall
that labor market fictions have no eﬀect on the between—sector component of aggregate income
inequality, which is equal to zero. Therefore, labor market frictions aﬀect aggregate income inequality solely through its within-sector component, which is decreasing in screening costs, and can
be either increasing or decreasing in search costs.
Together these results imply that aggregate wage and income inequality can move in opposite
directions. For example, an increase in screening costs can increase aggregate wage inequality and
reduce aggregate income inequality. Similarly, changes in search costs can have conflicting eﬀects
on aggregate wage and income inequality. For practical purposes, this implies that evaluating labor
market policies based solely on their eﬀects on wage inequality can be misleading if the ultimate
goal is to reduce income inequality.

5

Unemployment, Wages and Income Conditional on Ability

Our analysis of unemployment and wage inequality so far has not conditioned on worker ability;
we considered sectoral and aggregate outcomes only. However, a key feature of our model is that
the probability of unemployment and the distribution of wages vary with a worker’s ability, and
these variations are of interest even if ability is not observable. Of the two interpretations of worker
ability that we discussed in Section 2.2, i.e., specific skills that lead to diﬀerent productivity levels
when matched with diﬀerent firms or general skills that are match—independent, the general skills
interpretation is more suitable for the following analysis, which characterizes sectoral unemployment, wage inequality and income inequality conditional on worker ability. While we omit the
sector subscript to simplify notation, it should be understood that the analysis is sector specific.

5.1

Conditional Unemployment Rate

The unemployment rate of workers with ability a depends on the tightness of the labor market, x,
and the hiring rate for workers with this ability, σ (a), such that u (a) = 1 −xσ (a). The tightness of
the labor market, x, is the same for all worker types and reflects the probability of being sampled,
1/b. However, the hiring rate varies with ability because workers who draw a high value for ability
36

are hired by firms with a wider range of productivities.
For each worker ability a there is a hiring cutoﬀ productivity, θc (a), that corresponds to the
highest productivity at which a firm hires a worker of this ability. Therefore workers with ability a <
ad ≡ ac (θd ) are not hired even by the least productive firm and remain unemployed (i.e., σ (a) = 0
for a < ad ).55 For a > ad the hiring cutoﬀ productivity is implicitly defined by ac [θc (a)] ≡ a and
thus the hiring rate for a worker of ability a is:
R θc (a)

θ
σ (a) = Rd∞
θd

n (θ) dGθ (θ)

n (θ) dGθ (θ)

for a ≥ ad .

As the hiring cutoﬀ productivity, θc (a), is increasing in worker ability, so is the hiring rate, σ (a),
and therefore workers with higher ability have lower unemployment rates. We show in the Appendix
that the unemployment rate of workers with ability a has the following closed-form solution:
∙
³ a ´k/μ ¸
1
d
1−
u (a) = 1 −
b
a

∙

β (1 − γk) fd
for a ≥ ad ≡
Γ
c

¸1/δ

.

(37)

We therefore have:
Proposition 10 (i) The unemployment rate equals 1 for workers with ability a ≤ ad . (ii) For
workers with ability a > ad the rate of unemployment is monotonically decreasing in a from u(ad ) =
1 towards u(∞) = 1 − 1/b. (iii) The rate of unemployment conditional on ability is increasing in
the search cost b, decreasing in the screening cost c, and increasing in the dispersion of productivity
and ability (i.e., decreasing in z and k, respectively).
Proof. The proposition follows immediately from (37).
One implication of (37) is that changes in search and screening costs have heterogeneous eﬀects
on unemployment rates depending on ability. On the one hand, as ability increases, a higher
fraction of the workers sampled are hired, and so their unemployment rate becomes more sensitive
to search costs that determine the ease of sampling (∂u(a)/∂b > 0 is increasing in a ). On the
other hand, as ability increases, workers’ ability lies further above the threshold of hiring for a given
firm productivity, and so their unemployment rates become less sensitive to screening costs that
influence this threshold ability for hiring (∂u(a)/∂c > 0 is decreasing in a).
In contrast to our earlier results for the sectoral unemployment rate, u, we find that the unemployment rate conditional on ability, u(a), is increasing in the dispersion of both productivity
and ability (i.e., decreasing in z and k, respectively). Therefore the ambiguity of u with respect
to k discussed above arises through a change in composition of employment across workers with
diﬀerent abilities. Finally, we find that the unemployment rate becomes more sensitive to ability (a
larger absolute value of ∂u(a)/∂a) in sectors with lower search and screening costs and in sectors
with less dispersion of productivity and ability (i.e. larger values of z and k).

1/δ
Equation (18), which describes the equilibrium firm-level variables, yields ad = β(1 − γk)fd /(cΓ)
and the
parameter restrictions in Table 1 ensure ad > amin .
55

37

5.2

Conditional Wages and Income Inequality

Workers with diﬀerent abilities not only experience diﬀerent rates of unemployment but also have
diﬀerent wage and income distributions. These wage and income distributions depend on the
recruitment policies of firms. As both the ability cutoﬀ for hiring workers, θc (a), and the wage paid
by firms, w (θ), are increasing in their productivity, higher ability workers face wage distributions
that stochastically dominate those of lower ability workers.
To characterize the wage distribution conditional on ability, consider the productivity intervals
where workers are hired. Workers with ability a < ad = ac (θd ) are not hired by any firm that
enters, and so find no employment and earn no wages. In contrast, workers with ability a > ad
are hired by firms with productivity levels in the interval [θd , θc (a)] and the support of their wage
distribution is therefore [wd , wc (a)], where wc (a) ≡ w [θc (a)] and w (θ) is given in (18).56 The
cumulative distribution of wages conditional on ability is therefore:
R θw (w)
θ

n(θ)dGθ (θ)

θd

n(θ)dGθ (θ)

Fw (w | a) = R θd (a)
c

for a > ad

and wd ≤ w ≤ wc (a) ,

where θw (w) is the inverse of w (θ), i.e., θw (w) identifies the productivity of firms that pay the
wage w. We show in the Appendix that this cumulative distribution function can be expressed as:
Fw (w | a) =

1 − (wd /w)1/μ

for a > ad

1 − [wd /wc (a)]1/μ

and wd ≤ w ≤ wc (a) ≡ b

µ

a
amin

¶k

,

(38)

which is a truncated Pareto distribution with shape parameter 1/μ > 1.
Using this cumulative distribution function, the mean wage of employed workers with ability
a > ad equals (see Appendix):
w̄(a) ≡ E (w | a) =

Z

wc (a)

wdFw (w|a) =

wd

1 1 − (ad /a)k(1−μ)/μ
wd ,
1 − μ 1 − (ad /a)k/μ

which is increasing in a. Therefore, higher ability workers have higher average wages despite the
fact that with ability unobserved wages are the same across workers within firms. The reason is
that higher ability workers are employed by all the firms that employ lower ability workers and also
by more productive firms that pay higher wages.
As higher ability workers draw their wages from a distribution with a larger support, wage
inequality is also increasing in worker ability.57 Using the cumulative distribution function (38),
the Theil index of wage inequality of workers with ability a > ad is:
Tw (a) =

Z

wc (a)

wd

56
57

∙
¸
w
w
ln
dFw (w|a),
w̄(a)
w̄(a)

Equation (18) implies wc (a) = b (a/amin )k for a ≥ ad , and therefore wkd = b (ad /amin )k .
l
The support of the wage distribution of workers with ability a > ad is b (ad /amin )k , b (a/amin )k .

38

which can be expressed as (see Appendix):
"
#
µ
¶
μ
k (ad /a)k(1−μ)/μ ln (ad /a)
μ
1 − (ad /a)k(1−μ)/μ
− ln 1 +
+
− ln
.
Tw (a) =
1−μ
1−μ
1 − (ad /a)k(1−μ)/μ
1 − (ad /a)k/μ

(39)

Thus wage inequality conditional on ability, Tw (a), increases monotonically from 0–when a ap£
proaches ad and these workers are employed by only the least productivity firms–to μ/(1 − μ) −
¡
¢¤
ln 1 + μ/(1 − μ) > 0–when ad approaches infinity and these workers are employed by all firms
that operate in the industry (see Appendix). Additionally, wage inequality conditional on ability,
Tw (a), is increasing in the derived parameter μ, which is the suﬃcient statistic for wage inequality
in the unconditional wage distribution.
While unemployment and wage inequality are monotonically related to ability, income inequality
can either rise or fall with ability. Following the same line of reasoning as for the unconditional
distributions above, the Theil index of income inequality can be computed from the Theil index of
wage inequality and the rate of unemployment as follows (see Appendix):
Tι (a) = Tw (a) − ln [1 − u(a)] .
Using (37) and (39), this index can be expressed as:
µ
¶
∙
³ a ´k/μ ¸
μ
k (ad /a)k(1−μ)/μ ln (ad /a)
μ
d
Tι (a) = ln b +
− ln 1 +
+
.
− ln 1 −
1−μ
1−μ
a
1 − (ad /a)k(1−μ)/μ

(40)

Therefore income inequality decreases with a when ability is close to ad and increases with a
when ability is large. This lack of monotonicity stems from the fact that wage inequality rises
with ability, which increases income inequality, whereas unemployment declines with ability, which
reduces income inequality. As a approaches ad , the unemployment rate converges to one and an
arbitrarily small measure of workers are employed by firms with a narrow range of productivities
close to θd that pay similar wages. Therefore the unemployment eﬀect dominates. In contrast, as
a becomes large, the unemployment rate declines and workers are employed by firms with a wide
range of productivities that pay disparate wages. Therefore the wage inequality eﬀect dominates.
We summarize these findings in the following proposition, while Figure 4 illustrates how an
increase in worker ability has quite diﬀerent eﬀects on wage and income inequality.
Proposition 11 For a > ad , average sectoral wages w̄ (a) and sectoral wage inequality Tw (a) are
increasing in ability. Nevertheless, sectoral income inequality Tι (a) can be either increasing or
decreasing in ability and it achieves its minimum for intermediate levels of ability.
Proof. See Appendix.
Taking the results of this section together, the combination of firm heterogeneity, worker heterogeneity and labor market frictions generates rich labor market outcomes. More able workers
39

Thiel Indices, Tw(a) and Tι(a)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

T (a)
ι

0.2

T (a)
w

0
1

2
3
4
Ability Relative to Cutoff, a/ad

5

Figure 4: Sectoral income and wage inequality conditional on ability.
experience lower unemployment, earn higher wages on average, but face more wage inequality. The
overall income distribution is most equal for workers with intermediate levels of ability since for
them both the probability of unemployment and wage inequality are relatively low. While less
able workers have low wage inequality, their higher probabilities of unemployment generate greater
income inequality than for those of intermediate ability. Similarly, while more able workers have
low unemployment rates, their high wage inequality gives rise to greater income inequality than for
those of intermediate ability.
Although the distribution of wages conditional on ability is not observable because ability is
itself not observable, the distribution of wages conditional on wages being in an interval of the
support of the wage distribution is observable. It is therefore possible to compare the inequality in
the distribution of wages in two intervals, say [w1 , w2 ] and [w3 , w4 ], w3 > w1 , such that the fraction
of workers with wages in the first interval is the same as the fraction of workers with wages in the
second interval (e.g., one tenth of the workers in each one of the intervals). Then wage inequality is
larger in the second interval (see Appendix). That is, for equal-size groups of workers with similar
wages there is more wage dispersion across workers with the higher wages, which is consistent with
empirical findings that residual wage inequality is higher for groups with higher wages.

6

Conclusion

We have developed a general equilibrium model that features worker and firm heterogeneity and
frictions in the labor market, which generates heterogeneity in employment, output, wages and
productivity within industries. Despite its inherent complexity, the model is suﬃciently tractable
40

to yield closed-form solutions for sectoral measures of inequality and unemployment as a function
of structural parameters.
Firms face search costs in matching with potential workers and screening costs in obtaining
information about these workers’ unobserved ability. On the one hand, search frictions imply that
workers with the same unobserved ability earn diﬀerent wages and have diﬀerent unemployment
experiences depending on whether they match with a firm and the characteristics of the firm they
match with. On the other hand, screening frictions imply that workers with diﬀerent levels of unobserved ability face diﬀerent wage distributions and have diﬀerent probabilities of unemployment.
At the sectoral level, greater firm heterogeneity raises unemployment, wage inequality and income
inequality, whereas the eﬀects of greater worker heterogeneity are ambiguous. At the aggregate
level, higher search costs can have non-monotonic eﬀects on unemployment and income inequality,
whereas higher screening costs necessarily reduce unemployment and income inequality. However,
search and screening costs both have ambiguous eﬀects on aggregate wage inequality, so that examining changes in wage inequality can be misleading if changes in income inequality are the ultimate
concern. Finally, higher ability workers have lower unemployment rates, higher average wages,
but greater wage inequality than lower ability workers. As lower unemployment and higher wage
inequality have opposing eﬀects on income inequality, intermediate ability workers have the lowest
levels of income inequality.
The model accounts for a number of empirical findings. Our analysis features inter-industry
wage diﬀerentials and dispersion in wages across firms within industries, which are central features
of labor market data. And the model predicts a positive employer-size wage premium, as found
in empirical studies. While our model is necessarily an abstraction, it points to the importance
of compositional changes within and between sectors in understanding aggregate inequality and
unemployment.
Our analysis highlights a number of interesting areas for further research. One is the introduction of international trade. As our model features firm and worker heterogeneity, we expect trade
liberalization to impact income distribution and the distribution of unemployment. Other areas for
further inquiry include the introduction of both observed and unobserved heterogeneity in worker
characteristics and endogenous choices of schooling based on these characteristics. The tractability
of our framework lends itself to these and other extensions.

41

Appendix
A
A.1

Production Technology and Marginal Product
Production Technology

We assume the following production function:
y = θhγ ā = θ

µ ¶1−γ Z h
1
ai di,
h
0

(41)

where i ∈ [0, h] indexes the workers employed by the firm. One way to think about this technology is

the following: A manager with productivity θ has one unit of time which he allocates equally among his
employees. Thus, the manager allocates 1/h of his time to each worker and, as a result, a worker with
ability a can contribute θ(1/h)1−γ a to the total output of the firm, where (1 − γ) measures the importance
of managerial time input. Aggregating across workers yields the assumed production function. We further

assume, following a large literature on moral hazard in teams, that the contributions of individual workers to
total output are unobservable as production is done in teams and the production process is non—separable. As
a result, the ability of workers cannot be deduced upon observing output and so the manager does not learn
it even ex post. This justifies the assumption that the manager splits his time equally among the workers
since they all look homogenous to him due to the unobservable and non—verifiable nature of their ability.
Alternatively, an equal managerial time allocation among workers can be rationalized by assuming that the
productivity of each worker depends on average worker ability as a result of human capital externalities
across workers within firms.58

A.2

Marginal Product

Given the production technology (41), the marginal product of a worker with ability a is:59
£
¤
M P (a) ≡ M P (a|ā, h; θ) = θh−(1−γ) a − (1 − γ)ā .

Let ability in the pool of candidate employees be distributed according to cumulative distribution function
Ga (a). Then, if the firm hires workers only with ability above ac , the mean ability of its workers is
ā(ac ) =

1
1 − Ga (ac )

Z

∞

adGa (a).

ac

58
For empirical evidence on human capital externalities within plants, see for example Moretti (2004). See also
related work on O-ring production technologies following Kremer (1993).
59
To define the marginal product rewrite the production function as

y=θ

]

0

h

−(1−γ) ]
di

h

ai di.

0

Then the marginal product of adding worker h with productivity ah is
MPh ≡



dy
= θh−(1−γ) ah − (1 − γ)ā .
dh

Note that the production function does not depend on the ordering of workers and hence the marginal product
depends only on the ability of the worker in the sense that MPh = MP (ah ).

42

The marginal product of the threshold—ability worker is thus
¤
£
M P (ac ) = θh−(1−γ) ac − (1 − γ)ā(ac ) ,

which is negative whenever (1 − γ)ā(ac ) > ac . Since ā(ac ) > ac for any non—degenerate distribution,

M P (ac ) < 0 can be guaranteed by choosing γ small enough.
Specifically, consider the case of Pareto—distributed ability as we assume in the paper. In this case
ā(ac ) = kac /(k − 1) and the marginal product is
M P (ac ) = −θh−(1−γ)

1 − γk
ac ,
k−1

which is negative whenever γk < 1. Recall that this is the same parameter restriction which ensures that
output is increasing in the cutoﬀ ability. It also guarantees that the workers not hired by the firm have
negative marginal product and the firm will not want to retain them even at zero wage.
Note further that given γk < 1 the firm hires some workers with ability in the range [ac , â), where
â = (1 − γ)ā =

(1 − γ)k
ac > ac ,
k−1

and these workers have a negative marginal product. The firm would prefer not to hire these workers, but
costly search and screening make optimal the decision to hire all workers with ability above ac . Finally, note
that the average marginal product of the firm with productivity θ is positive:
¡
¢
M P (θ) = γθh(θ)−(1−γ) ā ac (θ) > 0.

B
B.1

Complete Closed—Form Solutions
Problem of the Firm

The first—order conditions for the firm’s problem in (6) are:
βγ
r(θ) = bn(θ),
1 + βγ
β(1 − γk)
r(θ) = cac (θ)δ ,
1 + βγ
so that the profit of the firm can be written as in the text:
π (θ) =

Γ
r (θ) − fd ,
1 + βγ

Γ ≡ 1 − βγ −

β
(1 − γk) > 0.
δ

Combining the two first—order conditions we obtain a relationship between n(θ) and ac (θ):
(1 − γk)bn(θ) = γcac (θ)δ .

43

Using the definition of r(θ), we can solve explicitly for
β(1−γk) − β(1−γk)
− βγ+Γ
δΓ
Γ

n(θ) = φ1 φ2

c

1/δ

ac (θ) = φ1 φ1−βγ
c−
2

b

1−βγ
δΓ

βγ

b− δΓ Q−

Q−

β−ζ
δΓ

β−ζ
Γ

β

θΓ,

β

θ δΓ ,

where we have introduced two constants:
φ1 ≡

∙

³

βγ
1+βγ

kaγk
min
k−1

´β ¸ Γ1

and

φ2 ≡

³

1−γk
γ

1
´ δΓ

.

Also we solve for
β
βγ
β−ζ
βγ
β(1−γk) − β(1−γk)
δΓ
c
b− Γ Q− Γ θ Γ ,
r(θ) = bn(θ) = φ1 φ2
1 + βγ
β
βγ
β−ζ
Γ
Γ
β(1−γk) − β(1−γk)
δΓ
c
b− Γ Q− Γ θ Γ ,
bn(θ) =
φ φ
π(θ) + fd =
βγ
βγ 1 2
µ
¶k
β(1−k/δ)
1−β/δ
(β−ζ)(1−k/δ)
amin
(1−k/δ) −(k−β) k−β
Γ
= akmin φ1
φ2
c δΓ b− Γ Q−
θ Γ .
h(θ) = n(θ)
ac (θ)

Finally, we solve for the wage rate:
w(θ) =

βγ r(θ)
n(θ)
=b
=b
1 + βγ h(θ)
h(θ)

µ

ac (θ)
amin

¶k

k/δ (1−βγ)k − (1−βγ)k
δΓ

= a−k
min φ1 φ2

c

b

1−βγ−β/δ
Γ

Q−

(β−ζ)k
δΓ

βk

θ δΓ .

Note that we have the following relationship, which proves useful in further derivations:
w(θ)h(θ) = bn(θ) =

B.2

βγ
r(θ).
1 + βγ

General Equilibrium

The worker’s indiﬀerence condition for searching employment in diﬀerent sectors requires xb = 1 in each
sector. Together with the definition of b = α0 xα1 , this implies
¡
¢ 1
x = 1/α0 1+α1

¡ ¢ 1
b = α0 1+α1 .

and

The zero—profit cutoﬀ condition is:

0 = π(θd ) =

β
βγ
β−ζ
Γ
β(1−γk) − β(1−γk)
δΓ
c
b− Γ Q− Γ θdΓ − fd .
φ1 φ2
βγ

(42)

The free entry condition is:
fe =

Z

∞

θd

π(θ)dG(θ) = fd

Z

∞

θd

44

"µ

θ
θd

¶β/Γ

#

− 1 dGθ (θ),

(43)

where the second equality uses (42). With our distributional assumption we can use this condition to solve
for60
∙µ
¶ ¸1/z
β
fd
θd =
θmin .
(44)
zΓ − β fe
Finally, using (42), we solve explicitly for
β−ζ

Q

=

β(1−γk)Γ
φΓ1 φ2

µ

Γ
βγ

¶Γ µ

β
zΓ − β

¶ βz

θβmin
Γ−β/z β/z
fd
fe

c−β(1−γk)/δ b−βγ .

(45)

Next, we solve for the number of firms, M , and the number of workers searching for jobs in the sector, L.
From the definitions of Q and r(θ) in the text we have:
ζ

Q =M

Z

∞
θd

1 + βγ
r(θ)dG(θ) = M
fd
Γ

Z

∞

θd

µ

θ
θd

¶β/Γ

dGθ (θ) = fe M

z(1 + βγ)
,
β

where the last equality uses (44). Thus, we have:
M=

Qζ
β
.
1 + βγ zfe

(46)

Finally, recall that the total income generated in the sector equals L. Therefore, we have:
L=M

Z

∞
θd

βγ
w(θ)h(θ)dGθ (θ) = M
1 + βγ

Z

∞

θd

r(θ)dGθ (θ) =

βγ
Qζ .
1 + βγ

(47)

Equations (46) and (47) together with (45) provide a closed form expression for M and L.
Finally, to finish the description of equilibrium we need to provide an expression for
R∞
∙
¸k/δ
M θd h(θ)dGθ (θ)
Γ
c
zΓ − β
H
R∞
= akmin
=
.
σ=
N
β(1 − γk) fd
zΓ − β(1 − k/δ)
M θd n(θ)dGθ (θ)

With this expression we can compute the sectoral unemployment rate u = 1 − σx and the total number of
unemployed in the sector U = L(1 − σx).
60


z
Here and below we use the property of the Pareto distribution (Gθ (θ) = 1 − θmin /θ ) that
] ∞
] ∞


z
z
θα dGθ (θ) = −zθzmin
θα−z−1 dθ =
θα−z θzmin =
θα 1 − Gθ (θd )
z−α d
z−α d
θd
θd

for a given constant α < z.

45

B.3

Variation Across Firms

We now provide closed form expressions for all firm—specific variables:
µ ¶β/Γ
¶β
µ
β
β
1 + βγ zΓ − β zΓ 1− zΓ
θ
1 + βγ
=
fd
fezΓ θβ/Γ ,
r(θ) =
fd
z
Γ
θd
Γ
βθmin
β
¶ zΓ
µ ¶β/Γ
µ
β
βγ fd θ
βγ zΓ − β
1− β
n(θ) =
=
fd zΓ fezΓ b−1 θβ/Γ ,
z
Γ b θd
Γ
βθmin
"
#1/δ
β
∙
¶β
¸1/δ µ ¶ δΓ
µ
β
β
β
β(1 − γk) fd
θ
β(1 − γk) zΓ − β zΓ 1− zΓ
zΓ −1
ac (θ) =
=
fd
fe c
θ δΓ ,
Γ
c
θd
Γ
βθzmin
¸−k/δ µ ¶ β(1−k/δ)
∙
Γ
θ
βγ fd β(1 − γk) fd
h(θ) =
Γ b
Γ
θd
caδmin
" µ
#1−k/δ
¶β
β
β
β(1−k/δ)
γ
β zΓ − β zΓ 1− zΓ
=
fd
fezΓ
b−1 ck/δ θ Γ ,
(1 − γk)k/δ Γ βθzmin
"
#k/δ
∙
¸k/δ µ ¶ βk
¶β
µ
β
β
b βk
β(1 − γk) fd
β(1 − γk) zΓ − β zΓ 1− zΓ
θ δΓ
−k
zΓ
w(θ) = b
= amin
fd
fe
θ δΓ .
z
δ
k/δ
Γ
θd
Γ
βθmin
c
camin
Note that the condition for positive screening by the least productive firm, ac (θd ) > amin , implies the
following parameter restriction:
β(1 − γk) fd
> aδmin ,
Γ
c
which is always satisfied for low enough c. Additionally, the condition for θd > θmin implies another parameter
restriction:
µ
¶
β
fd
> 1,
zΓ − β fe
which is always satisfied for large enough fd /fe . Finally, the revenue-based productivity measure can be
computed from the expressions above and is given by:
¸k/δ µ ¶ βk
∙
θ δΓ
r(θ)
1 + βγ β(1 − βγ) fd
.
t(θ) ≡
=b
δ
h(θ)
βγ
Γ
θd
camin
From the formulas above we can also compute the cumulative distribution functions of firm size (in terms
of revenue and employment) and firm productivity. Consider first the distribution of firm’s revenue. Note
that the fraction of firms with revenue below r(θ) for some θ > θd is the same as the fraction of firms with
productivity below θ and is equal to Gθ (θ)/[1 − Gθ (θd )]. Therefore, we have:
¢
¡
Gθ θr (r) − Gθ (θd )
Fr (r) ≡ Pr{r(θ) ≤ r | θ > θd } = Pr{θ ≤ θr (r) | θ > θd } =
,
1 − Gθ (θd )

where θr (·) is the inverse of r(·) and is given by:
θr (r) = θd

µ

r
rd

¶Γ/β

,

rd ≡ r(θd ) =

46

1 + βγ
fd .
Γ

With this definition and using the result above we have:
Fr (r) = 1 −

µ

θd
θr (r)

¶z

=1−

³ r ´zΓ/β

for

h ≥ hd ≡

for

t ≥ td ≡ b 1+βγ
βγ

d

for r > rd .

r

Following the same logic we obtain:
Fh (h) = 1 −

µ

hd
h

Ft (t) = 1 −

zΓ
¶ β(1−k/δ)

µ

td
t

¶ zδΓ
βk

βγ fd
Γ b

h

∙

β(1−γk) fd
Γ
caδmin
β(1−γk)
Γ

i−k/δ

fd
caδmin

¸k/δ

,
.

Note that all these distributions are again Pareto with shape parameters greater than 2 (since we have
assume zΓ > 2β and δ > k). This ensures finite means and variances of these distributions.61

C

Sectoral Distributions of Wages and Incomes

To compute the distribution of wages note that the fraction of workers receiving a particular wage w =
w(θ) > wd ≡ w(θd ) is proportional to h(θ)dGθ (θ). In other words, we have:
Fw (w) =

M

R θw (w)

M

θd

R∞
θd

h(θ)dGθ (θ)

h(θ)dGθ (θ)

R∞

θ (w)

= 1 − Rw∞
θd

h(θ)dGθ (θ)

h(θ)dGθ (θ)

for w > wd ,

h
ik/δ
¡
¢k
β(1−γk) fd
where wd = b ad /amin = a−k
b
is the minimal wage in the diﬀerentiated sector (paid by
min
Γ
c
the lowest productivity firm, θd , which screens to ability cutoﬀ ad ) and θw (·) is the inverse of w(·) and equal
¡
¢δΓ/(βk)
to θw (w) = θd w/wd
. Finally, for w < wd , Fw (w) = 0. Using the result from footnote 60, we can
rewrite the distribution of wages as follows:
Fw (w) = 1 −

µ

θd
θw (w)

¶z− β(1−k/δ)
Γ

=1−

³ w ´1+1/μ
d

w

,

for w > wd ,

where the second equality uses the definition of θw (·) and μ ≡ βk/[δ(zΓ − β)] as defined in (19). Therefore,
the distribution of wages is also Pareto with a shape parameter 1 + 1/μ > 2. Using the formulas from
footnote 61, we compute the mean and the coeﬃcient of variation for the wage distribution:
w̄ = (1 + μ)wd ,
μ
CVw = p
.
1 − μ2

Note that CVw is increasing in μ; therefore, μ is indeed a suﬃcient statistic for the dispersion of wages.
The distribution of incomes can be derived from the distribution of wages. It has an atom of mass
u = 1 − σx at ι = 0 and the same shape as the distribution of wages for ι > wd , i.e. Fι (ι) = u for ι ∈ [0, wd ]
and Fι (ι) = u + (1 − u) · Fw (ι) for ι > wd .
61

Recall that the mean and variance of a Pareto distribution with shape parameter χ and lower bound of the support
d are given by χ/(χ − 1) · d2 and χ/[(χ − 1)2 (χ − 2)] · d2 . As a result, the coeﬃcient of variation is [χ(χ − 2)]−1/2 ,
decreasing in χ and independent from d.

47

C.1

Lorenz Curve for Sectoral Wage Distribution

Following similar steps as above, we can compute the fraction of workers in the diﬀerentiated sector who
receive wage w(θ) or less and also the share of these workers in the total sectoral wage bill. Since w(·) is
monotonically increasing in θ, it is convenient to parameterize these shares by the productivity parameter
θ. We have (for θ ≥ θd ):
Rθ

µ

¶z−β(1−k/δ)/Γ
θd
,
θ
M θd h(θ̃)dGθ (θ̃)
Rθ
Rθ
µ ¶z−β/Γ
M θd n(θ̃)dGθ (θ̃)
M θd w(θ̃)h(θ̃)dGθ (θ̃)
θd
=
=1−
,
sw (θ) ≡
R∞
R∞
θ
M θd w(θ̃)h(θ̃)dGθ (θ̃)
M θd n(θ̃)dGθ (θ̃)
sh (θ) ≡

M

θ

d
R∞

h(θ̃)dGθ (θ̃)

=1−

where in the derivation of sw (·) we have used the fact that w(θ)h(θ) = bn(θ). Further, expressing sw as a
function of sh , we obtain the Lorenz curve for the wage distribution:
sw = Lw (sh ) = 1 − (1 − sh )1/(1+μ)

for sh ∈ [0, 1].

Clearly, μ is also a suﬃcient statistic for the Lorenz curve: since μ > 0 the Lorenz curve is convex and
greater μ is associates with a more convex Lorenz curve, i.e. greater inequality.

C.2

Lorenz Curve for Sectoral Income Distribution

Note that a fraction 1 − σx of the job seekers receive zero income while a fraction 1 − σx + σxsh(θ) earn a
share sw(θ) of income, where θ varies between θd and infinity and the functions sh (θ) and sw (θ) are given
in (24). Under these circumstances the Lorenz curve is:

sι = Lι (s ) ≡

⎧
⎪
⎨

⎪
⎩ 1−

µ

0
¶1/(1+μ)
1−s
σx

for 0 ≤ s ≤ 1 − σx,
for 1 − σx ≤ s ≤ 1,

(48)

where sι is the fraction of income and s is the fraction of job seekers receiving this income.62
Note that with u = 1 − σx, the Lorenz Curve can be re—written as follows:
Lι (s ) ≡

⎧
⎨

µ 0
¶ for 0 ≤ s ≤ u,
s −u
⎩ Lw
for u ≤ s ≤ 1.
1−u

Therefore the Gini coeﬃcient of the income distribution is:
Gι = 1 − 2

Z

0

1

Lι (s) ds = u + (1 − u) Gw = u + (1 − u) μ/ (2 + μ) ,

which is increasing in both u and μ.
62

Note that this formula coincides with the formula for the Lorenz Curve for the sectoral wage distribution when
σx = 1, i.e., when there are no unemployed workers.

48

C.3

Theil Indices of Sectoral Wage and Income Inequality

Using definition (26), we compute first the Theil index of sectoral wage inequality:
Tw =

Z

∞
wd

Z ∞
w ³w´
w
ln
dFw (w) =
ln wdFw (w) − ln w̄,
w̄
w̄
wd w̄

where w̄ = (1 + μ)wd is the mean of the wage distribution. Computing the integral in the formula above we
obtain:63
Z
1 1/μ ∞ −(1+1/μ)
Tw = wd
w
ln wdx − ln wd − ln(1 + μ) = μ − ln(1 + μ).
μ
wd
Note that Tw is monotonically increasing in μ and Tw = 0 when μ = 0.
Next we compute the Theil index for sectoral income inequality using decomposition (28) which splits
the Theil index into within and between components. We provide the following general result:

Lemma 1 Consider a population of workers split into two groups: one group, unemployed, receive no
income and constitute a fraction u of the population; the second group, employed, constitute a fraction 1 − u
of the population and their income is characterized by Theil inequality index Tw . Then the Theil index of
income inequality for the whole population is given by:
Tι = Tw − ln(1 − u).
Moreover, TW ≡ Tw measures the average within-group inequality, while TB ≡ − ln(1 − u) ≥ 0 measures the
between-group inequality so that Tι ≥ Tw with strict inequalities whenever u > 0.

Proof: Using decomposition (28) we can write Tι = TW + TB . Consider first within—group inequality. All
unemployed receive the same income of zero so that the Theil index for them is Tu = 0. Additionally, the
share of unemployed in income is zero and the share of employed is 1. Therefore, the average within—group
inequality is:
TW = 0 · Tu + 1 · Tw = Tw .
Next consider the between—group inequality. We have:
TB = 0 · ln 0 + 1 · ln[1/(1 − u)] = − ln(1 − u),
where 1/(1 − u) = w̄/ῑ is the ratio of the average wage (income) of the employed to the average income in
the population, since ῑ = u · 0 + (1 − u) · w̄. This completes the proof. ¥

As a consequence of this lemma, we have that the Theil index of sectoral income inequality is
Tι = μ − ln(1 + μ) − ln(1 − u),

1+1/μ

We use the facts that Fw0 (w) = (1 + 1/μ)wd
(where α > 1).
63

w−2−1/μ and

49

where u = 1 − σx.
U

x−α ln xdx =

x1−α
1−α


ln x −

1
1−α



up to a constant

D

Derivations of the Results for Section 4

From (16) we have:
L̂ = ζ Q̂,
where a hat above a variable denotes a proportional change, e.g. L̂ = dL/L. From (17) we have:
Q̂ = −

β(1 − γk)
βγ
b̂ −
ĉ.
β−ζ
δ(β − ζ)

Combining these two results we obtain:
L̂ = −

γβζ
βζ(1 − γk)
b̂ −
ĉ.
β−ζ
δ(β − ζ)

(49)

Next recall that 1 − u = σx with x = 1/b and σ given in (22). Therefore, we have:
x̂ = −b̂

and

σ̂ =

k
ĉ.
δ

Combining these expression, we obtain:
k
du
= −σ̂ − x̂ = b̂ − ĉ.
1−u
δ

(50)

Finally, the Theil index for sectoral income inequality is Tι = μ − ln(1 + μ) − ln(1 − u) so that, holding μ
constant, we have:
du
dTι =
.
(51)
1−u
We will frequently use the preliminary results (49)-(51) in our derivations below. Note also that bj and cj
do not aﬀect Li and ui when i 6= j, i.e. as result of the presence of the homogeneous numéraire sector, labor

market parameters in one diﬀerentiated sector do not aﬀect economic outcomes in another diﬀerentiated

sector.

D.1

Aggregate unemployment rate

Using the definition in expression (30), and assuming that duj = dLj = 0 for all j 6= i , we have
¤ ui Li
1£
du =
ui dLi + Li dui =
L̄
L̄

µ
¶
1 − ui dui
L̂i +
.
ui 1 − ui

(52)

That is, aggregate unemployment rate will rise if either more workers search for work in the diﬀerentiated
sector or the sectoral unemployment rate goes up. Now using (49)—(50), we can rewrite the above expression
to yield:
∙
∙
¸
¸
γiβiζ i
1 − ui
β i ζ i (1 − γ i ki ) 1 − ui ki
L̄
· du = −
−
b̂i −
ĉi
+
ui Li
βi − ζ i
ui
δ i (β i − ζ i )
ui δ i
Therefore, an increase in ci reduces u, while an increase in bi reduces u if and only if
ui
bi
β − ζi
≡
−1> i
,
1 − ui
σi
γiβiζ i

50

which is exactly the claim in Proposition 7. Note that when σ i < σ̄i defined by σ̄−1
i − 1 = (β i − ζ i )/(γ i β i ζ i ),

the condition above holds for all bi ≥ 1. In this case u is always decreasing in bi . In contrast, when σ i > σ̄ i ,
there exists a range [1, b̄i ) such that as long as bi belongs to this range, u is increasing in bi and decreasing

for bi > b̄i , i.e. u features an inverted U—shape.

D.2

Aggregate income inequality

Using the decomposition of the Theil index into within and between components provided in (28), we can
write the Theil index of aggregate income inequality as
Tι = TιW + TιB =

I
X
Li
i=0

L̄

Tιi +

I
X
Li
i=0

L̄

ln

ῑi
,
ῑ

where Tι0 = 0 and Tιi = μi − ln(1 + μi ) − ln(1 − ui ) are the sectoral Theil indices of income inequality, Li /L̄
is the sectoral income share and ῑi ≡ ῑ = 1 since average income in all sectors is one by force of the worker’s
indiﬀerence condition between the sectors. As a result, TιB = 0 and
Tι = TιW =

I
X
Li
i=1

L̄

Tιi ,

as claimed in the text.
The full derivative of Tι , where dμi = 0 and dLj = dTιj = 0 for all j 6= i, is given by:
∙
¸
¤ Tιi Li
1£
dTιi
dTι =
L̂i +
Tιi dLi + Li dTιi =
.
Tιi
L̄
L̄

Using (49)-(51), we have:
∙
∙
¸
¸
γiβiζ i
β i ζ i (1 − γ i ki )
L̄
−1
−1 ki
· dTι = −
− Tιi b̂i −
ĉi .
+ Tιi
Tιi Li
βi − ζ i
δ i (β i − ζ i )
δi
Note the close parallel to the results for the aggregate unemployment rate: the only change is that Tιi
substitutes now for ui /(1 − ui ). Similar analysis as above establishes the claims of Proposition 8.

Finally, we want to establish that in general it is impossible to rank ui /(1 − ui ) and Tιi . Note that

ui /(1 − ui ) > − ln(1 − ui ) for all ui ∈ (0, 1) with the diﬀerence converging to zero as ui → 0. At the same

time, μi − ln(1 + μi ) ∈ (0, 1 − ln 2) since μi ∈ (0, 1). By choosing ui close to zero and μi large enough, we can

guarantee Tιi > ui /(1 − ui ). In contrast, by choosing μi close to zero and ui large enough, we can obtain

the opposite inequality sign. Numerical examples confirm that it is indeed possible to choose μi and ui in
this way.

D.3

Aggregate wage inequality

Using results (34)—(36) from the text, we have:
Tw = TwW + TwB =

I
X
Li
i=0

L̄

Twi + ln(1 − u) −

51

I
X
Li
i=0

L̄

ln(1 − ui ),

where Tw0 = 0 and Twi = μi − ln(1 + μi ) are the sectoral wage inequality indices and Li /L̄ is now interpreted
as the sectoral share in the aggregate wage bill. Again assuming dμi = 0 and dLj = duj = dTwj = 0 for
j 6= i, we have:
Twi Li
L̂i
dTwW =
L̄
and
du
Li
Li dui
dTwB = −
.
− ln(1 − ui ) · L̂i +
1−u
L̄
L̄ 1 − ui
A reduction in Li necessarily reduces within inequality and reduces between inequality holding u constant.
Additionally, within inequality does not depend on ui and u.
Next using (52), we can rewrite
dTwB

µ
¶
ui Li
1 − ui dui
Li
Li dui
L̂i +
=−
− ln(1 − ui ) · L̂i +
ui 1 − ui
(1 − u)L̄
L̄
L̄ 1 − ui
½∙
¸
¾
ui
Li
ui − u dui
· −
=
.
− ln(1 − ui ) L̂i +
1−u
1 − u 1 − ui
L̄

Note that TwB increases in ui if and only if ui > u. It also increases in Li if and only if
ϕ(ui , u) ≡ −

ui
− ln(1 − ui ) > 0.
1−u

Using Taylor series, we can write
¡
¢
u2
u3
ϕ(ui , u) = −ui · 1 + u + u2 + . . . + ui + i + i
∙³
¶ µ2 3 3 ¶
¸
´ µ u2
ui
ui
2
3
i
= ui ·
−u +
−u +
− u + ... .
2
3
4
Note that ui ≥ 2u > 0 is suﬃcient (but not necessary) to have ϕ(ui , u) > 0 since 2k ≥ k+1. At the same time,

0 < ui ≤ u is suﬃcient (but not necessary) to have ϕ(ui , u) < 0. In the case when 0 ≤ u < ui < 2ui , ϕ(ui , u)

can take both positive and negative values depending on levels of ui and u, however, it is monotonically
increasing in ui and monotonically decreasing in u. Finally, ϕ(0, u) = 0 for all u.
Since both Li and ui are decreasing in ci , we have our first result:

Lemma 2 TwW is decreasing in ci . TwB , and hence Tw , are decreasing in ci if ui ≥ 2u. TwB is increasing
in ci if ui < u.

Using (49) and (50), we can write the explicit necessary and suﬃcient conditions for TwB and Tw to
decrease in ci . They respectively are given by:
∙
¸
ui
β i ζ i (1 − γ i ki )
−
− ln(1 − ui ) +
βi − ζ i
1−u
¸
∙
ui
β i ζ i (1 − γ i ki )
Twi −
− ln(1 − ui ) +
βi − ζ i
1−u

ui − u
ki > 0,
1−u
ui − u
ki > 0.
1−u

Since it is possible to set Twi arbitrary close to zero, Lemma 2 implies that both of these conditions may hold
or fail. They are more likely to hold for larger ui and smaller u. Finally, we note that since ui (and ui /u)
are increasing in ci , aggregate income inequality will generally have an inverted U—shape as ci increases (see

52

Figure 3 for an illustration).
Comparative statics for aggregate wage inequality with respect to bi can be obtained along the similar
lines. However, since bi has a negative eﬀect on Li and a positive eﬀect on ui , comparative statics with
respect to bi is generally ambiguous in all regions of (ui , u)—space. There exists a region for ui inside [u, 2u)
for which TwB unambiguously increases in bi , however, since TwW decreases in bi , the predictions for overall
inequality are still ambiguous. It easy to show numerically (see Figure 3) that both overall wage inequality
and its within component can both increase and decrease in bi . The intuition for this result, just like with
aggregate unemployment, is that changes in bi typically produce counteracting eﬀects on inequality through
opposing eﬀects on Li and ui .

E

Derivations of the Results for Section 5

¡
¢k
Recall that ability, a, is distributed according to the Pareto distribution, Ga (a) = 1 − amin /a . A firm
with productivity θ hires workers with ability no less than ac (θ) and more productive firms higher more able
workers. Using the properties of a Pareto distribution, the distribution of ability of workers in a θ—firm is
given by:
¢
¡
µ
¶k
Ga (a) − Ga ac (θ)
ac (θ)
¢ =1−
¡
Fa (a|θ) =
for a ≥ ac (θ),
a
1 − Ga ac (θ)
with ad ≡ ac (θd ) =

h

β(1−γk) fd
Γ
c

i1/δ

being the ability of the least able workers hired by the least productive

firms only. Workers with ability a < ad are not hired at all and our parameter restrictions guarantee

ad > amin .

E.1

Sectoral Unemployment by Ability

The sectoral unemployment rate for workers with ability a is given by:
u(a) = 1 −

N (a) H(a)
H(a)
=1−
= 1 − xσ(a).
L(a)
L(a) N (a)

Note that N (a)/L(a) = x for all a since sampling is random so that the probability of being sampled does not
depend on ability; σ(a) = H(a)/N (a) is the hiring rate which is ability-specific. Workers with ability a are
¢
¡
hired only by firms with productivity θ ≤ θc (a), where θc (·) is the inverse of ac (·), i.e. it solves ac θc (a) = a.
Therefore, firms with θ ≤ θc (a) hire all workers with ability a that they sample, while firms with θ > θc (a)

hire none of them.
As a result, we have that workers with ability a < ad are never hired so that σ(a) = 0 and u(a) = 1 for
a < ad . At the same time, for workers with a ≥ ad we have:
σ(a) =

M

R θc (a)

M

θd
R∞
θd

n(θ)dGθ (θ)

n(θ)dGθ (θ)

R∞

θ (a)

= 1 − Rc∞
θd

θβ/Γ dGθ (θ)

θβ/Γ dGθ (θ)

=1−

µ

θd
θc (a)

¶z−β/Γ

,

where we have used the result from footnote 60. Next, from the definition of θc (·) and expression for ac (·),

53

¡
¢δΓ/β
we have θc (a) = θd · a/ad
. Combining this with the expression above, we obtain:
u(a) = 1 −

∙
∙
³ a ´δ(zΓ−β)/β ¸
³ a ´k/μ ¸
1
1
d
d
=1−
,
1−
1−
b
a
b
a

so that u(a) is decreasing in a. Note that k/μ is increasing in both k and z. Additionally, ad is decreasing
in c and k and does not depend on z. As a result, for a given ability a > ad , the unemployment rate is
increasing in b and decreasing in c, z and k. Finally, the unemployment rate decreases faster in a in sectors
with larger z and k.

E.2

Sectoral Wage Distribution by Ability

Workers with ability a < ad never find employment and earn no wages. Workers with ability a = ad find
¢k
¡
employment (with probability zero) only in firms with productivity θd and earn wd ≡ w(θd ) = b ad /amin .

Finally, workers with ability a > ad find employment in firms with productivity in the interval [θd , θc (a)]
¡
¢
and the support of their wage distribution is hence [wd , wc (a)], where we denote wc (a) ≡ w θc (a) . The
¡
¡
¢k
¢k
expressions for w(·) and θc (·) then imply wc (a) = wd a/ad so that wc (a) = b a/amin .
Firms with productivity θ ∈ [θd , θc (a)] sample n(θ) · dGa (a) workers with ability a and hire them all;
they also pay a wage rate of w(θ). Therefore, the wage distribution for ability a > ad is given by:

Fw (w|a) =

R θw (w)

n(θ)dGθ (θ)

θd
R θc (a)
n(θ)dGθ (θ)
θd

=

1−
1−

h

θd
θw (w)

h

θd
θc (a)

iz−β/Γ

iz−β/Γ

£ ¤1/μ
1 − wwd
=
h
i1/μ ,
d
1 − ww
c (a)

for w ∈ [wd , wc (a)],

where θw (·) is the inverse of w(·) as defined above. Therefore, the wage distribution for ability a > ad has
the form of a truncated Pareto distribution with shape parameter 1/μ > 1.
We now compute the moments of the wage distribution conditional on ability, Fw (w|a). Using the
properties of the truncated Pareto distribution,64 we have that the average wage of a worker with ability a
is
£ ¤ 1−μ k
Z wc (a)
1 1 − aad μ
w̄(a) ≡ E {w(a)|a} =
wdFw (w|a) =
wd ,
1 − μ 1 − £ ad ¤ μk
wd
a
which is increasing in a (see results in footnote 64). Finally, using results in footnote 64, one can compute
64

Consider a truncated Pareto distribution with shape parameter χ and support [xmin , xmax ]. Denote by ρ ≡
xmin /xmax < 1. We thus have:

χ
1 − xmin /x
G(x) =
,
x ∈ [xmin , xmax ].
1 − ρχ
Then G0 (x) =

χ
χ
χ+1
1−ρχ xmin /x

and the mean of the distribution is

Ex =

χ
xχ
1 − ρχ min

]

xmax

x−χ dx =

xmin

χ 1 − ρχ−1
xmin .
χ − 1 1 − ρχ

χ
The mean of the distribution increases from xmin to χ−1
xmin as ρ falls from 1 to 0 (proof omitted). Next, one can
show that the variance of this distribution is
%
2 &

 2
χ 1 − ρχ−2
χ 1 − ρχ−1
2
x2min .
−
Vx = Ex − Ex =
χ − 2 1 − ρχ
χ − 1 1 − ρχ

The coeﬃcient of variation, CVx ≡

√
Vx/Ex, is decreasing in ρ and χ (proof omitted).

54

the coeﬃcient of variation for the wage distribution conditional on ability and show that it is increasing in
a and μ. Therefore, the dispersion of wages is greater for workers with higher ability; additionally, holding
ability fixed, the dispersion of wages is greater in sectors characterized by higher μ.

E.3

Theil Indices of Sectoral Wage and Income Inequality Conditional on Ability

Recall that workers with ability a > ad earn wages in the interval [wd , wc (a)] distributed according to
Fw (w|a). Therefore, the Theil index of wage inequality is given by:
Tw (a) =

Z

wc (a)

wd

w
ln
w̄(a)

µ

w
w̄(a)

¶

1
dFw (w|a) =
w̄(a)

Note that

Z

wc (a)

w ln wdFw (w|a) − ln w̄(a).

wd

1/μ

wd
1
w−(1+1/μ) ,
μ 1 − £ ad ¤k/μ

Fw0 (w|a) =

a

¡
¢k
where we used the fact that wd /wc (a) = ad /a . Now using the expression for w̄(a), we get:65
(1−μ)/μ

1 − μ wd
Tw (a) =
μ 1 − £ ad ¤ 1−μ
μ k
a

=

µ

Z

wc (a)

wd

μ
μ
− ln 1 +
1−μ
1−μ

¶

+

w−1/μ ln wdw − ln w̄(a)
k

¡ ad ¢

£ ad ¤ 1−μ
μ k
a

1−

ln a
£ ad ¤ 1−μ
μ k
a

⎡

⎤
£ ad ¤ 1−μ
μ k
1− a
⎦.
− ln ⎣
£ ¤k
1 − aad μ

The first two terms are similar to the ones in the unconditional Theil index of wage inequality, Tw : together they increases monotonically in μ. The latter two terms are new and come from the fact that the
wage distribution conditional on ability is truncated from above: together they increase monotonically from
³
h
i´
μ
μ
− 1−μ
− ln 1 + 1−μ
to 0 as a increases from ad to ∞.66 Therefore, Tw (a) increases monotonically from
³
h
i´
μ
μ
0 to 1−μ
− ln 1 + 1−μ
as a increases from ad to ∞. One can also show that for any given a, Tw (a)
increases in μ.
65

Derivation: using the property
]

wc (a)

w

−1/μ

wd

U

x−α ln xdx =

− 1−μ
μ
ln wdw =
w μ
1−μ d

%

x1−α
1−α

μ
1−μ

#


ln x −


1
1−α

wd
1−
wc (a)



+ const, we have

 1−μ $
μ



wd
+ ln wd −
wc (a)

 1−μ
μ

&

ln wc (a) .


k
Then, using the equality wd /wc (a) = ad /a , the further steps involve only straightforward algebra.
66
Proof: Consider the terms of Tw (a) that depend on a:
Fw ≡



1
μ y ln y
− ln (1 − y) + ln 1 − y 1−μ ,
1−μ1−y

where

and after taking the derivative and rearranging we get:

1
1
∂Fw
fw (y) ≡
=
∂y
1−μ1−y

%

μ

1 − y 1−μ
1

1 − y 1−μ

y≡

 a  1−μ k
d

a

μ

∈ [0, 1].

&
ln y
.
+μ
1−y

Note that fw (+0) → −∞ < 0 and fw (y) ∼ μ2 (y − 1) < 0 for y ↑ 1. Thus, Tw (a) increases in a both for a ≈ ad
and a À ad . The proof of global monotonicity of Tw (a) is analytically tedious. By means of a graph we check that
fw (y) < 0 for all (y, μ) ∈ [0, 1]2 which establishes the global monotonicity result.

55

To compute the Theil index of income inequality for workers with ability a, we use the result of Lemma 1:
Inequality can be computed from the Theil index of wage inequality and the unemployment rate according
to:
¡
¢
Tι (a) = Tw (a) − ln 1 − u(a) .

Combining the expressions for the unemployment rate, u(a), and Theil index of wage inequality, Tw (a), we
obtain:
£ ¤ 1−μ k ¡ ¢
µ
¶
µ
¶
h a i 1−μ
k aad μ ln aad
μ
μ
μ k
d
Tι (a) = ln b +
−
ln
1
−
.
− ln 1 +
+
£ ¤ 1−μ k
1−μ
1−μ
a
1 − ad μ
a

The conditional on ability Theil index of income inequality additionally increases in b, but can increase or
decrease with ability, a. Specifically, it decreases with a when a ≈ ad and increases when a À ad .67 Note

that when a → ad , Tι (a) → ∞ since all income is being concentrated among the group of workers with a

shrinking measure which converges to zero.

E.4

Wage Inequality within Given Wage Intervals

The distribution of wages within a given wage interval [w0 , w00 ] is truncated Pareto with shape parameter
(1 + 1/μ):
Fw (w) − Fw (w0 )
1 − (w0 /w)1+1/μ
F[w0 ,w00 ] (w) ≡ Fw (w|w0 ≤ w ≤ w00 ) =
,
=
Fw (w00 ) − Fw (w0 )
1 − (ω)1+1/μ

¡
¢1+1/μ
is the unconditional wage distribution and ω = w0 /w00 ∈ (0, 1) is the
where Fw (w) = 1 − wd /w
proportional measure of length of the wage interval and wd ≤ w0 < w00 . Using the results above, we can
compute the Theil index for this conditional wage distribution:
T[w0 ,w00 ] = μ − ln(1 + μ) +

∙
¸
ω 1/μ ln ω
1 − ω 1/μ
−
ln
.
1 − ω 1/μ
1 − ω 1+1/μ

As ω falls from 1 to 0 (i.e., w00 /w0 increases from 1 to ∞), the Theil index of this conditional distribution

increases from 0 to μ − ln(1 + μ). Note that inequality in the upper tail (the case when w00 = ∞) is always
equal to unconditional wage inequality, Tw = μ − ln(1 + μ), independently of the lower cutoﬀ w0 . Thus,

whenever w00 < ∞, inequality increases as we increase w00 or reduce w0 and it depends on this boundaries

uniquely through their ratio ω = w0 /w00 .
Now we need to establish ω for an arbitrary wage interval corresponding to a fraction α of workers. We
have:
³ w ´1+1/μ ³ w ´1+1/μ ³ w ´1+1/μ h
i
d
d
d
1+1/μ
α = Fw (w00 ) − Fw (w0 ) =
−
=
1
−
ω
.
w0
w00
w0
67

Proof: The terms of Tι (a) that depend on a are
Fι ≡

μ y ln y
− ln (1 − y) ,
1−μ1−y

where

Taking the derivative and rearranging, we have:

y≡

 a  1−μ k
d

a

μ

∈ [0, 1].



∂Fι
1
1
ln y
=
1+μ
.
∂y
1−μ1−y
1−y
1
> 0.
Notice that as y decreases towards zero ∂Fι /∂y → −∞ < 0, while when y increases towards 1 ∂Fι /∂y ∼ 1−y
Finally, noting that y decreases from 1 to 0 as a increases from ad towards ∞, we conclude that ∂Tι (a)/∂a < 0 for
a ≈ ad and ∂Tι (a)/∂a > 0 for a À ad .

56

Note that given α, the larger is lower bound of the interval w0 , the larger has to be the proportional length
of the interval which corresponds to a smaller ω. From the discussion above, it implies that wage inequality
within wage interval [w0 , w00 ] increases with w0 provided that the fraction of workers with wages in this
interval is held constant.

57

References
[1] Abowd, John M. and Francis Kramarz (1999) “The Analysis of Labor Markets using Matched EmployerEmployee Data,” Chapter 40 in eds. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3B, 2629-2709.

[2] Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz and David N. Margolis (1999) “High Wage Workers and High Wage
Firms,” Econometrica, 67(2), 251-333.

[3] Autor, David H., Katz, Lawrence F. and Melissa S. Kearney (2005) “Trends in US Wage Inequality:
Responding to the Revisionists”, NBER Working Paper, 11628.

[4] Autor, David H. and Scarborough, David (2007) “Does Job Testing Harm Minority Workers? Evidence
from Retail Establishments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

[5] Acemoglu, Daron, Pol Antràs and Elhanan Helpman (2007) “Contracts and Technology Adoption,”
American Economic Review 97, 916-943.

[6] Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel S. Kortum (2003) “Plants and
Productivity in International Trade,” American Economic Review, 93, 1268-1290.

[7] Bernard, Andrew B., Redding, Stephen J. and Peter K. Schott (2007) “Comparative Advantage and
Heterogeneous Firms,” Review of Economic Studies, 74, 31-66.

[8] Blanchard, Olivier and Jordi Gali (2008) “Labor Markets and Monetary Policy: A New-Keynesian
Model with Unemployment,” NBER Working Paper No. 13897.

[9] Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi (2003) “Macroeconomics Eﬀects of Regulation and Deregulation in Goods and Labor Markets”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118, 879—907.

[10] Bourguignon, Francois (1979) “Decomposable Income Inequality Measures,” Econometrica 47, 901-920.
[11] Brecher, Richard (1974) “Minimum Wage Rates and the Pure Theory of International Trade,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 88, 98-116.

[12] Burdett, Kenneth and Coles, Melvyn G. (1997) “Marriage and Class,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
112, 141-168.

[13] Copeland, Brian (1989) “Eﬃciency Wages in a Ricardian Model of International Trade,” Journal of
International Economics, 27, 221-244.

[14] Davidson, Carl, Lawrence Martin and Steven Matusz (1988) “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models with Frictional Unemployment,” Journal of Political Economy, 96, 1267-1293.

[15] Davidson, Carl, Lawrence Martin and Steven Matusz (1999) “Trade and Search Generated Unemployment,” Journal of International Economics, 48, 271-299.

58

[16] Davis, Donald and James Harrigan (2007) “Good Jobs, Bad Jobs, and Trade Liberalization,” mimeo,
Columbia University.

[17] Davis, Steve J. and John Haltiwanger (1991) “Wage Dispersion Between and Within US Manufacturing
Plants, 1963-86,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 115-200.

[18] Diamond, Peter A. (1982a) “Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal of Political Economy, 90, 881—894.

[19] Diamond, Peter A. (1982b) “Wage Determination and Eﬃciency in Search Equilibrium,” Review of
Economic Studies, 49, 217—227.

[20] Egger, Harmut and Udo Kreickemeier (2006) “Firm Heterogeneity and the Labour Market Eﬀects of
Trade Liberalization,” GEP Research Paper 2006/26.

[21] Faggio, Giulia, Kjell G. Salvanes and John Van Reenen (2007) “The Evolution of Inequality in Productivity and Wages: Panel Data Evidence,” CEPR Discussion Paper No 821.

[22] Felbermayr, Gabriel, Julian Prat and Hans-Jörg Schmerer (2008) “Globalization and Labor Market
Outcomes: Wage Bargaining, Search Frictions and Firm Heterogeneity,” IZA Discussion Paper, 3363.

[23] Garicano, Luis (2000) “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production,” Journal of
Political Economy, 108, 874-904.

[24] Garicano, Luis and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg (2006) “Organization and Inequality in a Knowledge Economy,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121, 1383-1435.

[25] Harris J. and M. Todaro (1970) “Migration, Unemployment and Development: A Two-Sector Analysis,"
American Economic Review, 60, 126-142.

[26] Helpman, Elhanan and Oleg Itskhoki (2007) “Labor Market Rigidities, Trade and Unemployment,”
NBER Working Paper No. 13365.

[27] Helpman, Elhanan, Marc J. Melitz and Stephen R. Yeaple (2004) “Export Versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms”, American Economic Review, 94, 300-316.

[28] Hopenhayn, Hugo A. (1992) “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium”, Econometrica, 60, 1127-1150.

[29] Jackson, Susan E., Randall S. Schuler and J. Carlos Rivero (1989) “Organizational Characteristics as
Predictors of Personnel Practices,” Personnel Psychology, 42, 727-786.

[30] Jovanovic, Boyan (1982) “Selection and the Evolution of Industry,” Econometrica, 50, 649-670.
[31] Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers (1989) “Industry Rents: Evidence and Implications,”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, 209-290.

59

[32] Kremer, Michael (1993) “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 551-575.

[33] Lemieux, Thomas (2006) “Increasing Residual Wage Inequality: Composition Eﬀects, Noisy Data or
Rising Skill Returns?”, American Economic Review, 96, 461-98.

[34] Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1978) “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics,
9, 508-23.

[35] Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1988) “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22, 139-171.

[36] Melitz, Marc J. (2003) “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
Productivity,” Econometrica, 71, 1695-1725.

[37] Moretti, Enrico (2004) “Workers’ Education, Spillovers and Productivity: Evidence from Plant-Level
Production Functions,” American Economic Review, 94, 656-690.

[38] Mortensen, Dale T. (1970) “A Theory of Wage and Employment Dynamics,” in (eds.) E. S. Phelps et
al., The Microeconomic Foundations of Employment and Inflation Theory, New York: Norton.

[39] Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides (1994) “Job Creation and Job Destruction in the
Theory of Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61, 397-415.

[40] Ohnsorge, Franziska and Daniel Trefler (2007) “Sorting It Out: International Trade with Heterogeneous
Workers,” Journal of Political Economy, 115, 868-892.

[41] Oi, Walter Y. and Todd L. Idson (1999) “Firm size and wages,” Chapter 33 in O. Ashenfelter and D.
Card (ed.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, Elsevier: Amsterdam, 2165-2214.

[42] Pissarides, Christopher A. (1974) “Risk, Job Search, and Income Distribution,” Journal of Political
Economy, 82, 1255-68.

[43] Pissarides, Christopher A. (2000) Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press,
second edition.

[44] Postel-Vinay, Fabien and Jean-Marc Robin (2002) “Equilibrium Wage Dispersion with Worker and
Employer Heterogeneity,” Econometrica, 70, 2295-2350.

[45] Rogerson, Richard, Robert Shimer and Randall Wright (2005) “Search-Theoretic Models of the Labor
Market: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature, XLIII, 959-988.

[46] Rosen, Sherwin (1982) “Authority, Control and the Distribution of Earnings,” Bell Journal of Economics, 13, 311-23.

[47] Shimer, Robert and Lones Smith (2000) “Assortative Matching and Search,” Econometrica, 68, 343369.

60

[48] Stole, Lars A. and Jeﬀrey Zwiebel (1996a) “Organizational Design and Technology Choice under Intrafirm Bargaining,” American Economic Review 86, 195-222.

[49] Stole, Lars A. and Jeﬀrey Zwiebel (1996b) “Intra-Firm Bargaining under Non-Binding Contracts,”
Review of Economic Studies, 63, 375-410.

[50] Terpstra, David and Elizabeth Rozell (1993) “The Relationship of Staﬃng Practices to Organizational
Level Measures of Performance,” Personnel Psychology, 46, 27-48.

[51] Van Reenen, John (1996) “The Creation and Capture of Economic Rents: Wages and Innovation in a
Panel of UK Companies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 195-226.

[52] Weiss, Andrew and Henry Landau (1984) “Wages, Hiring Standards and Firm Size,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 2, 477-499.

[53] Yeaple, Stephen R. (2005) “A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, International Trade, and Wages,”
Journal of International Economics, 65, 1—20.

61

