                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               STATE AND FEDERAL APPROACHES TO HEALTH REFORM:
                      WHAT WORKS FOR THE WORKING POOR?

                                            Ellen Meara
                                         Meredith Rosenthal
                                           Anna Sinaiko
                                         Katherine Baicker

                                        Working Paper 14125
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14125


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We are grateful to participants of the 2007 Frontiers in Health Policy Research Meetings for helpful
comments and suggestions on this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ellen Meara, Meredith Rosenthal, Anna Sinaiko, and Katherine Baicker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
State and Federal Approaches to Health Reform: What Works for the Working Poor?
Ellen Meara, Meredith Rosenthal, Anna Sinaiko, and Katherine Baicker
NBER Working Paper No. 14125
June 2008
JEL No. I1,I11,J3

                                             ABSTRACT

We compare and contrast the labor market and distributional impact of three common approaches
to state and federal health insurance expansion: public insurance expansions, refundable tax credits
for low income people, and employer and individual mandates. We draw on existing estimates from
the literature and individual-level data on the non-institutionalized population aged 64 and younger
from the 2005 Current Population Survey to estimate how each approach affects (1) the number of
people insured; (2) private and public health spending; (3) employment and wages; and (4) the distribution
of subsidies across families based on income in relation to the federal poverty level and work status
of adult family members. Employer mandates expand coverage to the largest number of previously
insured relative to public insurance expansions and individual tax credits, but with potentially negative
labor market consequences. Medicaid expansions could achieve moderate reductions in the share of
the uninsured with neutral labor market consequences, and by definition, they expand coverage to
the poorest groups regardless of work status. Tax credits extend coverage to relatively few uninsured,
but with neutral effects on the labor market. Both Medicaid expansions and tax credits offer moderate
redistribution to previously insured individuals who are poor or near-poor. None of the three policies
significantly expand insurance coverage among poor working families. Our findings suggest that no
single approach helps the working poor in exactly the ways policy makers might hope. To the extent
that states are motivated to help the uninsured in poor working families, health reforms must find ways
to include those unlikely to take up optional policies, and states must address the challenge of the many
uninsured likely to be excluded from policies based on part-time work status, firm size, or immigration
status.¸


Ellen Meara                                         Anna Sinaiko
Department of Health Care Policy                    Harvard University
Harvard Medical School                              Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue                                 Boston, MA 02118
Boston, MA 02115-5899                               sinaiko@fas.harvard.edu
and NBER
meara@hcp.med.harvard.edu                  Katherine Baicker
                                           Professor of Health Economics
Meredith Rosenthal                         Department of Health Policy and Management
Department of Health Policy and Management Harvard School of Public Health
Harvard School of Public Health            677 Huntington Avenue
677 Huntington Avenue                      Boston, MA 02115
Boston, MA 02115                           and NBER
mrosenth@hsph.harvard.edu                  kbaicker@hsph.harvard.edu
Introduction

It is a well-worn fact that over 46 million people in America now lack health
insurance. Less well-known is that 80% of uninsured individuals live in families
with at least one worker, but the vast majority of these families have incomes
under 300% of the federal poverty level (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2004).
Although the national appetite for large-scale reform has waned since President
Clinton’s failed attempt at broad health system reform, rising health insurance
costs and declining rates of employer coverage have motivated a wave of state
legislative proposals to expand health insurance coverage, particularly among this
population of low-income workers. As of February 2008, three states had enacted
reforms to achieve near universal coverage, and twelve more states have proposed
comprehensive reforms or formed commissions to recommend insurance
expansion proposals (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2008). These proposals run the
gamut from employer mandates to Medicaid expansions to state-sponsored
insurance pools. The April 2006 health reform legislation in Massachusetts has
attracted particular attention; its objective is to provide coverage to every state
resident through the combination of an individual mandate, employer
requirements, redirection of existing Medicaid funds, and the creation of a new
insurance infrastructure. Although it will take many years to fully evaluate the
effect of this and other state programs, and approaches that work well in some
states may not work in others (Glied and Gould, 2005), it is still possible to draw
broad lessons about the likely effects of different approaches (McDonough et al.,
2006). 1 In choosing among alternative policies, it is important to evaluate their
effects not just on the number of people covered by health insurance, but also on
public and private expenditures and on labor market outcomes such as
employment and wages, outcomes of particular importance to workers in poor and
near-poor families. Finally, when comparing the tradeoffs between policies, one
should consider the redistributive benefits of insurance expansions that make care
more affordable for low-income individuals.
        In this paper, we evaluate the likely effects of three prototypical
approaches to expanding health insurance coverage: public insurance expansions,
refundable tax credits for low-income people, and employer and individual
mandates. We draw on existing estimates from the literature and individual-level
data from the 2005 Current Population Survey to estimate how each approach
affects (1) the number of people insured; (2) private and public health spending;


1
  Massachusetts had several idiosyncratic characteristics that fostered a large-scale reform. It had
fewer uninsured individuals than most states and greater revenue available to fund subsidized
insurance coverage in the short term, and a political climate that was conducive to the legislation.




                                                 1
(3) employment and wages; and (4) the distribution of subsidies across families
based on income and work status.
        These approaches have substantially different public and private costs that
must be considered in addition to differences in the number and composition of
the newly insured. For example, although employer mandates are likely to
increase insurance rates among the near-poor substantially, they do so at the cost
of reduced employment for low-wage workers. Similarly, Medicaid expansions
are likely to increase insurance coverage more modestly without reducing
employment but entail social costs because they require additional public revenue,
typically obtained through taxes that distort the behavior of individuals and firms.
Furthermore, the distributional consequences of insurance coverage and
redistribution of resources toward individuals whose insurance status may not
change under reforms is one dimension that decision makers may wish to consider
but is often overlooked. States and the Federal government should take all of
these dimensions into account, not simply the number newly insured.

Three Common Approaches

Table 1 outlines three frequently considered approaches to covering those who are
uninsured. First, employer mandates typically require employers either to provide
sufficiently generous insurance to employees or to pay an assessment. The
Massachusetts plan is an example of an employer mandate coupled with an
individual mandate to purchase insurance, enforced through the tax system.
Second, Medicaid expansions extend public insurance coverage to individuals
with certain income or demographic characteristics. Some proposals also change
the nature of the Medicaid entitlement, such as converting the publicly provided
insurance policy to a voucher that recipients can use to purchase private
insurance. Third, tax credits can subsidize the purchase of private health
insurance coverage, are usually refundable, and often are restricted to the non-
group market (markets in which individuals purchase coverage without
sponsorship of an employer, union, or other organization). Such tax credits have
been proposed in President Bush’s past budgets. Notably, mandates, public
insurance expansions, tax credits, or some combination of the three have been put
forth by each of the three leading presidential candidates for the 2008 presidential
election.
        There are many variations on each of these proposals, often intended to
make health insurance more affordable to the near-poor. For example, President
Bush’s fiscal year 2007 budget proposal required people to have high deductible
health plans in order to collect the tax credit, encouraging the purchase of health
plans with relatively low premiums but higher out-of-pocket spending. Some
have suggested that combining such tax credits with other reforms would generate




                                         2
Table 1. Forms of Recent State and Federal Health Expansion Proposals
                                                                                 Recent Examples of
    Expansion        Description                 Variations                      These Initiatives
    Employer          • Mandate that              • May or may not be             • California,
    mandates            employers either            coupled with a mandate          Massachusetts,
                        provide health              that individuals purchase       Michigan, New
                        insurance benefits to       health insurance                Jersey, New York,
                        employees or pay into     • Can be coupled with a           Ohio
                        a state-run program         state- managed health         • 2008 Presidential
                        that provides health        insurance purchasing            primary proposals
                        benefits to these           pool for unemployed,            (Clinton &
                        workers                     self-employed, and/or           Obama)
                      • Often only applies to       workers at small firms to
                        firms with a minimum        purchase private health
                        number of workers           insurance plans
                                                  • Premiums often
                                                    subsidized by the state
                                                    according to a sliding
                                                    scale based on family
                                                    income
    Medicaid or      • Expand eligibility for     • May include a buy-in         • Illinois,
    other publicly     public health insurance      option for state residents     Massachusetts,
    provided           under Medicaid or S-         who donÕt meet income          Oregon,
    insurance          CHIPb program to             requirements                   Tennessee,
    expansion a        children and adults        • Can allow increased role       Wisconsin
                                                    for private market           • Maine (Dirigo),
                                                    through offer of managed       Vermont
                                                    care plans or subsidized       (Catamount
                                                    purchase of private            Health),
                                                    coverage.                      Pennsylvania
                                                                                   (AdultBasic)
                                                                                 • 2008 Presidential
                                                                                   primary health
                                                                                   plan proposals
                                                                                   (Clinton &
                                                                                   Obama)
    Tax credits      • Tax credits for           • May require purchase of       • Bush
                       purchase of a health        a high-deductible health        administration
                       plan in the non-group       plan that meets a             • 2008 presidential
                       market                      minimum deductible              primary health
                     • Tax credit may be           threshold                       plan proposals
                       refundable                • May also be extended to         (McCain &
                                                   group health insurance          Clinton)
                                                   products
a
  Although many state initiatives to reform their Medicaid programs may alter the eligible
population, we focus on major expansions in Medicaid eligibility. b S-CHIP = State ChildrenÕs
Health Insurance Program.




                                                 3
the greatest potential increase in coverage, and tax credits more generally have
garnered bipartisan support (Cogan, Hubbard, and Kessler, 2005; Etheredge,
2006). 2      Insurance pools are another strategy used in many states to provide
lower-cost options for people without employer-sponsored coverage. Often they
are coupled with a subsidy (or tax credit) to make premiums more affordable, or
with a mandate or public insurance expansion.
        This list is by no means exhaustive, and two other approaches warrant
particular mention. Many states have passed legislation to allow adult children to
remain on their parents’ insurance policies, typically until age 25, and until 30 in
New Jersey (National Conference of State Legislatures, 2006). These provisions
affect a relatively small share of uninsured individuals but can substantially affect
the non-group health insurance market. Finally, many states are experimenting
with Medicaid waivers. Most waivers are designed primarily to lower costs
(through methods such as increased cost-sharing, limited benefits, or an increased
role of managed care), but waivers have also allowed more comprehensive
Medicaid reform. For example, in 2005, Florida employed a waiver to implement
a defined contribution approach where Medicaid beneficiaries can use their state-
financed risk-adjusted premium to enroll in a Medicaid managed care plan or to
subsidize purchase of private employer-sponsored or individual-market coverage.
Successful cost-saving waivers could enable states to insure more people without
expanding Medicaid budgets, particularly if they foster a better-functioning
individual insurance market.
        Evaluating the likely effects of these proposals is a difficult empirical
exercise. Few of the reforms shown in Table 1 have been implemented, and many
of their consequences remain unknown. Supporters of each proposal often argue
that theirs will reduce the number of uninsured individuals at the lowest cost,
while pointing out the potential negative consequences of the others. For
example, Medicaid expansions may encourage employers to drop private
coverage as beneficiaries take advantage of lower premiums or more
comprehensive benefits, known as ‘crowd out’ (Cutler and Gruber, 1996; Shore-
Sheppard et al., 2000); employer mandates may lower wages and increase
unemployment. Existing evidence, when available, offers some support for both
sides of the debates (Lo Sasso, and Buchmueller, 2004). Any assessment of these
health insurance reforms must consider the effects on both health insurance
coverage and labor markets, especially for low-wage workers, to get a complete
picture of their distributional implications.




2
  We explicitly consider the availability of low-cost health insurance policies in simulating the
effect of tax credits in alternate specifications reported in Appendix Table A4.




                                               4
Economics of Insurance Expansion

When comparing the effects of insurance expansions, a thorough economic
analysis considers multiple factors including: the take-up of each policy (the
percentage of those eligible for a policy who use it); crowd-out (the percentage of
those taking up coverage who were previously insured); public and private costs
of insurance expansions; effects on wages and employment in response to
changing health care costs; deadweight loss imposed by raising revenue for
publicly funded expansions; and the implicit or explicit redistribution inherent in
each policy.
         Our analysis of the labor market effects of insurance expansions builds on
the literature predicting how labor market outcomes (i.e., employment, hours, and
wages) change in response to mandated insurance benefits. Economic theory
predicts that, when possible, employers will pass mandate costs on to employees
through lower wages (Summers, 1989). Who ultimately bears the burden of any
tax on wages is determined by the relative responsiveness of workers and
employers, but the burden of mandated benefits also depends on how much
employees value the benefits. If employees believe that benefits have value equal
to or greater than the cost of providing them (and there are no institutional
constraints to lowering wages), they will fully pay for the benefits with lower
wages and still be as well off (Summers, 1989). Empirical evidence suggests a
complete wage offset of mandated maternity benefits and workers’ compensation
benefits (Gruber, 1994; Gruber, and Krueger, 1991). In the case where minimum
wage laws limit employers’ ability to reduce wages, however, the mandate will
have the same effect as an increase in the minimum wage, potentially resulting in
increased unemployment. During the Clinton health plan debate, researchers used
responses to minimum wage increases to estimate the effect of employer
mandates on employment and projected a loss of 100,000 jobs (Klerman and
Goldman, 1994). Recent empirical evidence suggests lowered employment as
health care costs rise (Baicker and Levy, 2005; Baicker and Chandra, 2006).
         One should note that our simulations consider only the most direct, or
“partial equilibrium,” effects of changing health insurance costs, but these
changes could have broader effects throughout the economy, including effects on
prices of goods and services sold by firms, profitability, or the way firms produce
goods (such as a shift toward using more technology and fewer workers if labor
costs rise). These less-direct, or “general equilibrium,” effects of insurance
expansions are likely to be smaller in magnitude, especially given the empirical
evidence on wage and employment changes in response to mandates and health
care costs (Gruber, 1994; Gruber, and Krueger, 1991).




                                        5
Methods for Comparing the Proposals

Because state initiatives are changing almost daily, we analyzed stylized versions
of the three major health insurance expansion approaches. Table 2 briefly
describes the relevant eligibility rules, the size of benefits such as tax credits, and
other information for the three policy simulations. We modeled an employer
mandate applied to full-time workers at firms with more than 25 employees, a
Medicaid expansion up to 300% of the federal poverty level, and a tax credit of up
to $3,000 for families with income under $60,000. Our analysis was restricted to
the non-elderly (less than 65 years of age), non-institutionalized United States
population represented in the March 2005 Current Population Survey.
         We compared the effects of the three policies on both insurance and
employment outcomes. First, we estimated the number of people eligible, the
number predicted to take up health insurance under that policy, the fraction of
them who already had insurance from another source, and the average value of the
health insurance benefit for those who take it up. We then calculated changes in
private spending on health insurance, changes in public spending on health
insurance, and any deadweight loss arising from policies that require raising
public tax revenues, or due to the implicit tax imposed by mandates that require
spending on health insurance that may not be fully valued. We next estimated
changes in wages, employment, and hours worked per week per newly insured
person. Finally, we showed the distribution of the newly insured individuals
separately by employment status (whether the head of household or spouse
works) and by family poverty level (under 100%, 100-200%, 200-300%, and over
300%).
         To perform these calculations, we combined estimates from the literature
with our own calculations from the Current Population Survey. From the
literature, we identified the take-up rate of publicly provided free coverage among
various demographic groups; the rate of crowd-out; the price elasticity of demand
for insurance coverage; the response of private employers to changes in employee
costs and how this affects wages and employment; the estimated costs of
providing private or public coverage to individuals and families; and the
deadweight loss of raising public revenue. We used the Current Population
Survey to calculate the number of individuals eligible for each policy based on
income, family structure, and employment; and the distribution of single versus
family coverage among insured workers. A more comprehensive description of
the source of parameter estimates, our general approach, and the sensitivity of our
results to choice of key parameters can be found in the Technical Appendix.




                                          6
Table 2              Description of Simulated Policies

                     Employer            Medicaid
                     Mandates            Expansions        Tax Creditsa

Eligibility by       Uninsured full-     No                Individuals without
insurance status     time workers &      requirementsb     employer-sponsored or
                     dependents at                         public insurance
                     firms with 25 or                      coverage
                     more workers

Income eligibility   No income           Income under      Adjusted gross income:
                      cutoff             300% of           Single tax filer - up to
                                         poverty level     $30,000
                                                           Other tax filer- up to
                                                           $40,000 for individual
                                                           coverage, $60,000 for
                                                           family

Maximum benefit      Family coverage Medicaid              $1,000 per adult
                     through         coverage              $500 per child
                     employer                              $3000 max per family

Individual              Simulated with    None             None
mandate                 & without
a
  Details of tax credit are shown in appendix table A1.
b
  This assumes no “anti-crowd-out” provisions.

Effects on Health Insurance Coverage and Spending

Our simulation results, presented in Table 3, demonstrate important differences
across these three insurance reform approaches. The typical Medicaid expansions
and tax credits are available to more people, with 59.0 million eligible (including
20.8 million uninsured) for Medicaid expansions and 52.5 million eligible
(including 39.6 million uninsured) for tax credits, and 21.2 million eligible (all
uninsured) for employer mandates. The scope for displacing private spending
with the public subsidy is likely biggest with the tax credit, since the most
relevant evidence from the literature suggests limited new insurance take-up in
response to an increase in insurance premium subsidies (Glied, Remler, and Zivin,
2002; Congressional Budget Office 2005; Gruber, 2004; Marquis et al., 2004;




                                         7
Dorn et al., 2005).3 These estimates suggest that only about 1.5 million
previously uninsured individuals would gain insurance coverage with the credit.
We assumed that virtually all those already purchasing insurance in the non-group
market would take advantage of the credit. Thus, almost 90% of those taking up
the tax credit, 11.6 million out of 13.1 million total, are likely to have had prior
insurance coverage. This group reaps substantial financial benefits, however,
with an average subsidy of over $1,000 per tax filing unit, and $687 per person.
In contrast, using the 35% public insurance expansion crowd-out estimate from
the literature suggests that only 2.7 million of those gaining coverage through the
Medicaid expansion would have been previously insured (Cutler, and Gruber,
1996; Dubay, and Kennedy, 1996; Blumberg, Dubay, and Norton, 2000;Shore-
Sheppard, Buchmeueller, and Jansen, 2000). Low-income workers would also
benefit from redistribution under this plan as they take up Medicaid, since
employer health care costs would drop by an estimated $8.3 billion, which would
induce an increase in cash wages of the same amount.
         Under employer mandates, private employer spending would rise by an
estimated $40.6 billion if employers continued to buy coverage at the typical
prevailing premiums. This spending would exceed the public spending of $16.4
billion for a Medicaid expansion and $9.0 billion for the tax credit. In exchange
for the largest increases in spending, the number of uninsured individuals would
be expected to fall most with employer mandates – by 33%, compared with 12%
for Medicaid expansions and only 3.8% for tax credits. Employer mandates
would have even bigger effects on costs, insurance, and employment when
coupled with individual mandates, which could, as an upper bound estimate,
lower rates of uninsured by half in a world with perfect compliance. However, as
Massachusetts’ early experience and evidence on mandates in other settings
suggest, mandates are imperfect policies and their success relies on the relative
costs of compliance versus noncompliance and effective enforcement (Glied,
Hartz, and Giorgi, 2008).
         The social cost, or deadweight loss, of each policy would vary across
approaches. Medicaid expansions would induce deadweight loss of $4.9 billion.
We estimated the deadweight loss cost of tax credits at $2.7 billion. Finally,
assuming that workers only value the health insurance mandated under an
employer mandate at half of its cost, employer mandates would generate $1.6
billion of deadweight loss because of the wedge between the total cost of
compensation to employers and the total value of that compensation to workers.


3
  There is some variation in estimated take-up rates in the literature, discussed in these papers and
in Glied et al. (2002). The number newly insured is directly proportional to the estimated
elasticity of demand for non-group coverage. Thus, there would be three times as many newly
insured given an elasticity of -.3 than there are in our results below that assume an elasticity of -.1.




                                                   8
        Both Medicaid expansions and the tax credit approaches yield significant
redistribution of public funds to previously insured low-income individuals.
Individuals dropping private coverage for Medicaid would, in aggregate, receive
$5.7 billion in the form of free Medicaid insurance. Individuals previously
purchasing insurance in the non-group market would receive subsidies totaling
$7.8 billion for the purchase of that coverage. Thus, even policies that insure
relatively few uninsured individuals may have great social value. Given the
difficulty choosing an appropriate social welfare function that could assign
relative values to redistribution at different levels and based on characteristics of
the beneficiaries of redistribution, we do not explicitly model or value this change
in social welfare, but we highlight the magnitude of the redistribution inherent in
these two health reform approaches.
        Although our simulations show that these policies would decrease the
uninsured population overall, uninsurance could increase among some groups.
For example, if a policy that offered tax credits was limited to purchase of
coverage in the non-group market, some employers might stop offering coverage.
If some workers would fail to take up the tax credit to purchase coverage, they
would become newly uninsured. These effects, which we did not model, would
likely be small compared to the main effects, especially if the new expansions
covered only a minority of employees in any particular firm.

Effects on Labor Markets

Table 3b demonstrates that the aggregate labor market effects would be negative
for the employer mandates, and to a first approximation neutral for tax credits and
neutral or even positive for Medicaid expansions. As mentioned before, cash
wages would drop among previously uninsured workers who received insurance
under a new mandate and would rise among previously insured workers who
would drop employer-sponsored coverage to take-up Medicaid benefits. In the
aggregate, each 10% reduction in the number of uninsured individuals would
decrease annual wages by $20.8 billion under an employer mandate and would
increase wages by $6.9 billion under Medicaid expansions. About 235,000 fewer
workers would be employed with an employer mandate (when workers’ wages
cannot adjust downward and workers do not fully value the mandated benefits).4
Hours worked would fall by 0.77% under mandates.


4
  Baicker and Levy explicitly estimate what might be considered a lower bound on the potential
disemployment effects of employer mandates: they estimate the fraction of the uninsured
population earning wages so low that they cannot fully adjust to higher mandated health costs
because of the minimum wage, but assume that all workers fully-value the mandated benefits so
that there is no disemployment for higher-wage workers. Here, we assume that workers only




                                              9
Table 3a                                Comparison of Expansion Approaches
                                         Employer       Medicaid
                                                  a
                                         Mandates      Expansions      Tax
                                                                     Creditsb
Number of people eligible                21.2 million        59.0 million       52.5 million
Take-up by previously insured                   0             2.7 million       11.6 million
Take-up by uninsured                      14.2 million        5.0 million       1.5 million
(Reduction in uninsured)c                    (33%)              (12%)             (3.4%)
Average value of benefit for
those who take it up                         $2,860             $2,138              $687
Public spending
 Total                                          0            $16.4 billion      $9.0 billion
 Per newly insured                              0              $3,289             $6,000
Private spending
  Total                                   $40.6 billion      -$8.3 billion     -$6.4 billiond
  Per newly insured                         $2,860             -$1,664            -$4,307
Deadweight loss                           $1.6 billion       $4.9 billion       $2.7 billion
Redistribution to previously
insured                                         $0            $5.7 billion      $7.8 billion
a- With an individual mandate, the employer and individual mandates would newly insure 21.2
million, reduce employment by 1.9%, and raise private spending by $60.6 billion. .
b- As noted in the text, the tax credits modeled here are less generous than those many others
proposed in ongoing debates. Using a limit of $2500 for individuals and $5000 for families would
yield 2.9 million newly insured at a cost of $20 billion in new public spending. It would also
redistribute $15.6 billion to previously insured individuals taking up the credit.
c- Because empirical estimates of employers dropping offers of coverage in response to insurance
expansions are negligible, these effects are not included, making the number of newly insured
equal to take-up by previously uninsured. The % change in uninsured is based on the 2005 CPS
estimate of 43.0 million uninsured individuals under age 65.
d-
  This represents net change in private spending, or the difference between increased spending on
health insurance by newly insured and the decrease in spending by the previously insured.




partially value benefits. Disemployment effects will be proportionately higher or lower depending
on this assumption.




                                               10
Table 3b.          Labor Market Effects per 10% Reduction in Uninsured
                                Employer       Medicaid
Change In:                      Mandates      Expansions Tax Credits
Employed workers                -235,000
                                                   a             b
(%)                              (-0.39)
Hours worked per week         -18.8 million
                                                   a             b
(%)                              (-0.77)
                                                          a
Annual wages                  -$20.8 billion $6.9 billion
                                                                 b
(%)                              (-0.69)         (0.33)
a-
  If falling health care costs induce employment and hours effects that equal those in Baicker and
Chandra (2006) but simply operate in the opposite direction, employment would rise by 192,000
workers and hours worked per week would increase by 14 million. However, in the absence of
evidence that these effects are symmetric (that the response to falling health care costs equals that
for rising health care costs), we believe that these are upper bound effects and actual effects would
likely be closer to zero. The change in cash wages results from wages adjusting upward for
workers who drop employer-sponsored coverage to take up Medicaid.
b- Given the ambiguous sign of labor market effects accompanying tax credits, and the
expectation that these are very small in magnitude, these are likely close to zero.

Effects for the Working Poor

Would poor working families benefit more from some expansion approaches than
others? Table 4 suggests that under employer mandates, two-thirds of newly
insured individuals would live in working families with incomes under 300% of
the poverty level. By design, our Medicaid expansions target only families with
income under 300% of the poverty level, and over 60% of the newly insured
would be in working families. Tax credits also target individuals with low and
moderate incomes. The most striking feature of Table 4, though, is the low
reduction in rates of uninsurance in any of the three approaches among those
living below the poverty level. For employer mandates, this occurs mainly
because many individuals in these families do not work full time. The design of
employer mandates could address this by extending mandates to part-time
workers, but not without additional effects on wages and/or employment. Many
of those eligible under the Medicaid proposal are individuals already eligible
(based on income criteria) but not enrolled in Medicaid, so we assumed that the
expansion would have no effect on them. This can explain why a program
targeting the poor would likely cover less than one-fifth of uninsured individuals
living below poverty. The tax credit would perform poorly at all income levels
against the goal of reducing the number uninsured, and working families with
income under 100% of the poverty level are no exception. However, this tax
credit is relatively modest, and the more generous tax credits proposed by current
presidential hopefuls might boost the insurance effects.




                                                11
Table 4. Distribution of Newly Insured and Percent Reduction of Uninsured Under Each Simulation
by Family Income and Employment
                         Employer Mandatea Medicaid Expansion               Tax Credit
                                         Reduction of                  Reduction of                Reduction of
                              Newly      Uninsured in     Newly        Uninsured in      Newly     Uninsured in    Credit
                              Insured      Group          Insured        Group           Insured     Group         Dollars
                                (%)          (%)            (%)            (%)             (%)         (%)          (%)

Working individuals
& families
 <100% poverty                  12            12            5.9            5.9             15           4.6          5.7
 100%-200% poverty              31            18            20             11              25           4.2          13
 200%-300% poverty              24            20            37             30              11           2.8          8.8
 >300% poverty                  33            21             0              0              11           2.8          21

Non-Working
individuals
& families
 <100% poverty                   0             0            11             8.6             19           4.5          13
 100%-200% poverty               0             0            12             16              11           4.3          14
 200%-300% poverty               0             0            14             31              4.4          3.0          8.4
 >300% poverty                   0             0             0              0              3.3          2.6          16
a
 The percent reduction of the uninsured presented in the table corresponds to the case in which there is no individual mandate.
With an individual mandate, the percent reductions in uninsured below 100% of poverty, between 100% and 200% of poverty,
between 200% and 300% of poverty, and above 300% of poverty, respectively are 18%, 26%, 30%, and 31%.




                                                                    12
Redistribution from Health Insurance Expansions

Although the insurance effects of health reforms would be modest without
individual mandates, the redistribution implicit in insurance expansions would
offer substantial increases in the well-being of low-income families. Among
those purchasing insurance coverage via tax credits, the average subsidy would be
about $687 per person covered by the tax credit. Over half of the tax credit
dollars, about 63%, would accrue to families and individuals with income below
300% of the poverty level. A substantial share of the dollars, 46%, would accrue
to families with income under 200% of the poverty level. These distributional
benefits would accrue to both working and non-working families.
        The tax credit simulated here was based on the Bush Administration
budget proposal for fiscal year 2007. This proposal was modest in generosity
compared with those in current tax credit proposals. However, one could easily
extend our analyses to describe the impact of a more generous tax credit, and in
cases with no individual mandate, our qualitative conclusions regarding the
insurance impact and general distributional consequences will remain. Because
voluntary take-up of insurance in response to subsidized coverage is relatively
low, the number of newly insured individuals will still be low relative to other
alternatives, absent an individual mandate.5          However, the amount of
redistribution achieved through the tax credits would be substantially higher under
more generous tax credit scenarios.
        Medicaid expansions also offer significant redistribution to families. The
$8.3 billion reduction in private spending under the Medicaid expansion would
accrue to individuals either through higher wages or directly through premium
reductions. The majority of individuals newly insured would be in families with
children. Among those newly insured under a Medicaid expansion, many have
children covered by the State Children’s Health Insurance Program (data not
shown). Tax credits have similar effects on families with and without children.

Implications of our Analysis for Current Health Reform Initiatives

Although our analysis focuses on stylized reform approaches, our results offer
insights into the likely effects and potential pitfalls of the recent flurry of new
state-level initiatives to cover uninsured individuals. California’s proposal
mirrored some aspects of the Massachusetts plan by imposing combined

5
  There is limited evidence on the likely long-run effect of the availability of more generous
subsidies. The Appendix discusses increased availability of low-cost policies: to the extent that
these proliferate and drive net costs of insurance close to zero, there may be non-linear increases
in take-up, as there is some evidence that take-up of free benefits is much higher than those with
even modest copayments.




                                               13
individual and employer mandates, although it relies more on public insurance
coverage expansion. Our estimates suggest that the individual mandate would
cover more people than other policies alone, but the employer mandate could
dampen employment among those employers not currently offering health
insurance. Some of the distributional issues raised, such as low voluntary take-up
among low-income working individuals, would be mitigated by the individual
mandates. However, undocumented immigrants will continue to challenge states’
efforts to cover uninsured individuals, and low-wage workers are at risk of lower
employment rates as employers face higher payroll costs.
        Many of the features discussed above are also present in Pennsylvania’s
recently announced Prescription for Pennsylvania, which includes an individual
mandate for those whose income is over 300% of the poverty level, sliding scales
for subsidized insurance coverage among employees of small firms unable to
afford coverage, and a 3% payroll tax for employers not providing health
insurance coverage. Among individuals below 300% of poverty, take-up will
depend on the generosity of the sliding scales that the individuals face when
purchasing coverage.
        In late 2006, Indiana’s governor, Mitch Daniels, proposed a plan to cover
moderate-income individuals (up to 300% of poverty level) without access to
employer-sponsored coverage. Indiana’s plan would use cigarette taxes, Federal
funds, and individual fees to allow individuals to buy into insurance coverage on a
sliding-fee scale. Individuals buying into this plan would have a Health Savings
Account (called a power account) and would receive free preventive care. The
issue of take-up of subsidized coverage among moderate-income individuals also
looms large for the success of this plan. Among uninsured individuals with
family income under 300% of the poverty level, however, over 17% already have
access to employer-sponsored coverage, so they would not be helped by the state
plan. Even for the targeted individuals, it is unclear how many will take up
coverage, and the coverage offered limited financial protection for individuals
with catastrophic health care costs.
        In his 2007 State of the Union address, President Bush proposed an
overhaul of the tax treatment of health insurance. The proposed “Standard
Deduction for Health Insurance” would replace the current preference for
employer-sponsored health insurance with a flat deduction (for both payroll and
income tax purposes) for anyone covered by private insurance, regardless of the
source of the insurance or the size of the premium. The standard deduction would
be $7,500 for single coverage or $15,000 for family coverage. Like a flat tax
credit, this would substantially lower the cost of obtaining insurance for most
people, but would be of highest value for people in the highest tax brackets.
Unlike a non-flat credit or deduction that depended on the cost of the policy, it
would give the same tax benefit for the purchase of low-cost policies as high-cost




                                        14
policies. This policy also leaves open the questions of take-up among low-wage
workers with limited tax liability.
        The value of different approaches to insurance expansion ultimately
depends on policy priorities; tax credits and public insurance expansions generate
the most redistribution, while mandates achieve the biggest overall reduction in
the number of uninsured individuals at the risk of negative labor market
consequences.
        The feasibility of each approach depends on the environment in which it is
pursued. Medicaid expansions may not be feasible among states struggling to cut,
rather than increase, budgets. For these reasons, states will closely watch the
success of current Medicaid waivers including cost containment strategies.
Employer mandates meet with strong political backlash from business interests in
all states, although perhaps less with more progressive business communities.
Mandates in Massachusetts and those proposed in California and Pennsylvania
may not withstand Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)
challenges. Tax credits achieve redistribution, but at the greatest taxpayer
expense, and would require an accompanying individual mandate to achieve a
significant reduction in the number of uninsured individuals.

Why don’t expansions insure more people?

The poorest working families are not the primary beneficiaries of any of the
approaches examined here. Those in households earning less than 100% of the
federal poverty level would experience little change in insurance coverage,
although a portion of them would benefit from redistribution through tax credits
or Medicaid expansions.         The low insurance coverage among the poorest
families stems partly from the fact that most uninsured workers work part-time
and thus are not covered by most employer mandates. In addition, many low-
income workers are eligible for public insurance but do not take it up. Similarly,
the increase in insurance coverage in response to tax credits is likely to be low
due to low take-up.
        Finally, a large fraction of the working poor may not be eligible for tax
credits or public insurance because of their immigration status, yet the health and
financial impact of uncompensated care is substantial in states with high
immigrant populations. According to the March 2005 Current Population Survey,
about one-third of uninsured workers with incomes below 300% of the federal
poverty level were not United States citizens. How policy-makers evaluate
options depends on whether covering this population is one of their policy goals.
To address the gaps in coverage for the poorest families, an individual mandate,
extensions of employer mandates to cover part-time workers, or the loosening of




                                        15
restrictions for non-citizen eligibility for Medicaid benefits might change the
composition and share of low-income individuals accessing health insurance.

Limitations

Our findings should be interpreted in light of several caveats. First, we have
presented analyses of three stylized approaches to insurance expansion, but other
strategies, including combinations of approaches currently being pursued by
several states, are possible and might achieve desired outcomes more effectively.
        Second, there are other potential labor market effects not considered
explicitly in our simulation. For example, some researchers estimate that a large
number of firms might alter the way they hire in order to avoid regulations that
apply to firms over a particular size, such as 25 workers (Yelowitz, 2006).
Regulations on employers could also accelerate an ongoing trend toward
contingent workers who would not be covered by these regulations (Swartz,
2006). Thus, low-wage workers providing services even for large, relatively
high-wage firms, may fail to benefit from employer-sponsored insurance.
Potentially worse, those previously employed and receiving employer-sponsored
coverage might be replaced by workers at firms not subject to employer
mandates.
        Finally, we estimated the changes in public and private spending based on
typical insurance currently provided through private and public and group and
non-group purchasers, but the cost and generosity of many insurance plans might
change in response to policy changes. States may scale back optional Medicaid
benefits, or purchasing pools paired with mandates may encourage high-
deductible health plans, both of which have lower actuarial value. In these cases,
the value of insurance coverage enjoyed by the insured and the costs of providing
it may fall. Thus, our estimates may overstate changes in public and private
spending, as well as the potential redistribution to those affected by each
expansion approach.

Conclusion

States grappling with the growing number of uninsured individuals face tradeoffs
between approaches that expand coverage most broadly with potentially negative
labor market consequences, market-based approaches that redistribute dollars but
are likely to insure relatively few, and expansion of public coverage that offers
moderate gains in insurance coverage and redistribution, with moderate
deadweight loss. Our findings suggest that no single approach helps the working
poor in exactly the ways policy makers might hope. To the extent that states are
motivated to help uninsured individuals in poor working families, health reforms




                                       16
must find ways to include those unlikely to take up optional policies, and states
must address the challenge posed by uninsured workers and dependents likely to
be excluded from policies (based on part-time status, firm size, or immigration
status). Although a combination of the policies under debate and some of the
innovative approaches being pursued by states offer the promise of expanded
access to affordable insurance, advocates and policy makers should consider the
full range of economic costs and distributional concerns when designing health
insurance expansions.


Technical Appendix to “State and Federal Approaches to Health Reform:
What Works for the Working Poor?”

The following tables and text provide details on the tax credit analyzed in the
paper, the source of parameter estimates used to estimate who is covered by
insurance policies, and the sensitivity of our estimates to the choice of key
parameters. Table A1 provides detail on the proposed tax credit used in the
simulations. Table A2 gives a detailed description of the parameter estimates
used in the simulations presented in the text, including the source of each estimate
and ranges in the literature.




                                        17
Table A1                   Tax Credit Schedule


                                      Other filer with insurance policy covering:
                           Single     1 adult      1 adult & 2 adults 2 adults & 2 adults &
                           filer                   1 child     no child    1 child 2+ children

Maximum Adjusted Gross
Income that is eligible for
90% of premium up to cap $15,000 $25,000            $25,000    $25,000     $25,000        $25,000
Range over which credit
phases out from 90% to $15,000-
50%                         $20,000 NA              NA         NA          NA             NA
                           $20,000- $25,000-        $25,000-   $25,000-    $25,000-       $25,000-
Phaseout range to 0%       $30,000 $40,000          $40,000    $60,000     $60,000        $60,000


Maximum value of credit    $1,000     $1,000        $1,500     $2,000      $2,500         $3,000

Maximum cost of eligible
insurance policy         $1,111       $1,111        $1,111     $2,222      $2,778         $3,334

Maximum adults             1         1            1           2            2              2
Maximum children           0         0            1           0            1              2
Source: Bush Administration proposed budget for 2006 (United States Department of the Treasury, 2005)




                                               18
Table A2                                   Parameter Estimates

Simulation & estimate needed               Estimate      Source

Employer Mandate

Average cost of single employer-           $4,024        (Kaiser/HRET, 2005)
sponsored health insurance coverage,
2005

Average cost of family employer-           $10,880       (Kaiser/HRET, 2005)
sponsored health insurance coverage,
2005
Average cost of coverage per private       $8,009        Authors’ calculations based on 2005
worker with ESI                                          CPS estimate that 41.9% of insured
                                                         private workers at firms with >25
                                                         workers have single coverage and the
                                                         rest have family coverage, and
                                                         Kaiser/HRET (2005) survey estimates
                                                         of average cost of policies

Deadweight loss of taxes, used to          .30           (Poterba, 1995)
compute costs of unvalued benefits

Effect of a 10% increase in health
insurance premiums on:
   Aggregate probability of being         -1.2%         (Baicker, and Chandra, 2006)
    employed
   Hours worked per employee              -2.4%         (Baicker, and Chandra, 2006)
   Wages                                  -2.3%         (Baicker, and Chandra, 2006)

Medicaid Expansion
Fraction of eligible adults and children   13%           (Lo Sasso, and Buchmueller, 2004)
who will take up Medicaid coverage                       The highest estimates of take-up
                                                         (~25%) from Cutler and Gruber
                                                         (1996) apply to pregnant women, a
                                                         group likely to have higher take-up
                                                         than many individuals targeted by
                                                         current      Medicaid       expansion
                                                         proposals.
Fraction of newly insured who drop         .35           Midpoint of range of estimates (.2 to
prior health insurance coverage                          .5) in the literature, in (Blumberg,
(crowd-out)                                              Dubay, and Norton, 2000; Cutler, and
                                                         Gruber, 1996; Dubay, and Kennedy,
                                                         1996; Shore-Sheppard et al., 2000; Lo
                                                         Sasso, and Buchmueller, 2004;
                                                         Yazici, and Kaestner, 2000)




                                                 19
Table A2 continued                           Parameter Estimates

Simulation & estimate needed                 Estimate      Source
Cost of Medicaid per non-disabled            $1,343a       (U.S. House of Representatives, 2004)
child in 2000 ($2005)

Cost of Medicaid per non-disabled            $2,204a       (U.S. House of Representatives, 2004)
adult in 2000 ($2005)



Average cost of single employer-             $4,024        (Kaiser/HRET, 2005)
sponsored health insurance coverage,
2005
Average cost of family employer-             $10,880       (Kaiser/HRET, 2005)
sponsored health insurance coverage,
2005
Average cost of coverage per private         $7,899        Authors’ calculations based on 2005
worker with ESI                                            CPS estimate that 43.5% of all private
                                                           workers have single coverage and the
                                                           rest have family coverage, and
                                                           Kaiser/HRET (2005) estimates of
                                                           average cost of policies for 2005

Deadweight loss of taxes                     .30           (Poterba, 1995)

Tax Credits
Take-up elasticity, or the (% change in      -.10          Based on (Congressional Budget
uninsured)/(% subsidy). If the take-up                     Office, 2005; Dorn et al., 2005;
elasticity is -.10, a tax credit providing                 Marquis et al., 2004; Gruber, 2004).
a 50% subsidy to individuals would                         These estimates range from -.02 to -
reduce the number of uninsured among                       .16
target populations by 5%.

Fraction of eligible and previously          3.8%          Authors’ estimates using above price
uninsured population who take up tax                       elasticity and March 2005 CPS.
credit
Average non-group premium for single         $2300         Based on (AHIP Center for Policy
coverage                                                   and Research 2005).

Average non-group premium for family         $4400         Based on (AHIP Center for Policy
coverage                                                   and Research 2005).

Deadweight loss of taxes                   .30             Poterba, 1995
All costs in 2005 dollars
a. 2000 estimates inflated to 2005 dollars




                                                    20
Sensitivity analyses of the choice of parameter estimates
Some of the estimates used in the analysis are either controversial or based on
relatively scant empirical evidence. For example, the crowd-out estimates from
the literature range from a low of .17 to a high of .49. Table A3 shows how
estimates change when the lowest and highest crowd-out estimates are substituted
for the midpoint crowd out estimate used in our baseline simulation. The ranking
of health reforms in terms of which is most effective at reducing the number
uninsured, and which has the highest level of public spending per newly insured,
or the largest change in private spending per newly insured remain unchanged for
a wide range of crowd-out estimates. The labor market effect rankings of each
expansion approach are also unchanged by differences in the parameter estimate.
This sensitivity analysis highlights an unusual tension between crowd-out, which
policy typically tries to minimize, and labor market effects. For Medicaid
expansions, a higher rate of crowd out, while depressing the number newly
insured and increasing the public costs per newly insured, carries larger positive
employment effects.


Sensitivity analysis of labor market parameter estimates
A second consideration is the sensitivity of our results to the estimates in Baicker
and Chandra (2006), the only available evidence of employment effects based on
a within-state longitudinal analysis directly addressing the potential endogeneity
of health care costs. If the true labor market response to health care costs were
half of those estimated in Baicker and Chandra (2006), one would simply halve
the employment effects shown in the bottom panel of table A3. For the lowest
crowd out estimate, the employment effects of a Medicaid expansion would be
much more modest, with an increase of about 40,000 workers, 48,000 hours
worked per week, and $2.85 billion in wages. Similarly, the negative impact of
the employer mandates would be half as big.
        Third, our principal simulation of the tax credit approach to insurance
expansion uses the average price of insurance for single and family coverage in
the non-group market to model the reference plan ($2,300 for single coverage and
$4,400 for family coverage). In most areas, however, there are high-deductible
and other low-cost plans available that might appeal to many buyers in the non-
group market. As a sensitivity analysis we examine the implications of the tax
credit policy if individuals purchase insurance from health plans offering low-cost
health savings account plans with high-deductibles (HSA-compatible plans) rather
than the average plan.




                                        21
Table A3: Sensitivity of Exhibit 3 Medicaid expansion estimates to crowd-out parameter used in
calculationa
                                  Employer                    Medicaid
Change In:                        Mandates       Expansions by crowd-out estimate:        Tax Credits
                                                   .17           .35           .49
Take-up by previously insured                 NA             1.3 million       2.7 million        3.7 million        11.6 million
Number newly insured                     13,030,547         6.4 million         5 million         3.9 million         1.5 million
Percent reduction in uninsured              28.6%              14.8%             11.6%               9.1%                3.4%
Private spending             $40.6 billion   -$4.0 billion                   -$8.3 billion      -$11.6 billion       -$6.4 billion
Labor market effects per 10% reduction in uninsured
Change in:
Employed workers                -235,000
                                                   b                                 b                  b                   c
(% change)                        (-.39)
Hours worked/week             -18.8 million
                                                   b                                 b                  b                   c
 (% change)                       (-.77)
Annual wages                 -$20.8 billion $2.7 billion                      $6.9 billion       $12.8 billion
                                                                                                                            c
(% change)                        (-.69)        (0.24)                          (0.33)              (0.68)
a - Estimates not shown in this table are unchanged by changes in the crowd-out parameter used in calculation. Figures for the
employer mandate and tax credits are unaffected by the crowd-out figure, but are shown for comparison.
b - Given the ambiguous sign of labor market effects accompanying tax credits, and the expectation that these are trivial in magnitude,
these are set to equal zero.
c - Employment and hours might rise if employers were more willing to hire low wage workers eligible for Medicaid (since these
workers would likely decline employer-sponsored insurance), but these employment and hours effects are likely to be small. The
change in cash wages results from wages adjusting upward for workers who drop employer-sponsored coverage to take up Medicaid




                                                                      22
        We use alternative premium information from two sources. First,
America’s Health Insurance Plans (the health plan trade organization) reported
that the average premium for single coverage in the non-group market for the
most popular HSA-compatible plan in January 2006 was $1,121, $1,914, and
$3,157 for subscribers aged 20-29, 30-54, and 55-64 respectively. For family
coverage, premiums for the most popular plan were $2,507, $3,951, and $5,690
for subscribers aged 20-29, 30-54, and 55-64 respectively. Based on those
eligible for the tax credit, the population-weighted average premium for these
HSA-compatible plans are $1750 for single coverage and $3935 for family
coverage, only slightly lower than the average non-group market plan.
        Second, Feldman and colleagues (Feldman et al., 2005) simulated the
growth in HSA-compatible plans under a number of policy scenarios using data
from eHealthinsurance.com. Their simulations use the average premium for a 40-
year-old non-smoking male for a plan with a $3,500 deductible ($7,000 for family
coverage). The premiums for these HDHP plans are $1,233 for single coverage
and $2,724 for family coverage. In Table A-4 below, we compare key results of
the tax credit simulation under the three sets of alternative premiums. The
numbers of newly insured and public spending are similar between baseline
estimates and estimates using premiums reported by America’s Health Insurance
Plans. The number newly insured increases by roughly 70% in the model using
the premiums from Feldman et al. (2005) compared to the baseline estimates.
The deadweight loss rises modestly using the Feldman et al. (2005) estimates,
about 7%.
        Under a range of reasonable assumptions about the premiums of eligible
plans taken up by the newly insured, the tax credit approach yields many fewer
newly insured and much higher public spending per newly insured than the
employer mandate or Medicaid expansion. Moreover, we note that the increased
numbers of newly insured and lower costs per newly insured associated with the
simulations using the lowest premium estimates come at a cost of reduced
coverage (i.e., high deductibles and possibly coinsurance).

Table A4                   Tax credit insurance effects for individuals up to $40,000
                           and families up to $60,000 of adjusted gross income
                           assuming different types of insurance policies
                             Baseline (average) AHIP-reported          Feldman et al.
                              health insurance      HSA/HDHP             HSA/HDHP
                            premium estimates          premiums            premiums

Newly insured                        1.5 million       1.9 million         2.6 million

Deadweight loss                     $2.7 billion      $2.8 billion        $2.9 billion




                                      23
References

AHIP Center for Research and Policy. (2005). “Individual Health Insurance: A
       Comprehensive Survey of Affordability, Access, and Benefits,” available
       online at
       http://www.ahipresearch.org/pdfs/Individual_Insurance_Survey_Report8-
       26-2005.pdf, accessed May 30, 2008.
Baicker K. and Levy H. (2005). “Employer Health Insurance Mandates and the
       Risk of Unemployment,” Washington, D.C.: Employment Policies
       Institute.
Baicker K. and Chandra A. (2006). “The Labor Market Effects of Rising Health
       Insurance Premiums,” Journal of Labor Economics 24(3): 609-34.
Blumberg L.J., Dubay L., and Norton S.A. (2000). “Did the Medicaid Expansions
       for Children Displace Private Insurance? An Analysis Using the Sipp,”
       Journal of Health Economics, 19(1):33-60.
Cogan J.F., Hubbard R.G., and Kessler D.P. (2005). “Healthy, Wealthy, and
       Wise,” Washington D.C.: The AEI Press, and Stanford, California: The
       Hoover Institution.
Congressional Budget Office. (2005) “The Price Sensitivity of Demand for
       Nongroup Health Insurance,” Washington D.C.: The Congress of the
       United States.
Cutler D.M. (2002) “Employee Costs and the Decline in Health Insurance
       Coverage,” Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research
       Working Paper #9036.
Cutler D.M. and Gruber J. (1996). “Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private
       Insurance?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2):391-430.
Dorn S., Alteras T., and Meyer J. (2005). "Early Implementation of the Health
       Coverage Tax Credit in Maryland, Michigan, and North Carolina: A Case
       Study Summary," New York: The Commonwealth Fund, available at
       http://www.cmwf.org/usr_doc/806_dorn_earlyimplementationhct.pdf.
       Accessed April 14, 2008.
Dubay L.C. and Kennedy G.M. (1996). “Revisiting the Issues: The Effects of
       Medicaid Expansions on the Insurance Coverage of Children,” The Future
       of Children, 6(1):152-61.
Etheredge L. M. (2006). “Massachusetts Reform Plus President Bush's Tax
       Credits: A National Model?,” Health Affairs, 25 (2006):w444-6.




                                     24
Feldman R., Parente S., Abraham J., Christianson J., and Taylor R. (2005).
       “Health Savings Accounts: Early Estimates of National Take-Up,” Health
       Affairs, November/December:1582-91.
Glied S.A., Hart J., and Giorgi G. (2007). “Consider It Done? The Likely Efficacy
       of Mandates for Health Insurance,” Health Affairs, 26(6):1612-21.
Glied S., Remler D.K., and Zivin J.G. (2002). “Inside the Sausage Factory:
       Improving Estimates of the Effects of Health Insurance Expansion
       Proposals,” Milbank Quarterly, 80(4):603-35, iii.
Gruber J. (1994). “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American
       Economic Review, 84(3):622-41.
Gruber, J. (2004). "Tax Policy for Health Insurance," Cambridge, MA: National
       Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #10977.
Gruber J. and Krueger A.B. (1991). “The Incidence of Mandated Employer-
       Provided Insurance: Lessons from Workers' Compensation Insurance,” In:
       Bradford D. (ed), Tax Policy and the Economy, 5th ed. Cambridge, MA:
       MIT Press.
Gruber J. and Washington E. (2005). “Subsidies to Employee Health Insurance
       Premiums and the Health Insurance Market,” Journal of Health
       Economics, 24:253-76.Kaiser Family Foundation. “States Moving Toward
       Comprehensive         Health      Care      Reform,”      available      at
       http://www.kff.org/uninsured/upload/1420_09.pdf. Accessed February 28,
       2008.
Kaiser Family Foundation. “Health Care and the 2004 Elections: the Uninsured,”
       available at http://www.kff.org/uninsured/7155.cfm. Accessed June 8,
       2007.
Kaiser/HRET. "Employer-Sponsored Health Benefits Annual Survey," available
       at http://www.kff.org/insurance/7315/index.cfm. Accessed June 16, 2005.
Klerman J.A. and Goldman D.P. (1994). “Job Loss Due to Health Insurance
       Mandates,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 272:552-6.
Lo Sasso A.T. and Buchmueller T.C. (2004). “The Effect of the State Children's
       Health Insurance Program on Health Insurance Coverage,” Journal of
       Health Economics, 23:1059-82.
McDonough J.E., Rosman B., Phelps F., and Shannon M. (2006). “The Third
       Wave of Massachusetts Health Care Access Reform,” Health Affairs, 25
       w420-31.
National Conference of State Legislatures. (2006). “Health Insurance,”
       Highlights: State Health Notes, 27(464):1-3.
Poterba J. (1995). “Government Intervention in the Markets for Education and
       Health Care: How Much and Why?,” In: Victor Fuchs, ed. Individual and
       Social Responsibility, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.




                                       25
Shore-Sheppard L., Buchmueller T., and Jensen G., (2000). “Medicaid and
       Crowding Out of Private Insurance: A Re-examination Using Firm-Level
       Data,” Journal of Health Economics, 19(1): 61-91.
Summers L. (1989). “Some Simple Economics of Mandated Benefits,” American
       Economic Review, 79(2): 177-83.
Swartz K. (2006). “Reinsuring Health: Why More Middle-Class People Are
       Uninsured and What Government Can Do.” New York: Russell Sage
       Foundation Press.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. (2004). 2004
       Green Book, Washington, D.C.: United States House of Representatives.
United States Department of the Treasury. (2005). “General Explanations of the
       Administration's Fiscal Year 2006 Revenue Proposals,” Washington,
       D.C.: U.S. Department of the Treasury.
Yazici E.Y. and Kaestner R. (2000). “Medicaid Expansions and the Crowding out
       of Private Health Insurance,” Inquiry, 37(1):23-32.
Yelowitz A.S. (2006). “The "Fair Share for Health Care Act and New York's
       Labor Market.” Washington, D.C.: Employment Policies Institute




                                     26
