                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    INTENSIFIED REGULATORY SCRUTINY AND BANK DISTRESS IN NEW YORK
                   CITY DURING THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                          Gary Richardson
                                          Patrick Van Horn

                                        Working Paper 14120
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14120


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




Comments from Naomi Lamoreaux inspired us to investigate this topic. We thank Jeremy Atack, an
anonymous referee, and other colleagues and friends for comments that improved this essay. NSF
Grant D/SES-0551232 funded portions of this research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Intensified Regulatory Scrutiny and Bank Distress in New York City During the Great Depression
Gary Richardson and Patrick Van Horn
NBER Working Paper No. 14120
June 2008
JEL No. E42,G21,N1,N12

                                            ABSTRACT

New data reveals that bank distress peaked in New York City, at the center of the United States money
market, in July and August 1931, when the banking crisis peaked in Germany and before Britain abandoned
the gold standard. This paper tests competing theories about the causes of New York's banking crisis.
The cause appears to have been intensified regulatory scrutiny, which was a delayed reaction to the
failure of the Bank of United States, rather than the exposure of money-center banks to events overseas.


Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu

Patrick Van Horn
Department of Economics
4901 Evergreen Road
Dearborn, Michigan 48128
patrickv@umd.umich.edu
Introduction

         Information recently discovered in the National Archives reveals the date of distress (i.e.

terminal suspension, temporary suspension, voluntary liquidation, or merger forced by financial

difficulties) for all banks operating in the United States. This detailed data demonstrates that

bank failure rates peaked in New York City, at the center of the United States money market, in

July and August 1931. During those months, the banking crisis peaked in Germany. One month

later, Britain abandoned the gold standard.1

         According to the conventional academic wisdom, Britain’s departure from gold

transmitted a financial crisis in Europe to the United States.2 Anticipating a similar action on the

part of American monetary authorities, central banks and private holders in Europe converted

dollar assets in the New York money market into gold. The unloading of bills swiftly assumed

panic proportions. Gold outflows rose rapidly, draining funds from the United States and

threatening the solvency of financial institutions in the central money market. To stop the

international drain, the Federal Reserve System raised the discount rate from 1½ to 3½ percent

between October 9 and October 16. This was the

         sharpest rise within so brief a period in the whole history of the system, before or
         since … the move intensified internal financial difficulties and was accompanied
         by a spectacular increase in bank failures and runs on banks.3

Economists refer to this reaction as golden fetters.4


1
    The forms may be found in the National Archives and Record Administration [hereafter NARA], Record Group
    82, Federal Reserve Central Subject File, file number 434.-1, “Bank Changes 1921-1954 Districts 1929-1954 -
    Consolidations, Suspensions and Organizations-St. 6386 a,b,c, (By States) 1930-1933” [hereafter Bank
    Changes]. The forms are filed alphabetically by state, name of town or city, and name of bank. Multiple entries
    for individual banks appear in chronological order. For additional information about this source, see Gary
    Richardson, “Records;” Richardson, “Bank Distress … New Evidence;” Richardson, “Bank Distress …
    Illiquidity-Insolvency Debate,” and Richardson; “Quarterly Data.”
2
    Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, Monetary History; Barry Eichengreen, Golden Fetters; Peter Temin,
    Lessons.
3
    Friedman and Schwartz, Monetary History, p. 317
4
    Eichengreen, Golden Fetters
         Combining the new data and the conventional wisdom creates a paradox of timing which

had not been previously apparent. Previous studies examined data aggregated at the quarterly

level for Federal Reserve Districts and annual level for individual states.5 These series made

events in the Second Federal Reserve District (New York) during the third quarter of 1931

appear as if they occurred at the same time and in reaction to events in the United Kingdom

during the same quarter. The new data reveals that events in New York preceded events in the

Britain and coincided with events in Germany.

        This paper asks why bank distress in the central money market of the United States

peaked at that time. The initially plausible answers – that links of debt or deposit left New York

banks vulnerable to European difficulties – do not appear to explain the nature and timing of

events. The bank distress in New York City during the summer of 1931 appears to have another

explanation: intensified regulatory scrutiny.

        The impetus for additional scrutiny began with the failure of The Bank of United States

in December, 1930. Politicians throughout the state of New York criticized the Superintendent of

Banks for his failure to forestall that institution’s collapse. The state legislature demanded

heightened vigilance and augmented the bank superintendent’s staff. Additional regulatory

resources came on-line during the summer of 1931. At the same time, legislatures questioned the

superintendent’s abilities and threatened to remove him from office. Additional resources

enabled and political pressure prompted the superintendent’s office to demonstrate his vigor and

vigilance by closing (and either liquidating or merging) institutions in New York City. This

surge in scrutiny generated the wave of bank distress in the summer of 1931 that appears

correlated with events in continental Europe.



5
    Richardson, “Bank Distress … New Evidence.”


                                                  1
Potential Links between New York and Europe

         An initial inspection of the evidence suggests direct connections existed between the

banking crises in Germany and New York. The chronological correlation is striking. Figure 1

illuminates the relationship. The figure plots weekly hazard rates for liquidation and

consolidation due to financial difficulties for banks in New York City. The probability of failure

increased during July 1931, as a banking panic spread through central Europe. The probability

rose higher when bank runs swept Germany and the German government shut down the nation’s

banking system. The probability of failure peaked in August, immediately after the reopening of

banks in Germany but several weeks before Britain’s departure from gold.

         Recent research reveals reasons that events in Germany and New York might have been

linked. Banks in New York held large sums deposited by European clients. The foreign branches

of New York banks held deposits totaling over $600 million dollars. New York banks organized

over $1.4 billion in loans to German corporations, utilities, and governments (including local,

state, and national) from 1924 through 1930.6 Nearly $1 billion of those loans floated in the

United States were outstanding in June 1931.7 Econometric analysis of the links between the

German and United State’s economies during the 1930s suggests that German debt played a role,

perhaps substantial, in transmitting financial shocks across the Atlantic.8 Analysis of equity

returns also suggests a link through this channel.9

         By participating in schemes designed to stem the Austrian crisis, banks in New York

directly exposed themselves to risks rising on the continent. The Austrian Central Bank

established an intricate series of cross deposits to covertly “direct funds to the Creditanstalt via

6
    This information comes from the Senate Hearings on the Sale of Foreign Bonds or Securities in the United
    States, which took place from December 18, 1931 to February 10, 1932.
7
    Robert Kuczynski, 1927 and 1932
8
    Albrecht Ritschl and Samad Sarferaz, 2006
9
    Hanan Morsy, 2002


                                                        2
American and British banks – to compensate it for taking over the bankrupt Bodencreditanstalt

(Iago Gil Aguado 2001, p. 199).” All of the American institutions involved in this shell game

operated in New York City. The cross-deposit involved tens of millions of dollars, a substantial

multiple of the capital of the banks involved, indicating that they took on risks large enough to

put them out of business.

          Table 1 provides details about the banks that experienced distress in New York City

during the Great Depression. The first column indicates the date at which the bank closed its

doors to depositors or consummated a consolidation with another institution. More than 60

percent of these transactions (16 out of 26) occurred during the two month period bounded by the

failure of the Darmstadter- und Nationalbank on July 13, 1931 and Britain’s departure from gold

on September 21, 1931. Only two banks failed in the wake of Britain’s departure from gold. One

additional institution temporarily suspended payments during that period.10


Domestic Sources of Distress

          While chronological patterns reveal correlations between events in New York and central

Europe, further examination of the evidence suggests the correlation is coincidental, rather than

causal. We again refer to Table 1. The fourth column, labeled Distress, shows that two types of

distress predominated amongst banks in New York City. The letter L indicates that a bank

entered receivership and underwent liquidation. In all cases but one, the liquidation began at the

behest of the Superintendent of Banks of the State of New York, after bank examiners

determined that the institution faced financial difficulties so severe that it had to be closed to

protect the interests of depositors and usually after determining that no other bank wished to


10
     For the sake of comparison, only two banks failed in December 1930, a period that Friedman and Schwartz
     referred to as the First Banking Crisis. Only one bank failed during the fall of 1932 and winter of 1933, when
     gold drained from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the President declared a national banking holiday.


                                                         3
consolidate with the afflicted institution. The exception was the Queesnboro National Bank,

whose directors decided to turn the institution over to receivers. The letter C indicates that

financial difficulties compelled the bank to consolidate with another institution. Most of these

consolidations occurred at the behest of regulators after examinations revealed looming financial

problems. Typical situations involved banks lacking liquidity or banks whose capital had been

consumed by investment losses. Regulators threatened to close such institution unless their

directors resolved the problems by injecting additional funds or merging with another institution.

Many institutions that liquidated (i.e. L) had also sought consolidation, but failed to reach an

agreement with another organization in time to forestall receivership.

       Contemporary observers (such as Federal Reserve agents, bank examiners, accountants,

economists, and journalists) had access to an array of information unavailable to modern

scholars, including detailed, daily data about the financial status of and events affecting

commercial banks. Contemporary observers also had the ability to talk with the man on the spot

and possessed in-depth knowledge about the institutions and issues at hand. Detailed records

survive from several sets of contemporary observers. The first (and arguably the most important)

is the St. 6386 database constructed by the Federal Reserve Board’s Division of Bank

Operations. Table 2 summarizes the results of the Division’s analysis of bank suspensions. In 11

of 14 cases, the primary cause of suspension was the depreciation in the value of the bank’s

assets. In two cases, heavy withdrawals were the primary cause of suspension. In another case, a

bank failed after losing a substantial share of its capital to embezzlement. Comments written on

the St. 6386 forms discuss reasons for the depreciation in the value of the bank’s portfolio,

principally the declining value of stocks, corporate bonds, and real estate. In all cases, the

comments refer to declines of domestic assets. In no instance do the comments refer to foreign




                                                  4
investments or German debt.

          The Division of Bank Operations also tracked consolidations due to financial difficulties.

Table 3 summarizes the results of this endeavor. All but one of the banks forced to consolidate in

1931 suffered from frozen assets or impaired capital. The examiners who discovered these

afflictions reached conclusions like Midwood Trust Company’s condition was “such as to

necessitate its being taken over by some other institution.”11 Long Island National Bank’s health

was “such as to necessitate an immediate absorption.”12 “The condition of the International Trust

Company was such as to make desirable their being taken over by a stronger institution.”13 In

almost all of these cases, the absorbing bank took all of the assets of the troubled bank in

exchange for assuming the deposits and some, but not all, of the other liabilities of the troubled

institution. The Division of Bank Operations attributed the financial difficulties to domestic

factors. In no instance does the Division discuss international events, deposits, or debts.

          Like the Division of Bank Operations, the New York State Bank Superintendent’s office

investigated the cause of suspension for each state-chartered bank, trust company, and private

bank. These amounted to 13 of the 14 institutions that closed their doors to depositors during the

summer of 1931. The superintendent released initial statements about the cause of each closure

on the date that the institution closed its doors and in the weekly bulletin of the Department of

Banking. Final conclusions appeared in the Department of Banking’s Annual Report. So did

information about the rate of recovery from institutions undergoing liquidation. These sources

described the cause of Chelsea Bank’s and Trust Companies demise to be “rumors” that

circulated “which have caused abnormal withdrawals of deposits,” prompting the examiners to

close the bank to conserve its assets. In all other instances, the sources contained statements such

11
     NARA, Bank Changes, Midwood Trust Company, NY, NY, August 10, 1931.
12
     Ibid, Bank Changes, Long Island National Bank, NY, NY, August 22, 1931.
13
     Ibid, Bank Chagnes, International Trust Company, NY, NY, September 15, 1931.


                                                       5
as ‘because of a non-liquid condition and depreciation of its assets, it is unsafe and inexpedient

to permit the institution to continue in business.’ The Department of Banking attributed the

financial difficulties of all of these institutions to domestic factors, particularly the declining

values of securities, bonds, and real estate, which reduced the value and liquidity of banks’

portfolios. In no instance does the Department of Banking discuss international factors, such as

foreign deposits or German debt.

          Contemporary conclusions are clear. During the summer of 1931, the banks that ceased

operations did so for reasons unrelated to the financial crisis in Europe. The sources of distress

were the declining value of domestic assets – principally real estate, stocks, and bonds – and

withdrawals from banks which appeared to be headed for financial trouble. The banks that closed

their doors or consolidated with other institutions did not due so because German debt declined

in value or because foreign depositors withdrew funds. Widespread withdrawals did not occur in

the summer of 1931. Deposits at New York City banks in August 1931 were comparable to

deposits at New York City banks in August 1930. The small fall in deposits during the summer

of 1931 (approximately 4 percent) resembled typical seasonal variation.14

          Table 4 reveals why contemporary observers focused on domestic causes of bank

distress. The table reports cross tabulations between the incidence of bank distress and measures

of foreign exposure. The first cross tabulation shows that none of the banks that departed from

the banking business in the summer of 1931 possessed foreign branches, while two of the banks

that survived the summer possessed such branches. The second cross tabulation shows that none

of the banks that departed from the banking business in the summer of 1931 possessed time


14
     Data drawn from the column “New York Weekly Bank Statements” published each week in the New York
     Times and the compilation of member bank balance sheets released weekly by the Federal Reserve Bank of New
     York, entitled “New York City Reporting Member Banks”, and republished in numerous periodicals including
     Bradstreet’s Weekly, Dun’s Review, The Commercial and Financial Chronicle, and the New York Times.


                                                       6
deposits from financial institutions in foreign countries, while eight of the banks that survived

the summer possessed such deposits. The third cross tabulation shows that none of the banks that

departed from the banking business in the summer of 1931 belonged to syndicates that extended

loans to Germany during the 1920s, while four of the banks that survived the summer lead such

syndicates. In sum, none of the banks that departed from the banking business during the

summer of 1931 were exposed to foreign financial shocks, while many of the banks that survived

the summer (and the depression) had such exposure.

           A companion paper that we have written reinforces this point.15 It examines data drawn

from the balance sheets of Federal Reserve member banks, for which information on foreign

deposits, debts, and assets exists. For these banks, all measures of foreign exposure were

inversely correlated with the probability of distress. In other words, bank with more foreign

exposure experienced less distress during the depression of the 1930s.


Intensified Regulatory Scrutiny

           The behavior of the New York’s Banking Department changed during the summer of

1931. Eight months before, in December 1930, The Bank of United States failed. It was the

fourth largest depository institution in New York and the eighth largest in the nation. From

December 1930 through June 1931, “practically the entire examination force in the metropolitan

district was engaged in the liquidation of the Bank of United States”16 The concentration of

examination resources on this case compelled the superintendent’s office to expand the size of its

staff. The rigidity of civil service regulations, however, slowed the process and impeded the

hiring of experienced individuals. Eventually, “it was necessary to obtain executive permission

to employ temporary examiners not taken from Civil Service lists and to reinstate former

15
      Richardson and Van Horn, “Fetters.”
16
     Superintendent of Banks for the State of New York, Annual Report, p. 19.


                                                          7
examiners whose wide experience was desperately needed .”17 The Civil Service Commission

insisted that for each examiner appointed who was not a civil servant, an appointment had to be

made from the civil service list, which at the time, included few individuals with the training,

talent, or aptitude for bank-examination work. These restrictions slowed the department’s effort

to respond to the emergency.

          The department managed to increase the examination staff to 192 members at the end of

1931, up from 131 in December 1930. In addition, for a period of seven months, the department

“obtained the assistance of twenty-eight men whose services were donated by various banks as

well as the aid of fifteen Federal Reserve examiners who were temporarily lent to the

department.”18 Bureaucratic delays and the time to train the new examiners meant that the size of

the effective examination staff increased substantially during the summer of 1931. At the same

time that these new resources came on line, the permanent examination staff for the metropolitan

district, which had focused on The Bank of United States from January through June, finished

that investigation and returned to regular duties. Thus, in the summer of 1931, the effective

number of examiners in New York City increased substantially. The number of bank

examinations, which had been conducted infrequently for many months, increased

commensurately.

          The examinations also increased in intensity. The banking department adopted “new

regulations for the purpose of obtaining more complete information on loans and security

portfolios.”19 These changes included new reporting forms designed to “instantly reflect trends

and policies of each state bank and trust company” and new methods for “arriving at fair values



17
     Ibid, Annual Report, p. 19.
18
     Ibid,,Annual Report, p. 17.
19
     Superintendent of Banks for the State of New York , Annual Report, p. 17.


                                                         8
of securities.”20 These innovations stemmed from a reorganization of the banking department

begun in the spring of 1929 and completed in the wake of the failure of The Bank of United

States.

          The post-examination powers of the banking department also increased. In the spring, the

state legislature passed several reform bills introduced at the request of the state bank

superintendent. The first bill permitted the hiring of additional examiners in an emergency. The

second reduced from 30 to 20 days the time allowed for filing claims against a bank by the

superintendent after notice had been sent to creditors. The third allowed the superintendent to act

on the findings of clearing house examinations as if they were examinations conducted by the

state banking department. Two other bills failed to progress past the banking committee. One

would have permitted the superintendent to consolidate banks overnight in emergencies. The

other would have authorized the superintendent to remove officers of a bank upon evidence

showing them responsible for improper conditions.21 The superintendent argued that the rejected

reforms would have provided him with the ability to forestall the failure of The Bank of United

States. Critics of the Superintendent, including many legislators on the banking committee,

asserted that the superintendent possessed more than enough authority to have prevented the

crisis had he acted when irregularities at The Bank of United States were first brought to his

attention in 1929.

          Criticism of the superintendent, Joseph Broderick, peaked in June, when the case against

the directors of the Bank of United States reached trial. A New York Times headline blared

“STATE CALLED LAX IN BANK FAILURES (emphasis in original).”22 Another headlined

reported that the superintendent had been accused of “Gross Negligence” for his performance on

20
     Ibid, Annual Report, p. 17.
21
     “State Banking Bills,” Wall Street Journal, (March 13, 1931), p. 8.
22
     “State Called Lax in Bank Failures,” New York Times, (June 14, 1931), p. 1.


                                                          9
The Bank of United States.23 A former state attorney general circulated a letter calling for a

general investigation of the banking department and drawing parallels between its performance

in the current case and problems in the past. The chairman of the Republican State Committee

sent a letter to Governor Roosevelt requesting an inquiry and demanding the removal of

Superintendent Broderick.24 The state legislature discussed the creation of a special committee to

investigate the banking department and considered a bill authorizing suits against state bank

employees who performed their jobs negligently.

          The chorus of criticism focused on the banking department’s slow response after

discovering the financial problems faced by The Bank of United States. In reaction, the

superintendent testified that the irregularities which led to the bank’s demise were first brought

to his attention in the summer of 1929. Then, he believed that “he would have been ‘gravely

remiss in his sworn duty if he did not exhaust every possible resource to save the situation before

deciding that the doors must be closed’.” He allowed The Bank of United States to continue

operations for more than a year, and during that time, to continue conducting transactions,

“which he admits were dishonest even if inside the letter of the law,” and to continue to

accumulate losses, in hopes that some remedy for the situation would be found.25

          In the summer of 1931, the superintendent planned to deal with such situations

expeditiously, and requested an expansion of his powers to enable him to take control of banks

whenever he deemed it in the public interest. He planned to encourage the consolidation of banks

“in cases where it appeared the result would be generally beneficial. This tendency toward

consolidation, resulting as it does in the disappearance of many independent units, effects a

concentration of banking resources and improved management which should lend itself to the

23
     “Waldman Urges Broderick Ouster,” New York Times, (June 27, 1931), p. 2.
24
     “Steuer Banks Macy on Banking Inquiry,” New York Times, (June 26, 1931), p. 7.
25
     “State Supervision of Banks,” Wall Street Journal, (March 6, 1931), p. 2.


                                                       10
development of sound policies and the elimination of unwarranted competition.”26

          The impact of the superintendent’s new policies and increased authority can be seen in

the wave of examinations that swept New York City in the summer of 1931. New stringent

procedures highlighted investment losses and potential problems at numerous institutions. The

superintendent’s office moved swiftly to rectify such shortfalls. The department demanded that

the bank’s shareholders, directors, and management come up with capital to cover the losses, or

consolidate with other institutions, which typically required them to realize large losses (in many

cases, their entire investment), or face seizure by the superintendent’s office. A dramatic climax

of the campaign came on August 5, when the Superintendent Broderick seized three banks

(American Union, International Madison, and Times Square Trust), on the same morning. The

seizures upset the plans of the joint legislative committee on banking to hold a hearing at the Bar

Association Building that afternoon to discuss the performance of the banking department. The

announcement cancelling the hearings noted that “the taking over of the three banks made it

impossible for Mr. Broderick or the bankers to appear before the committee”27 During the next

three weeks, Superintendent Broderick oversaw the liquidation of those three depositories,

compelled the consolidation of an additional five New York City banks, and supervised the

examination and sanctioning of number other institutions. His office remained so busy that the

public hearings on his performance appear to have been postponed indefinitely.

          In sum, bank supervision in New York City became more aggressive during the summer

of 1931. It seems likely that the change stemmed from pressure on the bank superintendent,

changes in the incentives and attitudes of the superintendent and his staff, the growth of

resources available to the banking department, and the expansion of de jure and de facto


26
     Superintendent of Banks for the State of New York, Annual Report, p. 7.
27
     “Ignores Macy Plea for Banking Inquiry” New York Times, (August 6, 1931), p. 32.


                                                        11
regulatory authority.


Econometric Methods and Results

          Our empirical analysis compares competing explanations for the summer-1931 surge in

bank suspensions in New York City. Several considerations shape our analysis. One

consideration is the availability of evidence.28 For Federal Reserve member banks, call reports

provide detailed data on seven measures of foreign exposure: (i) balances payable in dollars due

from foreign branches of American banks, (ii) due from banks in foreign countries, (iii) due to

banks in foreign countries, (iv) time deposits of other banks and trust companies in foreign

countries, (v) foreign government bonds owned, (vi) other foreign securities owned, including

bonds of municipalities, and (vii) number of foreign branches. Similar data does not exist for

banks that did not belong to the Federal Reserve System.29

          These seven dimensions of foreign financial exposure are closely correlated. Their

covariance raises concerns about multicollinearity. To address this issue, we can create an index

of foreign financial exposure by deriving the principal components from the seven measures of

foreign financial exposure. The first principal component is a linear transformation of the vectors

that explains the greatest possible variance in these vectors. This first principal component serves

as our index. Banks for which the value of the index is lowest have the least foreign financial

exposure. Banks for which the value of the index is highest have the most foreign financial

exposure.

          Another consideration is the different regulatory regimes for banks that belonged to and
28
     See the appendix for a description of our data sources. See Richardson and Van Horn “Fetters” for additional
     details.
29
     For non-member banks, data on foreign exposure is limited. The New York State Bank Superintendent’s Office
     did not publish information on the topic, in large part, because non-members lacked substantial foreign
     operations. Rand McNally Bankers’ Directory published limited information on the topic, consisting of the
     names of foreign correspondents institutions, and in some case, and in a few cases, foreign branches and foreign
     holdings.


                                                          12
banks that did not belong to the Federal Reserve System. Federal Reserve rules prohibited

member banks from investing in certain assets that non-member banks often held on their

balance sheets. Fed policies encouraged member banks to invest in certain assets, such as short-

term commercial paper, that played a smaller role for non-member institutions. Federal Reserve

rules required member banks to maintain larger reserves and more cash on hand than non-

member institutions. Finally, member banks had access to the services of the Federal Reserve,

such as the discount window, that nonmember banks did not.

       Both member and non-member banks underwent periodic examinations. Member banks

submitted periodic financial reports to the Federal Reserve System. The dates on which these

reports were collected coincided with the call dates for the Comptroller of Currency, which

regulated and examined nationally chartered banks. The Federal Reserve also periodically

examined member banks, including those with national and state charters. State chartered banks

submitted periodic reports to the state bank superintendent and underwent periodic examinations

by state bank examiners. State-chartered banks that belonged to the Federal-Reserve system were

subject to both state and federal supervision.

       Lack of data and different regulatory regimes compel us to focus on banks belonging to

the Federal Reserve System and to exclude non-member banks from our analysis. This exclusion

does not, in all likelihood, bias our conclusions. All extant information indicates that non-

member banks had little (and usually no) foreign operations and had limited (and usually no)

foreign exposure. Non-member banks in New York City failed at extremely low rates. Their

failures peaked during the period when failures for all other banks peaked (see Table 5 for

details). These patterns are consistent with our conclusions.

       An additional concern is the chronological pattern of bank distress. Figure 2 and Table 5




                                                 13
illuminate these patterns. During 1931, bank distress in New York City appears to have been

clustered in three periods. The first occurred in March, during the months following the demise

of the Bank of United States and preceding the banking crisis in Austria. The spanned July and

August, when banking problems beset Germany and when subordinates of the bank

superintendent examined all of the state-chartered banks in New York City. The third followed

Great Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard and the Federal Reserve’s interest-rate reaction

to Britain’s action. Figure 2 displays these three periods of risk as three periods of increased risk,

separated by periods without bank distress. Table 5 displays these patterns by separating the data

into four periods: the three described above and one additional period representing the rest of the

contraction. These periods form the foundation of our analysis.

       This periodization also encompasses patterns of regulatory activity in New York City.

During 1931, the failure of the Bank of United States distorted schedules for state bank

examinations. Liquidating the Bank of United States employed almost the entire state-bank

examination staff full-time for the months of January through June. During this six-month

period, the superintendent’s office postponed regular examinations, and it hired and trained

additional staff members. Examinations resumed in the month of July, under new and stricter

standards. After August, examination schedule returned to normal. The Comptroller of the

Currency and Federal Reserve System did not face the same manpower constraints, and they

maintained their regular examination schedule throughout the year. Thus, state banks

experienced no state examinations during our first analytic period, intense examinations during

the second period, and regular examinations during the third and fourth periods. National banks

experienced regular examinations across all four periods. As a result, the inspection regime for

Federal Reserve member banks with national charters differed from the inspection regime for




                                                 14
Federal Reserve members with state charters in one dimension. During July and August of 1931,

state member banks faced heightened scrutiny, when examiners inspected their balance sheets

under new, stricter standards. All of the state chartered banks that closed were taken over by state

examiners in the wake of these examinations.30

         These circumstances lend themselves to statistical methods akin to discrete-time survival

analysis. We observe whether banks survived during a period conditional on their having

survived through the previous period. This conditionality is captured by a panel-logit

specification:

                  4          4             J
          Dit = ∑ α t Pt + ∑ β t Pt Fi + ∑ δ j X ij + ϕP2 Si + ε it
                 t =1       t =1          j =1



The dependent variable, Dit, equals one if during the period t, bank i experienced distress, (i.e.

ceased operations and either entered receivership or consolidated due to financial difficulties).

The dependent variable equals zero otherwise. The dependent variable is regressed on a series of

explanatory variables. Pt is an indicator variable that equals one during period t and zero

otherwise. The coefficient, αt, indicates the baseline hazard for period t. Fi indicates bank i’s

foreign exposure as measured by our index. Fi is measured before the onset of risk in period 1.

The effect of foreign exposure is allowed to vary across periods by interacting the variables Fi

and Pt. The coefficient, βt, indicates whether foreign exposure increased or decreased the

probability of distress during period t. Si equals one if bank i is a state-chartered bank and zero

otherwise. Xij is a vector of bank characteristics measured before the onset of risk. The letter j =

{1, …, J} indexes the characteristics. These characteristics include net worth as a share of total


30
     NARA, Bank Changes, Prisco State Bank, NY, NY, July 28, 1931. Midtown Bank, NY, NY, August 4, 1931.
     American Union Bank, NY, NY, August 5, 1931. International-Madison Bank and Trust Company, NY, NY,
     August 5, 1931. Times Square Trust Company, NY, NY, August 5, 1931. Midwood Trust Company, NY, NY,
     August 10, 1931. Globe Bank and Trust Company, NY, NY, August 22, 1931. Bank of Europe Trust Company,
     NY, NY, August 28, 1931.


                                                          15
resources, reserves as a share of total resources, and deposits as a fraction of total liabilities. The

coefficients for these variables possess signs and magnitudes consistent with previously

published studies. These coefficients indicate that banks with higher net worth as a percentage of

assets failed less often than banks with lower net worth. Banks with more reserves as a

percentage of resources failed less often than banks with fewer reserves. Banks with more

liquidity and lower cost of capital failed at lower rates than other institutions. For brevity, we do

not report these coefficients in Table 6.31

          The coefficients of interest are those indicating the influence of foreign financial

exposure, β1 through β4, and the impact of intensive examinations of state banks during the

second period (i.e. July and August 1931), φ. Table 6 reports these coefficients.32 Column (1)

reports the baseline hazard rates estimated without other covariates. The baseline rates for

periods one through four were 1.3 percent, 12.7 percent, 5.8 percent, and 3.1 percent

respectively.33 Column (2) reports the model with the inclusion of our index for foreign

exposure. The coefficients indicate that banks with more foreign exposure failed less often than

banks with less exposure. The magnitude of the effect was substantial. In the first period,

increasing foreign exposure by one standard deviation reduced the probability of distress from

1.3 percent to less than 0.0013 percent. In the second period, increasing foreign exposure by one

standard deviation reduced the probability of distress from 12.7 percent to less than 0.0005

percent. In sum, the more foreign exposure possessed by banks, the lower the likelihood of their

failure. This econometric result seems reasonable, since all of the banks in New York City with

substantial foreign financial exposure survived the depression. Most continued to pay dividends

31
     Note that we checked for robustness by running specifications including a wide array of bank characteristics on
     the right-hand side. These variations did not substantially alter our results. See Richardson and Van Horn
     “Fetters” for details.
32
     We estimate our model as a logistic panel. We report Huber-White standard errors clustered on individual banks.
33
     You convert the coefficient into the probability of failure with the formula P(distress) = 1/(1+e(-coefficient)).


                                                          16
throughout the contraction. Column (3) presents the full model, where the last coefficient

indicates the impact of intensified state examinations. The examinations increased the odds of

distress nearly 4-fold.

       Table 7 puts these estimates in perspective. Column (1) indicates the predicted

probability of failure in each period for state member banks. Column (2) indicates the predicted

probability of failure in each period for national banks. Column (3) indicates the difference for

each period between (1) and (2). In the first, third, and fourth periods, the national banks

experienced distress at higher rates than state member banks (in the later two periods,

significantly so). During the second period, however, the risk of distress for state member banks

exceeded the risk for national banks by more than twelve percent. Our model attributes indicates

that this difference arose due to the intensified inspection regime. Without these intense

inspections, our model indicates the risk of distress for state member banks would have been less

than 6 percent during the second period.



Discussion

       The statistical and historical evidence presented in this essay point to a common

conclusion. The chronological correlation of the banking crises in Germany and New York City

was coincidental, not causal. Foreign exposure did not lead to distress among banks at the center

of the American money market. An intensified inspection regime, which was a delayed reaction

to the failure of the Bank of United States, caused the surge of bank liquidations and

consolidations in New York City during July and August of 1931.

       This realization raises several issues regarding bank distress during the Great Depression.

The first pertains to the uniqueness of the United States central money market. Scholars have




                                                 17
long recognized that the pattern of bank distress in New York City differed from the pattern of

distress for the national as a whole. In New York City, few banks closed their doors to

depositors; in the rest of the nation, nearly a third of all banks went out of business. Our study

suggests that the behavior of the New York state banking department had much to do with the

fates of banks in the central money market. The superintendent’s office actively merged weak

banks with stronger institutions. Banking law required banks in New York City to hold larger

reserves and greater capital than depository institutions elsewhere in the nation. These legal

requirements left a large cushion between the onset of difficulties and the point of no return. The

superintendent used this cushion as a window of opportunity to resolve bank distress short of

receivership. The superintendent’s vigilance meant that few institutions failed in New York City

and those that did go out of business returned substantial sums to depositors.

       A second issue is the political economy of bank regulation. Regulators determined the

fate of many banks. What influenced the decisions made by bank regulators, such as the New

York Superintendent of Banks and his subordinates? Ideology, experience, politics, legislation,

and self interest all played a part. The superintendent’s treatment of troubled banks changed over

time. Changing economic conditions may have been one reason. The optimal method of

resolving financial difficulties depends on the short-term prospects for sustaining cash flow and

the long-term prospects for earning profits. Both factors fluctuated during the 1930s. Changing

legislation was another reason. Politicians provided the banking department with additional tools

for dealing with bedeviled banks. Political decisions also changed the incentives of the

superintendent, who had been appointed as a reformer in the spring of 1929 and was criticized as

incompetent two years later. The failure of The Bank of United States was the principal cause of

criticism. Its demise led to political pressures which pushed the superintendent of banks to take a




                                                 18
prophylactic approach towards imperiled banks.

       A third issue concerns correlations between events in financial centers in the United

States and Europe. Causal links may have created some of these correlations. But, this essay

shows that coincidences created others. This realization suggests that there is a danger of

drawing false inferences from correlations between events in different countries during the Great

Depression. With so many things going wrong in so many countries in such a short span of time,

numerous chronological correlations would have been generated by random chance.

       A final issue concerns the international transmission of the banking crisis in the summer

and fall of 1931. Numerous channels could have transmitted the financial crisis across the

Atlantic. Direct links between banks in Europe and the United States appear to have been

plausible candidates, but this essay demonstrates that those direct links did not, in fact, spread the

affliction. Thus, golden fetters remain the principal explanation for the trans-Atlantic

transmission of the financial panic in the fall of 1931.




Appendix: Data Sources Used for Statistical Analysis

        Several sources provide the data that we employ in our econometric analysis. Rand
McNally Bankers’ Directory describes correspondent network, foreign branches, and
international transactions services provided to consumers. The Senate Hearings on the Sale of
Foreign Bonds or Securities in the United States reports loans to Germany arranged by banks in
New York and outstanding during the summer of 1931. Call reports collected by the Federal
Reserve Board and Comptroller of Currency provide detailed information for banks belonging to
the Federal Reserve System. For state-chartered member banks, balance sheets and income
statements survive for the December and June calls for the first five years of the depression (i.e.
December 1929 through December 1933). For national banks, balance sheets survive from the
December 1929 and December 1931 calls. Income statements survive from the December 1929,
June 1931, and December 1931 calls. The balance sheets provide detailed data about bank’s
foreign exposure. Schedule G indicates holdings of foreign government bonds and other foreign
securities. Schedule I indicates balances due in dollars and foreign currencies from foreign banks
and foreign branches of U.S. banks. Schedule J indicates balances due to banks in foreign
countries. Schedule L indicates time deposits of foreign banks and trust companies. Schedule D



                                                 19
indicates the number of branches in foreign countries. A balance sheet also exists for each
foreign branch, which provides additional information about overseas operations.
        Information on bank distress – including temporary suspensions, liquidations, mergers of
solvent institutions, and consolidations forced by financial difficulties – comes from the archives
of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors’ Division of Bank Operations. Combining the St.
6386 forms and the bank-balance sheet data described above yields a cross-sectional database of
banks on the eve of the financial crisis at the beginning of 1931. The database contains more
information about banks’ characteristics, financial health, and fates than any other extant source.
        Data on economic conditions comes from several sources. Bradstreet’s Weekly, Dun’s
Review, The Commercial and Financial Chronicle, the Federal Reserve Bulletin, and the Annual
Reports of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York provide data
on building permits, business failures, commodity prices, market interest rates, Federal Reserve
discount rates, prices, and industrial production. The same sources also data on international
flows of gold, goods, and funds.




                                                20
Table 1
Bank Distress in New York City, 1929 to 1933
    Date                 Bank                                                Type   Distress      Capital   Loans and Investment

    December 11, 1930    Bank of United States                               SM        L       25,250,000           213,403,000
    December 23, 1930    Chelsea Bank and Trust Company                       S        L        2,500,000            19,673,000
    March 20, 1931       World Exchange Bank                                  S       L           500,000             1,879,000
    March 31, 1931       Bay Parkway National Bank                            N       C           200,000             1,358,000
    July 15, 1931        Lebanon National Bank                                N       C           500,000               894,000
    July 28, 1931        Prisco State Bank                                    S       L           250,000             1,810,000
    August 4, 1931       Midtown Bank                                         S       C           769,000             2,741,000
    August 5, 1931       American Union Bank                                 SM       L         1,000,000             7,765,000
    August 5, 1931       International-Madison Bank and Trust Company        SM       L         1,750,000             9,255,000
    August 5, 1931       Times Square Trust Company                          SM       L         1,000,000             3,323,000
    August 10, 1931      Midwood Trust Company                               SM       C         1,000,000             8,484,000
    August 22, 1931      Long Island National Bank of New York                N       C           250,000             2,668,000
    August 22, 1931      Globe Bank and Trust Company                        SM       L         1,525,000             7,175,000
    August 24, 1931      Queensboro National Bank of the City of New York     N       L           200,000             1,781,000
    August 25, 1931      Bryant Park Bank                                     P       C           500,000             1,719,000
    August 25, 1931      Brooklyn National Bank                               N       C           500,000             1,719,000
    August 28, 1931      Bank of Europe Trust Company                        SM       L         1,000,000            13,636,000
    August 29, 1931      National Bank of Ridgewood                           N       C           200,000             1,286,000
    September 15, 1931   International Trust Company                         SM       C         3,200,000            12,440,000
    September 15, 1931   Straus National Bank and Trust Company               N       C         2,000,000             9,006,000
    October 30, 1931     Federation Bank and Trust Company                   SM       TS          750,000            14,936,000
    October 31, 1931     M. Bernandi State Bank                               S       L           350,000             2,235,000
    December 4, 1931     Sakser State Bank                                    S       L           100,000             1,236,000
    March 30, 1932       Washington Square National Bank                      N       VL          500,000               997,000
    April 8, 1932        Liberty National Bank and Trust Company              N       C         2,250,000             8,816,000
    February 14, 1933    D.J. Faour and Bros.                                 P        L         100,000                711,000

Notes: N indicates national bank. S indicates state bank. SM indicates a state bank that is a member of the Federal Reserve System. P
indicates private bank. L indicates liquidation. C indicates a consolidation due to financial difficulties. TS indicates temporary
suspension. VL indicates a voluntary liquidation. Source: St. 6386 Database, see footnote 1 for details



                                                                        21
Table 2
Causes of Suspensions in New York City, 1929 through 1933


 Date of              Name of Bank                           Deposits         Deposit    Days   Borrowings        Causes of Suspension
 Suspension                                                                    Losses    Lost
                                                                                                                 Primary   Contributing

 December 11, 1930    Bank of United States               202,965,000    41,965,000        78                     Assets   Withdrawals
 December 23, 1930    Chelsea Bank and Trust Company       18,801,000                                        Withdrawals        Assets

 March 20, 1931       World Exchange Bank                   1,910,000                              200,000        Assets
 July 28, 1931        Prisco State Bank                     1,902,000                                        Defalcation
 August 5, 1931       American Union Bank                   7,939,000          845,000     36      628,000        Assets   Withdrawals
 August 5, 1931       International-Madison Bank            7,778,000          967,000     36    1,004,000        Assets   Withdrawals
 August 5, 1931       Times Square Trust Company            2,882,000        1,444,000     36      300,000        Assets   Withdrawals
 August 22, 1931      Globe Bank and Trust Company          7,426,000        2,060,000     53      973,000        Assets   Withdrawals
 August 24, 1931      Queensboro National Bank              2,492,000                                        Withdrawals
 August 28, 1931      Bank of Europe Trust Company         12,807,000        3,307,000     59      200,000        Assets
 October 30, 1931     Federation Bank and Trust Company    13,390,000        1,220,000     31      858,000        Assets   Withdrawals
 October 31, 1931     M. Bernandi State Bank                1,253,000          153,000     31      750,000        Assets
 December 4, 1931     Sakser State Bank                     1,074,000          134,000     65      400,000        Assets

 February 14, 1933    D.J. Faour and Bros.                   527,000                                78,000        Assets



Notes: Deposits indicates the deposits held by the bank on the last call date before suspension. Deposit losses indicates the decline in
deposits between the last call date and the date of suspension. The information needed to calculate this figure exists only in the listed
cases. Days lost indicates the number of days between the last call date and the date of suspension, or in other words, the number of
days over which the decline in deposits was calculated. Borrowings indicates loans outstanding from the Federal Reserve and other
banks on the date of suspension. See Section 2 for definitions of the primary and contributing causes of suspensions. Asset indicates
that slow, doubtful, or worthless investments were a source of bank distress. Withdrawal indicates that withdrawals of deposits were a
source of bank distress. Defalcation indicates that embezzlement was a source of bank distress.

Source: St. 6386 Database, see footnote 1 for details.


                                                                        22
Table 3
Consolidations Due to Financial Difficulties in New York City, 1929 through 1933

Date                   Consolidating Bank                 Absorbing Bank                     Description of consolidation   Disposition


March 31, 1931         Bay Parkway National Bank          Lafayette National Bank
July 15, 1931          Lebanon National Bank              Manufacturers Trust                All except capital             Branch
August 4, 1931         Midtown Bank                       Manufacturers Trust                All except capital             Discontinued
August 10, 1931        Midwood Trust                      Manufacturers Trust                All except capital             Branch
August 22, 1931        Long Island National Bank          National City Bank                 Liquidation basis              Branch
August 25, 1931        Bryant Park Bank                   Manufacturers Trust                Assets and deposits            Discontinued
August 25, 1931        Brooklyn National Bank             Manufacturers Trust                Assets and deposits            Discontinued
August 29, 1931        National Bank of Ridgewood         The Richmond National Bank         All except capital             Branch
September 15, 1931     International Trust                Continental Bank and Trust                                        Branch
September 15, 1931     Straus National Bank and Trust     Continental Bank and Trust                                        Branch

April 8, 1932          Liberty National Bank and Trust    Harriman National Bank and Trust                                  Branch



Notes: The consolidating bank was the institution suffering financial difficulties. The absorbing bank was a healthy
institution which took over the affairs of its weaker compatriot. Description of consolidation describes the financial details
of the transaction. “All except capital” indicates that the absorbing bank assumed all liabilities except the capital liability of
the consolidating institution and acquired all of its assets. “Assets and deposits” indicates that the absorbing bank assumed
only the deposit liabilities of the consolidating institution while acquiring all of its assets. “Liquidation basis” indicates that
the absorbing bank acquired all assets and liabilities of the consolidating bank, and if the assets proved more valuable than
the obligations of the consolidating institution, returned a portion of the surplus to the shareholders. Disposition indicates
what became of the offices of the consolidating bank. “Branch” indicates that the offices of the consolidating bank became
a branch of the absorbing institution. “Discontinued” indicates that the offices of the consolidating bank ceased operations.

Source: St. 6386 Database, see footnote 1 for details..




                                                                       23
Table 4
Foreign Exposure and Bank Distress
Selected Cross-Tabulations for National and State-Member Banks, 1931


                     Foreign Branches
                      No        Yes
   No Distress        62         2
   Distress           16         0

                     Foreign Deposits
                      No        Yes
   No Distress        56         8
   Distress           16         0

                      German Loans
                      No       Yes
   No Distress        60        4
   Distress           16        0


Sources: See text.




                                            24
Table 5
Bank Supervision and Distress in New York City
January 1930 until the National Banking Holiday in March 1933

Federal Reserve                                                             Member    Nonmember

Charter                                                National               State            State
                                                  #    ─     %         # ─      %     # ─        %

Period at Risk
    Begin                     End

1.   January 1, 1930     to   June 31, 1930       51   1    2.0        29   0 0.0     33   1    3.0
2.   July 1, 1931        to   August 31, 1931     50   4    8.0        29   6 20.7    32   2    6.3
3.   September 1, 1931   to   November 31, 1931   46   2    4.4        23   2 8.8     30   1    3.3
4.   December 1, 1931    to   Bank Holiday        44   2    4.6        22   0 0.0     29   1    3.4

     January 1, 1930     to Bank Holiday          51   9 17.6          29   8 27.6    33   5 15.2


Notes: The column headed # indicates the number of banks in operation at the beginning of the
period. The column headed – indicates the number of banks experiencing distress and departing
from the banking business during that period. The column headed % indicates the percentage of
banks experiencing distress and departing from the banking business during that period.

Source: See text.




                                                                  25
Table 6
Panel Logit Estimates of Probability of Distress

Dependent Variable: Distressed Departures from the Banking Business

                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)

Period 1 – January through June 1931                 -4.37        1.33         0.99
                                                     [1.01]       [2.41]      [2.39]
Period 2 – July and August 1931                      -1.93        0.24         0.36
                                                     [0.34]       [2.48]      [2.90]
Period 3 – September through November 1931           -2.79        0.24         0.61
                                                     [0.52]       [2.44]      [2.47]
Period 4 – December 1931 until Bank Holiday          -3.45        0.31         0.66
                                                     [0.72]       [3.05]      [3.09]
Interaction Terms

Period 1 and Index of Foreign Exposure                            -3.50       -3.18
                                                                  [1.36]      [1.33]
Period 2 and Index of Foreign Exposure                            -5.07       -6.88
                                                                  [2.15]      [2.79]
Period 3 and Index of Foreign Exposure                            -3.61       -3.27
                                                                  [3.12]      [3.03]
Period 4 and Index of Foreign Exposure                            -2.35       -2.02
                                                                  [1.63]      [1.44]

Period 2 and Intensified State Examination                                     1.73
                                                                              [0.83]

Vector of Bank Characteristics                         No          Yes         Yes


Observations                                          293         293           293
Log-psuedolikelihood                                 -59.6       -55.3        -52.8
Wald Chi Squared                                     102.5       101.0         97.3
Wald Chi Squared Degrees of Freedom                      4          11           12


Notes: Robust standard errors clustered for each bank appear within brackets below
coefficients. Boldfaced font indicates significant at 5 percent level.

Sources: See text.




                                               26
Table 7
Impact of Intensified Inspection Regime
Predicted Probability of Failure Across Four Periods at Risk

                                                               State Member     National
Period at Risk                                                                           Difference
                                                                      Banks       Banks

           Begin                    End                                   (1)        (2)        (3)

Period 1   January 1, 1930     to   June 31, 1930                        1.01      1.38        0.37
Period 2   July 1, 1931        to   August 31, 1931                     20.69      8.00      -12.69
Period 3   September 1, 1931   to   November 31, 1931                    4.31      6.54        2.23
Period 4   December 1, 1931    to   Bank Holiday                         2.35      3.42        1.07


Source: Estimates reported in Table 6.




                                                                   27
Figure 1
Weekly Hazard for Liquidation and Consolidation Due to Distress
New York City, July 1930 through March 1933
  0.8%

                      German panic begins
  0.7%
               Creditanstalt collapses             Britain departs gold standard
  0.6%
                                                    Federal Reserve raises discount rate
  0.5%


  0.4%                                                            Liquidations

                                                                  Consolidations Due to Distress
  0.3%


  0.2%


  0.1%


  0.0%
     Jul '30           Jan '31           Jul '31        Jan '32            Jul '32         Jan '33


Notes: The hazard function is a non-parametric estimate constructed by smoothing raw hazard
rates (i.e. the number of bank liquidations divided by the number of banks at risk each week and
the number of consolidations due to financial difficulties divided by the number of banks at risk
in each week). The kernel is Epanechnikov. The bandwidth is two weeks, which is wide enough
to reveal trends without obscuring short-term shifts in the probability of failure.

Source: See text.




                                                   28
References

Aguado, Iago Gil. “The Creditanstalt Crisis of 1931 and the Failure of the Austro-German
      Customs Union Project.” The Historical Journal 44, no. 1 (2001): 199-221.

Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: GPO:
       various dates.

--------- Reports of Condition of (Federal Reserve Member) Banks. Unpublished records, various
         calls.

--------- Bulletin. Washington, D.C.: GPO, various dates.

Bradstreet’s Weekly, various dates.

Commercial and Financial Chronicle, various dates.

Dun’s Review: A Weekly Survey of Business Conditions in the United States and Canada,
      various dates.

Eichengreen, Barry. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939.
      New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.

Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Annual Report. New York: Federal Reserve. 1928-1933.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867 to 1960.
      Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Kuczynski, Robert. American Loans to Germany (1924-26). New York: Macmillian, 1927.

-----   Bankers’ Profits from German Loans. Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution,
        1932.

Morsy, Hanan. International Financial Crisis Contagion. Mimeo.

National Archives and Records Administration, Record Group 82, Federal Reserve Central
       Subject File, file number 434.-1, “Bank Changes 1921-1954 Districts 1929-1954 -
       Consolidations, Suspensions and Organizations-St. 6386 a,b,c, (By States) 1930-1933.”

New York Times, various dates.

Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Unpublished examination reports and letters
       pertaining to national banks in New York City, 1929 and 1931.

Rand Mc Nally. Rand-McNally Bankers’ Directory. Chicago: Rand McNally and Company,
      1929-1933.



                                               29
Richardson, Gary. “The Records of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in the National
        Archives of the United States,” Financial History Review 13, no. 1 (2006): 123-134.

-----   “Bank Distress during the Great Contraction, 1929 to 1933, New Evidence from the
         Archives of the Board of Governors” NBER Working Paper w12590, Cambridge, MA,
         December 2006.

-----   2006b. “Quarterly Data on the Categories and Causes of Bank Distress during the Great
         Depression,” NBER Working Paper w12715, Cambridge, MA, December 2006.

-----   “Correspondent Clearing and the Banking Panics of the Great Depression,” This Journal
         67, no. 3 (2007): 643-671.

Richardson, Gary and Patrick Van Horn. “Fetters of Debt, Deposit, or Gold?” NBER Working
        Paper w12983, Cambridge, MA, March 2007.

Ritschl, Albrecht and Samad Sarferaz. Currency vs. Banking in the German Debt Crisis of 1931.
        Mimeo.

Superintendent of Banks for the State of New York. Annual Report of the Superintendent of
       Banks. Albany, NY: J.B. Lyon Company, 1929–1932.

Temin, Peter. Lessons from the Great Depression. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989.

U.S. Committee on Finance, 72nd Congress, 1st Session. Sale of foreign bonds or securities in the
       United States: Hearings on S.R. 72nd Congr., 1st sess., 1932.

Wall Street Journal, various dates.




                                               30
