                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           GLOBAL TRADE AND THE MARITIME TRANSPORT REVOLUTION

                                            David S. Jacks
                                           Krishna Pendakur

                                         Working Paper 14139
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14139


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We thank Rui Esteves, Douglas Irwin, Chris Meissner, Alan Taylor, William Hutchinson, and the
paper's two referees for comments. We also appreciate the feedback from seminar participants at the
Long-term Perspectives for Business, Finance, and Institutions conference, the 2007 Allied Social
Sciences meetings, the 2007 All-UC Group in Economic History conference, the 2007 European Historical
Economics Society meetings, the 2007 Economic History Association meetings, Harvard, and Dalhousie.
 Finally, we gratefully acknowledge the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
for research support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by David S. Jacks and Krishna Pendakur. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Global Trade and the Maritime Transport Revolution
David S. Jacks and Krishna Pendakur
NBER Working Paper No. 14139
June 2008
JEL No. F15,F40,N70

                                              ABSTRACT

What is the role of transport improvements in globalization? We argue that the nineteenth century
is the ideal testing ground for this question: freight rates fell on average by 50% while global trade
increased 400% from 1870 to 1913. We estimate the first indices of bilateral freight rates for the period
and directly incorporate these into a standard gravity model. We also take the endogeneity of bilateral
trade and freight rates seriously and propose an instrumental variables approach. The results are striking
as we find no evidence that the maritime transport revolution was the primary driver of the late nineteenth
century global trade boom. Rather, the most powerful forces driving the boom were those of income
growth and convergence.


David S. Jacks
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
CANADA
and NBER
dsjacks@gmail.com

Krishna Pendakur
Department of Economics
Simon Fraser University
8888 University Drive
Burnaby, BC V5A 1S6
Canada
pendakur@sfu.ca
I. Introduction

       In 1995, Krugman noted that the question of “Why has world trade grown?” was then an

open issue. The most commonly held perception was that this growth was strongly associated

with relentless technological improvement in the communication and transport sectors—roughly,

computers, containers, and supertankers. However, academics and policy-makers were prone to

associate the explosion of global trade in the post-World War II period to the decline in

protectionist commercial policies. Particularly dramatic in this sense was the succession of

GATT negotiations which achieved a reduction of average tariffs in industrialized countries from

roughly forty percent in 1950 to less than five percent in 1995 (Irwin, 1995).

       More than ten years later, the issue has still not been conclusively resolved. In one of the

main contributions to the literature, Baier and Bergstrand (2001) argue that a general equilibrium

gravity model of international trade implies that roughly two-thirds of the growth of world trade

post-1950 can be explained by income growth, one-fourth by tariff reductions, and less than one-

tenth by transport-cost reductions. Given that there are few sources for consistent data on the

cost of international freight for the post-war period (Hummels, 2001; Levinson, 2006), their

general equilibrium approach allows the economics of supply-and-demand to “fill in the holes”.

       An alternative approach is to use data on the actual cost of international shipping to

determine whether or not declining freight costs drive increasing international trade. In this

paper, we use data on over 5000 maritime shipping transactions in the period from 1870 to 1913

to address this question. We argue that the late nineteenth century is an ideal testing ground:

from 1870 to 1913, maritime freight rates fell on average by 50% as a result of productivity

growth in the shipping industry (Mohammed and Williamson, 2004) while global trade increased

by roughly 400% (Cameron and Neal, 2003). This feature of the late nineteenth century global




                                                                                                    3
economy sets it apart from the post-World War II period where the joint trajectory of freight

rates and bilateral trade is less clear and the data are sparse. Thus, if maritime transport

revolutions matter, then the nineteenth century is the place to start looking.

       This paper addresses some of the issues raised by the recent work of Estevadeordal et al.

(2003). They use a gravity model of bilateral trade for the years 1913, 1928, and 1938 to

indirectly decompose the forces driving the change in country-level aggregate trade volumes

between 1870 and 1939. However, in contrast to Estevadeordal et al. (2003), we focus only on

the initial upsurge of trade from 1870 to 1913 and accordingly bring new, direct panel data to

bear on the issue. More specifically, we are able to provide the first indices of country-pair

specific freight rates for this earlier period and incorporate these into a standard gravity equation

of bilateral trade. That these indices are country-pair specific is important as it is well-known

that technological innovation in the maritime shipping industry reduced long-haul freight rates

more than short-haul ones.

       We also address a major and previously unnoticed identification issue: freight rates are

endogenous to bilateral trade. This is due to the fact that freight rates are the price for shipping

services and are, thus, partially determined by import demand. Although one would expect that

lower freight rates would stimulate higher volumes of trade, this simultaneity is as likely to

generate a positive correlation between the two variables of interest. In the short-run, increases

in import demand could interact with capacity constraints in the shipping industry to create

higher freight rates. Disentangling these two forces via standard IV panel methods is one of the

paper’s main contributions.

       In our empirical work, we are able to document such correlations. OLS estimates

generate a positive coefficient on freight rates in a standard gravity equation. But by using a




                                                                                                       4
plausible set of instruments ranging from shipping input prices to weather on major shipping

routes, we are able to identify a negative, but statistically insignificant relationship between the

two variables. In sum, the results are striking: we find little systematic evidence suggesting that

the maritime transport revolution was a primary driver of the late nineteenth century global trade

boom. Rather, the most powerful forces driving the boom were those of income growth and

convergence. Finally, we suggest that a significant portion of the observed decline in maritime

transport costs may have been induced by the trade boom itself. In this view of the world, the

key innovations in the shipping industry were induced technological responses to the heightened

trading potential of the period.

       In the following section, we explore the relationship between freight costs and trade

flows more fully. In the third section, we discuss our data and introduce the means by which the

bilateral freight indices are constructed. The fourth section presents our main empirical results

while the fifth section presents a decomposition exercise in the spirit of Baier and Bergstrand

(2001). The sixth section concludes.



II. Transportation Costs and Trade Flows

       There is a strong impression in both popular and professional opinion that the late

twentieth century—just like the late nineteenth century—witnessed drastic improvements in

transport technology which are assumed to have necessarily spilled over into international trade

flows. Lundgren (1996, p. 7) writes that “during the last 30 years merchant shipping has actually

undergone a revolution comparable to what happened in the late nineteenth century.” In these

accounts, identifying the sources of such improvements is relatively straightforward and is seen

in the movement towards containerization and increased port efficiency (Levinson, 2006). Thus,




                                                                                                       5
“the clearest conclusion is that new technologies that reduce the costs of transportation and

communication have been a major factor supporting global economic integration” (Bernanke,

2006).

         However, this view has not gone unchallenged. Hummels (1999) strongly argues against

a twentieth century maritime transport revolution and accompanying declines in shipping costs.

In reviewing the limited data on maritime freight rates dating from 1947, Hummels concludes

that “there is remarkably little systematic evidence documenting [such a] decline” (p. 1). Yet he

does find considerable evidence of changes in the composition of transport medium and in the

trade-off between transport cost and transit time. The most marked development in this regard

has been the increasing reliance on air shipments in international trade. As of 2000, these

shipments had grown from negligible levels in the 1940s to roughly one-third (by value) of all

U.S. trade. These developments point to the fact that the late nineteenth century offers a much

simpler context in which to study the effect of rapidly declining maritime freight rates on global

trade.

         As to the most widely-held view of the nineteenth century, it is generally supposed that

the railroad and telegraph take pride of place in promoting economic integration within countries

while the wholesale adoption of steam propulsion in the maritime industry plays a similar role in

spurring trade between countries (cf. Frieden, 2007, p. 19; James, 2001, pp. 10-13). While

analytically sound, this interpretation overlooks many critical elements of the late nineteenth

century. The first would be the development of a host of commercial and monetary institutions,

chief among them the classical gold standard. More importantly, this view fails to condition on

the economic environment in which this global trade boom occurred: this was a period of both

significant income growth and convergence (Taylor and Williamson, 1997).




                                                                                                     6
       What is needed then is evidence on the relationship between transport costs and trade

flows. Of course, this is traditionally proxied within the context of gravity models of trade as the

mapping of distance into bilateral trade flows. Almost always this is formulated as a log-linear

equation which allows for potential fixed costs in shipping and a concave relationship between

distance and transport costs. This seems to be a reasonable procedure, especially in the cross-

section. But, of course, this approach suffers from the fact that distance is a time-invariant

variable, so the instrument to gauge the contribution of changes in transport costs to changes in

trade flows is decidedly blunt.

       In an effort to empirically assess the much-touted “death of distance” in the late twentieth

century, researchers have tried to tease out any time-variant properties of the relationship among

distance, trade costs, and trade flows. One of the first to explore this relationship was Leamer

and Levinsohn who wrote “that the effect of distance on trade patterns is not diminishing over

time. Contrary to popular impression, the world is not getting dramatically smaller” (1995, p.

1387). Taking this view as a starting point, a string of papers has strongly confirmed their

results. Berthelon and Freund (2004) find corroborating evidence in highly disaggregated trade

data, suggesting that distance-related trade costs have been on the rise in recent years, rather than

falling as has often been assumed. Likewise, Carrère and Schiff (2004) argue that a measure of

the distance separating trade partners (or distance-of-trade) has been falling from the 1960s.

Finally, Disdier and Head (2008) conduct a meta-analysis of over 1000 estimated distance

coefficients from 78 previous studies. They find that the estimated distance coefficient has been

on the rise from 1950, suggesting that there has been an exaggerated sense of the death of

distance.




                                                                                                    7
       This paper can make a contribution to the debate on several fronts. First, it provides

economists with a different testing ground for assessing the interaction between transport costs

and trade flows. Second, and much more importantly, it is the first study for any period to tackle

this question with the aid of direct information on country-pair specific freight rates rather than

proxies such as the ratio of declared cost-insurance-freight to free-on-board prices as in Baier

and Bergstrand (2001) or a single world-wide index of global freight rates as in Estevadeordal et

al. (2003). Finally, freight rates are almost certainly endogenous to trade flows. Freight rates are

the price of shipping services and, thus, are determined by supply and demand in the shipping

industry where demand obviously depends on international trade flows. The identification

strategy employed in this paper is to isolate the supply curve of shipping services from changes

in demand with a wide-ranging set of instrumental variables. This approach yields a small,

negative, but statistically insignificant relationship between freight rates and trade volumes,

leaving little independent role for the maritime transport revolution in explaining the late

nineteenth century trade boom.



III. Data

       One of the first issues which must be addressed is how to separate out the effects of

changes in maritime transport from changes in other modes of transport. Our approach is to

identify a country which might be thought of as representative and for which all trade was

maritime by definition. The choice here is obvious. The United Kingdom loomed large in

developments in the global economy of the time and is conveniently separated from all of its

trading partners by water. Thus, we will explore the evolution of maritime freight rates and trade

flows through the lens of the United Kingdom’s experience during the late nineteenth century.




                                                                                                      8
Figure 1 gives a rough sense of the changes involved. The trends in the two variables are clear—

freight rates decline appreciably while trade volumes explode, suggesting a negative correlation

between these variables. At the same time, Figure 1 also demonstrates that trade volumes only

take off after 1895 by which time the maritime transport revolution has essentially played itself

out.

        Our data are an unbalanced panel on twenty-one countries (UK trading partners) for the

period 1870 to 1913. Table 1 provides the share of our sample in total trade with the United

Kingdom, the share of the United Kingdom in global trade, and the share of our sample in global

trade during the period. Here, we see that, although the sample’s share of UK trade is slightly

rising through time, the UK share in global trade is effectively halved over this period from 30%

to 15%. Consequently, our sample falls from 21% to 11% of global trade in the period.

However, the UK was the primary trading partner of not only the fastest growing economies of

the time (e.g. Germany, Japan, and the United States) but also those economies experiencing the

most rapid decline in maritime freight rates (e.g. Australasia, India, and Japan). Finally, Table 2

summarizes the coverage of matched bilateral trade, freight, and GDP data. It should be noted

that, in general, the limiting variable here is GDP—by comparison, the bilateral trade data are

complete and the freight data have only a few breaks in coverage.

        Our underlying gravity equation of bilateral trade flows is the following:

                             (1) TradeUK ,i ,t = α fUK ,i ,t + X UK ,i ,t β + δ t + θi + ε i ,t

where i indexes countries; t indexes years; Trade is the trade flow between the United Kingdom

and country i in year t and is equal to (ln(Exports UK,i,t ) + ln(Imports UK,i,t )) / 2 ; f is the freight cost

index to ship one ton of a generic commodity from Great Britain to country i in year t; and X is a

vector of covariates suitable to a gravity model of trade. The third-to-last term is a decade fixed



                                                                                                                  9
effect to control for secular changes in world GDP and other variables. The second-to-last term

is a country fixed effect to control for time-invariant multilateral barriers and/or price effects

which capture the average trade barrier facing countries (Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003).1 In

addition, these country fixed-effects absorb all other time-invariant factors which affect

international trade volumes including the geographical distance between trading partners,

membership in the British Empire, use of the English language, and other cultural factors.

         The freight cost index used in (1) constitutes a primary contribution of this paper and

varies across countries and over time. All extant freight cost indices are either commodity- and

city-specific as in Mohammed and Williamson (2004) or invariant across countries as in Isserlis

(1938). We use information on 5247 shipments of 40 different commodities during the period

1870 to 1913 between the United Kingdom and our sample of 21 countries. These shipping data

were collected from a number of sources, detailed in Appendix I, while Appendix II delves in

greater length into the composition of the underlying freight rates series in terms of country,

commodity, and route coverage.

         We model the freight index as fUK ,i ,t = fUK ,i (t ) where fUK ,i (t ), i = 1,...,21 are country-

specific freight rate indices, each of which is estimated as part of the function:

                                (2) ln FUK ,i , s ,t = δ i + fUK ,i (t ) + φi ,s + uUK ,i , s ,t .

1
    Appendix III considers other formulations of the gravity equation which address the

identification problem highlighted by Baldwin and Taglioni (2006). Specifically, they

incorporate country-specific time dummies. The results presented in the following section

remain qualitatively unaltered by the addition of country-specific decade dummies. In the body

of this paper, we present results with country fixed-effects and decade fixed-effects, but without

their interaction as these diminish the identifying power of the freight variable.



                                                                                                              10
Here, FUK ,i , s ,t is the shipment cost in Great British pounds per ton, i indexes shipments between a

given country i and the United Kingdom in a given year t for a given commodity s, and δ i is (the

log of) a country fixed effect capturing the 1870 freight cost separating Great Britain and country

i. In addition, fUK ,i (t ) are commodity-independent smooth functions of time normalized to have

a mean of zero (i.e., the log of one), and φi , s , s = 1,…,40 are commodity fixed effects which vary

across countries. The function is estimated separately for each country i and is implemented as a

semiparametric model, using a penalized B-spline smoother for fUK ,i (t ) with partially linear

effects for commodities.

        The motivation for using semiparametric estimation is to let the data determine the shape

of fUK ,i (t ), rather than imposing a parametric structure a priori. The penalized spline approach

uses polynomial functions of t over separate “windows” covering different time periods (the

spline functions) to approximate the unrestricted function fUK ,i (t ), with additive commodity

effects in this case. We implement quadratic B-splines: quadratic splines for the curvature

within windows and B-splines which optimize the spacing and placement of the windows to

minimize the collinearity of spline functions across windows. To maintain degrees of freedom, a

roughness penalty is added to restrict the change in curvature from window to window, resulting

in greater smoothness. The spline functions are cross-validated to achieve the

semiparametrically optimal smoothness. We use quadratic splines with cross-validated

roughness (λ) of 2 and implement the model in S-Plus using the “GLASS” routines of Eilers and

Marx. See Eilers and Marx (1996) for a description of the software and Ruppert et al. (2003) for

a survey of semiparametric spline methods.




                                                                                                      11
       There are three crucial assumptions embodied in our semiparametric estimation of freight

rate indices. First, we use country-specific, but time-invariant coefficients for the 40 different

commodities we observe in our sample. This implies that, in any given country, the prices for

shipping different commodities must be related by the same proportionate differences over the

entire period. Historically, this restriction may be justified by considering freight rates in the

North Atlantic, the most heavily traveled route. In 1870, grain could be transported between

Britain and the US at 30% of the cost per ton of cotton. Likewise, wheat could be transported at

20% of the cost. In 1913, the respective figures were 25% and 16%. Given that the overall

maritime freight rate index for this route fell by 45% between 1870 and 1913, the above changes

on the order of 5% are relatively small and likely of second-order importance. Second, the

penalized splines employ a small number of windows and a roughness penalty that delivers a

freight index which varies smoothly over time and does not allow for discrete jumps or falls in

freight costs. Both of these assumptions are imposed to deliver a tractable empirical model. If

either is relaxed, the resulting model has too many parameters to feasibly estimate.

       Finally, since we are interested in the total volume of trade between country i and the

United Kingdom, i.e. imports plus exports, we estimate equation (2) using information on both

UK-bound and -originated freight rates. In this sense, the fUK ,i (t ) term can be thought of as the

commodity-independent average freight rate separating country i and the United Kingdom. This

method also avoids the problem that indices derived from freight rates in only one direction, e.g.

from the United States to the United Kingdom, are likely to be biased as back-haulage rates were

vitally affected by both outward-bound rates and the composition of trade between two countries.

       Figure 2 gives the reader a rough sense of this approach by plotting all available per-ton

freight rates between the United States and the United Kingdom against our UK-US freight rate



                                                                                                     12
index as estimated from equation (2). The results are reassuring as the main trends in the data

seem to be captured well. From 1870 to 1913, the index registers a 45% decline for the UK-US

as compared to the 34% decline reported in the standard source on freight rates for this period

(Isserlis, 1939). Again, we emphasize that this Isserlis series which was used by Estevadeordal

et al. (2003) among others is simply a chained, unweighted average of a large number of

disparate freight rate series with no controls for commodities or routes and is, thus, country-

invariant. We believe that explicitly modeling the structure of freight rates as in equation (2) as

well as allowing for cross-country differences in the evolution of freight rates is an important

step in the right direction.

         Next, we incorporate the country-specific freight indices into the vector of covariates X of

equation (1) which includes standard gravity model variables: GDP, income similarity, average

tariff intensities and exchange rate volatility for the United Kingdom and the twenty-one sample

countries, plus an indicator for gold standard adherence by each trading partner.2 The data are

described and summarized in Table 3 while the sources are detailed in Appendix IV.



IV. Results

         In what follows, we take a very agnostic approach to our estimation strategy. Since our

main task is in exploring the co-movement of maritime freight rates and global trade flows, we

have avoided at the moment the issue of developing a fully specified, micro-founded model of

international trade in which to ground our gravity equation. And as our concern does not lie in

utilizing the gravity equation as a means of testing the empirical validity of any particular

2
    The United Kingdom was, of course, on the gold standard for the entire period from 1870 to

1913.



                                                                                                   13
modeling approach (Feenstra et al. 2001; Evenett and Keller, 2002), we are then on safe ground

in making the following assumptions about the gravity equation: simply, that the level of

bilateral trade flows should be increasing in economic size and in income similarity. Notably,

accounting for time-invariant unobservables with country fixed effects “knocks out” classic

gravity variables such as distance.3

          Our first exercise is to simply run a very naïve regression of bilateral trade flows on

nothing more than a constant and our measure of bilateral freight rates. These results are

reported in column A of Table 4 and strongly confirm the traditional story of the role of the

maritime transport revolution in the nineteenth century global trade boom. The estimated

elasticity between the two variables is precise, large, and negative. A ten percent drop in freight

rates is associated with an increase in trade volumes of over four percent. Thus, the drop in

average freight rates between 1870-75 and 1908-13 is predicted to explain approximately fifty

percent of the change in U.K. trade volumes in the same period.

          Of course, this is the wrong exercise for evaluating the relationship of interest in light of

the considerable body of research into gravity models of international trade flows. Thus, we

include standard gravity variables—GDP, income similarity, tariff intensity, the gold standard,

and nominal exchange rate volatility. GDP is defined as (log GDPUK + log GDPi ) while income

                                 GDPUK         GDPi      
similarity is measured by log              ×              . Tariff intensities are defined as
                               GDPUK + GDPi GDPUK + GDPi 

3
    The use of country fixed effects also allows us to avoid the issue of making the freight rate

indices—which are estimated at the country level as mean-zero series—strictly comparable

across countries. Thus, identification of the effects of the maritime transport revolution will

instead solely come from the proportionate changes in trade and freight rates within countries.



                                                                                                      14
              Tariff revenue  
log  average                   . We note that we lack country-pair specific information on
                 Imports     UK ,i 
    

tariff barriers—that is, these measures capture the general level of protection afforded in the UK

and US markets, for example, but not the protection afforded against British goods in US

markets and vice versa. At the same time, these same measures have been shown to correlate in

sensible ways with such things as trade costs and flows (Jacks et al., 2006). Likewise, adherence

to fixed exchange rate regimes as a stimulus to bilateral trade has a fairly long provenance in the

literature (Rose, 2000) and especially in the context of the gold standard of the late nineteenth

century (López-Córdova and Meissner, 2003).

          When we incorporate these variables, the picture changes radically. Column B of Table 4

reports the results of OLS estimation of the gravity equation. Conforming to our priors, we find

significant positive coefficients for GDP, income similarity, and the gold standard as well as

significant negative coefficients for average tariffs and exchange rate volatility. But by far, the

most striking result is that for the freight rate term. Whereas in Column A the relationship was

decidedly negative, here in column B the relationship is decidedly positive.4

          What explains this divergence from the previous results and, more pointedly, the

traditional narrative of the nineteenth century? In this take, the relationship should be a negative

one as lower freight rates drive down the costs of international trade and, thus, stimulate an

increase in observed trade volumes. Such a result would be consistent with the findings of Baier

and Bergstrand (2001) in company with Estevadoreal et al. (2003), both of which invoke the

exogeneity of transportation costs in explaining the growth of world trade.

4
    We note that this finding is not affected by the inclusion of time-variant fixed effects or other

freight indices. Appendix III reports the results of this sensitivity analysis.



                                                                                                        15
       We believe there is another explanation, namely that freight rates are not exogenous.

One of our key arguments is that there has been insufficient appreciation of the following facts:

1.) freight rates are nothing but the prices for transport services and as such are a function of the

supply of shipping and the volume of trade demanded; and 2.) the volume of trade is a function

of traded prices and the quantity of goods shipped. In other words, the two variables—trade

volumes and freight rates—are simultaneously determined.

       In the next battery of regressions, we address this endogeneity by instrumenting for the

freight price indices f i (t ) using a vector of instruments which includes the log of Norwegian

sailors’ wages, log of the prices of coal and fish, the log of the average tonnages of sail and

steamships registered in the United Kingdom, the log of the (once- and twice-lagged) net

tonnage of British sail and steamships, and the annual mean and variance of barometric pressures

in four quadrants around the United Kingdom (the Baltic and North Seas, the Mediterranean Sea,

and the North and South Atlantic). The basic idea here is to isolate the supply curve of shipping

services from changes in demand, and we can motivate out instruments as follows.

       Wage bills constituted a significant portion of variable costs in shipping. However, using

British sailors’ wages would be inappropriate as these wages are likely correlated with the

British business cycle and, thus, import demand. We exploit a different source of exogenous

variation in sailors’ wages. Hiring Norwegian sailors was a common occurrence on merchant

ships of all flags throughout this period, so their wages are likely to be highly correlated with,

but not wholly dependent upon those prevailing in the British shipping industry as their labor

was, in effect, an internationally traded commodity (Grytten, 2005). Such wages are likely to be

a suitable instrument in that they should be correlated with freight rates but not with the error

term, i.e. they only affect trade volumes indirectly through freights. Likewise, coal was a major



                                                                                                     16
input to the production of shipping services during the period, but the share of coal consumed by

the industry was relatively small with 1.3% and 1.2% of British coal output in 1869 and 1903,

respectively, being allocated to coaling stations which acted as the depositories for coal

consumed in maritime transport (Griffin, 1977).

       The measures of fish prices and route-specific barometric pressures are intended to

capture climatic effects on the supply of shipping with the idea being that inclement weather

over a year should have an adverse effect on the level of freight rates. The average tonnage of

sail and steamships is intended to capture exogenous technological change in the shipping

industry. As refinements in steamship technology were adopted and the physical size of

steamships ballooned, the cost advantages of steam versus sail mounted and shifted out the

supply curve of shipping over the long-run. And as these average tonnages enter logarithmically,

these variables capture the ratio of the average steamship size to that of the average sail ship

which should not be contemporaneously correlated with prevailing freight rates. We have

measures of the stock of net tonnage in the sail and steam fleets of the United Kingdom at our

disposal. Capacity constraints should vitally affect freight rates. However, we only include

lagged values of these measures to avoid the simultaneity between what is the quantity supplied

(net tonnages) and price (freight rates) of shipping service. Finally, as freight rates are

dependent on the distance separating ports, we also interact all instruments with the distance

between country i’s chief port and London.

       The use of instrumental variables may also correct for the endogeneity of freight rates

due to correlated missing variables. One such correlated missing variable is unobserved declines

in overland shipping costs within the partner countries, particularly the introduction and

extension of railroad networks. These costs bear on the alternative to maritime trade with the




                                                                                                   17
United Kingdom, i.e., domestic trade. Our instruments are based on the weather, sail and steam

tonnages, sailors’ wages, fish prices and UK coal prices. Noting that coal is a relatively small

input to rail and other overland transport, all these instruments are plausibly uncorrelated with

overland freight costs. Consequently, our IV regressions can be thought of as dealing with

unobserved declines in overland freight costs.

          The instruments we chose are reasonably correlated with our endogenous variables of

interest. In our baseline model, the R-squared of the first stage regression is 0.84, and the Shea

partial R-squared of excluded instruments is 0.21. In addition, these instruments are plausibly

exogenous: the test of overidentifying restrictions has a p-value of about 10%. The results of the

instrumental-variables exercise are reported in Column C of Table 4. The coefficient on freight

is now small, negative, and statistically indistinguishable from zero.5 Taking together, these

results suggest that we are correctly identifying the relationship between trade flows and freight

rates, namely that freight rates are partially determined by the volume of trade—or more broadly,

the degree of economic integration—demanded by nations. However, once these demand-

induced changes in freight rates are accounted for, freight rates seem to have little independent

bearing on the volume of trade as the coefficient on freight in Column C is effectively zero.




5
    The z-test statistic on an exclusion restriction for a constructed, endogenous regressor is

asymptotically normally distributed. This is because the semiparametric estimate of our

constructed regressor is consistent under the model and because the constructed regressor is not

in the model under the null hypothesis. See Section 6.2 of Newey and McFadden (1994).



                                                                                                    18
V. What Drove the Nineteenth Century Trade Boom?

         In the preceding, we have presented the evidence on the relationship linking trade flows

and freight rates with the view of determining the sources of globalization, both in the past and

the present. As of yet, we have reached a seemingly negative conclusion: there is little evidence

suggesting that the maritime transport revolution was a primary driver of the late nineteenth

century global trade boom.6

         If this conclusion is warranted, it raises the issue of what might be the other, true drivers.

In order to provide an answer, we turn to the work of Baier and Bergstrand (2001). There, they

argue that a general equilibrium gravity model of international trade implies that roughly two-

thirds of the growth of world trade post-1950 can be explained by income growth, one-fourth by

tariff reductions, and less than one-tenth by transport-cost reductions while virtually none of the

growth in trade can be explained by income convergence. In the following, we suggest implicitly




6
    At the same time, there is a voluminous body of work on commodity price convergence

throughout the nineteenth century (O’Rourke and Williamson, 1994, and Jacks, 2005). In the

most influential contribution to this literature, O’Rourke and Williamson write that the

“impressive increase in commodity market integration in the Atlantic economy [of] the late

nineteenth century” was a consequence of “sharply declining transport costs” (1999, p. 33).

However, O’Rourke and Williamson (1999) are quick to point out that a host of other factors

could also be responsible for the dramatic boom in international trade during the period, chief

among them being increases in GDP and import demand.



                                                                                                     19
invoking their underlying model of world trade and explicitly following their lead by estimating

the following equation7:

              (3) ∆ (TradeUK ,i ) = β1∆ log( FreightUK ,i ) + β 2 ∆ (log GDPUK + log GDPi )
                                                     GDPUK         GDPi
                                    + β 3 ∆ log(               ×             )
                                                   GDPUK + GDPi GDPUK + GDPi
                                                            Tariff revenue  
                                    + β 4 ∆ log  average                    
                                                               Imports     UK ,i 
                                                
                                    + β 5 ∆Gold i + β 6 ∆ ( Exchange rate volatilityUKi ) + ε i ,


where ∆ denotes the change in a variable over a ten year period. What we are trying to achieve

here is comparability of results for the nineteenth and twentieth centuries as well as provide

another test of the independent role of freight rates in determining the volume of trade.

         The results of this exercise are presented in Table 5. Once again, the instrumented freight

variable fails to register—whether by sign or significance—in a manner consistent with

prevailing narratives of a transport-led global trade boom in the late nineteenth century.

However, the variables capturing changes in income growth, convergence, tariffs, gold standard

adherence, and exchange rate volatility are all highly statistically significant and signed

consistently with the results of Table 4.

         Coupled with the sample means of the variables reported in Table 3, the point estimates

allow us to decompose the relative contribution of these variables. Clearly, the overwhelming

majority (>75%) of the change in trade volumes is explained by the growth of economies in this

period—a result which compares well with the 65% figure from O’Rourke and Williamson

(2002) for 1500 to 1800, the 67% figure from Baier and Bergstrad (2001) for 1958 to 1988, and

7
    We have slightly augment the model of Baier and Bergstrand by incorporating terms for secular

changes in the gold standard and exchange rate volatility.



                                                                                                    20
the 76% figure from Whalley and Xin (2007) for 1975 to 2004. Unlike Baier and Bergstrand

(2001), we are also able to associate income convergence with the growth of trade volumes as

this variable explains 18% of the variation of the dependent variable—a result which might be

explainable by the greater convergence forces in effect for the pre-World War I era (O’Rourke et

al., 1996). Finally, we find significant but relatively mild trade-enhancing effects for the gold

standard (+6.23%) and the decline in nominal exchange rate volatility (+2.26%) as well as trade-

diminishing effects for average tariffs (-1.40%).8



VI. Conclusion

          As seen above, this paper has established two important facets of global trade which are

likely to be just as applicable to the post-WWII trade boom as the pre-WWI one. First, greater

care must be taken in future work considering the relationship between transportation costs and

trade volumes as they are simultaneously determined. Second, and more fundamentally, once

this endogeneity is dealt with in appropriate fashion there is potentially little room for maritime

transport revolutions to be the primary drivers of the two global trade booms of the nineteenth

and twentieth centuries. Rather, the most powerful forces driving the boom were those of

income growth and convergence—a finding established here and congruent with a mounting




8
    Partially controlling for the potential endogeneity of GDP by netting out the balance of trade

(i.e., X+M in the GDP equation) leaves the results largely unchanged. And since most of the

countries in our sample ran large, persistent trade surpluses with the United Kingdom, this direct

(accounting) effect of trade on GDP probably dominates any second order effects on, for

instance, scale and efficiency.



                                                                                                     21
body of research on the sources of trade growth spanning not only the late twentieth century but

all the way back to the beginning of the global trading system in 1500.

       In balance, these results allow for a potential revision of the first wave of globalization—

one in which the maritime transport revolution is substituted by the general progression and

convergence of incomes and in which freight rates are driven by the “demand” for globalization.

In this view of the world, the key innovations in the shipping industry, e.g. iron hulls and the

screw propeller, were induced technological responses to the heightened trading potential of the

period (see Peet, 1969, for an earlier statement of this view). Analogously, the movement

towards containerization of the world mercantile fleet was strongly conditioned upon agents’

expectations of commercial policy in light of attempts to re-establish the pre-war international

economic order (Levinson, 2006). In short, exploring this potential causal connection between

technological innovation and the diplomatic and political environment surrounding world trade

remains an important task for future research.

       Another possibility that our results suggest is that focusing solely on the secular decline

in freight rates across the nineteenth century may be misleading. Aggregate trade costs of the

countries in our sample fell on average by around 15% from 1870 to 1913 (Jacks et al., 2006).

How can such a finding be reconciled with the very well-documented decline in maritime freight

rates in the period? First, transportation costs are only one input into trade costs, as emphasized

by Anderson and van Wincoop (2004). A broader look at the factors contributing to declines in

trade costs should include overall shipping and freight rates, the rise of the classical gold

standard and the financial stability it implied, and improved communication technology. There

were also countervailing effects of tariffs. These rose on average by 50 percent between 1870

and 1913 (Williamson, 2006). In addition, new non-tariff barriers were erected (Saul, 1967).




                                                                                                   22
         At the same time, the results also warrant some caution. First, it could be argued that the

United Kingdom might well be a peculiar unit of observation. Given the heavy share of raw

materials and especially food stuffs in its imports, it may have found itself on an inelastic section

of its demand curve, i.e. the level of freight rates would not affect the decisions of importers.

However, given that separate gravity equations estimated for imports and exports (not reported)

yield symmetric results, it seems unlikely that this is generating our findings.

         Second, more work needs to be done in documenting and testing the complementary

decline in overland freight rates during this period. In some instances, the introduction of the

railroad and the telegraph led to declines in transportation costs on the order of 90% (but this

number was subject to wide variation). This point can be seen in the example of the grain trade

between the UK and US after 1850. Much of the decrease in the price differential between the

UK and US markets came through a narrowing of price gaps separating the Midwest and the East

coast of the US (O’Rourke and Williamson, 1994). The ever-expanding networks of railroads

and telegraphs lowered transportation costs between the Midwest and the Atlantic ports at a

faster rate than the observed decline in maritime freight rates. Jacks (2005) documents a similar

pattern based on commodity price data for a large set of countries which shows much faster

within country integration than cross-border integration over the period from 1800 to 1913.

Thus, the differential decline in overland and maritime freight rates across countries might tell a

different story, and we encourage others to follow our lead. Yet as we have argued before, to the

extent that within-country freight costs are uncorrelated with the supply-side instruments we use,

our instrumental variables strategy corrects for such excluded changes in overland transportation

costs.




                                                                                                    23
       Finally, recent research has suggested that the period prior to 1870 might have, in fact,

been the “big bang” period for the maritime transport revolution. Again, Jacks (2006)

documents a decline in the price gap for wheat separating London and New York City from 1830

to 1913 of 88%. Yet this decline was highly concentrated—of that 88%, the period from 1830 to

1870 witnessed a 74% decline with the remaining 14% decline being contributed in the period

from 1870 to 1913. It stands to reason that if maritime transport revolutions matter we should

also be looking at the early nineteenth century for clues. Unfortunately, systematic freight,

output, and trade data are all lacking for this earlier period. But there are some fragments at our

disposal: real US trade with 10 European countries and Canada grew 449% between 1870 and

1913 but only 412% between 1830 and 1870 (Treasury Department, 1893). Of course, one needs

to condition on standard gravity variables as argued above, but prima facie this suggests that if

anything the response of trade in the face of an even steeper decline in freight rates from 1830 to

1870 was more muted. Only ongoing work by economic historians piecing together the trade

history of the early nineteenth century will allow us to test this hypothesis directly.




                                                                                                    24
Appendix I: Sources of Freight Rates

The richest single source for nineteenth century freight rates is Angier (1920). This provided

3049 of the 7923 observations in the global freight rate dataset available from the authors. Of

these 7923 observations, 5247 comprise either UK-destined or –originated freights and were

used in this paper. The following comprises the full list of sources.



Andrews, F. (1907), “Ocean Freight Rates and the Conditions Affecting Them.” USDA Bureau

       of Statistics Bulletin no. 67. Washington: GPO.

Angier, E.A.V. (1920), Fifty Years' Freights 1869-1919, London: Fairplay.

Berry, T.S. (1984), Early California. Richmond: The Bostwick Press.

Board of Trade (1903), British and Foreign Trade and Industrial Conditions. London: Eyre and

       Spottiswoode.

Brentano, L. (1911), Die Deutschen Getreidezölle. Stuttgart.

California State Agricultural Society (1891-1896), 1890-5 Transactions. Sacramento.

Daish, J.B. (1918), The Atlantic Port Differentials. Washington: W.H. Lowdermilk & Co.

Great Britain (1905), Parliamentary Papers.

Harley, C.K. (1988), “Ocean Freight Rates and Productivity, 1740-1913.” Journal of Economic

       History 48(4), 851-876.

Harley, C.K. (1989), “Coal Exports and British Shipping, 1850-1913.” Explorations in Economic

       History 26(3), 311-338.

Harley, C.K. (1990), “North Atlantic Shipping in the Late 19th Century: Freight Rates and the

       Interrelationship of Cargoes.” In Shipping and Trade, 1750-1950, Fischer and Nordvik

       (Ed.s). Pontefract: Lofthouse Publications, pp. 147-172.




                                                                                                  25
Hobson, C.K. (1914), The Export of Capital. London: Constable & Co.

Jevons, H.S. (1909), Foreign Trade in Coal. London: P.S. King & Son.

Jevons, H.S. (1969), The British Coal Trade. New York: Augustus M. Kelley.

Johnson, E.R. (1906), Ocean and Inland Water Transportation, New York: Appleton.

Kuczynski, R.R. (1902), “Freight-Rates on Argentine and North American Wheat.” Journal of

       Political Economy 10(3), 333-360.

McCain, C.C. (1893), Report of Changes in Railway Transportation Rates on Freight Traffic

       throughout the United States. Washington: CPO.

Mitchell's Maritime Register. Various years.

New York Maritime Register. Various years.

D.C. North, D.C. (1958), “Ocean Freight Rates and Economic Development 1750-1913.”

       Journal of Economic History 18(4), 537-555.

Rubinow, I.M. (1908), “Russia's Wheat Trade.” USDA Bureau of Statistics Bulletin no. 65.

       Washington: GPO.

Sundbaerg, G. (1908), Apercus Statistiques Internationaux. Stockholm: Imprimerie Royale.

Thomas, D.A. (1903), “The Growth and Direction of our Foreign Trade in Coal during

       the Last Half Century.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 66(3), 439-533.




                                                                                            26
Appendix II: Composition of Freight Rates

Of primary concern in constructing freight rate indices as above is the composition and, thus,

representativeness of the underlying series. Table A.1 details the dataset of individual freight

rate observations along three dimensions. The first column considers the frequency with which

countries are represented in the data. At the top of the list, we find that a very substantial

proportion of the freight rates are taken from the United States. This is probably not surprising

as the United States was the United Kingdom’s largest trading partner (and the two were the

largest trading partners in the world throughout the period). At the same time, one can see that

most countries are very well-represented, including a number (e.g. Australasia, Ceylon, and

India) which witnessed the most dramatic drops in freight rates in the period under consideration.

The second column considers the commodities for which the freight rates were contracted. The

number one commodity was coal which, of course, was a primary export of the United Kingdom

at the time. Of the remaining twenty commodities, only the “General” and “Provisions”

categories could be interpreted as capturing manufactured goods. Thus, the freight rate indices

should capture the maritime transport revolution reasonably well to the extent that it vitally

affected high-bulk, low-value commodities. Finally, the third column details the most prominent

country and commodity pairings.




                                                                                                   27
                            Table A.1: Composition of freight rate series

By country:                      By commodity (top 21 only):     By country & commodity (top 21 only):
                     N     %                        N      %                                  N      %
United States       1627 30.76   Coal              2037 38.51    United States, grain        537 10.23
Russia              794 15.01    Grain             770 14.56     Italy, coal                 449 8.56
India               518 9.79     Wheat             567 10.72     United States, wheat        251 4.78
Italy               450 8.51     General           303 5.73      France, coal                247 4.71
Argentina           317 5.99     Deals             213 4.03      United States, flour        210 4.00
France              247 4.67     Flour             210 3.97      Argentina, coal             188 3.58
Spain               237 4.48     Provisions        149 2.82      Russia, wheat               188 3.58
Germany             180 3.40     Cotton            139 2.63      Germany, coal               180 3.43
Chile               120 2.27     Ore               114 2.16      Russia, grain               179 3.41
Australasia         116 2.19     Rice               76    1.44   India, coal                 167 3.18
Ceylon              115 2.17     Sugar              63    1.19   Spain, coal                 165 3.14
Brazil              101 1.91     Beef               58    1.10   Russia, coal                157 2.99
Sweden/Norway        91  1.72    Pork               58    1.10   United States, provisions   149 2.84
Canada               86  1.63    Phosphate          57    1.08   India, general              143 2.73
Philippines          71   1.34   Hemp               44    0.83   United States, cotton       137 2.61
Portugal             48  0.91    Nitrate            40    0.76   Russia, deals               136 2.59
Denmark              42  0.79    Bacon              38    0.72   Ceylon, coal                101 1.92
Dutch East Indies    41  0.78    Jute               38    0.72   Chile, coal                  80    1.52
Japan                39  0.74    Wood               36    0.68   Brazil, coal                 78    1.49
Uruguay              31  0.59    Oats               35    0.66   Sweden/Norway, coal          72    1.37
Colombia             19  0.36    Mutton             32    0.60   Argentina, wheat             64    1.22




                                                                                                           28
Appendix III: Sensitivity Analysis

The following tables present the results of some sensitivity analysis. The inclusion of decadal

country fixed effects (i.e., there are five separate fixed effects for each of the twenty-one sample

countries) in the second column of Table A.2 is intended to capture any remaining unexplained

variation coming from time-varying country attributes. The specification preserves the sign of

the freight variable while decreasing its magnitude and significance. This does little to change

our basic story. This specification also destroys most of the explanatory power of remaining

variables, but the GDP and GDP shares remain large and highly significant. Additionally, this

specification comes closest to addressing the identification problems highlighted in Baldwin and

Taglioni (2006). The results are much the same for the IV specification presented immediately

below.

                                     Table A.2: Regressions with time-varying country fixed effects

            Dependent variable: Average bilateral volume of trade

            OLS with fixed effects:                      Country and decade fixed effects          Decadal country fixed effects
                                                       Estimate     Std Error     p-value       Estimate    Std Error      p-value
            Freight                                     0.2463       0.1047        0.019         0.0692      0.0674         0.305
            GDP                                         0.7549       0.1650        0.000         0.8308      0.1250         0.000
            Income similarity                           0.9095       0.1556        0.000         0.7300      0.1973         0.000
            Average tariffs                            -0.1556       0.0645        0.016        -0.0306      0.0755         0.686
            Gold standard                               0.2019       0.0396        0.000         0.0633      0.0447         0.157
            Exchange rate volatility                   -1.7926       0.8069        0.026        -0.1466      0.6822         0.830

            Observations                                               671                                      671
            R-squared                                                 0.4789                                   0.7800

            IV with fixed effects:                       Country and decade fixed effects          Decadal country fixed effects
                                                       Estimate     Std Error     p-value       Estimate    Std Error      p-value
            Freight                                    -0.0146       0.1754        0.934         0.0572      0.1546         0.712
            GDP                                         0.5470       0.1532        0.000         0.7357      0.1421         0.000
            Income similarity                           0.8498       0.1529        0.000         0.5185      0.1984         0.009
            Average tariffs                            -0.2211       0.0618        0.000        -0.0812      0.0561         0.148
            Gold standard                               0.2178       0.0358        0.000         0.1037      0.0304         0.001
            Exchange rate volatility                   -1.5656       0.8346        0.061        -0.0431      0.6535         0.947

            IV relevance (p-value)                               152.185 (0.000)                          226.696 (0.000)
            IV overidentification test (p-value)                 29.871 (0.095)                           45.324 (0.002)

            Observations                                               671                                      671
            R-squared                                                 0.4837                                   0.7801

            NB: All estimation with first-order auto-regressive and heteroskedastic robust standard errors; fixed effects not reported.




                                                                                                                                          29
Table A.3 shows that the results presented in the text are robust to the inclusion of other freight

rate indices, whether they be variants of our preferred index or the Isserlis (1938) index. Across

the board, the coefficients on the freight variable are statistically indistinguishable from the

results discussed above.


                                                                 Table A.3: Regressions with alternate freight indices

  Dependent variable: Average bilateral volume of trade

  OLS with country fixed effects                      Estimate   Std Error    p-value    Estimate     Std Error   p-value       Estimate    Std Error   p-value    Estimate   Std Error   p-value
  Freight (λ=2)                                       -0.4457     0.0590       0.000
  Isserlis index                                                                          -0.5020      0.0676        0.000
  Alternate Freight (λ=1)                                                                                                       -0.4363      0.0587        0.000
  Alternate Freight (λ=3)                                                                                                                                          -0.4513     0.0592       0.000

  Observations                                                      671                                 671                                   671                                671
  R-squared                                                       0.1937                               0.1856                                0.1878                            0.1976

  OLS with country and decade fixed effects           Estimate   Std Error    p-value    Estimate     Std Error   p-value       Estimate    Std Error   p-value    Estimate   Std Error   p-value
  Freight (λ=2)                                        0.2463     0.1047       0.019
  Isserlis index                                                                          0.1904       0.0821        0.020
  Alternate Freight (λ=1)                                                                                                       0.2397       0.0942        0.011
  Alternate Freight (λ=3)                                                                                                                                           0.2486     0.1121       0.027
  GDP                                                 0.7549      0.1650        0.000      0.6447      0.1446        0.000       0.7499      0.1606        0.000    0.7572     0.1681       0.000
  Income similarity                                   0.9095      0.1556        0.000      1.0133      0.1665        0.000       0.9092      0.1568        0.000    0.9100     0.1549       0.000
  Average tariffs                                     -0.1556     0.0645        0.016     -0.1854      0.0649        0.004      -0.1576      0.0644        0.014   -0.1548     0.0646       0.017
  Gold standard                                       0.2019      0.0396        0.000      0.1878      0.0389        0.000       0.2002      0.0396        0.000    0.2027     0.0395       0.000
  Exchange rate volatility                            -1.7926     0.8069        0.026     -1.7378      0.8002        0.030      -1.8173      0.8051        0.024   -1.7802     0.8080       0.028

  Observations                                                      671                                 671                                   671                                671
  R-squared                                                       0.4789                               0.4810                                0.4791                            0.4786

  IV with country and decade fixed effects            Estimate   Std Error    p-value    Estimate     Std Error   p-value       Estimate    Std Error   p-value    Estimate   Std Error   p-value
  Freight (λ=2)                                       -0.0146     0.1754       0.934
  Isserlis index                                                                          0.1653       0.1151        0.151
  Alternate Freight (λ=1)                                                                                                       -0.0195      0.1838        0.915
  Alternate Freight (λ=3)                                                                                                                                          -0.0734     0.1913       0.701
  GDP                                                 0.5470      0.1532        0.000      0.5703      0.1314        0.000       0.5301      0.1522        0.000    0.4993     0.1587       0.002
  Income similarity                                   0.8498      0.1529        0.000      0.8833      0.1477        0.000       0.8479      0.1716        0.000    0.8591     0.1700       0.000
  Average tariffs                                     -0.2211     0.0618        0.000     -0.1943      0.0622        0.002      -0.2062      0.0636        0.001   -0.2151     0.0634       0.001
  Gold standard                                       0.2178      0.0358        0.000      0.2323      0.0368        0.000       0.2317      0.0369        0.000   0.2288      0.0371       0.000
  Exchange rate volatility                            -1.5656     0.8346        0.061     -1.3195      0.8458        0.119      -1.3140      0.8588        0.126   -1.3105     0.8549       0.125

  IV relevance (p-value)                                      152.185 (0.000)                      468.905 (0.000)                       137.162 (0.000)                  135.872 (0.000)
  IV overidentification test (p-value)                         29.871 (0.095)                      22.952 (0.347)                        29.030 (0.113)                   29.659 (0.099)

  Observations                                                      671                                 671                                   671                                671
  R-squared                                                       0.4837                               0.4846                                0.4767                            0.4717

  NB: All estimation with first-order auto-regressive and heteroskedastic robust standard errors; fixed effects not reported.




                                                                                                                                                                                                    30
Appendix IV: Sources of Gravity Variables


Coal export prices: Mitchell, B.R. (1994), British Historical Statistics. New York: Cambridge

       University Press.

Exchange rates: Global Financial Database.

Fish prices: Urquhart, M.C. and K.A.H. Buckley (1965), Historical Statistics of Canada.

       Toronto: MacMillan Company.

GDP and U.S. GDP deflator: Maddison, A. (2005), The World Economy: Historical Statistics.

       Paris: OECD.

Monetary standards: Meissner, C. (2005), “A New World Order: Explaining the Emergence of

       the Classical Gold Standard.” Journal of International Economics 66(2), 385-406.

Norwegian sailors’ wages: Grytten, O. (2005), “Real Wages and Convergence in the 19th

       Century Maritime Labour Market.” Norwegian School of Economics.

Sail and steamship tonnage: Mitchell, B.R. (1994), British Historical Statistics. New York:

       Cambridge University Press.

Sea-level pressures in the East North Atlantic and Europe: Luterbacher, J., E. Xoplaki, R. Rickli,

       D. Gyalistras, C. Schmutz and H. Wanner (2002), “Reconstruction of Sea Level Pressure

       Fields over the Eastern North Atlantic and Europe back to 1500.” Climate Dynamics

       18(3), 545-61.

Tariffs (ratio of customs revenue to value of imports): Clemens, M.A. and J.G. Williamson

       (2004), “Why did the Tariff-Growth Correlation Change after 1950?” Journal of

       Economic Growth 9(1), 5-46.

U.K. exports and imports: Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom. London: various years.




                                                                                                31
Works Cited

Anderson, James E. and Erik van Wincoop (2003), “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the

       Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review 93(1), 170-192.

Baier, Scott L. and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand (2001), “The Growth of World Trade: Tariffs,

       Transport Costs, and Income Similarity.” Journal of International Economics 53(1), 1-

       27.

Baldwin, Richard and Daria Taglioni (2006), “Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity

       Equations.” NBER Working Paper 12516.

Bernanke, Ben (2006), “Global Economic Integration: What’s New and What’s Not?”

       http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20060825/default.htm

Berthelon, Matias and Caroline Freund (2004), “On the Conservation of Distance in International

       Trade.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3293.

Bhagwati, Jagdish (2004), In Defense of Globalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Cameron, Rondo and Larry Neal (2003), A Concise Economic History of the World. Oxford:

       Oxford University Press.

Carrère, Celine and Maurice Schiff (2004), “On the Geography of Trade: Distance is Alive and

       Well.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3206.

Disdier, Anna-Celia and Keith Head (2008), “The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on

       Bilateral Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(1), 37-48.

Eilers, Paul and Brian D. Marx (1996), “Flexible Smoothing with B-splines and Penalties.”

       Statistical Science 11(2), 89-121.

Estevadeordal, Antoni, Brian Frantz, and Alan M. Taylor (2003), “The Rise and Fall of World

       Trade, 1870-1939.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2), 359-407.




                                                                                               32
Evenett, Simon J. and Wolfgang Keller (2002), “On Theories Explaining the Success of the

       Gravity Equation.” Journal of Political Economy 110(2), 281-316.

Feenstra, Robert C., James R. Markusen, and Andrew K. Rose (2001), “Using the Gravity

       Equation to Differentiate among Alternative Theories of Trade.” Canadian Journal of

       Economics 34(3), 430-447.

Griffin, Alan R. (1977), The British Coalmining Industry. Stoke-on-Trent: Wood Mitchell.

Grytten, O. (2005), “Real Wages and Convergence in the 19th Century Maritime Labour

       Market.” Norwegian School of Economics.

Hummels, David (1999), “Have International Transportation Costs Declined?” Purdue

       University.

Hummels, David (2001), “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs.” Purdue University.

Irwin, Doug A. (1995), “The GATT in Historical Perspective.” American Economic Review

       85(2), 323-328.

Isserlis, L. (1938), “Tramp Shipping Cargoes and Freight.” Journal of the Royal Statistical

       Society 101(1), 53-134.

Jacks, David S. (2005), “Intra- and International Commodity Market Integration in the Atlantic

       Economy, 1800-1913.” Explorations in Economic History 42(3), 381-413.

Jacks, David S. (2006), “What Drove 19th Century Commodity Market Integration?”

       Explorations in Economic History 43(3), 383-412.

Jacks, David S., Chris M. Meissner, and Dennis Novy (2006), “Trade Costs in the First Wave of

       Globalization.” NBER Working Paper 12602.

James, Harold (2001), The End of Globalization. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Krugman, Paul (1995), “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences.” Brookings Papers




                                                                                              33
       on Economic Activity (1), 327-377.

Leamer, Edward .E. and James Levinsohn (1995), “International Trade Theory: The Evidence.”

       In G.M. Grossman and K. Rogoff (Ed.s), Handbook of International Economics, vol. III.

       New York: Elsevier.

Levinson, Marc (2006). The Box. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

López-Córdova, J. Ernesto and Chris M. Meissner (2003), “Exchange-Rate Regimes and

       International Trade: Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard Era.” American

       Economic Review 93(1), 344-353.

Lundgren, Nils-Gustav (1996), “Bulk Trade and Maritime Transport Costs: The Evolution of

       Global Markets.” Resources Policy 22(1), 5-32.

Mohammed, Shah S. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2004), “Freight Rates and Productivity Gains in

       British Tramp Shipping 1869-1950.” Explorations in Economic History 41(2), 172-203.

Newey, Whitney K. & McFadden, Daniel (1994), “Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis

       Testing.” In R. F. Engle and D. McFadden (Ed.s), Handbook of Econometrics, vol. IV.

       New York: Elsevier.

O’Rourke, Kevin H., Alan M. Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1996), “Factor Price

       Convergence in the Late Nineteenth Century.” International Economic Review 37(3),

       499–530.

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1994), “Late Nineteenth-Century Anglo-

       American Factor-Price Convergence: Were Heckscher and Ohlin Right?” Journal of

       Economic History 54(4), 892-916.

O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History. Cambridge:

       MIT Press.




                                                                                             34
O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2002), “After Columbus: Explaining Europe’s

       Overseas Trade Boom, 1500-1800.” Journal of Economic History 62(2), 417-456.

Peet, Richard (1969), “The Spatial Expansion of Commercial Agriculture in the Nineteenth

       Century: A Von Thünen Interpretation.” Economic Geography 45(2), 283-301.

Rose, Andrew K. (2000), “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common

       Currencies on Trade.” Economic Policy 30(1): 7–45.

Saul, S.B. (1967), Studies in British Overseas Trade, 1870-1914. Liverpool: Liverpool

       University Press, 1967.

Taylor, Alan M. and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1997), “Convergence in the Age of Mass

       Migration.” European Review of Economic History 2(1), 27-63.

Treasury Department (1893), Statistical Tables Exhibiting the Commerce of the United State

       with European Countries from 1790 to 1890. Washington: GPO.

Wand, M.P. and R.J. Carroll (2003), Semiparametric Regression. Cambridge: Cambridge

       University Press.

Whalley, John and Xian Xin (2007), “Regionalization, Changes in Home Bias, and the Growth

       of World Trade.” NBER Working Paper 13023.

Williamson, Jeffrey G. (2006), “Explaining World Tariffs, 1870-1913: Stolper-Samuelson,

       Strategic Tariffs, and State Revenues,” in H. Lindgren R. Findlay, H. Henriksson and

       M. Lundhal, eds., Eli Heckscher, International Trade, and Economic History.

       Cambridge: MIT Press, 199-228.




                                                                                              35
                         Figure 1: Global Freights and UK Trade
120


110


100

 90


 80


 70


 60

 50


 40
      187 0



              187 5



                        188 0



                                    188 5



                                                 189 0



                                                              189 5



                                                                            190 0



                                                                                       190 5



                                                                                               191 0
                      Global Freight Index, Isserlis (1938)           Volume of U.K. Trade




                                                                                                       36
                             Table 1: Trade Ratios

                   Sample to UK            UK to global          Sample to global
                    trade ratio             trade ratio             trade ratio
 1870-1875            0.7116                  0.2969                  0.2111
 1875-1880            0.7264                  0.2629                  0.1909
 1880-1885            0.7369                  0.2310                  0.1703
 1885-1890            0.7456                  0.2193                  0.1635
 1890-1895            0.7508                  0.2098                  0.1575
 1895-1900            0.7607                  0.2013                  0.1532
 1900-1905            0.7657                  0.1940                  0.1486
 1905-1910            0.7539                  0.1692                  0.1276
 1910-1913            0.7412                  0.1514                  0.1122

Sources: Estevadeordal et al. (2003); Statistical Abstract for the United Kingdom .




                                                                                      37
        Table 2: Sample Countries and Coverage

Countries with a full panel of GDP and freight data from 1870:
          Brazil                           Japan
          Canada (ends 1907)               Portugal
          Ceylon                           Russia
          Dutch East Indies                Spain
          France                           United States
          Germany                          Uruguay (ends 1907)
          Italy

Countries with a full panel of GDP and freight data from 1884:
          Australasia                      India
          Denmark                          Norway & Sweden

Countries with a full panel of GDP and freight data from 1900:
          Argentina                        Colombia
          Chile                            Philippines

 NB: Australia and New Zealand do not enter as separate trade
 entities before 1887; likewise, Norway and Sweden do not enter
 seperately until 1891.




                                                                  38
                       Figure 2: Freight Rates and Freight Indices

           Pence-per-ton freight rates for the U.K. and U.S. & the Semiparametric Index
1000

 900

 800

 700

 600

 500

 400

 300

 200

 100

   0
   187 0




           187 5




                      188 0




                                  188 5




                                                    189 0




                                                                189 5




                                                                             190 0




                                                                                     190 5




                                                                                             191 0
                                          Freight rates     Semiparametric Index




                                                                                                     39
                                                                       Table 3: Data Summary

                                     Description:                                                       N    Mean      Stand Dev   Minimum   Maximum
Volume of trade                      Average of bilateral imports (log of) plus exports (log of)       671   20.38       1.206      17.22     22.58
Freight                              Semiparametric index of country-specific freight rates (log of)   671   4.28        0.368       3.11      5.19
GDP                                  Sum of UK and partner GDP (log of)                                671   12.32       0.334      11.69     13.53
Income similarity                    Product of UK- and partner-shares of combined GDP (log of)        671   -2.31       0.860      -4.71     -1.39
Average tariffs                      Average of partner and UK tariffs (log of)                        671    2.30       0.511       1.25      3.46
Gold standard                        Indicator variable for partner adherence to gold standard         671   0.56        0.497       0.00      1.00
Exchange rate volatility             Standard deviation of change in logged nominal exchange rate      671   0.01        0.014       0.00      0.10

Growth of trade                      Decadal difference in Volume of trade                             463    0.1565    0.3108     -0.9414    1.7904
Change in freight                    Decadal difference in Freight                                     463   -0.2327    0.1814     -0.7567    0.4213
Growth in GDP                        Decadal difference in GDP                                         463    0.1894    0.0532      0.0638    0.4133
Convergence of GDP                   Decadal difference in Income similarity                           463    0.0300    0.0939     -0.1863    0.5062
Change in average tariffs            Decadal difference in Average tariffs                             463    0.0112    0.2444     -0.7258    0.8139
Change in gold standard adherence    Decadal difference in Gold standard                               463    0.1102    0.4349     -1.0000    1.0000
Change in exchange rate volatility   Decadal difference in Exchange rate volatility                    463   -0.0018    0.0167     -0.0771    0.0930

                                                                                      `




                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                Table 4: Gravity Regressions

Dependent variable: Average bilateral volume of trade

                                 Column A - OLS estimates         Column B - OLS estimates            Column C - IV estimates
                               Estimate Std Error p-value       Estimate Std Error p-value         Estimate Std Error p-value
Freight                        -0.4457   0.0590      0.000       0.2463   0.1047      0.019        -0.0146   0.1754      0.934
GDP                                                              0.7549   0.1650      0.000         0.5470   0.1532      0.000
Income similarity                                                0.9095   0.1556      0.000         0.8498   0.1529      0.000
Average tariffs                                                 -0.1556   0.0645      0.016        -0.2211   0.0618      0.000
Gold standard                                                    0.2019   0.0396      0.000         0.2178   0.0358      0.000
Exchange rate volatility                                        -1.7926   0.8069      0.026        -1.5656   0.8346      0.061

Decade fixed effects?                      NO                                 YES                                YES

IV relevance (p-value)                                                                                     152.185 (0.000)
IV overidentification test (p-value)                                                                        29.871 (0.095)

Observations                                671                                671                                671
R-squared                                 0.1937                             0.4789                             0.4837

NB: All estimation with first-order auto-regressive and heteroskedastic robust standard errors; fixed effects not reported;
freight instrumented with sailors' wages, coal & fish prices, average sail & steam tonnages, lagged sail & steam net tonnages,
and barometric means & standard deviations.




                                                                                                                                 41
                                                  Table 5: Differenced Regression

Dependent variable: Change in average bilateral volume of trade

                                                Coefficient                         Average change     Predicted      As a percentage of
                                                on regressor    Std Error p-value    in regressor        effect      average trade growth
                                                     A                                    B             C=A*B         D=(C/.1565)*100

Change in freight                                 -0.1786        0.2761    0.518        -0.2327           0.042             26.56
Growth in GDP                                     0.6311         0.2320    0.007        0.1894            0.119             76.36
Convergence of GDP                                0.9583         0.1836    0.000        0.0300            0.029             18.38
Change in average tariffs                         -0.1958        0.0851    0.021        0.0112           -0.002             -1.40
Change in gold standard adherence                 0.0854         0.0453    0.060        0.1102            0.009             6.23
Change in exchange rate volatility                -1.9396        0.9580    0.043        -0.0018           0.003              2.26

IV relevance (p-value)                                   86.122 (0.000)
IV overidentification test (p-value)                     11.995 (0.151)

Observations                                                    463
R-squared                                                      0.3246

NB: All variables are differenced over ten year periods in the estimation above; the change in freight is instrumented with changes in
sailors' wages, coal & fish prices, average sail & steam tonnages, lagged sail & steam net tonnages, and barometric means & standard deviations.




                                                                                                                                              42
