                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                           VENGEANCE

                                          Naci H. Mocan

                                       Working Paper 14131
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14131


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




I thank Armando Gomes, Volkan Topalli, Julie Hotchkiss, Sudipta Sarangi, Julie Berry Cullen, Murat
Iyigun and Kaj Gittings for helpful comments. Paul Mahler, Michelle McCown, Umut Ozek and Duha
Altindag provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Naci H. Mocan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Vengeance
Naci H. Mocan
NBER Working Paper No. 14131
June 2008
JEL No. H56,I0,K4,K42,O1,P16

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the extent of vengeful feelings and their determinants using data on more than
89,000 individuals from 53 countries. Country characteristics (such as per-capita income, average
education of the country, presence of an armed conflict, the extent of the rule-of-law, uninterrupted
democracy, individualism) as well as personal attributes of the individuals influence vengeful feelings.
The magnitude of vengeful feelings is greater for people in low-income countries, in countries with
low levels of education, low levels of the rule-of-law, in collectivist countries and in countries that
experienced an armed conflict in recent history. Females, older people, working people, people who
live in high-crime areas of their country and people who are at the bottom 50% of their country's income
distribution are more vengeful. The intensity of vengeful feelings dies off gradually over time. The
findings suggest that vengeful feelings of people are subdued as a country develops economically
and becomes more stable politically and socially and that both country characteristics and personal
attributes are important determinants of vengeance. Poor people who live in higher-income societies
that are ethno-linguistically homogeneous are as vengeful as rich people who live in low-income societies
that are ethno-linguistically fragmented. These results reinforce the idea that some puzzles about individual
choice can best be explained by considering the interplay of personal and cultural factors.


Naci H. Mocan
Department of Economics
Louisiana State University
2119 Patrick F. Taylor Hall
Baton Rouge, LA 70803-6306
and NBER
mocan@lsu.edu
                                             Vengeance

           “Thou shalt give life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.”
                                                                   Exodus 21:23-24

                                                  “An eye for an eye makes the whole world blind”
                                                                 Attributed to Mahatma Gandhi.


I. Introduction

       It has been argued that revenge serves a number of objectives, ranging from righting

perceived injustice to restoring self-worth of the vengeful individual (Cota-McKinley et al.

2001). The idea that vengeful behavior can stop potential offenders from committing similar

crimes or from even considering similar crimes (Cota-McKinley et al. 2001, Wilson 1983) also

suggests a deterrence effect of vengeance.

       It has been indicated that “Revenge is often tied to self-worth of the originally offended

individual. Frequently, individuals with little power seek revenge against powerful adversaries

even though the action has overwhelming costs” (Kim and Smith, 1993). This argument implies

that investigation of the existence of vengeance, its extent and its determinants may be important

not only for theoretical and practical aspects of the criminal justice system, but also because it

may shed light into extremely violent behavior such as suicide bombings and other terrorist

attacks.

       Although vengeance is assumed to be an integral part of human behavior, little

quantitative research exists on vengeance. One obvious reason for the dearth is the difficulty of

measurement. A common procedure to measure an individual’s extent of vengeful feelings is to

employ the widely-used Vengeance Scale (Stuckless and Goranson 1992). This is a 7-point

scale index based subjects’ responses to such hypothetical statements as “I am not a vengeful

                                                  1
person”, “I try to even the score with anyone who hurts me,” and “It is always better not to seek

vengeance,” Researchers have investigated the relationship between a vengeance index created

this way and various behaviors, such as aggressive driving (Wiesenthal, Hennessy, and Gibson,

2000).

         The dictionary definition of vengeance is “Punishment inflicted or retribution exacted for

an injury or wrong.” Consider a situation where having been subjected to a “wrong” means

having been a victim of burglary in recent past and consider two individuals who are identical in

all respects. If one of these individuals was then burglarized, vengeful feelings can be identified

by the difference in the severity of punishment these individuals wish to inflict on a convicted

burglar. This paper operationalizes this concept and provides evidence on the extent of

vengeance using data on more than 89,000 individuals from 53 countries. It also investigates the

extent to which personal attributes of individuals, and cultural and country characteristics explain

the degree of their vengeful feelings.

         People are likely to differ in their notions of fairness and in their beliefs about the level of

appropriate punishment. Furthermore, victimization may prompt enhanced demand for

protection, which may be mistaken for vengeance. To address these issues, empirical analyses

control for a host of personal characteristics that may be correlated with potential victimization

and the demand for punishment. These variables include, among others, age, gender, and

education of the person, the rank of family income in the income distribution of the country and

the burglary rate in the area of the residence of the person. Furthermore, I present evidence

indicating that having been victimized by burglary triggers vengeful feelings against a burglar,

but having been victimized by other crimes such as robbery and theft does not trigger demand for

harsher punishment for a burglar. This indicates that the results are not due to a general desire to

punish or a pre-existing demand for protection. It is conceivable that vengeful feelings of people

                                                    2
get stronger as they are exposed to more incidents of victimization. I find evidence that this is

the case for people who live in countries with undesirable political and economic environments.

       The paper is related to an emerging literature in economics that analyzes the impact of

culture on violent or illicit behavior. For example, Fisman and Miguel (2007) show that the

parking violations of the foreign diplomats who live in New York City are related to the extent

of corruption in their home country. Miguel, Saiegh and Satyanath (2008) analyze the actions of

the soccer players in five European soccer leagues and find that the cautions and ejections

handed out by the referees due to rough play are correlated with whether or not the player’s

home country was involved in a war or armed conflict. They conclude that having been exposed

to war or armed conflict increases the propensity for violence.1

       This paper documents that the degree to which people want retaliation depends on both

personal attributes and a number of country characteristics. For example, vengeful feelings are

stronger for people in low-income countries, in countries with low levels of education, low levels

of rule-of-law, in countries that experienced a war in recent history and in countries which are

fragmented ethno-linguistically. Females, older people, working people, people who live in

high-crime areas of their country and people who are at the bottom 50% of their country’s

income distribution are more vengeful. There is also evidence indicating that vengeful feelings

dissipate over time: having been victimized in recent past is associated with stronger vengeful

feelings than having been victimized in more distant past.




       1
          There is also a broader literature in economics that investigates the impact of culture on
economic behavior and outcomes. For example, Fernandez and Fogli (2006) investigate the link between
culture and fertility. Alesina and Giulianao (2008) study the impact of culture, as measured by the
strength of family ties, on labor force participation, living arrangements and geographical mobility of
second generation immigrants in the U.S. A summary on recent research on the impact of culture can be
found in Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2006).


                                                   3
        There are also implications for the criminal justice system. The assumption that

vengeance is an integral part of human psyche, and vengeful behavior is common and natural,

along with the presumed deterrent effect of vengeful behavior give rise to the discussions of the

role of vengeance in criminal justice system, and the extent to which vengeance should be an

explicit part of the landscape of criminal law. For example, Whitman (2004) argues that

individuals who have committed violent acts of vengeance are compelled to justify these acts in

the language of self-defense or extreme emotional disturbance. He further states that “There is

thus a kind of mismatch between our criminal law doctrine and the human motivations that give

rise to violent crime.” If vengeance is indeed hardwired into the human psychology, and if it is

conceptually inseparable from justice itself as argued by Hegelian philosophy, then there may be

reason to discuss the room for vengeance in an optimal punishment regime. (For a detailed

discussion of this issue, see Whitman 2004).2

        In a different framework, Glaeser and Sacerdote (2003) provide compelling evidence for

the existence of vengeance in criminal punishment. They find that victim characteristics affect

sentence lengths in vehicular homicide, which is a crime where the victim is random. This

suggests that sentence lengths are determined, in part, by a taste for vengeance, which implies a

need for a theory that incorporates the taste for vengeance.




2
  The United States penal system is based on retributive justice, where punishment is based on the
assumption of “just deserts” (Wasserstrom 1978). An individual may be punished only if he/she has
committed the crime voluntarily; and the blameworthiness determines the level of punishment. In the
tradition of Bentham (1823) and Becker (1968), punishment has also a role of deterrence, but the extent
of punishment should not be determined by emotion or vengeance. The desire for vengeance is not
considered as legitimate in criminal law (Whitman, 2004); and it is argued that criminal law defenses
reflect the need for a liberal polity to control vengeance (Nourse 2003). Any indication of vengeance-
tainted punishment raises trepidations for legal scholars. For example, concerns have been raised that the
1991 Supreme Court decision in Payne v. Tennessee to allow victim impact statements during the penalty
phase of a murder trial would introduce inappropriate emotion and vengeance to the sentencing hearing
(Hoffman 2003, Bandes 1996, Long 1995).

                                                    4
       Section II describes the data. Section III presents information on the vengeful feelings at

the country level. Section IV describes the analyses conducted at the individual level and

Section V presents the results of these analyses. Section VI investigates the determinants of

vengeance. A discussion of the results and their implications are provided in Section VII, and

Section VIII offers a conclusion.



II. Data and the Measurement of the Desire to inflict Punishment

       The data are obtained from the International Crime Victim Survey compiled by the

United Nations Inter-regional Crime and Justice Research Institute. Table 1 presents the list of

countries included in the analysis. The countries were surveyed either in 1989, 2000, or

between 1992 and 1996. Some countries were surveyed in more than one year. The key variable

for this paper is based on the answer to the following two questions: “People have different ideas

about the sentences which should be given to offenders. Take for instance the case of a man of

20 years old who is found guilty of burglary for the second time. This time, he has stolen a

colour TV. Which of the following sentences do you consider the most appropriate for such a

case?” The alternatives given are: fine, prison, community service, suspended sentence, any

other sentence (to specify), and don’t know. For those respondents who declared that a prison

sentence is appropriate, the following question is asked: “For how long do you think he should

go to prison?” Fifteen alternatives are given to this question, which are: one month or less, 2-6

months, 6 months-1 year, 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, 4 years, 5 years, 6-10 years, 11-15 years, 16-

19 years, 20-24 years, more than 24 years, life sentence, and don’t know.

       Table 1 displays the percentage of individuals in each country who declared the

appropriateness (according to them) of various sentence lengths. The first column displays the

proportion of individuals in each country who indicated that a prison sentence of two years or

                                                 5
longer would be appropriate punishment for a burglar who is convicted for stealing a color TV

as his second offense. The second column displays the proportion of respondents who would

like to impose a sentence of 4 or more years; and the third column reports the proportion who

suggests a prison sentence of at least 6 years. These percentages include every respondent

regardless of whether they were a victim of a crime themselves. As expected, the proportion of

individuals who prefer longer prison terms declines in each country. The last column exhibits

the proportion of the respondents who would like to administer a life sentence for burglary.

Although a very negligible fraction of the respondents suggested a life sentence for burglary in

most countries, a sizable portion of individuals chose this option in some countries. For

example, 14 percent of the respondents in Botswana, and 7 percent in both Costa Rica and

Zimbabwe declared that a life sentence would be appropriate. The rate is about 4 percent in

China.

         A comparison of countries for a given desired sentence length reveals substantial

differences. For example, in China, Romania and Botswana 39-to-40 percent of the people

prefer a prison sentence of 4 or more years. The rate is 25 percent in South Africa, 18-to-20

percent in Egypt, Ukraine, Paraguay and Georgia, 16 percent in Canada and Indonesia, 12

percent in the U.S. and Philippines, about 4 percent in Norway and Slovenia, and 1 percent in

Belgium and Spain.



III. Vengeful Feelings at the Country Level

         The information displayed in Table 1 is not a reflection of vengeful feelings. It merely

pertains to the level of the desired stiffness of punishment. There are at least three reasons why

the preference for harsh punishment might differ across countries. First, the question pertains to

stealing a color TV. This action carries different monetary values in different countries. A color

                                                  6
TV constitutes a larger fraction of personal income in a developing country than a developed

one. Thus, the desired penalty for the theft of a color TV is expected to differ between countries.

Second, criminal penalties and the culture of illegality differ between countries. Imagine two

otherwise similar countries. If the first country has developed a more strict penal code with

harsher penalties than the second country, the citizens of the first country may be expected to

propose more strict penalties for burglary in comparison to those of the second country.5 Third,

the desired punishment level of each person may, in part, be determined by the level of

prevailing criminal activity. Put differently, an individual’s response to the desired punishment

for burglary may contain his/her reactions to the extent of the crime rate in the region of country

that he/she resides.

        Because of these reasons, I will analyze the data by focusing on the variation of the

responses to the revealed desired punishment within a country. As will be demonstrated in the

next section, personal characteristics (such as age, education etc.) are similar between those who

were victimized and who were not. Further, I will address the issue of potential differences

between the individuals who were victimized and who were not victimized in the next section

when I analyze the individual-level data. However, as a first approximation, the strength of

vengeful feelings at the country level can be measured as the difference between the proportion

of individuals who would like to assign a particular prison sentence for a burglar given that they

themselves were victims of burglary, and the proportion of individuals who were not victimized

but who would like to see the same sentence handed out to a burglar. For example, in Brazil 8

percent of the individuals, who were not victims of burglary, consider a prison term of at least 4

years as the appropriate punishment for a burglar who stole a color TV as a second offense. On

5
  On the other hand, it should be noted that if a country has a very harsh penalty for burglary (e.g. losing a
limb), then, suggesting a 6 year prison term for burglary in that country may be considered a lenient
treatment.

                                                      7
the other hand, 14 percent of the people who were victimized by a burglar in Brazil believe that

the same punishment is appropriate. The six percentage-point difference can be attributable to

the effect of vengeful feelings due to having been victimized by a burglar.

        If being burglarized does not trigger vengeful feelings towards a burglar, then the

proportion of individuals who desire a certain level of punishment should be the same among

groups of victimized and non-victimized people. Figure 1 displays, for each country, the

proportion of individuals who desire at least a 2-years prison term for a burglar who stole a color

TV as his second offense. The horizontal axis displays the rate among people who were not

victimized, and the vertical axis measures the rate among those who were victimized. The solid

line is the 45-degree line. As Figure 1 demonstrates most countries lie above the 45-degree line,

indicating that the tendency to demand a stiffer penalty is higher among those who are

victimized.6

        Figures 2 and 3 display similar information. Figure 2 presents the proportion of people in

each country who believe that a sentence of at least 4 years in prison is appropriate; and Figure 3

displays the rates pertaining to desired sentence of at least 6 years. Figures 4A and 4B present

the rates of males and females who prefer a punishment of at least 4 years in prison. The gender-

specific rates pertaining to the proportion of individuals who would like a sentence of at least 2

years or at least 6 years were similar to Figures 4A and 4B. As can be seen the disparity between

the reaction of victims and non-victims is particularly significant in some countries. On the other

hand a few countries, such as Botswana and China are located under the 45-degree line.



6
  For these figures I employ all people with non-missing responses to victimization and desired
punishment questions even if some of their personal attributes are missing. Thus, the sample sizes are
larger behind these figures, a total of more than 175,000 people in all countries. Albania, which is
included in the graphs, could not be included in empirical analyses because it has only six individuals
with non-missing values for all explanatory variables.

                                                    8
IV. Individual-level Analysis

       I hypothesize that vengeful feelings can be measured by the discrepancy in desired

punishment between victims and non-victims. On the other hand, the discrepancy, or part of the

discrepancy, may pre-exist. Individuals who live in high crime areas (where the risk of

victimization is higher) may have higher demands for punishment. That is, these individuals

may prefer stiffer penalties for a deterrent effect to reduce their risk of victimization. Similarly,

individuals who have lower risks of victimization may prefer lesser punishments. If the risk of

victimization is highly correlated with actual victimization revealed in the data, then the

observed differences displayed in Figures 1-4 may be due to pre-existing preferences about

optimal punishment, and not necessarily because of the vengeful feelings that emerge after

victimization.

       The risk of victimization can be related to personal characteristics of the person, such as

age, education and income level, labor market activity, and marital status. Although the

descriptive statistics presented in Table 3 below do not reveal differences in personal

characteristics of individuals by victimization, it is important to control for potential

confounding. Thus, I estimate individual-level regressions depicted by Equation (1) below.

(1) Pij= δ0+δ1Vij +Xij’δ2+Kj’δ3+uij,



where Pij stands for desired punishment for burglary as revealed by individual i who lives in

country j. Vij is a dichotomous variable to indicate if the individual has been a victim of burglary

in the recent past. The coefficient δ1 is expected to be positive if, all else the same, being a

victim of a burglary prompts a desire to inflict harsher punishment. X is a vector of personal

characteristics, including age, gender, marital status, gun ownership, the level of education, labor

market status of the individual and whether the individual’s family income is located in the upper


                                                  9
50 percent of the income distribution in that country. These attributes may be correlated with the

risk of victimization and the desire to impose stiffer punishment. Other variables that

potentially impact the risk of victimization are the size of the city the person resides in, and the

burglary rate in the region of the country where the individual lives.

          The variables in vector K pertain to country characteristics. They allow for an

investigation of the impact of country attributes on the desire to impose punishment. In addition

to acting as control variables, these country characteristics will allow for an investigation as to

whether the extent of vengeful feeling are influenced by such country attributes. Following La

Porta et al. (1999) and Treisman (2000), I include variables that measure the structure of the

existing legal system in the country. La Porta et al. (1999) argue that the common law system

developed in England in the 17th century has been shaped by the parliament and aristocracy at

the expense of the crown and it is intended to limit the power of the sovereign. As a

consequence, British common law puts emphasis on individuals’ private and property rights, and

it intends to limit, rather than strengthen, the power of the state (David and Brierley 1978, Finer

1997, La Porta et al., 1999). In comparison, French civil law, Scandinavian civil law and

German civil law are designed as instruments of the state to expand its power; and socialist law

is a manifestation of the state’s intent to create institutions to maintain power and extract

resources without much regard for protecting economic interests (La Porta et al. 1999). To

control for the structure of the existing legal system in the country, I include variables to measure

the legal origin of the country. They are: whether the country’s legal system is based on British

common law, French civil law, Scandinavian civil law, German civil law, or Socialist legal

origin.

          Religious make-up of the country may be a potentially important determinant of both

individuals’ demand for stiff penalties and the extent of the demand for retribution. Religious

                                                  10
composition is controlled for by the proportion of Catholic, proportion of Muslim and proportion

of Protestant in the country. If interrupted democracy in the country and involvement in a war

in recent history are correlated with social disorder, they may impact people’s exposure to

violence and as a result, the extent of their willingness to punish. I employ the same measure of

war/armed conflict as used by Miguel et al. (2008), obtained from the PRIO/Uppsala Armed

Conflict data set.

           Per-capita income in the country is another country attribute included in the analyses. A

large government may create more occasions for individuals to interact with government

workers, increasing the exposure to corruption, potentially influencing their desire to punish. On

the other hand a large government may be correlated with a more developed welfare system that

may mitigate strong feelings to punish. To control for this effect, I add a variable which is the

share of government in per-capita gross domestic product. The average level of education in the

country, which is an aggregate measure of the human capital, the size of the population of the

country, the percentage of young people in the population and the proportion of seats held by

women in the parliament are additional variables that are added to control for country attributes.

          Ethno-linguistic fragmentation of the country, the extent of individualistic culture

prevailing in the country, and prevalence of the rule-of-law in the country are additional control

variables to capture some cultural dimensions of the countries. The Rule-of-Law index is

obtained from the World Bank.7 It measures “the extent of which agents have confidence in and

abide by the rules of society, and in particular the quality of contract enforcement, the police, and

the courts, as well as the likelihood of crime and violence.” Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi

(2007). The range of the index is from -2.5 indicating the weakest rule-of-law environment, to

2.5 representing the strongest. In our sample, the lowest score of rule-of-law is -1.71 and it

7
    (http://info.worldbank.org/ governance/wgi2007/ mc_countries.asp.)

                                                    11
belongs to Zimbabwe. Kyrgyzstan and Belarus have second and third lowest scores of -1.18 and

-1.16. Norway and Denmark have the highest scores of the rule-of-law, with 2.02 and 2.03

respectively. Slovakia is at the sample median with 0.43.

           Another measure of cultural differences is the index of individualism as employed

Hermann, Thőni and Gächter (2008). The index is developed by Hofstede (2001) and Hofstede

(2005).8 Lower values indicate the extent of collectivism of the society, which stands for the

extent to which individuals are integrated into groups. Higher values of the index represent

individualistic societies where the ties between individuals are loose, and where people are

expected to look after themselves and their immediate family. In collectivist societies, people

from birth onwards are integrated into strong, cohesive in-groups, often extended families (with

uncles, aunts and grandparents) which continue protecting them in exchange for unquestioning

loyalty.9 In our sample, the United States is the most individualistic country with a score of 91,

followed by Australia with a score of 90 and the U.K. with 89. The most collectivist societies

in the data are Colombia with a score of 13, Indonesia with a score of 14 and Costa Rica with a

score of 15. Slovakia Czech Republic and Austria are around the median score of 57.

          The ethno-linguistic fragmentation index measures the probability that two randomly

selected people in a given country in 1985 will not belong to the same ethno-linguistics group.

This index, which is obtained from (Roeder 2001), has been used in research in both economics

and political science (Smith 2004, Easterly and Levine 1997). In the data, the most ethno-

linguistically homogenous country is Portugal with the value of the index being 0.007, followed

by Hungary with 0.01. The two most heterogeneous countries are Uganda and South Africa with




8
    The data are downloaded from http://www.geert-hofstede.com/hofstede_dimensions.php.
9
    The description is obtained from (http://www.geert-hofstede.com/geert_hofstede_ resources.shtml).

                                                    12
score of 0.922 and 0.886, respectively. Belarus is at the mean with score of 0.374, and the U.S.

has a score of 0.575.

        Table 2 displays the definitions and the descriptive statistics of the variables employed in

empirical analyses. The first column of numbers provides the descriptive statistics of the

observations with non-missing personal and country characteristics. The second column displays

the descriptive statistics of the sample which with non-missing personal characteristics. The

third column provides the same information with the omission of the two variables that gauge the

size of the city. Exclusion of these city size variables from the regressions did not alter either the

magnitude or the statistical significance of the other coefficients, but allowed an increase in the

sample size.

       To provide a sense of the difference between people who were and who were not

victimized, Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics of the personal characteristics by

victimization. The average personal characteristics, including gun ownership, income and

education, of those who were victimized this year or last year and who were not victimized

during the same time period are similar. The same is true for victimization before last year,

indicating that there are no obvious and systematic differences in observable characteristics

between those were victimized and those who were not. In fact, the burglary rate in the locality

of those where were victimized are lower than the burglary rate in the locality of people who

were not victimized.



V. Results

       Table 4 displays the results of the ordered probit models, where the dependent variable

consists of 6 categories, measuring the severity of desired punishment. These are: 1) if the

person declared that the appropriate punishment is something other than a prison sentence (such

                                                 13
as fine, community service, suspended sentence); 2) if the person declared that the appropriate

punishment is a prison sentence of 1-to-6 months; 3) the appropriate punishment is declared as 6

months-to-a year prison term; 4) 2-to-3 years in prison; 5) 4-to-5 years in prison; 5) 6 years-to-

life in prison.   The proportions of responses in each category are: 62 %, 10%, 12%, 8%, 4% and

4%, respectively.

        Three specifications are displayed in Table 4. All specifications include time dummies to

control for the year in which the survey was registered in that country and the standard errors are

adjusted for clustering at the country-level. The first column reports the results obtained from

the entire sample with non-missing personal and country attributes. Because the variables which

measure the size of the city the person lives in were never significant and because in a few

countries this information was not collected, and because dropping these variables did not alter

the remaining coefficients, I dropped these two variables and re-estimated the model. The results

that are reported in column II are almost identical to the ones displayed in column I. Finally,

results of column III are based on the specification that includes country fixed effects, instead of

the country characteristics. Again, the magnitudes and the statistical significance of the

estimated coefficients do not change.

        The existence of vengeful feelings is identified by comparing the reactions of individuals

who have identical observable personal characteristics but who differ in their victimization

experience. The first two coefficient reported at the top of Table 4 demonstrate evidence of

vengeful behavior. Specifically, individuals who were victims of burglary this year or last year,

prefer stiffer penalties for burglars in comparison to those who were not victimized. In addition,

being a victim of burglary two years ago or earlier has an additional positive effect on the desire

to impose stiffer penalties.




                                                 14
       Other coefficients listed in Table 4 demonstrate the impact of a particular personal or

country attribute on the level of desired punishment. For example, if the individual or anyone

else in that household owns a gun, the intensity of the desire for stiffer punishment is stronger,

suggesting that characteristics of the individuals that make them more likely to own a gun induce

them to impose harsher penalties. An increase in the burglary rate in the region that the

individual lives in has also a positive impact on the intensity of the desire to impose harsher

punishment. Males prefer stronger punishment in comparison to females, and older individuals

are more lenient in comparison to younger individuals. Singles and widows are also more

lenient. On the other hand, working people, and retired or disabled individuals are harsher

regarding the desired level of punishment. The legal origin of the country has an impact on the

desired level of punishment as do other country attributes such as rule-of-law, individualism,

women in the parliament and uninterrupted democracy. The proportion of women in the

parliament is negatively associated with the intensity of the desire to impose harsh punishment.

Although the rule of law in the country and the extent of individualism in the country are highly

positively correlated, these variables have different impacts on the desired stiffness of

punishment. While the extent of individualism in the country has a negative impact on the

desired level of punishment, a higher value for the rule-of-law is positively associated with

stiffer desired punishment.

       As described in the introduction, Glaeser and Sacerdote (2003) find that victim

characteristics affect sentence lengths in vehicular homicide. To justify this result, an argument

can be made that juries and judges implicitly calculate the social welfare loss associated with

each victim’s death, and they assign differential values for each victim type, which is then

translated to the severity of the sentence. In our case, however, such a justification is not valid.

This is because the individuals who are analyzed here were asked to provide information about a

                                                 15
hypothetical 20 year old male burglar. This does not imply that the respondent in our data set

would not be more or less vengeful against females, older criminals, or towards certain race or

ethnicity classes, but the results in Table 4 demonstrate that there is an overall vengeful attitude,

which stems from the person’s own past victimization experience.

       Note that the results of Table 4 indicate that vengeful feelings dissipate slowly over time.

Individuals who were victims of burglary this year or last year would like to impose stiffer

penalties on a burglar. If victimization took place before last year, this event still has an impact

on the demand for retribution, but the magnitude of the impact is smaller. This suggests that

people forgive and forget slowly. This finding is reinforced below when I estimate probit

equations for the probability of asking for various sentence lengths.



Are Vengeful Feelings Event-Specific?

       The results of Table 4 indicate that people who were victims of burglary demand stiffer

penalties for a burglar in comparison to those individuals who were not victimized. An

interesting question is whether or not other types of victimization trigger vengeful feelings

towards burglars as well. In other words, do people who were victims of other crimes, such as

theft or robbery, demand stiffer punishments for a burglar? To investigate this question, I re-

estimated the models displayed in Table 4 by including an indicator variable to represents if the

person was a victim of robbery this year or last year. I also ran the models with the following

indicator variables: if the person was a victim of personal theft, victim of bicycle theft, or if

he/she was physically assaulted.

       Table 5 displays the results. In each of the four specifications reported, an additional

victimization indicator is included (in addition to being a victim of burglary). For example, the

model in column 1 includes an additional dichotomous indicator to measure if the individual was

                                                  16
a victim of robbery this year or last year. Columns 2, 3 and 4 report the models which include

indicator variables of whether the person suffered from personal theft this or last year, had a

bicycle stolen this or last year, or was assaulted this or last year, respectively. As can be seen,

having been a victim of robbery, theft, or bicycle theft in the past has no additional impact on

vengeful feelings towards a burglar; but being a victim of an assault increases the extent of

vengeful feelings (column 4). Dropping the burglary victimization variables but keeping the

variable to indicate victimization for other crimes did not alter at all the remaining coefficients;

and estimating the models with country fixed-effects provided the same results as in Table 5.

       The results of Table 5 indicate that vengeful feelings are specific. They are targeted to

the person who is believed to have generated the harm in the first place. People who were

victimized by burglary have vengeful feelings about burglars; but having been victims of

robbery, theft or bicycle theft does not evoke vengeful feelings about burglars. This suggests that

the identified vengeance effect is not likely to be driven by a general attitude about crime, or by a

demand for protection that would be correlated with all types of victimization. The exception is

physical assault. Having been physically assaulted increases people’s desire to impose heavier

punishment for burglary, indicating that physical victimization triggers stronger feelings than

being victims of other crimes. This may suggest that having been targeted for violence may

augment retaliatory feelings.



VI. What Determines Vengeance?

       The identification of the extent of vengeful feelings is obtained from the responses of

individuals who differ in their victimization experience. As shown in the previous section,

controlling for personal characteristics and a host of country attributes (or country fixed effects),

having been a victim of burglary increases one’s desire to impose harsher punishment on a

                                                 17
hypothetical burglar. In this section I investigate the extent to which these vengeful feelings are

influenced by personal characteristics of the individuals or the attributes of the countries they

live in. For example, I will ask question such as: are males more vengeful than females? Are

more educated people in a country more vengeful than less educated people in the same country?

Are people who live in high-crime areas in a country more vengeful than people in the same

country who live in low-crime areas? Are people who live in poorer countries more vengeful

than people who live in richer countries? What are the impacts on the strength of vengeful

feelings of the rule-of-law, the level of individualism, having experienced a war in recent history,

or having an uninterrupted democracy in the country?

       To identify the impact of personal and country characteristics on vengeful feelings, I

estimate a sequence of probit regressions, where the world population in the data set is divided

into two groups for each regression. For example, I classify people by their gender. I run

separate probit regressions for males and females to investigate if being a victim of burglary has

an impact on the probability of a) imposing any prison sentence on a burglar, b) imposing a

sentence of at least 2 years, c) imposing a sentence of at least 4 years.



       The Impact of Personal Attributes

       Table 6A reports the marginal effects obtained from running these probit regressions for

males and females in the sample. Each regression contains the complete set of explanatory

variables used in column II of Table 4. I also report the marginal effects obtained from the

models that control for country fixed-effects instead of country characteristics. They are reported

in [brackets]. The top panel of Table 6A shows that in the sample of 35,443 men from 53

countries, controlling for all personal and country characteristics, if a man was a victim of

burglary this year or last year, his propensity to impose a prison sentence (as opposed to no

                                                 18
sentence, a fine, or community service) is 2 percentage points higher in comparison to a man

who was not victimized. Table 6A also reports that in the model with country fixed-effects,

where the sample size is [41,832], victimization of men increases the probability of suggesting a

prison sentence by 2.4 percentage points. The top panel of table 6A also reports that the mean

of the dependent variable is 0.413 for men, indicating that 41.3% of the men in the world want to

impose a prison sentence for burglary.

       The right-hand panel of Table 6A displays the same information for females. Using

39,345 females from 53 countries, I find that having been burglarized increases females’

propensity to impose a prison sentence for a hypothetical burglar by 3.7 percentage points.

Thus, according to top panel of Table 6A females are more vengeful than males, because having

been burglarized this year or last year increases females’ propensity to impose a prison sentence

more than that of males (3.7 percentage point vs. 2.0 percentage point in models with country

characteristics and 3.3 percentage points vs. 2.4 percentage points in models with country fixed

effects). Furthermore, the baseline demand for punishment is lower for females: 36.8 percent of

females versus 41.3 percent of males demand a prison term, implying that the effects are

relatively stronger for females.

        Another way to put these numbers into perspective is to consider the following

simulation. At the bottom line of the top panel of Table 6A, the descriptive statistics reveal that

36.8 % of all females would like to impose a prison term punishment for burglary. If all females

in the world were switched from being non-victimized to victimized, this would increase the

demand for a prison term by females by 10% (0.037/0.368). If all males in the world were

switched from being non-victimized to victimized, this would increase males’ demand for a

prison term by 4.8% (0.020/0.413).




                                                 19
       The top panel of Table 6A indicates that having been victimized before last year has no

statistically significant vengeful effects for either gender if the desired punishment pertains to

any prison term. The middle panel of the table, however, shows that having been victimized this

or last year and having been victimized before last year both have impacts on vengeful feelings if

the punishment for burglary involves at least a two-year prison term. However, as discussed

earlier, the marginal effects of having been victimized before last year are smaller, suggesting

that victimization in more distant past triggers vengeful feelings that are weaker. In the middle

panel the marginal effects are almost identical between males and females, and the baseline

desired punishment rates also similar (0.180 and 0.156). The bottom panel of Table 6A presents

the same information based on the desire to impose a prison term of at least 4 years.

Culture vs. Individual Characteristics

       The results displayed in Table 6A are summarized in the first two rows of Table 7.

Specifically, Table 7 presents the calculations based on the coefficients reported in Table 6 to

address the issue of relative vengefulness of various groups, such as males-females, people in

high income countries vs. people in low income countries, people who live in areas of their

countries with above-median burglary rate vs. people who live in below-median burglary rate

areas. For example, the first two rows of Table 7 display the difference in vengeful feelings

between males and females. Based on the marginal effects reported in Table 6A and the existing

rates of desired punishment in these groups, also reported in Table 6A, if males were switched

from being non-victims to being victims of burglary, this would increase their existing desire to

impose a sentence of 4-plus years by 23 percent [and 19 percent in case of the model with

country fixed effects]. If all females were victimized, this would increase females’ desire to

inflict a 4-plus years of punishment by 26 percent [or 23% in the model with fixed effects]. Note

that in column III of Table 7 the rate of increase in the desire to punish is zero for men (row A1),

                                                 20
because the estimated marginal effect is not significantly different from zero in this case (the

bottom panel of table 6A for males). However, the impact is 16% in the model with country

fixed-effects. Looking across the rows A1 and A2 of Table 7, we see that in all cases

victimization increases the desire to inflict punishment more strongly for women than men; that

is, women seem to be more vengeful than men.

       Table 4 demonstrates that the coefficient of male is positive and significant in the models

that explain the propensity to impose stiffer penalties, while the results displayed in Table 6A

and summarized in Table 7 suggest that females are more vengeful than males. These results are

not inconsistent, because the first groups of results indicate the desired level of harshness of the

penalty, while the second is about vengeance. Put differently, while men demand stiffer

penalties, women react more strongly than men in response to being victimized.

       Table 6B reports the results of the investigation of the impact of personal education on

vengeful feelings. Each person in the data set is classified as having above-median education or

below-median education in comparison to the median education level of their own country. As

shown in the top panel of Table 6B, the mean of the dependent variable for highly-educated

people is 0.362 for a jail or prison term. This means that 36.2 percent of people who are

relatively more educated (in comparison to their country’s median education) would like impose

a prison term on a burglar. Victimization among this group increases this propensity by 2.1

percentage points. Among people who are less educated (those who have less education than

their country median) the proportion who wants to impose a prison sentence is 0.413, and

victimization among less-educated people increases their propensity to impose a prison term by

3.4 percentage points. As before, these results are summarized in Table 7. Victimization has a

similar impact on the propensity to impose a prison sentence between people who have above-

median education and below-median education in their own country. If all relatively more

                                                 21
educated people were victimized, this would increase the proportion who wants to impose a

prison sentence of 2 year or more by 30% in this group. On the other hand, if all relatively less-

educated people were victimized, this would increase the rate of those who wants to impose a

minimum 2 years of prison term by 11 percent among less-educated group, suggesting that more

educated people are more vengeful. The third column of Table 7 shows that the reverse is true if

we analyze the propensity to impose a sentence of at least 4 years. Thus, looking across rows

B1 and B2 of Table 7, it is hard to make a statement about relative vengefulness of more

educated people in comparison to less educated ones.

       Rows C-F of Table 7, on the other hand, depict a clearer picture as to the impact of

personal attributes on vengeful feelings. Specifically, burglarization of working people around

the world prompts stronger reactions about their desired punishment to be imposed on a burglar

in comparison to burglarization of nonworking people (rows E1 and E2). The same is true for

people who live in above-median burglary areas of their countries in comparison to those who

live in low burglary areas (rows F1 and F2), and people who are older than 40 years of age (C1

and C2). Similarly, people who are at the bottom 50% of their country’s income distribution are

more vengeful than those who are in the top 50% (rows D1 and D2). Summary tables pertaining

to these results are presented in Tables 6C to 6F in the Appendix.

       Rows G-M of table 7 display the impacts pertaining to the classification of people by

their country characteristics. Some of these characteristics pertain to economic development

such as per-capita income; some others can be claimed to be correlated with “cultural” aspects of

these societies such as the extent of individualism or ethno-linguistic fragmentation in the

country. The corresponding regression results are summarized in tables 6G-6M in the Appendix.

Section G divides people into two groups: Those who live in countries where the average

education in the country is above the world median in the sample of 53 countries, (which is 8

                                                22
years); and those people who live in countries where the average country education is below the

world mean. Rows G1 and G2 demonstrate that people who live in countries with low education

are more vengeful than those who live in more educated countries. Other country differences

also influence vengeful feelings. For example, people who live in countries that are more

fragmented ethno-linguistically are more vengeful than people who live in more homogeneous

countries. Similarly, people who live in more collective (less individualistic) societies, and those

who live in countries that experienced a war or armed conflict in recent history, are more

vengeful. People who live in countries where per-capita income is less than $8,000, which is the

world median in the sample, are more vengeful than people who live in richer countries.

       Although some of these country characteristics are reasonably highly correlated with per-

capita income in the country, this is not the case for all country attributes. For example, there are

six countries in the sample that experienced a war or armed conflict since 1975 although their

average per-capita income is greater than $8,000. These countries are United Kingdom, Spain,

United States, Russia, Slovenia and Argentina. There are also 16 countries with less than

$8,000 per-capita income but have not involved in a war or armed conflict since 1975 (Poland,

Latvia, Macedonia, Ukraine, Belarus, Bulgaria, Lithuania, Mongolia, Kyrgyzstan, Egypt,

Botswana, Costa Rica, Brazil and Bolivia). Similarly, there is no strong correlation between

ethno-linguistic fragmentation and per-capita income in the country.

       Table 7 demonstrates that both personal characteristics and country characteristics are

important in determining the extent of vengeful feelings. This suggests that country attributes

alone are not reliable predictors in identifying vengeful behavior. For example, although low

levels of per-capita income in a country, ethno-linguistics fragmentation or having experienced a

war are positively related to vengeful feelings, personal characteristics of the individuals such as




                                                 23
age, the crime rate in the locality of the individual, and the ranking of the individual’s family

income in his/her country’s income distribution are also important.

       To make the point visible, I classified the people in the world into two categories: those

who live in countries with low per-capita income (<$8,000) and with high ethno-linguistic

fragmentation (above the world mean), but whose incomes rank in the top 50% of their own

country’s income distribution. The second category consists of people who live in richer

countries, that also have low ethno-linguistic fragmentation. But people in this group have

incomes that are in the bottom 50% of the income distribution of their country. Estimating

probit regressions as the ones reported in Tables 6 revealed that there is no meaningful difference

in terms of the strength of vengeful feelings between these two groups of people. In all cases,

having been victimized sparks vengeful feelings. However, the strength of these feelings is not

different between these two groups. The results are summarized in rows N1 and N2 of Table 7.

In the group of (relatively) rich people who live in low-per-capita GDP and highly fragmented

societies, switching them group from being non-victims to victims of burglary increases their

demand for a prison term for a burglar by 9 percent (shown in the first column). Row N2

displays that the same switch among relatively poor people who live in richer and more

homogeneous countries increases the demand for a prison term by 6 percent. Looking across

rows N1 and N2 reveals that there is no substantial difference in the strength of the reaction to

victimization between these groups; i.e. their vengeful feelings are similar.

       Rows O1 and O2 present the results of a similar analysis conducted for the following two

groups: Poorer people (people who are in the bottom of the 50% of their countries income

distribution), who are older (greater than 40 years of age), who live in high-burglary areas of

their own countries, and who live in countries with no war or armed conflict experience since

1975. As rows C, D and F of Table 7 display, these personal attributes are positively correlated

                                                 24
with vengeful feelings. On the other hand, having experienced no war in the country in recent

history is associated with less vengeful feelings (row H). The second group of people possesses

the opposite attributes. They live in a country that experienced a war or armed conflict since

1975, but they are younger than 40, located in the upper 50% of their country’s income

distribution and live in low-burglary areas. The comparison between these two groups reveals

that the strength of their vengeful feelings is comparable (rows O1 and O2).

       The upshot of these results is the following. Although a number of personal and country

attributes have significant impacts on vengeful feelings, a more complete picture of vengeful

behavior involves a combination of these attributes. As shown in Table 7, some of these factors

can counter-balance each other (such as being a rich person in a poor country) and it may be

misleading to attribute vengeful feelings to a particular characteristic.



       Excess Vengeance

       The results presented so far demonstrate that there is evidence for vengeful feelings. All

else the same, people who were victimized by burglary demand stiffer penalties for a burglar in

comparison to those who were not victimized; and the strength of these vengeful feelings

depends on a number of personal and country characteristics. In this sub-section I ask the

following question. Among the group of people who were victimized, does the strength of

vengeful feelings depend on repeated victimization? To address this issue, I analyze the sample

of people who were victimized this year or last year, or who were victimized before last year.

An indicator variable is created that differentiates between two groups of people: 1) People who

were victimized both during this year or last year and before last year. 2) People who were

victimized in either during this year or last year or before last year, but not both.




                                                  25
       In this sample which consists of victimized people, any residual unobservable that may

be correlated with victimization should be similar between individuals. Using this sample I

investigate if having been victimized more heavily (repeatedly) makes people more vengeful in

comparison to those who have less severe victimization experience. Estimating probit

regressions to analyze the impact of heavy victimization defined this way on the probability of

demanding i) any prison sentence ii) a prison sentence of at least 2 years and iii) a sentence of

at least 4 years revealed that the coefficient of heavy victimization was positive in all cases but

significant only in the range of 0.15-0.4 level. However, estimation of the same models in sub-

samples of the world population, displayed in Table 8, revealed very interesting patterns.

       Table 8 shows that there is no difference in the severity of the vengeful feelings between

those who were victimized less heavily and those who are victimized more heavily if these

victims live in countries where the average country education is above the world median (row

A1), if there was no war or military conflict in the country since 1975 (row B1), if the rule-of-

law rating of the country is high (row C1), if the country’s per-capita income is higher than

$8,000 (row D1), if the country is individualistic (row E1), if the country is homogeneous ethno-

linguistically (row F1), or has enjoyed uninterrupted democracy (row G1).

       On the other hand, people who are victimized more heavily are more vengeful in

comparison to those who are victimized less heavily if the country they live in has poor

education (row A2), has experienced a war (row B2), suffers from low rule-of-law (row C2), if

the country is poor (row D2), if the country is collectivist (row E2), ethno-linguistically

fragmented (row F2), or if the democratic structure has been interrupted (row G2).

       In other words, additional victimization triggers additional vengeance only in countries

that suffer from low income, low education, no adherence to the rule-of-law and similar

attributes listed in Table 8. This finding is interesting because it suggests that a feeling such as

                                                  26
vengeance, which usually is thought of as primal, is subdued as the country develops

economically and becomes more stable politically and socially.



VII . Discussion

        These results reinforce the idea that some puzzles about individual choice can best be

explained by considering the interplay of personal and cultural factors. For example, it is well-

known that the proportion of rejected offers in ultimatum games differs substantially between

experiments conducted in different countries (Oosterbeek, Sloof and Van de Kuilen 2004,

Heinrich et al. 2001, Fehr and Gaehter 2000). 10 Although the average offers made by the first

player in an ultimatum game is around 40% of the endowment in experiments conducted around

the world, the rejection rates differ substantially between countries, ranging from no rejected

offers to one-third of the offers being rejected (Oosterbeek, Sloof and Van de Kulien 2004).

Similarly, there is significant variation in the rates antisocial punishment in experiments

conducted in various countries (Herrmann, Thoni and Gaehter, 2008). Although researchers

recognize the complicated nature of behavioral responses in these environments, “culture” turns

out to be a primary suspect as a determinant of behavior around the notions of fairness,

individualism vs. collectivism, and retaliation. The results of this paper suggest that the variation

in these behaviors can be best explained by taking into account both the personal and the cultural

factors as well as the interplay between them.

        On the other hand, country attributes are very important in explaining the extent of

vengeful feelings. Furthermore, the finding that repeated victimization makes people more

10
  In an ultimatum game one player is given a certain amount of money (or tokens than can be used for
money or other items at the end of the experiment). The first player then proposes a division of this
money between him/herself and the second player. If the second payer accepts the offer the game ends,
and the players receive the proposed amount. If the second player rejects the offer no player receives
anything.

                                                  27
vengeful only if they live in countries with less desirable economic and political environments

seems to quantify a mechanism through which the observed “cycles violence” take place. People

in societies with low-income, low education, poor rule-of-law, and military conflict are more

prone to heightened vengeful feelings. Thus, violence between countries with these attributes

may have a self-feeding mechanism that is fueled by retribution, if the impact of having been

victimized by violence on vengeful feelings is as large as vengeance targeted towards a burglar,

detected in this paper.



VIII. Conclusion

       Although it has been argued that revenge is an integral part of human psyche, and

vengeful behavior is common, there has been very limited research to quantify its extent. The

investigation of the existence of vengeance, its extent and its determinants may be important not

only for theoretical and practical aspects of criminal justice system, but also because it may shed

interesting light into extremely violent behavior such as suicide bombings and other terrorist

attacks.

       This paper employs data on more than 89,000 individuals from 53 countries to directly

investigate the presence and the extent of vengeful feelings. Since the definition of vengeance is

“infliction of punishment in return for a wrong committed,” the extent of vengeance is measured

by the difference in the propensity to assign a particular punishment for the burglary of a color

TV between two people: one, who has been burglarized himself/herself during this year or last

year, and the other, who has not been burglarized. Empirical analyses control for potential

differences in victimization propensities and other factors that may be correlated with both the

demand for punishment and likelihood of victimization.




                                                28
       Descriptive statistics reveal that there are substantial differences between countries

regarding the extent to which people are willing to impose harsh punishment. For example,

while 1% of the population in Belgium believes that a prison term of four years to life is

appropriate for a 20 year old man who is found guilty of stealing a color TV as a second offense,

the rate is about12 percent in the U.S., 19 percent in Paraguay, 21 percent in Mongolia, and 25

percent in South Africa. These average differences between countries are interesting, but they

can be reflections of a number of country characteristics, ranging from the effectiveness of the

legal system to economic conditions and culture.

       Individual-level analyses compare the reactions of observationally equivalent individuals,

who differ in terms of their victimization experience. The results show that people’s desire to

impose stiffer punishment is positively related to their own victimization experience.

Controlling for a large set of personal characteristics ranging from education, the rank of the

family income in the income distribution of the country, to the crime rate of the region of the

country, along with a host of country attributes, having been a victim of burglary increases one’s

willingness to impose harsh prison sentences on a hypothetical 20 year old burglar.

       The strength of vengeful feelings are influenced by country characteristics, such as per-

capita income, the extent of individualism and rule-of-law in the country, the extent of ethno-

linguistics fragmentation in the country and the existence or a war in recent history as well as

uninterrupted democracy. Vengeful feelings towards a burglar are not influenced by having been

a victim of robbery, theft or bicycle theft, suggesting that the identified vengeance effect is not a

reflection of a general demand for law and order or the demand for protection. The findings,

which are summarized in Table 7, indicate that the magnitude of vengeful feelings is greater for

people in low-income countries, in countries with low levels of education, low level of rule-of-

law, and countries that experienced a war in recent history. Females, older people, working

                                                 29
people, people who live in high-crime areas of their country and people who are at the bottom

50% of their country’s income distribution are more vengeful. The intensity of vengeful feelings

dies off gradually over time. Furthermore, the analysis of victims reveals that repeated

victimization generates more vengeance, but this difference exists only in countries with poor

economic and political circumstances.

       These results have implications on at least two fronts. First, they suggest that a complete

understanding of economic behavior should incorporate the context and the environment in

which the decision is taking place, including measures of culture. But also, they highlight the

dangers of attributing too much of the impact to “culture” as the economic conditions pertaining

to the individual (independent of culture) are important determinants of behavior. For example,

as summarized in Table 7, poor people who live in higher-income societies that are ethno-

linguistically homogeneous are as vengeful as rich people who live in low-income societies that

are ethno-linguistically fragmented.




                                                30
                                          Table 1
                         The Proportion of People in Each Country
               Who Would Like to Impose the Following Punishment for Burglary
                       Two Years Four Years Six Years           Life      Number of
Country Name
                        Or More      or More       or More   Sentence    Observations
WESTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
United Kingdom            0.175       0.061         0.017      0.003         9,873
Netherlands               0.064       0.026         0.009      0.001         4,031
Switzerland               0.002       0.000         0.000      0.000          812
Belgium                   0.028       0.011         0.002      0.001         1,778
Finland                   0.012       0.004         0.001      0.000         3,344
Norway                    0.096       0.035         0.009      0.000          115
Sweden                    0.022       0.008         0.004      0.002         3,632
Austria                   0.007       0.002         0.001      0.000         1,254
Denmark                   0.014       0.004         0.002      0.000         2,637
MEDITERRANEAN COUNTRIES
France                    0.014       0.007         0.003      0.000        1,534
Malta                     0.130       0.047         0.014      0.003          906
Spain                     0.019       0.010         0.007      0.002        1,153
Portugal                  0.107       0.040         0.017      0.000          948
Italy                     0.049       0.024         0.010      0.000          716
U.S., CANADA , AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND
United States             0.253       0.117         0.044      0.006        1,379
Canada                    0.218       0.159         0.136      0.027        4,611
Australia                 0.095       0.035         0.011      0.002        2,964
New Zealand               0.045       0.017         0.004      0.002        1,504
CENTRAL and EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES
Estonia                   0.231       0.105         0.031      0.000          735
Poland                    0.091       0.034         0.011      0.002        7,868
Czech Republic            0.163       0.062         0.016      0.000        2,355
Slovakia                  0.265       0.101         0.031      0.001        1,179
Russia                    0.237       0.123         0.049      0.009        1,282
Georgia                   0.340       0.201         0.072      0.026        1,842
Slovenia                  0.085       0.035         0.011      0.002        2,376
Latvia                    0.299       0.141         0.056      0.004        1,273
Romania                   0.581       0.409         0.221      0.010          958
Hungary                   0.189       0.089         0.048      0.006          660
Yugoslavia                0.205       0.109         0.032      0.011          975
Macedonia                 0.108       0.055         0.022      0.008          603
Croatia                   0.030       0.009         0.000      0.000          865
Ukraine                   0.335       0.202         0.112      0.006          837
Belarus                   0.230       0.110         0.043      0.005          809
Lithuania                 0.252       0.094         0.035      0.003        1,090



                                            31
                                      (Table 1 concluded)
 ASIAN COUNTRIES
 Japan              0.120                    0.040        0.016         0.003          1,155
 Indonesia          0.274                    0.160        0.058         0.012           569
 Philippines        0.300                    0.121        0.061         0.014          1,960
 India              0.302                    0.170        0.099         0.009          1,398
 China              0.734                    0.391        0.205         0.039          1,373
 Mongolia           0.441                    0.211        0.068         0.003           762
 Kyrgyz Republic    0.186                    0.096        0.028         0.004          1,564
 AFRICAN COUNTRIES
 Uganda             0.515                    0.270        0.116         0.016          1,209
 Egypt              0.380                    0.183        0.070         0.005           573
 South Africa       0.467                    0.247        0.106         0.008          1,578
 Tunisia            0.281                    0.104        0.035         0.010           481
 Zimbabwe           0.571                    0.330        0.167         0.069           801
 Botswana           0.557                    0.397        0.296         0.142           388
 LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES
 Costa Rica         0.346                    0.258        0.191         0.072          1,116
 Brazil             0.194                    0.095        0.047         0.011          1,469
 Argentina          0.161                    0.049        0.021         0.005          1,700
 Bolivia            0.272                    0.143        0.056         0.018           767
 Paraguay           0.313                    0.188        0.098         0.027           480
 Colombia           0.200                    0.073        0.016         0.001           790

The values in columns represent the proportion of individuals in each country who consider the sentence
length displayed in column headings (e.g. two years or longer) as the appropriate punishment for a
burglar. The information pertains to individuals in each country who have non-missing values for all
personal characteristics. The tabulations that used all individuals generated very similar outcomes.




                                                     32
                                               Table 2
                                         Descriptive Statistics
                                                                         Mean       Mean       Mean
  Variable Name                   Definition (source)                 (Std. Dev) (Std. Dev) (Std. Dev)
                                                                       N=70324 N=84338 N=89037
Victim of Burglary-   Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent              0.067      0.073      0.072
This or last year     was a victim of burglary this year or last        (0.250)    (0.259)    (0.258)
                      year.
Victim of Burglary-   Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent             0.086      0.087      0.087
Before Last Year      was a victim of burglary before last year.       (0.280)    (0.281)    (0.282)
                      Dummy Variable(=1) it the respondent or           0.103      0.101      0.100
Gun                   someone else in the household owns a gun         (0.304)    (0.301)    (0.301)
                      (other than air riffle) for any purpose other
                      than part of a collection (A)
Male                  Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.510      0.477      0.470
                      male, 0 otherwise (A)                            (0.500)    (0.499)    (0.499)
Upper Income          Dummy Variable (=1) if the family income          0.537      0.514      0.512
                      is in the upper 50% of the country, 0            (0.499)    (0.500)    (0.500)
                      otherwise (A)
Education             Years of education of the respondent (A)         12.179     12.238     12.192
                                                                       (3.524)    (3.570)    (3.572)
Burglary Rate         The burglary rate in the region of the            0.036      0.039      0.038
                      country that the respondent lives in (A)         (0.035)    (0.036)    (0.035)
Small City            Dummy Variable(=1) if the respondent is           0.442      0.382
                      living in a town with a population of            (0.497)    (0.486)
                      50,000 less (A)
Middle Size City      Dummy Variable(=1) if the respondent is           0.379      0.430
                      living in a town with a population of            (0.485)    (0.495)
                      50,000 to 1 million (A)
Age20to24             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.094      0.079      0.078
                      between ages 20 and 24, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.292)    (0.270)    (0.269)
Age25to29             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.118      0.110      0.109
                      between ages 25 and 29, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.323)    (0.312)    (0.312)
Age30to34             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.127      0.122      0.123
                      between ages 30 and 34, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.333)    (0.328)    (0.328)
Age35to39             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.115      0.125      0.125
                      between ages 35 and 39, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.319)    (0.331)    (0.331)
Age40to44             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.105      0.111      0.111
                      between ages 40 and 44, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.307)    (0.315)    (0.314)
Age45to49             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.089      0.094      0.093
                      between ages 45 and 49, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.285)    (0.291)    (0.291)
Age50to54             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.082      0.079      0.079
                      between ages 50 and 54, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.274)    (0.270)    (0.270)
Age55to59             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.064      0.066      0.066
                      between ages 55 and 59, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.244)    (0.249)    (0.249)
Age60to64             Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is          0.050      0.056      0.057
                      between ages 60 and 64, 0 otherwise (A)          (0.219)    (0.231)    (0.232)




                                                   33
                                                (Table 2 continued)
Age65to69                  Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is           0.047        0.050     0.050
                           between ages 65 and 69, 0 otherwise (A)           (0.212)      (0.218)   (0.219)
Age70+                     Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is           0.072        0.078     0.079
                           older than 70, 0 otherwise (A)                    (0.259)      (0.268)   (0.270)
Single                     Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is           0.217        0.213     0.213
                           single, 0 otherwise (A)                           (0.412)      (0.410)   (0.410)
Widowed                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is           0.056        0.069     0.070
                           widowed, 0 otherwise (A)                          (0.229)      (0.253)   (0.256)
Living together            Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is           0.068        0.060     0.059
                           living together as a couple (but not married),    (0.252)      (0.237)   (0.237)
                           0 otherwise (A)
Divorced                   Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is            0.052       0.062     0.063
                           divorced, 0 otherwise (A)                          (0.223)     (0.240)   (0.243)
Working                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is            0.607       0.595     0.594
                           working, 0 otherwise (A)                           (0.488)     (0.491)   (0.491)
Looking for job            Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is            0.070       0.069     0.068
                           looking for job, 0 otherwise (A)                   (0.255)     (0.253)   (0.251)
Home keeper                Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is            0.099       0.098     0.102
                           house keeper, 0 otherwise (A)                      (0.299)     (0.297)   (0.302)
Retired/disabled           Dummy Variable (=1) if the respondent is            0.168       0.186     0.186
                           retired or disabled, 0 otherwise (A)               (0.374)     (0.389)   (0.389)
Individualism              Index of the degree to which individuals           62.790
                           are integrated into groups (N)                    (21.351)
Rule of Law                Index of the extent to which agents have            0.982
                           confidence and abide by the rules of society       (0.974)
                           (M)
Ethno-linguistic           The index of the extent of ethno-linguistic         0.358
Fragmentation              fragmentation in the country (P)                   (0.267)
British Legal Origin       Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of          0.336
                           the respondent is English, 0 otherwise (E)         (0.472)
French Legal Origin        Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of          0.250
                           the respondent is French, 0 otherwise (E)          (0.433)
German Legal Origin        Dummy Variable (=1) if the legal origin of          0.041
                           the respondent is German, 0 otherwise (E)          (0.198)
Percent Catholic           Percent of Catholics in the country (E)            40.332
                                                                             (34.718)
Percent Muslim             Percent of Muslims in the country (E)               2.743
                                                                             (11.128)
Democratic                 Dummy Variable (=1) if the country was              0.563
                           democratic in all 46 years between 1950            (0.496)
                           and 1995(D)
Per-capita income          PPP adjusted Real per-capita income of the       15,685.030
                           country in 2000 dollars (G)                      (8,444.320)
Government Share           Government share of per-capita GDP (G)             20.755
                                                                              (5.762)
Population                 Population of the country in millions in the       79.910
                           survey year (G)                                   (201.873)
                       )




                                                        34
                                            (Table 2 concluded)
Population less than    Percentage of population less than 25 years        38.145
25                      of age (K)                                         (9.601)
Average Country         Average education of adults in the country          8.666
Education               in the survey year (L)                             (2.192)
Women in Parliament     Percentage of women in parliament of the           19.025
                        corresponding country (F)                         (10.699)
 War                    Dummy Variable (=1) if a war/civil conflict         0.357
                           occurred since 1975 (C)                         (0.479)
 Western Europe            Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in         0.370
                           Western Europe, 0 otherwise                     (0.483)
 Central Europe            Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in         0.216
                           Central Europe, 0 otherwise                     (0.411)
 Mediterranean             Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in         0.046
                           Mediterranean region, 0 otherwise               (0.209)
 Asia                      Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in         0.089
                           Asia, 0 otherwise                               (0.285)
 Africa                    Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in         0.071
                           Africa, 0 otherwise                             (0.256)
 Latin America             Dummy Variable (=1) if the country is in         0.072
                           Latin America, 0 otherwise                      (0.258)
  The descriptive statistics pertain to observations with non-missing values in all variables.
A: UNICRI International Crime Victim Survey version ICVS2000_2(1)
B: “National Cultures of the World: A Statistical Reference” (1997), Parker, Philip M., Greenwood Press.
C: Gleditsch, Nils Petter; Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg & Håvard Strand,
2002. ‘Armed Conflict 1946–2001: A New Dataset’, Journal of Peace Research 39(5): 615–637.
D: The causes of corruption: a cross-national study; Daniel Treisman, Journal of Public Economics
76 (2000) , 399-457
E: The Quality of Government; La Porta, Rafael et al., NBER Working Paper: 6727 (1998)
F: World Development Indicators. CD 2003
G: Alan Heston, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.2, Center for
International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania, September
2006..
H: The State in a Changing World, World Development Report 1997, World Bank, Washington, DC:
Oxford University Press, 1997
I: Governance Matters III: Governance Indicators for 1996-2002, Daniel Kaufmann, Aart Kraay, Massimo
Mastruzzi, The World Bank, June 30,2003
J: World Bank, Education Statistics Database http://www1.worldbank.org/education/edstats/
K: United Nations Statistics Division, Common Database, Population by Sex, Age Group, Urban and
Rural, Census Years, Series Number 14890: http://unstats.un.org/unsd/cdb
L: Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee, "International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and
Implications" (CID Working Paper No. 42, April 2000) – Human Capital Updated Files.
M: Governance Matters 2007 – Worldwide Governance Indicators, 1996-2006.
<http://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi2007/mc_countries.asp>. (June 13, 2008)
N: Hofstede, Geert. “Cultural Dimensions,” <http://www.geert-hofstede.com/ hofstede_
dimensions.php> (June 13, 2008).
P: Philip G. Roeder. 2001. "Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization (ELF) Indices, 1961 and 1985."
February 16. <http//:weber.ucsd.edu\~proeder\elf.htm>.(June 13, 2008)


                                                    35
                                                Table 3

             Descriptive Statistics of Personal Characteristics by Victimization Status

                    Victim of Burglary-This or last year        Victim of Burglary- Before Last Year
                        Yes                     No                   Yes                    No
Variable Name Mean           Std.       Mean Std. Dev          Mean       Std.        Mean      Std.
                             Dev                                          Dev                   Dev
Gun               0.105    (0.307)      0.114      (0.318)     0.104    (0.306)       0.119   (0.324)
Male              0.458    (0.498)      0.477      (0.500)     0.457    (0.498)       0.480   (0.500)
Upper Income      0.484    (0.500)      0.483      (0.500)     0.482    (0.500)       0.516   (0.500)
Education        12.168 (3.501)        12.599      (3.676)    12.150 (3.501)         12.678 (3.625)
Burglary Rate     0.034    (0.030)      0.063      (0.053)     0.034    (0.031)       0.049   (0.046)
Age20to24         0.085    (0.279)      0.120      (0.325)     0.087    (0.282)       0.088   (0.284)
Age25to29         0.101    (0.301)      0.128      (0.334)     0.103    (0.304)       0.102   (0.303)
Age30to34         0.110    (0.313)      0.128      (0.335)     0.111    (0.314)       0.120   (0.325)
Age35to39         0.112    (0.315)      0.119      (0.323)     0.111    (0.315)       0.122   (0.328)
Age40to44         0.101    (0.301)      0.105      (0.306)     0.100    (0.300)       0.110   (0.313)
Age45to49         0.085    (0.278)      0.085      (0.279)     0.084    (0.278)       0.088   (0.284)
Age50to54         0.075    (0.264)      0.066      (0.249)     0.075    (0.263)       0.075   (0.263)
Age55to59         0.065    (0.247)      0.057      (0.231)     0.065    (0.246)       0.062   (0.242)
Age60to64         0.062    (0.242)      0.044      (0.205)     0.062    (0.240)       0.057   (0.232)
Age65to69         0.058    (0.233)      0.038      (0.191)     0.057    (0.232)       0.048   (0.213)
Age70+            0.095    (0.293)      0.053      (0.224)     0.094    (0.292)       0.070   (0.255)
Single            0.235    (0.424)      0.287      (0.452)     0.236    (0.425)       0.270   (0.444)
Widowed           0.079    (0.270)      0.056      (0.230)     0.078    (0.269)       0.067   (0.250)
Living together 0.053      (0.223)      0.055      (0.227)     0.053    (0.224)       0.051   (0.220)
Divorced          0.056    (0.231)      0.067      (0.249)     0.056    (0.230)       0.071   (0.257)
Working           0.582    (0.493)      0.603      (0.489)     0.580    (0.494)       0.616   (0.486)
Looking for job 0.060      (0.237)      0.074      (0.262)     0.061    (0.240)       0.059   (0.235)
Home keeper       0.099    (0.299)      0.105      (0.307)     0.100    (0.300)       0.092   (0.289)
Retired/disabled 0.177     (0.382)      0.121      (0.326)     0.176    (0.381)       0.144   (0.351)
  N                9,817-11,547         127,275-161,080         11,475-14,420        125,546-158,178




                                                   36
                                    Table 4
                           Ordered Probit Estimates
       Dependent Variable: Severity of Desired Punishment for Burglary
Variables                                  I            II           III
Victim of Burglary This/Last Year    0.085***      0.085***      0.082***
                                      (0.020)       (0.020)       (0.018)
Victim of Burglary Before Last Year    0.041**     0.036**       0.033**
                                       (0.017)      (0.017)       (0.016)
Gun                                     0.047*        0.036      0.061***
                                       (0.027)      (0.026)       (0.020)
Male                                  0.122***     0.127***      0.113***
                                       (0.023)      (0.022)       (0.020)
Upper Income                            -0.020       -0.007       -0.004
                                       (0.024)      (0.026)       (0.022)
Education                            -0.021***    -0.020***     -0.022***
                                       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.004)
Burglary rate                           0.165         1.196      1.656**
                                       (1.091)      (1.125)       (0.817)
Small City                              -0.057
                                       (0.067)
Middle Size City                         0.040
                                       (0.081)
Age20to24                                0.023        0.032        0.032
                                       (0.052)      (0.051)       (0.041)
Age25to29                                0.018        0.012        0.023
                                       (0.048)      (0.046)       (0.040)
Age30to34                                0.044        0.031        0.051
                                       (0.049)      (0.048)       (0.042)
Age35to39                               -0.008       -0.019        0.005
                                       (0.050)      (0.051)       (0.045)
Age40to44                               -0.038       -0.041       -0.010
                                       (0.054)      (0.054)       (0.049)
Age45to49                               -0.090       -0.094       -0.061
                                       (0.065)      (0.063)       (0.059)
Age50to54                              -0.115*     -0.122**       -0.085
                                       (0.062)      (0.063)       (0.062)
Age55to59                              -0.119*      -0.125*       -0.096
                                       (0.068)      (0.068)       (0.063)
Age60to64                               -0.089       -0.089       -0.062
                                       (0.074)      (0.071)       (0.067)
Age65to69                               -0.090       -0.098       -0.059
                                       (0.074)      (0.072)       (0.071)
Age70+                                  -0.095       -0.098       -0.058
                                       (0.076)      (0.074)       (0.073)
Single                                -0.051**     -0.051**     -0.052***
                                       (0.025)      (0.024)       (0.020)
Widow                                  -0.047*       -0.032       -0.020
                                       (0.025)      (0.022)       (0.021)
Living together                          0.024        0.029        0.040
                                     (0.037)      (0.035)        (0.026)



                                    37
                            (Table 4 continued)
Divorced                                -0.008       -0.013    -0.029
                                       (0.030)      (0.030)   (0.026)
Working                                0.096**     0.100**      0.026
                                       (0.042)      (0.041)   (0.032)
Looking for job                          0.070      0.072*     -0.017
                                       (0.044)      (0.043)   (0.038)
Home keeper                           0.114**      0.144***     0.055
                                       (0.050)      (0.050)   (0.040)
Retired/disabled                     0.163***      0.163***   0.099**
                                       (0.050)      (0.049)   (0.042)
Individualism                        -0.021***    -0.018***
                                       (0.005)      (0.006)
Rule of Law                          0.369***      0.381***
                                       (0.137)      (0.143)
Ethnolingu. Fragment                    -0.109       -0.261
                                       (0.244)      (0.288)
British Legal Origin                     0.524        0.402
                                       (0.368)      (0.406)
French Legal Origin                     0.475*      0.536*
                                       (0.266)      (0.315)
German Legal Origin                  -1.219***     -1.026**
                                       (0.361)      (0.431)
Percent Catholic                        -0.002       -0.003
                                       (0.003)      (0.003)
Percent Muslim                         -0.011*      -0.011*
                                       (0.006)      (0.006)
Democratic                            -0.443**    -0.610***
                                       (0.203)      (0.233)
Per-capita income                        0.000        0.000
                                       (0.000)      (0.000)
Government Share                         0.002        0.014
                                       (0.012)      (0.013)
Population                               0.000     0.001**
                                       (0.000)      (0.000)
Population less than 25                 -0.006        0.007
                                       (0.014)      (0.015)
Average Country Education                0.033        0.107
                                       (0.068)      (0.078)
Women in parliament                    -0.017*    -0.028***
                                       (0.009)      (0.010)
War                                      0.305        0.220
                                       (0.195)      (0.222)
Europe                                  -0.218       -0.171   0.618***
                                       (0.353)      (0.388)    (0.087)
Central Europe                           0.251       -0.337   0.801***
                                       (0.649)      (0.693)    (0.205)
Mediterranean                        -1.562***    -1.334***    -0.049
                                       (0.480)      (0.529)    (0.079)
Asia                                     0.585        0.232   0.894***
                                       (0.563)      (0.650)    (0.136)


                                    38
                                           (Table 4 concluded)
           Africa                                    1.050**          0.611          0.899***
                                                     (0.472)         (0.571)          (0.032)
           Latin America                              0.166          -0.103          0.507**
                                                     (0.455)         (0.533)          (0.228)

           N                                          70,324         74,788            89,037
           Year FE                                      Yes            Yes               Yes
           Country FE                                   No             No                Yes
           Log likelihood                             -81,287        -87063           -104,265
Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-level are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the
coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.




                                                     39
                                              Table 5
               Ordered Probit Estimates with additional Indicators of Victimization
                     Dependent variable: Severity of Punishment for Burglary
Variable                              Robbery         Personal Theft Bicycle Theft      Assault
Victim of Burglary This/Last Year     0.080***           0.086***       0.082***       0.076***
                                       (0.020)            (0.021)         (0.019)       (0.020)
Victim of Burglary Before Last         0.032**            0.034**         0.032*        0.032**
Year                                   (0.016)            (0.016)         (0.017)       (0.017)
Victim of the Crime listed in the        0.003             -0.009          0.026       0.051***
column heading this or last year       (0.036)            (0.020)         (0.037)       (0.017)
Gun                                      0.037              0.038          0.037          0.033
                                       (0.026)            (0.026)         (0.026)       (0.026)
Male                                  0.125***           0.125***       0.125***       0.126***
                                       (0.022)            (0.022)         (0.022)       (0.022)
Upper Income                            -0.007             -0.008         -0.006         -0.006
                                       (0.026)            (0.026)         (0.026)       (0.026)
Education                            -0.019***          -0.020***      -0.020***      -0.020***
                                       (0.005)            (0.005)         (0.005)       (0.005)
Burglary rate                            1.100              1.050          1.128          1.043
                                       (1.105)            (1.102)         (1.102)       (1.113)
Individualism                        -0.018***          -0.018***      -0.018***      -0.018***
                                       (0.006)            (0.006)         (0.006)       (0.006)
Rule of Law                           0.375***           0.374***       0.375***       0.374***
                                       (0.140)            (0.140)         (0.139)       (0.141)
Ethnolingu. Fragment                    -0.273             -0.264         -0.277         -0.269
                                       (0.287)            (0.287)         (0.287)       (0.287)
Age20to24                                0.031              0.025          0.031          0.027
                                       (0.050)            (0.052)         (0.051)       (0.051)
Age25to29                                0.009              0.007          0.010          0.006
                                       (0.045)            (0.045)         (0.045)       (0.044)
Age30to34                                0.030              0.026          0.029          0.025
                                       (0.046)            (0.047)         (0.046)       (0.046)
Age35to39                               -0.018             -0.022         -0.017         -0.020
                                       (0.050)            (0.051)         (0.050)       (0.049)
Age40to44                               -0.039             -0.044         -0.039         -0.044
                                       (0.052)            (0.053)         (0.053)       (0.052)
Age45to49                               -0.096             -0.098         -0.090        -0.099*
                                       (0.061)            (0.062)         (0.062)       (0.060)
Age50to54                             -0.121**           -0.126**       -0.118**       -0.125**
                                       (0.061)            (0.062)         (0.061)       (0.061)
Age55to59                              -0.124*            -0.125*        -0.120*        -0.125*
                                       (0.067)            (0.068)         (0.067)       (0.066)
Age60to64                               -0.089             -0.090         -0.086         -0.091
                                       (0.070)            (0.071)         (0.071)       (0.070)
Age65to69                               -0.097             -0.102         -0.092         -0.096
                                       (0.071)            (0.072)         (0.071)       (0.071)
Age70+                                  -0.098             -0.102         -0.092         -0.096
                                       (0.073)            (0.074)         (0.074)       (0.074)


                                               40
                                (Table 5 continued)
Single                       -0.050**          -0.050**    -0.050**     -0.053**
                              (0.024)           (0.024)      (0.024)     (0.024)
Widow                          -0.034           -0.036*      -0.032      -0.036*
                              (0.022)           (0.022)      (0.022)     (0.022)
Living together                 0.032             0.031       0.033        0.033
                              (0.035)           (0.035)      (0.034)     (0.034)
Divorced                       -0.015            -0.014      -0.016       -0.016
                              (0.030)           (0.030)      (0.030)     (0.030)
Working                     0.100***           0.100***    0.102***     0.107***
                              (0.041)           (0.039)      (0.040)     (0.040)
Looking for job                 0.069            0.068*      0.071*       0.075*
                              (0.043)           (0.041)      (0.043)     (0.042)
Home keeper                  0.146***          0.147***    0.146***     0.156***
                              (0.050)           (0.049)      (0.050)     (0.049)
Retired/disabled            0.162***           0.161***    0.161***     0.168***
                              (0.049)           (0.049)      (0.049)     (0.049)
British Legal Origin           0.438              0.431       0.431        0.433
                              (0.400)           (0.400)      (0.399)     (0.400)
French Legal Origin            0.540*            0.539*      0.539*       0.539*
                              (0.314)           (0.313)      (0.314)     (0.313)
German Legal Origin            -1.041         -1.044***    -1.033**    -1.041***
                              (0.428)           (0.428)      (0.427)     (0.428)
Percent Catholic               -0.003            -0.003      -0.003       -0.003
                              (0.003)           (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)
Percent Muslim                -0.011*           -0.011*     -0.011*      -0.011*
                              (0.006)           (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.006)
Democratic                  -0.602***         -0.594***   -0.596***    -0.602***
                              (0.232)           (0.233)      (0.232)     (0.233)
Per-capita income               0.000             0.000       0.000        0.000
                              (0.000)           (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
Government Share                0.014             0.014       0.014        0.014
                              (0.013)           (0.013)      (0.013)     (0.013)
Population                    0.001**           0.001**     0.001**      0.001**
                              (0.000)           (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)
Population less than 25         0.007             0.007       0.007        0.007
                              (0.015)           (0.015)      (0.015)     (0.015)
Average Country Education       0.110             0.109       0.110        0.109
                              (0.077)           (0.077)      (0.077)     (0.077)
Women in parliament         -0.028***         -0.028***   -0.029***    -0.028***
                              (0.010)           (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)
War                             0.203             0.206       0.205        0.204
                              (0.217)           (0.216)      (0.216)     (0.217)
Europe                         -0.147            -0.151      -0.156       -0.153
                              (0.380)           (0.379)      (0.379)     (0.379)
Central Europe                 -0.305            -0.304      -0.313       -0.311
                              (0.685)           (0.686)      (0.685)     (0.687)



                                     41
                                             (Table 5 concluded)
 Mediterranean                            -1.309***        -1.313***           -1.317***          -1.320***
                                           (0.521)          (0.520)              (0.519)           (0.521)
 Asia                                        0.271            0.269               0.278              0.265
                                           (0.641)          (0.638)              (0.639)           (0.641)
 Africa                                     0.637             0.644               0.645              0.630
                                           (0.566)          (0.567)              (0.566)           (0.567)
 Latin America                              -0.064           -0.065              -0.063             -0.072
                                           (0.524)          (0.524)              (0.524)           (0.526)


 N                                          74,684             74,478           74,523             74,444

 Log-likelihood                             -88,333           -88,062           -88,125            -87,948

Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-level are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the
coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.




                                                      42
                                              Table 6A
                              The Preference for Punishment by Gender
                                         Probit regressions
                                                  Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                        Males                           Females
  Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.020**        (0.009)          0.037***        (0.011)
                                        [0.024***]     (0.009)          [0.033***]      (0.009)
  Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.009          (0.010)          0.003           (0.011)
                                        [0.008]        (0.010)          [0.006]         (0.010)
  Gun                                   0.027**        (0.012)          0.007           (0.018)
  Upper Income                          -0.006         (0.012)          -0.022**        (0.011)
  Education                             -0.009***      (0.002)          -0.011***       (0.002)
  Burglary rate                         0.534          (0.409)          0.340           (0.421)
  N                                     35,443                          39,345
                                        [41,832]                        [47,205]
  Mean of the dependent variable        0.413                           0.368
                                        [0.413]                         [0.371]
                                                  Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
  Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.024**        (0.011)          0.024***        (0.008)
                                        [0.019**]      (0.009)          [0.024***]      (0.006)
  Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.017*         (0.009)          0.017***        (0.006)
                                        [0.016*]       (0.009)          [0.014**]       (0.006)
  Gun                                   -0.002         (0.008)          0.000           (0.007)
  Upper Income                          0.007          (0.007)          0.003           (0.007)
  Education                             -0.002**       (0.001)          -0.003***       (0.001)
  Burglary rate                         0.757**        (0.317)          0.551*          (0.282)
  N                                     35443                           39345
                                        [41454]                         [47205]
  Mean of the dependent variable        0.180                           0.156
                                        [0.189]                         [0.168]
                                                  Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
  Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.011          (0.007)          0.013***        (0.004)
                                        [0.015***]     (0.006)          [0.013***]      (0.004)
  Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.005          (0.004)          0.007***        (0.003)
                                        [0.005]        (0.005)          [0.005]         (0.003)
  Gun                                   0.001          (0.005)          -0.004          (0.004)
  Upper Income                          0.005          (0.004)          0.004           (0.004)
  Education                             0.000          (0.001)          -0.002***       (0.001)
  Burglary rate                         0.383*         (0.206)          0.195           (0.211)
  N                                     35,443                          39,296
                                        [41,454]                        [46,719]
     Mean of the dependent variable     0.087                           0.076
                                        [0.092]                         [0.083]
The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of
Table 4. The marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-
effects instead of country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust
standard errors of the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of
the underlying probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.




                                                           43
                                              Table 6B
                       The Preference for Punishment by Personal Education
                                         Probit Regressions
                                                  Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                        Highly-Educated person          Person with Low Education
  Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.021**        (0.011)          0.034***        (0.012)
                                        [0.023**]      (0.010)          [0.031***]      (0.010)
  Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.005          (0.011)          0.008           (0.014)
                                        [0.001]        (0.010)          [0.012]         (0.012)
  Gun                                   0.022          (0.015)          0.019           (0.012)
  Male                                  0.063***       (0.010)          0.049***        (0.010)
  Upper Income                          0.001          (0.013)          -0.021**        (0.010)
  Education                             -0.012***      (0.003)          0.002           (0.004)
  Burglary rate                         0.703*         (0.393           -0.126          (0.441)
  N                                     32,476                          42,312
                                        [38,564]                        [50,472]
  Mean of the dependent variable        0.362                           0.413
                                        [0.364]                         [0.414]
                                                  Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
  Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.028***       (0.009)          0.019***        (0.007)
                                        [0.023***]     (0.008)          [0.019***]      (0.006)
  Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.018**        (0.009)          0.015           (0.010)
                                        [0.016*]       (0.009)          [0.012]         (0.008)
  Gun                                   0.008          (0.007)          -0.006          (0.008)
  Male                                  0.031***       (0.004)          0.020***        (0.007)
  Upper Income                          0.010          (0.007)          0.003           (0.006)
  Education                             -0.005***      (0.001)          0.002           (0.002)
  Burglary rate                         0.791***       (0.309)          0.424           (0.294)
  N                                     32,476                          42,312
                                        [38,564]                        [50,159]
  Mean of the dependent variable        0.154                           0.179
                                        [0.164]                         [0.189]
                                                  Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
  Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.011**        (0.006)          0.011***        (0.003)
                                        [0.013***]     (0.006)          [0.014***]      (0.004)
  Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.001          (0.005)          0.010**         (0.005)
                                        [-0.001]       (0.005)          [0.009**]       (0.004)
  Gun                                   0.004          (0.004)          -0.005          (0.004)
  Male                                  0.015***       (0.003)          0.003           (0.004)
  Upper Income                          0.001          (0.003)          0.008***        (0.004)
  Education                             -0.001**       (0.001)          0.000           (0.001)
  Burglary rate                         0.379**        (0.168)          0.135           (0.231)
  N                                     32,476                          42,312
                                        [38,564]                        [50,159]
  Mean of the dependent variable        0.074                           0.087
                                        [0.083]                         [0.092]
The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table 4. The
marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead of country
characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors of the marginal
effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying probit coefficients at the
10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.




                                                                44
                                                                   Table 7
                                          Differential Strength of Vengeful Feelings by Groups
                                                                    Percentage increase     Percentage increase in    Percentage increase in
                                                                    in the desire to        the desire to impose a    the desire to impose a
                                                                    impose any prison       prison sentence of at     prison sentence of at
                                                                    sentence due to         least 2 years due to      least 4 years due to
                                                                    victimization among     victimization among       victimization among
                                                                    people in the world     the people in the world   people in the world
                                                                    with the characteristic with characteristics      with the characteristic
                                                                    listed in rows          listed in rows            listed in rows
     PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS
A1   Males                                                                  5% [6%]               23% [19%]                0%    [16%]
A2   Females                                                              10% [9%]                26% [23%]               26%    [16%]
B1   More Educated People (in own country)                                  6% [6%]               30% [24%]               15%    [16%]
B2   Less Educated People (in own country)                                  8% [8%]               11% [10%]               25%    [25%]
C1   Older People (Age≥40)                                                  7% [7%]               26% [21%]               18%    [19%]
C2   Younger People                                                         8% [7%]               15% [13%]               13%    [13%]
D1   People in the top 50% of the income distribution (in own             10% [8%]                22% [19%]                9%    [9%]
     country)
D2   People in the bottom 50% of the income distribution                    5% [7%]               26% [22%]               30%    [22%]
E1   Working People                                                         8% [8%]               29% [25%]               23%    [23%]
E2   Non-Working People                                                     7% [6%]               17% [14%]               11%    [8%]
F1   People who live in High-burglary areas                                 9% [9%]               24% [20%]               24%    [16%]
F2   People who live in Low -burglary areas                                 0% [0%]               16% [14%]                0%    [0%]
     COUNTRY CHARACTERISTICS
G1   People who live in countries where average country                     6% [7%]                 8% [8%]                8% [12%]
     education is above the world median (8 years)
G2   People who live in countries where average country                     7% [8%]               33% [32%]               31% [33%]
     education is below the world median (8 years)
H1   People who live in countries where there was at least one war          4% [4%]               24% [22%]               27% [30%]
     or military conflict since 1975
H2   People who live in countries with no war or military conflict        10% [10%]               17% [15%]               12% [16%]
     since 1975




                                                                    45
                                                               (Table 7 concluded)
I1      People who live in countries where the Rule-of-law rating is           7%    [7%]              10% [12%]                 0% [0%]
        above the world median
I2      People who live in countries where the Rule-of-law rating is           6%    [7%]              27% [21%]                29% [21%]
        below the world median
J1      People who live in richer countries (mean GDP per capita is            6%    [8%]                0% [9%]                 0% [0%]
        greater than 8000$)
J2      People who live in poorer countries (mean GDP per capita is            6%    [6%]              30% [22%]                34% [29%]
        smaller than 8000$).
K1      People who live in more Individualistic countries                      6%    [7%]              12% [0%]                  8% [15%]
K2      People who live in less Individualistic countries                      8%    [8%]              29% [28%]                17% [16%]
L1      People who live in countries with higher ethno-linguistic              6%    [7%]              25% [24%]                22% [17%]
        fragmentation
L2      People who live in countries with lower ethno-linguistic               8%    [6%]              15% [10%]                15% [15%]
        fragmentation
M1      People who live in countries with uninterrupted Democracy             12%    [12%]             11%    [11%]              0%    [0%]
M2      People who live in countries with interrupted Democracy                6%    [6%]              31%    [22%]             37%    [31%]
N1      Low GDP, High ethno-linguistic fragmentation, Rich person              9%    [11%]             14%    [17%]             21%    [22%]
N2      High GDP, Low ethno-linguistic fragmentation, Poor person              6%    [6%]              23%    [19%]             21%    [21%]
O1      No war, High local burglary rate, Old and poor person                 14%    [11%]             23%    [15%]             33%    [0 %]
O2      War, Low local burglary rate, Young and rich person                    7%    [7%]              22%    [19%]             14%    [11%]

For each row, the cells depict the percentage increase in the proportion of people in that row who would like to assign the punishment listed in
column headings if the people listed in the row were victimized. The values are calculated using the marginal effects reported in Tables 6A-6M
and the relevant mean values of desired punishment. The values in [brackets] have the same meaning, except that they are based on the marginal
effects that are obtained from the models with country fixed-effects in Tables 6A-6M.




                                                                       46
                                                                              Table 8
                                                       Differential Impact of More Frequent Victimization
                                                          Among Victims with Various Characteristics
                                                                    Percentage increase in the          Percentage increase in the desire   Percentage increase in the
                                                                    desire to impose any prison         to impose a prison sentence of at   desire to impose a prison
                                                                    sentence due to more frequent       least 2 years due to more           sentence of at least 4 years
                                                                    victimization among                 frequent victimization among        due to more frequent
                                                                    victimized people in the world      victimized people in the world      victimization among
                                                                    with the characteristic listed in   with characteristics listed in      victimized people in the world
                                                                    rows                                rows                                with the characteristic listed in
                                                                                                                                            rows
A1      People who live in countries where average country                    0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                          0% [0%]
         education is above the world median (8 years)
A2      People who live in countries where average country                    0%    [0%]                          18%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
         education is below the world median (8 years)
B1      People who live in countries with no war or military                  0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
         conflict since 1975
B2      People who live in countries where there was at least                 0%    [0%]                          23%    [18%]                       19%    [18%]
         one war or military conflict since 1975
C1      People who live in countries where the Rule-of-law                    0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
         rating is above the world median
C2      People who live in countries where the Rule-of-law                    0%    [0%]                          26%    [0%]                        18%    [0%]
         rating is below the world median
D1      People who live in richer countries (mean GDP per                     0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
         capita is greater than 8000$)
D2      People who live in poorer countries (mean GDP per                     0%    [0%]                          16%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
         capita is smaller than 8000$).
E1      People who live in more Individualistic countries                     0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
E2      People who live in less Individualistic countries                     0%    [0%]                          22%    [21%]                        0%    [0%]
F1      People who live in countries with lower ethno-linguistic              0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                         0%    [-23%]
         fragmentation
F2      People who live in countries with higher ethno-linguistic             0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                        19%    [0%]
         fragmentation
G1      People who live in countries with uninterrupted                       0%    [0%]                           0%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
         Democracy
G2      People who live in countries with interrupted                        28%    [0%]                          21%    [0%]                         0%    [0%]
         Democracy
See notes to Table 7.




                                                                                     47
                                                             Figure 1
                          Proportion of Respondents Considering 2 or More Years in Prison as Appropriate
                                   Punishment for Theft of a Color TV as a 2nd Burglary Offense
                0.8

                0.7
                                                                          Uganda
                0.6                                            Egypt
                0.5
                                          Belarus
     Victims




                0.4
                           Malta
                0.3

                0.2

                0.1

                  0
                      0            0.1       0.2         0.3        0.4        0.5        0.6         0.7         0.8
                                                               Non‐Victims


                                                             Figure 2
                          Proportion of Respondents Considering 4 or More Years in Prison as Appropriate
                                   Punishment for Theft of a Color TV as a 2nd Burglary Offense
                0.4

               0.35                                                 Uganda                                     Botswana

                0.3            Malta
                                          Belarus
               0.25
Victims




                0.2                                                                                    China

               0.15

                0.1

               0.05

                 0
                      0            0.05      0.1        0.15        0.2        0.25        0.3        0.35        0.4
                                                               Non‐Victims




                                                          48
                                                         Figure 3
                      Proportion of Respondents Considering 6 or More Years in Prison as Appropriate
                               Punishment for Theft of a Color TV as a 2nd Burglary Offense
           0.35

            0.3

           0.25

            0.2                                                                                       Botswana
 Victims




                           Belarus                               Albania
                                        Uganda
           0.15
                  Brazil
            0.1                 Malta

           0.05
                                                 India
             0
                  0              0.05              0.1           0.15          0.2          0.25          0.3     0.35
                                                                     Non‐Victims


                                                      Figure 4A
                       Proportion of Females Respondents Considering 4 or More Years in Prison as
                        Appropriate Punishment for Theft of a Color TV as a 2nd Burglary Offense
           0.45
            0.4                                                              Uganda

           0.35
            0.3
                                 Belarus
Victims




           0.25                              Indonesia

            0.2
           0.15       Brazil

            0.1
           0.05
             0
                  0            0.05        0.1           0.15        0.2    0.25      0.3          0.35     0.4   0.45
                                                                     Non‐Victims




                                                                49
                                                       Figure 4B
                 Proportion of Males Respondents Considering 4 or More Years in Prison as Appropriate
                              Punishment for Theft of a Color TV as a 2nd Burglary Offense

          0.45
                                                         Egypt
           0.4                                                                  Uganda

          0.35
                                             Paraguay
           0.3
                                Slovakia
          0.25
Victims




                      Hungary
           0.2                                                                                  Botswana

          0.15

           0.1

          0.05

            0
                  0        0.05        0.1        0.15        0.2        0.25   0.3      0.35    0.4       0.45
                                                                 Non‐victims




                                                         50
                                      References


Acemoglu, Daron; Johnson, Simon; Robinson, James A. “The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review,
2001, 91: 1369-1401

Alesina, Alberto and Paola Giuliano. “The Power of Family,” NBER Working Paper
13051, April 2007.

Bandes S., “Empathy, Narrative and Victim Impact Statements,” The University of
Chicago Law Review, 1996, 63: 361-412.

Becker, Gary S. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political
Economy. 1968; 76: 169-217.

Bentham, Jeremy. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. 1823.
London: W. Pickering.

Cota-McKinley, Amy, William Douglas Woody, and Paul A. Bell, “Vengeance: Effects
of Gender, Age and Religious Background,” 2001 Aggressive Behavior; 27: 343-50.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine, “Africa's Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic
Divisions,” 1997; The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 112, No. 4, pp. 1203-50.i

Fehr, Ernst and Gachter, Simon. “Fairness and Retaliation: The Economics of
Reciprocity,” 2000. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3) pp.159-81.

Fernandez, Raquel and A. Fogli. “Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family Experience,”
2006; Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 4 no. 2-3, pp552-61.

Finer, Samuel. “The History of Government, vol. I-III,” 1997; Cambridge, U.K.:
Cambridge University Press.

Fisman, Raymond and Edward Miguel. “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement:
Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” 2007. Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
115, no.6 pp.1020-48.

Glaeser, Edward L. and Bruce Sacerdote, “Sentencing in Homicide Cases and the Role of
Vengeance.” 2003, Journal of Legal Studies.

Henrich, Joseph, Robert Boyd, Samuel Bowles, Colin Camerer, Ernst Fehr, Herbert
Gintis and Richard McElreath. “In Search of Homo Economicus: Behavioral
Experiments in 15 Small-Scale Societies,” 2001; The American Economic Review,
Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the American
Economic Association, Vol. 91 No. 2 pp. 73-78.



                                           51
Herrmann, Benedikt, Christian Thoni and Simon Gachter, “Antisocial Punishment Across
Societies,” 2008; Science, Vol. 319, March, pp. 1362-67.

Hoffmann, J. L. “Revenge or Mercy? Some Thoughts about Survivor Opinion Evidence
in Death Penalty Cases.” Cornell Law Review, 2003, 88: 530-542.

Hofstede, G. Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions and
Organizations Across Nations, 2001. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Hofstede G and G. J. Hofstede. Cultures and Organizations. Software of the Mind, 2005.
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Kim, S.H and R. H. Smith, “Revenge and Conflict Escalation,” 1993, Negotiation
Journal; 9: 37-43.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. Vishny. “The Quality of
Government,” 1999. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 15, pp.222-79.

Long, Katie, “Community Input at Sentencing: Victim’s Right or Victim’s Revenge?”
1995. Boston University Law Review, January 1995.

Miguel, Edward, Sebastian Saiegh and Shanker Satyanath, “National Cultures and Soccer
Violence,” NBER Working Paper 13968, March 2008

Mocan, Naci. “"What Determines Corruption? International Evidence From Micro Data".
Forthcoming in Economic Inquiry.

Nourse, V. F., Conceptualizing Criminal Law Defenses,” Pennsylvania Law Review,
May, 2003.

Oosterbeek, Hessel, Randolph Sloof and Gijs Van De Kuilen. “ Cultural Differences in
Ultimatum Game Experiments: Evidence from a Meta-Analysis,” 2004. Experimental
Economics, 7, pp.171-88.

Rene, David and John Brierley. Major Legal Systems in the World Today, New York:
The Free Press.

Roeder, Philip G., “Ethnolinguistic Fractionalization (ELF) Indices, 1961 and 1985,”
2001. February 16. <http//:weber.ucsd.edu\~proeder\elf.htm>.

Smith, Benjamin. “Oil Wealth and Regime Survival in the Developing World, 1960-
1999,” 2004; American Journal of Political Science, 48 (2), pp.232-46.

Stuckless N, and R. Goranson, “The Vengeance Scale: Development of a Measure of
Attitudes Towards Revenge,” 1992; Journal of Social Behavior and Personality; 7: 25-42.



                                           52
Wasserstrom, R. “Retribution and the Theory of Punishment,” The Journal of
Philosophy, 1978; 75: 601-22.

Whitman, James Q, “Symposium: Twenty-Five Years of George P. Fletcher’s Rethinking
Criminal Law: Between Self-defense and Vengeance/ Between Social Contract and
Monopoly of Violence,” 2004, Tulsa Law Review.

Wiesenthal DL, Hennessy D and PM Gibson. “The Driving Vengeance Questionnaire
(DVQ): the development of a scale to measure deviant drivers' attitudes.” Violence and
Victims, 2000, 15(2):115-36.

Wilson, John. "The Purposes of Retribution." Philosophy, 1983, 58(226) pp. 521-27.




                                           53
                                             Table 6C
                      The Preference for Punishment by Personal Income
                                       Probit Regressions
                                                 Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      If the family Income is in the If the family Income is in the
                                      top 50% of Income Distr.        bottom 50% of Inc. Distr.
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.037***         (0.010)        0.022**         (0.010)
                                      [0.031***]       (0.009)        [0.028***]      (0.010)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.010            (0.012)        0.003           (0.011)
                                      [0.010]          (0.011)        [0.006]         (0.011)
Gun                                   0.032***         (0.012)        0.009           (0.013)
Male                                  0.065***         (0.009)        0.042***        (0.011)
Upper Income
Education                             -0.010***        (0.002)        -0.010***       (0.002)
Burglary rate                         -0.009           (0.520)        0.570           (0.389)
N                                     38,527                          36,261
                                      [45,625]                        [43,412]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.370                           0.416
                                      [0.374]                         [0.413]
                                                Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.018***         (0.007)        0.030***        (0.010)
                                      [0.017***]       (0.006)        [0.027***]      (0.009)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.016**          (0.009)        0.017**         (0.008)
                                      [0.014*]         (0.008)        [0.015*]        (0.008)
Gun                                   0.007            (0.007)        -0.007          (0.011)
Male                                  0.027***         (0.006)        0.023***        (0.006)
Upper Income
Education                             -0.003**         (0.001)        -0.003***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.113            (0.274)        0.933***        (0.265)
N                                     38,527                          36,261
                                      [45,625]                        [43,020]
Mean of the dependent variable        0 .158                          0.180
                                      [0.168]                         [0.190]
                                                Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.007*           (0.004)        0.017***        (0.006)
                                      [0.008**]        (0.004)        [0.020***]      (0.005)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.004            (0.004)        0.008**         (0.004)
                                      [0.004]          (0.004)        [0.005]         (0.004)
Gun                                   0.002            (0.004)        -0.003          (0.006)
Male                                  0.010***         (0.004)        0.008***        (0.003)
Upper Income
Education                             -0.001           (0.001)        -0.001*         (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.009            (0.173)        0.392*          (0.229)
N                                     38,527                          36,242
                                      [45,205]                        [42,997]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.079                           0.085
                                      [0.085]                         [0.090]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table 4. The
 marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead of country
 characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors of the marginal effects,
 clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and
 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.

                                                                    54
                                             Table 6D
                              The Preference for Punishment by Age
                                        Probit Regressions
                                                 Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                       Age ≥40                        Age<40
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.024***        (0.009)         0.032***        (0.008)
                                       [0.025***]     (0.009)         [0.030***]      (0.008)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year   0.005          (0.007)         0.007           (0.011)
                                       [0.007]        (0.007)         [0.008]         (0.010)
Gun                                    0.020*         (0.012)         0.023           (0.014)
Male                                   0.080***       (0.010)         0.028***        (0.010)
Upper Income                           -0.013         (0.012)         -0.010          (0.011)
Education                              -0.010***      (0.002)         -0.009***       (0.002)
Burglary rate                          0.008          (0.457)         0.698           (0.393)
N                                      40,147                         34,641
                                       [47,714]                       [41,322]
Mean of the dependent variable         0.356                          0.428
                                       [0.363]                        [0.421]
                                                Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.018***        (0.007)         0.029***        (0.008)
                                       [0.017]        (0.006)         [0.026***]      (0.008)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year   0.019***       (0.007)         0.014           (0.010)
                                       [0.017]        (0.007)         [0.012]         (0.008)
Gun                                    -0.002         (0.006)         0.003           (0.010)
Male                                   0.031***       (0.006)         0.019***        (0.006)
Upper Income                           0.000          (0.007)         0.013*          (0.007)
Education                              -0.003***      (0.001)         -0.002          (0.002)
Burglary rate                          0.443          (0.313)         0.836***        (0.309)
N                                      40,147                         34,641
                                       [47,714]                       [41,322]
Mean of the dependent variable         0.144                          0.193
                                       [0 .158]                       [0.198]
                                                Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.012***        (0.004)         0.012***        (0.005)
                                       [0.015***]     (0.004)         [0.013***]      (0.005)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year   0.005          (0.003)         0.007           (0.005)
                                       [0.004]        (0.004)         [0.005]         (0.004)
Gun                                    0.001          (0.004)         -0.002          (0.005)
Male                                   0.012***       (0.003)         0.006           (0.004)
Upper Income                           0.002          (0.004)         0.008***        (0.004)
Education                              -0.001***      (0.000)         0.000           (0.001)
Burglary rate                          0.280          (0.167)         0.285           (0.271)
N                                      40,147                         34,641
                                       [47,243]                       [40,981]
Mean of the dependent variable         0.070                          0.093
                                       [0.078]                        [0.096]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table 4. The
 marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead of country
 characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors of the marginal effects,
 clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and
 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                                    55
                                            Table 6E
                    The Preference for Punishment by Labor Market Status
                                       Probit Regressions
                                                Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      Working                        Non-working
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.030***       (0.010)         0.026**         (0.011)
                                      [0.030***]     (0.009)         [0.024***]      (0.009)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.001          (0.011)         0.013           (0.011)
                                      [0.003]        (0.010)         [0.013]         (0.011)
Gun                                   0.022*         (0.013)         0.019           (0.015)
Male                                  0.056***       (0.008)         0.053***        (0.014)
Upper Income                          -0.014         (0.010)         -0.010          (0.015)
Education                             -0.011***      (0.002)         -0.007***       (0.002)
Burglary rate                         0.536          (0.448)         0.216           (0.385)
N                                     44,961                         29,827
                                      [52,843]                       [36,193]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.389                          0 .394
                                      [0.390]                        [0.395]
                                               Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.031***       (0.009)         0.014*          (0.009)
                                      [0.028***]     (0.008)         [0.012*]        (0.008)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.016**        (0.008)         0.017**         (0.009)
                                      [0.014*]       (0.008)         [0.014*]        (0.008)
Gun                                   0.005          (0.007)         -0.011          (0.009)
Male                                  0.028***       (0.005)         0.018**         (0.008)
Upper Income                          0.002          (0.006)         0.006           (0.009)
Education                             -0.003**       (0.001)         -0.003***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.670**        (0.299)         0.615*          (0.329)
N                                     44,961                         29,827
                                      [52,843]                       [35,922]
Mean of the dependent variable        0 .163                         0 .176
                                      [0.172]                        [0.188]
                                               Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.018***       (0.006)         0.003           (0.005)
                                      [0.019***]     (0.005)         [0.004]         (0.005)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.004          (0.004)         0.009**         (0.005)
                                      [0.004]        (0.004)         [0.008**]       (0.004)
Gun                                   0.002          (0.003)         -0.006          (0.005)
Male                                  0.012***       (0.003)         0.003           (0.005)
Upper Income                          0.003          (0.003)         0.006           (0.005)
Education                             0.000          (0.001)         -0.002***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.322          (0.192)         0.212           (0.250)
N                                     44,961                         29,827
                                      [52,302]                       [35,917]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.078                          0 .087
                                      [0.084]                        [0.092]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table 4. The
 marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead of country
 characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors of the marginal effects,
 clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and
 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                                    56
                                            Table 6F
                         The Preference for Punishment by Local Crime
                                       Probit Regressions
                                                Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      High Burglary Rate              Low Burglary Rate
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.037***       (0.007)          0.003           (0.014)
                                      [0.035***]     (0.007)          [0.006]         (0.015)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.007          (0.008)          0.007           (0.012)
                                      [0.009]        (0.009)          [0.008]         (0.012)
Gun                                   0.011          (0.011)          0.036***        (0.013)
Male                                  0.058***       (0.009)          0.047***        (0.012)
Upper Income                          -0.019         (0.013)          -0.002          (0.008)
Education                             -0.010***      (0.002)          -0.010***       (0.002)
Burglary rate                         0.666          (0.464)          0.957           (1.005)
N                                     47,678                          27,110
                                      [59,633]                        [28,964]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.409                           0.359
                                      [0.407]                         [0.369]
                                                Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.030***       (0.009)          0.009           (0.007)
                                      [0.026***]     (0.007)          [0.009]         (0.008)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.016***       (0.006)          0.020**         (0.010)
                                      [0.014**]      (0.007)          [0.019**]       (0.010)
Gun                                   -0.011         (0.007)          0.015**         (0.007)
Male                                  0.026***       (0.007)          0.022***        (0.005)
Upper Income                          0.006          (0.008)          0.002           (0.005)
Education                             -0.004***      (0.001)          -0.002*         (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.438          (0.422)          0.519           (0.749)
N                                     47,678                          27,110
                                      [59,633]                        [28,964]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.192                           0.126
                                      [0.200]                         [0.136]
                                                Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.016***       (0.006)          0.002           (0.006)
                                      [0.016***]     (0.005)          [0.005]         (0.007)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.007*         (0.004)          0.006           (0.005)
                                      [0.005]        (0.004)          [0.008]         (0.006)
Gun                                   -0.005         (0.004)          0.006           (0.004)
Male                                  0.009**        (0.004)          0.007***        (0.003)
Upper Income                          0.007*         (0.004)          0.002           (0.003)
Education                             -0.002***      (0.001)          0.000           (0.000)
Burglary rate                         0.179          (0.293)          0.179           (0.595)
N                                     47,678                          27,110
                                      [59,633]                        [28,152]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.095                           0.057
                                      [0.100]                         [0.063]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
 4. The marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead
 of country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors
 of the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying
 probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                            57
                                            Table 6G
                      The Preference for Punishment by Country Income
                                       Probit Regressions
                                                Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      Per-capita GDP>$8,000           Per-capita GDP≤$8,000
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.021***       (0.008)          0.034***        (0.012)
                                      [0.025***]     (0.008)          [0.030***]      (0.010)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.004          (0.008)          0.008           (0.018)
                                      [0.009]        (0.008)          [0.004]         (0.016)
Gun                                   0.024**        (0.011)          0.021           (0.024)
Male                                  0.065***       (0.008)          0.010           (0.024)
Upper Income                          -0.019**       (0.009)          0.011           (0.014)
Education                             -0.010***      (0.002)          -0.009***       (0.003)
Burglary rate                         -0.251         (0.294)          0.078           (0.559)
N                                     56,986                          17,802
                                      [60,337]                        [28,700]
   Mean of the dependent variable     0.335                           0.568
                                      [0.337]                         [0.506]
                                                Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.009          (0.006)          0.058***        (0.014)
                                      [0.008]        (0.006)          [0.044***]      (0.011)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.008          (0.007)          0.044***        (0.016)
                                      [0.010*]       (0.006)          [0.025**]       (0.012)
Gun                                   0.003          (0.004)          0.008           (0.030)
Male                                  0.021***       (0.004)          0.032*          (0.018)
Upper Income                          0.001          (0.006)          0.015           (0.013)
Education                             -0.004***      (0.001)          -0.004*         (0.002)
Burglary rate                         0.170          (0.174)          0.204           (0.765)
N                                     56,986                          17,802
                                      [60,337]                        [28,700]
   Mean of the dependent variable     0.114                           0.341
                                      [0.114]                         [0.309]
                                                Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.004          (0.003)          0.035***        (0.014)
                                      [0.004]        (0.003)          [0.034***]      (0.009)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.001          (0.003)          0.026***        (0.011)
                                      [0.003]        (0.003)          [0.013*]        (0.008)
Gun                                   0.002          (0.002)          -0.004          (0.016)
Male                                  0.008***       (0.002)          0.004           (0.010)
Upper Income                          0.002          (0.003)          0.014           (0.011)
Education                             -0.001***      (0.000)          -0.003***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.003          (0.102)          0.071           (0.554)
N                                     56,986                          17,802
                                      [59,525]                        [28,700]
   Mean of the dependent variable     0.049                           0.183
                                      [0.050]                         [0.164]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
 4. The marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead
 of country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors
 of the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying
 probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                            58
                                            Table 6H
                   The Preference for Punishment by Country Individualism
                                       Probit Regressions
                                                Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      Highly- Indiv. Society          Collectivist Society
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.024***       (0.008)          0.031***         (0.011)
                                      [0.024***]     (0.008)          [0.031***]       (0.011)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.010          (0.011)          -0.002           (0.011)
                                      [0.008]        (0.009)          [0.004]          (0.010)
Gun                                   0.019          (0.014)          0.042***         (0.015)
Male                                  0.069***       (0.010)          0.037***         (0.012)
Upper Income                          -0.024***      (0.009)          -0.004           (0.014)
Education                             -0.013***      (0.003)          -0.012***        (0.003)
Burglary rate                         0.277          (0.194)          0.637            (0.406)
N                                     37,824                          36,964
                                      [52,073]                        [36,964]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.368                           0.414
                                      [0.376]                         [0.414]
                                                Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.003          (0.006)          0.042***         (0.008)
                                      [0.007]        (0.006)          [0.040]          (0.008)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.015**        (0.007)          0.019**          (0.010)
                                      [0.011]        (0.008)          [0.018]          (0.009)
Gun                                   0.000          (0.006)          0.016*           (0.009)
Male                                  0.020***       (0.006)          0.029***         (0.007)
Upper Income                          -0.006         (0.005)          0.012            (0.009)
Education                             -0.004***      (0.001)          -0.004***        (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.580***       (0.145)          0.460            (0.403)
N                                     37,824                          36,964
                                      [52,073]                        [36,964]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.128                           0.208
                                      [0.156]                         [0.208]
                                                Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.004          (0.003)          0.017***         (0.007)
                                      [0.011***]     (0.004)          [0.016***]       (0.006)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.005*         (0.003)          0.008            (0.005)
                                      [0.002]        (0.004)          [0.007]          (0.005)
Gun                                   0.002          (0.003)          0.003            (0.007)
Male                                  0.009**        (0.004)          0.007**          (0.003)
Upper Income                          -0.002         (0.003)          0.010**          (0.004)
Education                             -0.002***      (0.000)          -0.002***        (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.258**        (0.110)          0.126            (0.250)
N                                     37,012                          36,964
                                      [51,261]                        [36,964]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.061                           0.103
                                      [0.076]                         [0.103]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
 4. The marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead
 of country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors
 of the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying
 probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                            59
                                            Table 6I
                 The Preference for Punishment by the level of the Rule-of-Law
                                       Probit Regressions
                                                Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      High Rule of Law                Low Rule of Law
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.023***       (0.008)          0.029***        (0.010)
                                      [0.022***]     (0.008)          [0.030***]      (0.009)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.009          (0.009)          -0.002          (0.013)
                                      [0.011]        (0.008)          [0.003]         (0.011)
Gun                                   0.023**        (0.011)          0.038**         (0.019)
Male                                  0.066***       (0.007)          0.032**         (0.015)
Upper Income                          -0.018**       (0.009)          -0.009          (0.014)
Education                             -0.012***      (0.003)          -0.009***       (0.0039
Burglary rate                         0.105          (0.245)          1.184***        (0.400)
N                                     44,365                          30,423
                                      [45,340]                        [43,697]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.331                           0.477
                                      [0.333]                         [0.453]
                                                Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.003          (0.005)          0.047***        (0.010)
                                      [0.001]        (0.005)          [0.039***]      (0.008)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.011*         (0.006)          0.023**         (0.011)
                                      [0.013**]      (0.006)          [0.015]         (0.009)
Gun                                   0.004          (0.005)          0.008           (0.016)
Male                                  0.018***       (0.003)          0.032***        (0.011)
Upper Income                          -0.001         (0.005)          0.013           (0.011)
Education                             -0.004***      (0.001)          -0.004***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.181          (0.156)          1.422***        (0.506)
N                                     44,365                          30,423
                                      [45,340]                        [43,697]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.103                           0.263
                                      [0.105]                         [0.253]
                                                Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.001          (0.002)          0.025***        (0.008)
                                      [0.001]        (0.003)          [0.026***]      (0.006)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.002          (0.002)          0.012**         (0.007)
                                      [0.004]        (0.003)          [0.007]         (0.006)
Gun                                   0.003          (0.002)          -0.005          (0.009)
Male                                  0.007***       (0.002)          0.007           (0.006)
Upper Income                          0.000          (0.002)          0.016**         (0.007)
Education                             -0.001***      (0.000)          -0.003***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.042          (0.083)          0.506           (0.419)
N                                     44,365                          30,423
                                      [44,528]                        [43,697]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.046                           0.132
                                      [0.048]                         [0.127]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
 4. The marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead
 of country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors
 of the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying
 probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                            60
                                           Table 6J
          The Preference for Punishment by the Existence of Armed Conflict in Country
                                               Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                     Armed Conflict or War         No War or Armed Conflict

Victim of Burglary- This or last year            0.021**       (0.009)          0.029***        (0.009)
                                                 [0.021***]    (0.008)          [0.030***]      (0.009)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year             0.009         (0.014)          0.003           (0.007)
                                                 [0.016]       (0.012)          [0.001]         (0.008)
Gun                                              0.007         (0.030)          0.025***        (0.008)
Male                                             0.040*        (0.021)          0.057***        (0.010)
Upper Income                                     -0.028*       (0.015)          -0.005          (0.009)
Education                                        -0.012**      (0.005)          -0.010***       (0.002)
Burglary rate                                    2.006***      (0.770)          0.127           (0.178)
N                                                26,504                         48,284
                                                 [33,042]                       [55,995]
Mean of the dependent variable                   0.570                          0.293
                                                 [0.532]                        [0.310]
                                                          Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year            0.031*        (0.017)          0.018***        (0.004)
                                                 [0.024*]      (0.013)          [0.019***]      (0.005)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year             0.037***      (0.013)          0.006           (0.004)
                                                 [0.036***]    (0.011)          [0.003]         (0.005)
Gun                                              -0.013        (0.020)          0.008*          (0.004)
Male                                             0.041***      (0.013)          0.016***        (0.004)
Upper Income                                     -0.001        (0.011)          0.003           (0.005)
Education                                        -0.006**      (0.003)          -0.002***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                                    2.787***      (0.593)          0.040           (0.188)
N                                                26,504                         48,284
                                                 [33,042]                       [55,995]
Mean of the dependent variable                   0.285                          0.104
                                                 [0.266]                        [0.126]
                                                          Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year            0.020**       (0.010)          0.006**         (0.003)
                                                 [0.020***]    (0.008)          [0.010***]      (0.003)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year             0.016***      (0.006)          0.001           (0.002)
                                                 [0.019***]    (0.006)          [-0.002]        (0.003)
Gun                                              -0.011        (0.011)          0.004*          (0.002)
Male                                             0.013         (0.010)          0.006***        (0.002)
Upper Income                                     0.006         (0.009)          0.002           (0.002)
Education                                        -0.003***     (0.001)          0.000           (0.000)
Burglary rate                                    1.591***      (0.258)          -0.166          (0.159)
N                                                26,504                         48,284
                                                 [33,042]                       [55,183]
Mean of the dependent variable                   0.135                          0.052
                                                 [0.129]                        [0.063]
  The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
  4. The marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead
  of country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors
  of the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying
  probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                             61
                                            Table 6K
                       Preference for Punishment by Country Education
                                                Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      Country Education above        Country Education below
                                      World Median                   World Median
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.022***       (0.007)         0.038***        (0.013)
                                      [0.023***]     (0.008)         [0.039***]      (0.011)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.006          (0.008)         0.009           (0.017)
                                      [0.003]              (0.008) [0.019]           (0.015)
Gun                                   0.020**        (0.010)         0.048***        (0.018)
Male                                  0.062***       (0.008)         0.017           (0.023)
Upper Income                          -0.011         (0.010)         -0.011          (0.017)
Education                             -0.010***      (0.002)         -0.011***       (0.003)
Burglary rate                         -0.015         (0.263)         -0.609          (0.728)
N                                     56,690                         18,098
                                      [66,451]                       [22,586]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.341                          0.547
                                      [0.353]                        [0.508]
                                               Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.010*         (0.006)         0.055***        (0.012)
                                      [0.011*]       (0.006)         [0.046***]      (0.010)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.009          (0.007)         0.041***        (0.015)
                                      [0.006]        (0.007)         [0.036***]      (0.012)
Gun                                   0.000          (0.005)         0.018           (0.017)
Male                                  0.020***       (0.005)         0.039***        (0.013)
Upper Income                          0.003          (0.006)         0.009           (0.013)
Education                             -0.004***      (0.001)         -0.004**        (0.002)
Burglary rate                         0.225          (0.180)         -0.285          (0.741)
N                                     56,690                         18,098
                                      [66,451]                       [22,586]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.129                          0.290
                                      [0.150]                        [0.259]
                                               Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.005**        (0.003)         0.029***        (0.012)
                                      [0.009***]     (0.003)         [0.027***]      (0.009)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.002          (0.002)         0.017*          (0.010)
                                      [0.001]              (0.003) [0.017**]         (0.008)
Gun                                   0.000          (0.002)         0.005           (0.014)
Male                                  0.007***       (0.003)         0.010           (0.007)
Upper Income                          0.003          (0.003)         0.007           (0.010)
Education                             -0.002***      (0.000)         -0.002**        (0.001)
Burglary rate                         0.058          (0.095)         -0.168          (0.416)
N                                     56,690                         18,098
                                      [65,639]                       [22,586]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.060                          0.150
                                      [0.072]                        [0.132]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
 4. The values reported in [brackets] are the obtained from the regressions that include country fixed-effects instead of
 country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors of
 the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying probit
 coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                            62
                                              Table 6L
                     Preference for Punishment by Democracy in Country
                                   The Preference for Punishment
                                                  Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                        Uninterrupted Democracy        Interrupted Democracy
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.026***         (0.007)         0.028**         (0.012)
                                        [0.027***]     (0.007)         [0.027***]      (0.009)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year    0.014*         (0.008)         -0.008          (0.011)
                                        [0.014*]       (0.008)         [-0.001]        (0.012)
Gun                                     0.020*         (0.011)         0.040**         (0.019)
Male                                    0.070***       (0.007)         0.029**         (0.014)
Upper Income                            -0.023***      (0.009)         0.005           (0.011)
Education                               -0.012***      (0.002)         -0.009***       (0.003)
Burglary rate                           -0.135         (0.224)         0.165           (0.562)
N                                       42,698                         32,090
                                        [42,698]                       [46,339]
Mean of the dependent variable          0.345                          0.452
                                        [0.345]                        [0.435]
                                                 Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.003            (0.005)         0.051***        (0.010)
                                        [0.003]        (0.005)         [0.036***]      (0.008)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year    0.012**        (0.006)         0.023**         (0.010)
                                        [0. 012**]     (0.007)               [0.015*]        (0.009)
Gun                                     0.004          (0.004)         0.008           (0.015)
Male                                    0.020***       (0.003)         0.029***        (0.010)
Upper Income                            -0.004         (0.005)         0.014**         (0.007)
Education                               -0.003***      (0.001)         -0.005***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                           0.007          (0.248)         0.387           (0.604)
N                                       42,698                         32,090
                                        [42,698]                       [46,339]
Mean of the dependent variable          0.114                          0.240
                                        [0.114]                        [0.236]
                                                 Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.001            (0.002)         0.027***        (0.009)
                                        [0.001]        (0.001)         [0.025***]      (0.006)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year    0.001          (0.002)         0.016***        (0.006)
                                        [0.001]        (0.003)             [0.010**]         (0.005)
Gun                                     0.002          (0.002)         0.000           (0.009)
Male                                    0.006***       (0.003)         0.008           (0.005)
Upper Income                            -0.002         (0.002)         0.013**         (0.005)
Education                               -0.001**       (0.000)         -0.002***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                           -0.092         (0.157)         0.208           (0.338)
N                                       42,698                         32,090
                                        [41,886]                       [46,339]
Mean of the dependent variable          0.055                          0.116
                                        [0.056]                        [0.116]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
 4. The marginal effects reported in [brackets] are obtained from regressions that include country fixed-effects instead
 of country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors
 of the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying
 probit coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                            63
                                           Table 6M
                Preference for Punishment by Ethno-linguistics Fragmentation
                                       Probit Regressions
                                                Preference for any Jail or Prison Time
                                      Heterogeneous Society          Homogenous Society
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.029***       (0.008)         0.023*          (0.012)
                                      [0.032***]     (0.007)         [0.018*]        (0.011)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.005          (0.011)         0.010           (0.009)
                                      [0.010]        (0.010)         [0.002]         (0.010)
Gun                                   0.019          (0.015)         0.037***        (0.011)
Male                                  0.050***       (0.014)         0.056***        (0.012)
Upper Income                          -0.006         (0.017)         -0.011          (0.007)
Education                             -0.012***      (0.003)         -0.009***       (0.002)
Burglary rate                         0.766***       (0.310)         0.096           (0.406)
N                                     36,902                         37,886
                                      [46,437]                       [42,600]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.482                          0.303
                                      [0.460]                        [0.318]
                                               Preference for at least 2 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.027***       (0.011)         0.018***        (0.006)
                                      [0.027***]     (0.009)         [0.013***]      (0.005)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.027***       (0.009)         0.005           (0.006)
                                      [0.025***]     (0.008)         [0.001]         (0.007)
Gun                                   0.001          (0.009)         0.011***        (0.005)
Male                                  0.032***       (0.009)         0.017***        (0.004)
Upper Income                          0.015          (0.012)         0.000           (0.005)
Education                             -0.005**       (0.002)         -0.004***       (0.001)
Burglary rate                         1.099***       (0.434)         0.396           (0.290)
N                                     36,902                         37,886
                                      [46,437]                       [42,600]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.214                          0.124
                                      [0.218]                        [0.133]
                                               Preference for at least 4 years in Prison
Victim of Burglary- This or last year 0.015**        (0.007)         0.008**         (0.004)
                                      [0.019***]     (0.006)         [0.009***]      (0.004)
Victim of Burglary- Before last year  0.009**        (0.005)         0.003           (0.004)
                                      [0.007]        (0.005)         [0.003]         (0.004)
Gun                                   0.000          (0.006)         0.005           (0.004)
Male                                  0.011*         (0.007)         0.006***        (0.002)
Upper Income                          0.014*         (0.008)         0.000           (0.003)
Education                             -0.002***      (0.001)         -0.001***       (0.000)
Burglary rate                         0.421          (0.380)         0.132           (0.120)
N                                     36,090                         37,886
                                      [45,625]                       [42,600]
Mean of the dependent variable        0.110                          0.056
                                      [0.113]                        [0.060]
 The reported values are the marginal effects. Regressions include all explanatory variables included in models of Table
 4. The values reported in [brackets] are the obtained from the regressions that include country fixed-effects instead of
 country characteristics. The rest of the coefficients are not reported in the interest of space. Robust standard errors of
 the marginal effects, clustered at the country level, are in parentheses. Statistical significance of the underlying probit
 coefficients at the 10% , 5% and 1% level are indicated by *, **, and ***.


                                                            64
