                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CLIMATE CHANGE AND ECONOMIC GROWTH:
                       EVIDENCE FROM THE LAST HALF CENTURY

                                           Melissa Dell
                                        Benjamin F. Jones
                                        Benjamin A. Olken

                                       Working Paper 14132
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14132


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Esther Duflo, Michael Greenstone, Jonathan Gruber, Seema Jayachandran,
Charles Jones, Peter Klenow, William Nordhaus, Elias Papaioannou, and Carl Wunsch for helpful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Melissa Dell, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Climate Change and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century
Melissa Dell, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 14132
June 2008
JEL No. O11,O13,O40,Q54

                                                ABSTRACT

This paper uses annual variation in temperature and precipitation over the past 50 years to examine
the impact of climatic changes on economic activity throughout the world. We find three primary results.
First, higher temperatures substantially reduce economic growth in poor countries but have little effect
in rich countries. Second, higher temperatures appear to reduce growth rates in poor countries, rather
than just the level of output. Third, higher temperatures have wide-ranging effects in poor nations,
reducing agricultural output, industrial output, and aggregate investment, and increasing political instability.
Analysis of decade or longer climate shifts also shows substantial negative effects on growth in poor
countries. Should future impacts of climate change mirror these historical effects, the negative impact
on poor countries may be substantial.


Melissa Dell                                           Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics                                Harvard Society of Fellows
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                  78 Mt. Auburn St.
50 Memorial Drive, Cambridge MA 02142                  Cambridge, MA 02138
mdell@mit.edu                                          and NBER
                                                       bolken@nber.org
Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1.     Introduction
       Climate change may – or may not – be a central issue for the world economy. Yet

assessing the economic impact of climate change faces a fundamental challenge of complexity:

the set of mechanisms through which climate may influence economic outcomes, positively or

negatively, is extremely large and difficult to investigate comprehensively. Even if the effect of

climate on each relevant mechanism were known, one would still be faced with the challenge of

how various mechanisms interact to shape macroeconomic outcomes.

       The complexity of the climate-economy relationship is apparent in a brief survey of the

literature. Much research focuses on agriculture (e.g., Adams et al. 1990; Mendelsohn et al.

2001; Deschenes and Greenstone 2007; Guiteras 2007). Other research examines ocean fisheries,

fresh water access, storm frequency, migration, tourism and many other potential issues, as

reviewed extensively in the recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 4th Assessment

Report (IPCC 2007). Less discussed, but perhaps critical, are classic ideas in economic

development that link productivity to temperature (e.g., Montesquieu 1750; Marshall 1890;

Huntington 1915). Meanwhile, there are well-established, substantial effects of temperature on

mortality (e.g. Curriero et al. 2002; Deschenes and Moretti 2007; Deschenes and Greenstone

2007), temperature on crime (e.g. Field 1992; Jacob et al. 2007), and drought on conflict (Miguel

et al. 2004), all of which have direct and indirect effects on economic activity. Faced with these

different channels, the traditional approach to estimating the overall economic impact of climate

change is to use “Integrated Assessment Models” (IAM), which take some subset of

mechanisms, specify their effects, and then add them up (e.g. Mendelsohn et al. 2000, Nordhaus




                                                 1
and Boyer 2000, Tol 2002). Implementations of the IAM approach require many assumptions

about which effects to include, how each operates, and how they aggregate. 1

        This paper takes a different approach. Rather than identifying mechanisms one-by-one

and summing up, we examine the effects of temperature and precipitation on a single aggregate

measure: economic growth. Specifically, we construct historical temperature and precipitation

data for each country and year in the world from 1950 to 2003 and combine this dataset with

historical growth data. The main identification strategy uses year-to-year fluctuations in

temperature and precipitation within countries to estimate the impact of temperature and

precipitation on economic growth. 2 This approach estimates the effect of short-run climate

fluctuations using relatively few assumptions. It examines aggregated outcomes directly, rather

than relying on a priori assumptions about what mechanisms to include and how they might

operate, interact, and aggregate.

        Our main results show large, negative effects of higher temperatures on growth, but only

in poor countries. In poorer countries, we estimate that a 1◦C rise in temperature in a given year

reduces economic growth in that year by about 1.1 percentage points. In rich countries, changes

in temperature have no discernable effect on growth. Changes in precipitation also have no

substantial effects on growth in either poor or rich countries. We find broadly consistent results

across a wide range of alternative specifications.




1
  As a result of these many assumptions, even primary users of these models acknowledge their substantial
limitations. For example, the Stern report (2007) describes IAM models as follows (p. 145):
        “Making such estimates is a formidable task in many ways (discussed below). It is also a computationally
        demanding exercise, with the result that such models must make drastic, often heroic, simplifications along
        all stages of the climate-change chain. What is more, large uncertainties are associated with each element in
        the cycle. Nevertheless, the IAMs remain the best tool available for estimating aggregate quantitative global
        costs and risks of climate change.”
2
  The use of annual variation in temperature and precipitation to estimate the impact of climate change was
pioneered by Deschenes and Greenstone (2007), who use annual county-level data in the United States to estimate
the impact of climate on U.S. agricultural output.


                                                             2
       To interpret these effects, one can distinguish two potential ways temperature could

affect economic activity: 1) influencing the level of output, for example by affecting agricultural

yields, or 2) influencing an economy’s ability to grow, for example by affecting investments or

institutions that influence productivity growth. By looking at multiple lags of temperature, we

can examine whether temperature shocks appear to have temporary or persistent impacts on

economic output – and thus whether temperature has level or growth effects (or both). Our

results suggest that higher temperatures may reduce the growth rate in poor countries, not simply

the level of output. Since even small growth effects have large consequences over time, these

growth effects – if they persist in the medium run – would imply large impacts of temperature

increases.

       We also find evidence for a broad set of mechanisms through which temperature might

affect growth in poor countries. While agricultural output contractions are part of the story, we

also find adverse effects of hot years on industrial output and aggregate investment. Further,

higher temperatures lead to political instability in poor countries, as evidenced by irregular

changes in the national leadership. These industry, investment, and institutional effects sit

outside the primarily agricultural focus of most economic research on climate change and

underscore the importance of an inclusive approach to understanding climate change

implications. These broader mechanisms also help explain how temperature might affect growth

rates in poor countries, not simply the level of output.

       These results are identified using short-run fluctuations in temperature and precipitation.

A fundamental issue, however, is that the long-run effects of climate change may be quite

different from the effects of short-run fluctuations. For example, in the long run, adaptation

mechanisms might mitigate the short-run economic impacts that we observe. Alternatively,




                                                  3
climate change may have additional long-run effects, including changes in water tables, soil

quality, and sea level, producing larger impacts (IPCC, 2007; Meehl et al., 2004; Nicholls and

Leatherman, 1995).

       Although our approach (like others) cannot fully overcome these challenges, we can

make further headway by examining longer-term climate shifts. Mean global land temperatures

have risen nearly 1◦C since 1970 (Brohan et al. 2006), but countries have not warmed equally.

We therefore examine whether those countries that experienced the largest climate shifts

between early and late periods in our sample had the largest shifts in their growth rates. Though

this approach has less statistical power than using annual variation, the estimated effects of

increased temperature in poor countries over decade or longer time horizons are very similar to

our panel estimates. Should there be rapid adaptation to climate change, these estimates also

appear consistent with the overall cross-sectional relationship between temperature and per-

capita GDP found in the world today. To the extent that these historical effects continue, our

estimates suggest substantial negative consequences of climate change for poor countries and

few effects on rich countries.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the data and

provides descriptive statistics. Section 3 describes the estimation strategy, presents the main

results, and considers a number of robustness checks. Section 4 considers channels that may link

climate change to national output. Section 5 estimates the effects of longer-run climate shifts,

offers projected implications of climate change using a standard climate model, and discusses the

limitations of such predictions. Section 6 concludes.




                                                 4
2.       Data and Descriptive Statistics

2.1.     Data
         The historical climate data is taken from the Terrestrial Air Temperature and

Precipitation: 1900-2006 Gridded Monthly Time Series, Version 1.01 (Matsuura and Willmott

2007). This data set provides worldwide (terrestrial) monthly mean temperature and precipitation

data at 0.5 x 0.5 degree resolution (approximately 56km x 56km at the equator). Values are

interpolated for each grid node from an average of 20 different weather stations, with corrections

for elevation.

         We use geospatial software to aggregate the climate data to the country-year level. Our

main specifications use population-weighted average temperature and precipitation, where the

weights are constructed from 1990 population data at 30 arc second resolution (approximately

1km at the equator) from the Global Rural-Urban Mapping Project (Balk et al. 2004). We also

consider averaging based on geographic area, which produces broadly similar climate variables

for most countries. 3 Appendix I presents additional details about the climate data.

         For economic data, we primarily use the Penn World Tables Version 6.2 (Heston et al.

2006). We also use data from the World Development Indicators (World Bank 2007) to examine

robustness and disaggregated value-added output from agriculture and industry. We focus on the

panel of 136 countries with at least 20 years of GDP data in the Penn World Tables, and consider

other samples as robustness checks.


2.2.     Descriptive statistics
         Figure 1 presents population-weighted global mean temperature and precipitation from

1950 to 2006. The figure shows that the world has become about 1◦C warmer since the early


3
 Countries where the weighting scheme makes a substantial difference are those with large, sparsely populated
areas with unusual climates: Russia (Siberia), Canada (the arctic and sub-arctic areas), the United States (Alaska),
and Australia (central Australia).


                                                          5
1970s, and that average precipitation has fallen by about 10 cm. The warming trend since the

1970s is well-documented (e.g. Brohan et al. 2006) and suggests a linear rate of change that,

should it continue, would predict an additional 3◦C warming by 2100, in line with many climate

models. The decline in precipitation is also well-documented, though this trend stands in contrast

to most climate models, which predict that global warming will come with increased

precipitation on average. 4

         To examine variation in climate, Figure 2 summarizes temperature (left graph) and

precipitation (right graph) data for each country in the sample, plotted against log per-capita PPP

GDP in the year 2000. For each country, the circle symbols represent the mean levels of

temperature and precipitation in the first decade of our sample (1950-1959), the plus symbols

represent the mean levels in the last decade of our sample (1996-2005), and the gray lines

indicate the range of annual mean levels we observe for that country.

         The left panel of Figure 2 shows the tremendous temperature variation across countries:

the hottest country in the world is Mauritania, with an average population-weighted temperature

of 28.4 ºC, and the coldest is Mongolia, with an average population-weighted temperature of

-1.77 ºC. Figure 2 also shows the strong relationship between temperature and per-capita income,

with hot countries tending to be poor and cold countries rich. This relationship has been known

since at least the 18th century (Montesquieu 1750) and has been further established using sub-

national data (Nordhaus 2006). The exceptions to this rule fall into two main groups: oil states of

the Middle East, such as Qatar and Kuwait, which are hot and wealthy, and Communist / post-

Communist states, such as Mongolia and North Korea, which are cold and poor.


4
 Historical area-weighted data for land shows a precipitation increase of nearly 1 cm over the 20th century.
However, a peak occurred in the 1950s, with precipitation falling across more recent decades (Neng et al., 2002;
New et al., 2001). On average, climate projections predict a rise in precipitation equal to about half of the recent
global decrease by the end of the 21st century (see IPCC 2007 Working Group 1 Chapter 10).


                                                           6
       Looking at variability within countries, we see fluctuations in annual mean temperatures

on the order of about 2-3ºC. Thus, the max-min variation within countries is more than twice the

average increase in temperature observed over the period, and similar to the increase in global

temperatures expected to occur over the next century. Figure 2 further shows that, while there

tend to be larger temperature fluctuations in cooler countries, the upward trend in temperature

has occurred globally with similar magnitude in both hot and cold countries.

       Examining the data on precipitation in the right panel of Figure 2 shows substantial

annual variability in precipitation in all but the very driest countries. However, there is no clear

relationship between the level of precipitation and the level of per-capita income in 2000.

       To examine the variability further, Table 1 documents the extent of temperature and

precipitation fluctuations within countries. While the max-min difference in temperature is about

2-3ºC (Figure 2), a country’s temperature deviates more than 1ºC from the country mean

approximately once every fifteen years. Precipitation is more volatile, with deviations from mean

rainfall of about 400-500mm appearing once every fifteen years. When common global or

region-specific year fixed effects are removed, these deviations become somewhat more modest.




                                                  7
3.       The effect of climate fluctuations on economic activity

         In this section we develop the empirical framework for the analysis of climate shocks,

present our main results, and consider a variety of robustness checks.


3.1.     Empirical framework

         Our empirical framework follows the derivation in Bond et al. (2007). To fix ideas,

consider the following simple economy: 5

                           Yit = e βTit Ait Lit                                            (1)

                           ΔAit / Ait = gi + γTit                                          (2)

where Y is aggregate output, L measures population, A measures labor productivity, and T

measures climate. Equation (1) captures the level effect of climate on production; e.g. the effect

of current temperature or precipitation on crop yields. Equation (2) captures the growth effect of

climate; e.g. the effect of climate on features such as institutions that influence productivity

growth.

         Taking logs in the production function and differencing with respect to time, we have the

dynamic growth equation

                            git = g i + ( β + γ )Tit − βTit −1                             (3)

where git is the growth rate of per-capita output. The “level effects” of climate shocks on output,

which come from equation (1), appear through β . The “growth effects” of climate shocks,

which come from equation (2), appear through γ . 6



5
  We focus here on this simple production model. Appendix II extends the reasoning developed here to more general
dynamic panel models that incorporate richer lag structures and lagged dependent variables.
6
  Rather than first-differencing (1), one could integrate (2), producing a fully-specified equation in the log level of
output. However, as Bond et al. (2007) notes, this creates non-stationarity in both output levels (on the left-hand
side) and accumulable factors (on the right-hand side). To avoid relying on cointegration assumptions for
identification, Bond et al recommend first-differencing.


                                                            8
         The growth equation in (3) allows separate identification of level effects and growth

effects through the examination of transitory weather shocks. In particular, both effects influence

the growth rate in the initial period of the shock. The difference is that the level effect eventually

reverses itself as the climate returns to its prior state. For example, a temperature shock may

reduce agricultural yields, but once temperature returns to its average value, agricultural yields

bounce back. By contrast, the growth effect appears during the climate shock and is not reversed:

a failure to innovate in one period leaves the country permanently further behind. The growth

effect is identified in (3) as the summation of the climate effects over time.

         The above reasoning extends to models where climate effects play out more slowly. 7

With more general lag structures in (1) and (2), the growth effect is still identified by summing

the lagged effects of the climate shock. This standard distributed-lag result is demonstrated

formally in Appendix II.

         To estimate these effects, we run panel regressions of the form

                            g it = θ i + θ rt + ∑ j =0 ρ j Tit − j +ε it
                                                     L
                                                                                            (4)

where θ i are country fixed effects, θ rt are time fixed effects (interacted separately with region

dummies and a poor country dummy in our main specifications), ε it is an error term clustered by

country, and Tit is a vector of climate variables (temperature and precipitation) with up to L lags

included. In addition, we also consider variations of (4) that include interactions between climate

variables and country characteristics. We have verified using Monte Carlo analysis that the




7
 For example, low temperatures in the latter part of one year could affect harvests the next year – which would
generate a lagged level effect. Alternatively, a permanent shock to productivity could influence subsequent capital
accumulation as the capital stock adjusted to its new steady state – which would generate a lagged growth effect.
The key distinction is that, as in equation (3), level effects eventually generate equal and opposite responses through
further lags, whereas growth effects do not. See Appendix II.


                                                               9
specification in (4) produces unbiased estimates of both growth and level effects and has

appropriate size given the properties of our data. (See Appendix II for more details.)

       We begin by estimating (4) with no lags, focusing on the null hypothesis that climate

does not affect growth:

                        H 0 ( L = 0) : ρ 0 = 0

A failure to reject this hypothesis would indicate an absence of both level and growth effects. In

subsequent regressions with lags, following the conventions in the distributed-lag literature (see

Greene 2000), we separately test the immediate effect of temperature:

                        H 01 ( L > 0) : ρ 0 = 0

and the cumulated effect of temperature:

                        H 02 ( L > 0) : ∑ j =0 ρ j = 0
                                          L




The summation of the lag coefficients corresponds to the parameter γ, the growth effect, in the

simple model above, as well as a more general concept of growth effects in models with longer

lag structures, as demonstrated in Appendix II. Appendix II also discusses generalizations of the

empirical model and tests following Bond et al. (2007) that allow for more general short-run

dynamics. As discussed in the appendix, the results from the extended dynamic model are very

similar to the results from the simpler model developed here.


3.2.   Panel results
       Table 2 examines the null hypothesis that climate does not affect growth, either through

level effects or growth effects. It presents results from estimating equation (4) with no lags (i.e.,

imposing ρj = 0 for all j > 0; models with lags are examined in the next subsection). Column (1)

of Table 2 shows a negative but statistically insignificant relationship between temperature

fluctuations and growth. In column (2), we interact temperature with a dummy for a country


                                                         10
being “poor”, defined as having below-median PPP-adjusted per-capita GDP in the first year the

country enters the dataset. The coefficient on the interaction between the “poor” dummy and

temperature is negative and statistically significant, indicating substantial heterogeneity between

poor and rich countries. 8 As shown in the last row of the table (which reports the sum of the

main effect of temperature and its interaction with the poor dummy), the net effect of a 1◦C rise

in temperature is to decrease growth rates in poor countries by -1.09 percentage points.

         The next columns of Table 2 examine the impact of precipitation and do not show strong

effects, in rich or poor countries. Focusing on column (4), an extra 100mm of annual

precipitation is associated with a 0.07 percentage point lower growth rate in rich countries and a

statistically insignificant 0.05 percentage point higher growth rate in poor countries. Since global

mean precipitation levels have fallen nearly 100mm in the last 50 years (see Figure 1), a 100mm

variation in precipitation is on the same order historically as the 1◦ C rise in temperature. By this

metric, the precipitation effects typically appear at least a factor of 10 smaller than the

temperature effect in poor countries. Moreover, Table 4 below shows that the statistical

significance of the precipitation effects are sensitive to specification, suggesting that they should

be interpreted with caution. Column (5) shows that controlling for temperature and precipitation

simultaneously leaves both estimates unchanged.

         Poorer countries tend to be both hotter and more agricultural. In columns (6) and (7) we

consider whether being “poor” proxies for these characteristics. Column (6) adds the interaction

between temperature and “hot”, defined as having above median temperature in the 1950s. The

negative effect of temperature appears through being poor, not through being hot, with the poor




8
 We have also considered quintiles of initial per-capita income rather than a binary distinction. We find the largest
negative effects of temperature on the bottom 2 quintiles of temperature.


                                                         11
coefficient remaining unchanged. 9 Column (7) controls for the interaction between temperature

and “agricultural”, defined as having an above median agricultural GDP share in 1995. 10 Once

again, the negative effect of temperature appears through being poor. 11 While it is impossible to

definitively separate the impacts of poverty from those of the agriculture share or mean

temperature, this evidence suggests that being poor characterizes a locus of substantial negative

temperature effects.


3.3.     Models with lags
         The above results, using the simple model with no lags, reject the null hypothesis that

temperature has no effect on growth in poor countries. This section considers more flexible

models with up to 10 lags of temperature to better understand the dynamics of these temperature

effects, nesting both the level and growth effects of temperature described in Section 3.1.

         Table 3 presents results from estimating equation (4) with no lags, one lag, three lags,

five lags, or ten lags of the climate variables. In columns (1) – (5), temperature and its lags are

the only climate variables included. Columns (6) – (10) present results where precipitation and

its lags are also included. All climate variables are interacted with poor and rich country

dummies. The bottom two rows of each column present, separately, the cumulated effect of

temperature for poor and rich countries, calculated by summing the respective temperature

variable and its lags. In models with more than three lags, given space constraints, the table

reports only the first three lags and the sum of all the lags.

9
  In results not reported in the table, we have also experimented with different definitions of “hot,” such as being
above the 75th or 90th percentiles of the world average temperature distribution, as well a linear temperature variable.
The results from these alternative specifications are qualitatively similar to the results presented in the Table.
10
   We use 1995 data for agricultural share because data coverage from earlier years is sparse. Using earlier data cuts
sample sizes considerably but produces broadly similar results.
11
   In results not reported in the table, regressions that control only for temperature fluctuations and their interaction
with the agriculture share (i.e. not including interactions with national income) produce statistically insignificant
effects for agriculture, further suggesting that poverty is the more informative characteristic. Furthermore,
regressions that include linear interactions with initial income, temperature, and agriculture share (as opposed to
binary dummies) continue to show that initial poverty is the relevant distinction.


                                                           12
        Table 3 shows that the cumulative effect of temperature in poor countries becomes more

negative as more lags are included. With no lags, in columns (1) and (6), a one-time 1ºC

temperature increase in a poor country reduces growth by 1.07 – 1.09 percentage points. With

one lag included, the cumulative effect is a reduction of 1.28 – 1.30 percentage points. Including

three, five, or ten lags increases the magnitude and statistical significance of these cumulative

effects, with a 1ºC temperature increase producing a 1.58 – 2.01 percentage point reduction in

growth.

        The individual lag coefficients show little evidence of a level effect of temperature on

output. That is, the effects of above average temperature appear to persist in the medium-run,

rather than being reversed. Recalling the empirical framework from Section 3.1, level effects are

reversed when the climate shock is reversed. In the model with one lag – i.e., columns (2) and (6)

– a level effect would appear as equal and opposite coefficients on the immediate effect and the

first lag. More generally, even if level effects occur with lags – i.e., if last year’s temperature

affects this year’s harvest – level effects are eventually reversed once the shock disappears.

Therefore, to the extent temperature effects are level effects, the cumulated sum of the

temperature effect and all its lags should be zero. That the lags in Table 3 do not sum to zero –

and, in fact, the cumulated effect of temperature becomes stronger as more lags are added –

suggests that the effects of temperature persist in the medium run; i.e., they look more like

growth effects than level effects.

        Of course, temperature effects may be mitigated beyond the 10-year horizon examined

here. However, the increasing cumulative impact of temperature as longer lags are considered

suggests that, if anything, the effects of temperature shocks strengthen over time rather than

diminish. In Section 5.1, we consider an alternative empirical approach that examines longer-run




                                                  13
historical relationships between changes in temperature and changes in growth. That analysis

finds longer-run effects consistent with these panel results.


3.4.     Robustness
         Table 4 considers a variety of robustness checks. For each specification, Panel A reports

the results from models with no lags (i.e., equivalent to column 5 of Table 2), Panel B reports

cumulative effects from models with five lags (i.e., equivalent to the cumulative effects in

column 9 of Table 3), and Panel C reports cumulative effects from models with ten lags (i.e.,

equivalent to the cumulative effects in column 10 of Table 3). Results from models with one and

three lags are qualitatively similar and are omitted to conserve space. To facilitate comparisons,

the relevant results from Tables 2 and 3 are repeated in the first column of Table 4.

         We find that the results are broadly consistent across a range of alternative specifications.

Column (2) shows that including only country and region × year fixed effects (i.e., dropping the

poor × year fixed effects) produces similar estimated temperature effects in poor countries.

Similar results also emerge in column (3), which uses common global year fixed effects instead

of region × year fixed effects, and column (4), which incorporates country-specific trends as well

as region × year and poor × year fixed effects, though the standard errors increase in column (4)

so that the five and ten lag results are no longer statistically significant. 12

         Column (5) shows that limiting the sample to 1971-2003, for which we have a balanced

sample, strengthens the temperature effect in poor countries. Column (6) adds countries with less

than 20 years of data, and continues to show substantial negative effects in poor countries. In this

sample, the zero-lag model shows a positive effect of increased temperature in richer countries.

12
  In addition, we have also considered using logs rather than levels of annual average temperature and precipitation.
This specification strengthens the results. We have also estimated a first differenced version of (4), i.e.
Δg it = Δθ rt + ∑ j = 0 ρ j ΔTit − j +Δε it . This produces very similar results for the 0 lag model, while the estimates become
                  L


substantially more negative and more imprecise as we add additional lags.


                                                              14
This effect is driven by several post-Soviet states, which are grouped as rich and which enter the

data in the early 1990s, and appears to be driven by extreme outliers during the post-Communist

transition. 13

        Column (7) re-considers the main specification using growth data from the World

Development Indicators rather than the Penn World Tables. The zero-lag and five-lag results are

very similar using WDI data. The ten-lag result attenuates somewhat and is statistically

insignificant. Column (8) uses climate data aggregated using area-weighting rather than

population-weighting and shows similar effects. 14 Finally, we split the sample into Sub-Saharan

African countries (column 9) and all other countries (column 10). In the model with zero lags,

the negative impacts of temperature are especially pronounced in Sub-Saharan Africa and much

weaker elsewhere. However, when we examine either the five or ten lag models, the negative

point estimates are similar and large (though statistically insignificant) in both samples. 15

        In our analysis, temperature enters linearly, whereas one might suspect that temperature

has non-linear effects. 16 To investigate this possibility, we examined more flexible

aggregations of the sub-national temperature data. Using daily climate data available on a 1.0 x

1.0 degree grid (NCC, 2005), we calculated the number of ‘people-days’ spent at each

temperature and precipitation level throughout the year for each country. We then repeated the

panel analysis above (e.g., equation (4) with no lags) allowing the climate effects to vary

arbitrarily at different temperature and precipitation ranges. Unfortunately, we did not have

13
   Estimating the effect of temperature on growth for the sub-sample of post-Soviet / Eastern European countries
shows that each 1◦C is associated with 3.9 percentage points higher growth. However, when excluding the transition
years 1992, 1993, and 1994, each 1◦C rise becomes associated with 0.62 percentage points lower growth.
14
   Weighting by rural population or urban population yields similar results to using total population weights.
15
   Another potential concern is that climate data quality may be lower for Africa. We have repeated our analysis of
Africa with a number of (independently collected) alternative datasets – the Global Precipitation Climatology
Project, the National Center for Environment Prediction, and the UN Food and Agricultural Organization Climatic
Data. Results are very similar in all samples.
16
   For example, Deschenes and Greenstone (2007a, 2007b) find non-linear temperature effects for agriculture and
mortality.


                                                        15
sufficient power to tease out detailed effects of the distribution of days within different climate

ranges. While the results are imprecise, the point estimates suggest that the impact of

temperature on GDP is roughly linear, supporting the focus on annual averages (results available

on request). 17


4.       Channels
         The climate change literature suggests a wide array of channels through which climate

may affect economic outcomes, from agriculture to political instability to health. In this section,

we apply the panel methodology developed above to investigate several such mechanisms.

         It is important to note that these analyses are reduced-form, and therefore do not identify

the possibly complex structural relationships between climate, growth, and other outcomes. For

example, higher temperature could lead directly to political instability by making a population

more prone to riot, with possible effects on growth. Conversely higher temperature could cause

lower agriculture yields, with the resulting GDP reduction leading to political instability. Teasing

out structural relationships between these many variables would require a large number of

identifying assumptions. Instead, we focus on net climate effects, documenting several plausible

channels through which climate may affect aggregate output.


4.1.     Decomposing the impacts of climate
         Table 5 examines the impact of temperature and precipitation on several components of

GDP. Panel A begins with zero-lag models to test the null hypotheses of no effects of

temperature and precipitation. Column (1) examines growth in agricultural value-added, and



17
  We have also conducted several exercises to look for nonlinear effects of the average temperature variable and
found little evidence for non-linearities at that level as well. First, we verified that both hot and cold deviations from
the national temperature mean have effects of similar absolute magnitude on growth. Second, we used median
regressions to verify that the results are not driven by outliers. Third, we found that temperature shocks do not affect
poor countries differentially depending on whether the country is typically hot or cold, though the tiny number of
cold poor countries prevents a definitive conclusion on this dimension (results available on request).


                                                           16
column (2) investigates growth in industrial value-added. 18 These variables are taken from the

World Development Indicators. (Note that the WDI sample is more limited than the PWT

sample.) Column (3) examines growth in investment, using data from the Penn World Tables.

        The results in Panel A show substantial, negative effects of temperature in poor countries

on all three of these components of GDP. Column (1) shows that a 1◦C higher temperature in

poor countries is associated with 2.37 percentage points lower growth in agricultural output. For

wealthier countries, the point estimate is substantially smaller and not statistically significant,

showing 0.34 percentage points lower growth in agricultural output for each additional 1◦C of

temperature. As might be expected, precipitation positively impacts agriculture – each additional

100mm of annual rainfall is associated with 0.24 percentage points higher growth in agricultural

output in poor countries and 0.14 percentage points higher growth in agricultural output in richer

countries.

        Column (2) of Panel A shows negative temperature impacts on the growth of industrial

value-added in poor countries. Specifically, a 1◦C higher temperature in poor countries is

associated with 2.44 percentage points lower growth in industrial output. This effect may reflect

labor productivity losses, consistent with a long literature documenting the impact of temperature

on output in factory settings. 19 Alternatively, this effect could represent a demand-side spillover

from the negative effect of temperature on agricultural output.




18
   The residual category, services, is typically computed as the difference between total value-added and the sum of
agricultural and industrial value added. As such, it is likely more noisily measured and, consistent with increased
measurement error we find no statistically significant results when we examine services (results available on
request).
19
   Building on classic ideas in economic development that link productivity to temperature (Montesquieu 1750;
Marshall 1890), Huntington (1915) documented that high temperature reduces the productivity of piece-rate
Connecticut factory workers and Florida cigar-makers. More recently, Link and Pepler (1970), Wyon (1976), Meese
et al. (1982), and others have found substantial negative impacts of higher temperatures on the productivity of
factory workers.


                                                        17
         The results on investment in column (3) also show substantial negative impacts of

temperature in poor countries. Specifically, a 1◦C higher temperature in poor countries reduces

the growth rate of investment by 3 percentage points. We find no temperature effects in rich

countries. 20

         Panel B examines the lag structure of these effects. For each dependent variable (growth

in agriculture, growth in industry, and growth in investment), we present results with 1, 5, and 10

lags. For all three dependent variables, the impact effect – i.e., the coefficient on

contemporaneous temperature – is negative, large, and statistically significant. For agriculture

and investment, the point estimates of the cumulative effects, while imprecise, are somewhat

smaller than the immediate effects, suggesting the presence of some combination of growth and

level effects for these variables. By contrast, for industrial value added, the point estimates of the

cumulative effects are virtually identical to the immediate effect. 21

         Overall, the findings in Table 5 demonstrate broad negative effects of increased

temperature. We find effects not only on agriculture, but also on industrial output and

investment. The fact that temperature has such broad effects may help explain both the

magnitude of the overall effect of temperature on output as well as its persistence.


4.2.     Political economy effects
         Temperature may also impact growth if increased temperature leads to political

instability, which in turn impedes investment and productivity growth. The idea that riots and

protests are more likely in warmer weather is an old idea that has found substantial empirical

20
   Note, however, that there is a significant precipitation effect in rich countries. Using daily data on precipitation
(NCC, 2005), we find that having a larger number of days with very high precipitation has a significant negative
effect on aggregate output in rich countries (results available upon request). One conjecture is that construction
responds negatively to rain, providing the investment effect.
21
   There also is some evidence of cumulative effects of precipitation on agricultural output, particularly in rich
countries. One potential explanation involves the effects of drought on soil erosion, which may have longer-run
consequences. For example, Hornbeck (2007) documents that soil erosion during the Dust Bowl years in the United
States had substantially negative and lasting consequences on agricultural output.


                                                          18
support (e.g., United States Riot Commission, 1968; Carlsmith and Anderson, 1979;

Boyanowsky, 1999). 22 If warm weather causes riots, in some fraction of cases these riots could

spill over into political change and instability. Alternatively, economic shocks from climate

might provoke dissatisfied citizens to seek institutional change.

         We examine the impact of temperature on several measures of political instability. First,

the Polity IV dataset (Marshall and Jaggers 2004) rates the political system in each country

annually from -10 (fully autocratic) to +10 (fully democratic). This POLITY variable further

designates “interregnum periods”, which are years when the political system is in flux and no

clear political regime has emerged. We consider two dummy variables: one for any change in the

POLITY variable, indicating a political change, and one for a POLITY interregnum period,

indicating a period of political turmoil.

         The second set of measures comes from the Archigos dataset on political leaders

(Goemans et al 2006). This dataset classifies the primary national political leader for each

country and year and codes all leader transitions into two categories: “regular” transitions, which

take place according to the prevailing institutional rules of the country, and “irregular”

transitions (such as coups), which do not follow the prevailing institutional rules. We consider a

dummy variable for years with leadership transitions, as well as separate dummy variables for

regular and irregular transitions.

         The results are presented in Table 6. Looking first at POLITY, an additional 1°C in poor

countries is associated with a (statistically insignificant) 2.3 percentage point increase in the

probability of any change in POLITY. Column (2) shows that a 1°C increase in temperature

leads to a 2.3 percentage point increase in the probability of a POLITY interregnum period,

22
  Medical studies have documented that levels of platelet paroxitine – a chemical that blocks impulsivity and
aggression – fall when temperatures increase and have linked low levels of platelet paroxitine to higher rates of
aggression (Tihonen et al., 1997). Violent crime also increases with temperature (Jacob et al. 2007).


                                                         19
which suggests that all of the changes in POLITY induced by temperature occur through

increases in political instability. Though these effects are statistically insignificant (p-values of

0.16 and 0.20 respectively), the estimated magnitudes are substantial, given that the baseline

probability of a POLITY change in poor countries is 13.1 percent and the baseline probability of

an interregnum period in poor countries is only 5.7 percent. The results on precipitation are

somewhat weaker, but suggest that political change in poor countries is more likely in years with

lower rainfall.

        The Archigos results show a similar pattern and are stronger statistically. A one degree

rise of temperature raises the probability of leader transitions by 3.7 percentage points in poor

countries (column 3). Moreover, this effect comes not from regular leadership transitions

(column 4) but from irregular leader transitions – i.e. coups (column 5). This effect of 3.9

percentage points is large, as the baseline probability of an irregular leader transition is only 4.5

percent per year in poor countries. By contrast, we see no effects on leader transitions in rich

countries.

        Combined, the POLITY and Archigos data tell a consistent story: higher temperatures are

associated with political instability in poor countries. Whether temperature has direct effects on

political instability, which in turn affects economic growth, or whether temperature has direct

effects on economic growth, which in turn affects political instability – or both – is difficult to

distinguish, since poor economic performance and political instability are likely mutually

reinforcing. Nevertheless, the impact of temperature on political instability in poor countries is

suggestive of an institutional mechanism through which temperature might affect productivity

growth, rather than just the level of income.




                                                  20
         The final columns of Table 6 consider the impact of temperature and precipitation on

conflict. We use the PRIO conflict data (PRIO 2006), which indicates for every country-year

whether the country was involved in a high-intensity conflict (defined as ≥ 1,000 conflict deaths /

year) or a low-intensity conflict (defined as 25 to 1000 conflict deaths / year). Column (6)

examines the start of conflicts (i.e., the probability a conflict begins given no conflict in the

previous period), and column (7) examines the end of conflicts (i.e., the probability a conflict

ends given conflict in the previous period). 23 We find no significant effect of temperature or

precipitation on either the start or conclusion of conflicts. 24 The political impacts of temperature

and precipitation thus appear more concentrated in political instability rather than outright civil

or interstate wars.



5.       The longer-run
         In this section, we re-examine the historical data to investigate longer-term climate

changes. We then discuss some illustrative implications of climate change obtained by

integrating our historical estimates with standard climate projections.


5.1.     Longer-run historical estimates

         The short-run panel estimates indicate substantial effects of temperature shocks in poor

countries, with per-capita income growth falling approximately 1 percentage point for a 1◦C rise

in temperature. Although this effect persists for 10 years in the panel model, the effect of

sustained temperature increases might attenuate over time if economies adapt. On the other hand,



23
   Given how rare conflicts are, we use year fixed effects rather than region-by-year fixed effects in these
specifications.
24
   These results differ from Miguel et al. (2004), who find - also using the PRIO dataset - that greater precipitation is
associated with a lower probability of conflict. Miguel et al. examine only Sub-Saharan African countries from
1981-1999, and use a somewhat different empirical specification from the one in Table 6.


                                                           21
sustained higher temperatures may reinforce growth-related problems by placing continued

pressure on political systems, health, crime, or other channels.

        We therefore consider the longer-run analogue of our panel specification, examining the

relationship between climatic changes and growth changes in the early and late periods in our

dataset. There is substantial heterogeneity in temperature increases over this period, with

countries such as Tunisia, Zambia, and Botswana warming by approximately 1◦C since the mid

1980s, while others such as Laos, Kenya, and Nigeria experienced almost no warming over the

same period. We exploit this variation to ask whether countries with sustained warming saw

sustained changes in growth.

        Specifically, we estimate the following regression

                           g i 2 − g i1 = α + θ r + γ (Ti 2 − Ti1 ) + ε i

where g i1 is the mean growth rate in country i in the early period (1970-1985 in our main

specification) and g i 2 is the mean growth rate in the late period (1986-2000). 25 Mean

temperature and precipitation in these periods are Ti1 and Ti 2 , while θ r captures region fixed

effects and a dummy for being poor, and ε i is an independently distributed error term. This first-

differenced regression is the longer-run version of the fixed effects panel model in equation (4).

To see this, start with equation (4) with no lags, take averages of the left- and right-hand sides for

a given period, and then first-difference. We have one observation per country, having




25
  We begin in the 1970s, rather than an earlier decade such as the 1960s, because we lose most of the poor countries
in our sample when we extend the sample back to the 1960s. We present results for a variety of alternative time
periods below.


                                                            22
differenced out any initial conditions or other fixed national characteristics that might influence

growth. 26

         Table 7 presents the results. The baseline specification compares the 1970-1985 period to

the 1986-2000 period and shows substantial, statistically significant negative effects of warming

on poor countries. In column (1), a temperature rise of 1◦ C reduces annual growth in poor

countries by 3.2 percentage points. The inclusion of region fixed effects does not substantially

change this effect, as shown in column (2). When we split the sample into Sub-Saharan African

countries (column 7) and all other countries (column 8), we find similar effects in both samples,

though the estimates are not statistically significant. 27 Using WDI data instead of PWT data finds

1◦ C reduces annual growth in poor countries by 2.3 percentage points (column 9). 28

         The statistical significance of the results is more sensitive to the estimation period used,

although the point estimates remain large and negative in all specifications. When using the time

series up to the final year of the data, comparing slightly longer periods from 1970-1987 and

1988-2003, we find very similar results (column 3). When comparing shorter periods over

various intervals, such as the 1990s to the 1960s (column 4), the 1990s to the 1970s (column 5),

and the 1990s to the 1980s (column 6), we find similar point estimates of the effect of

temperature on poor countries, but less statistical significance.

         Overall, this analysis continues to suggest substantial negative effects of warming on

growth in poor countries. Moreover, the estimated effect in the longer-run analysis is typically


26
   Note also that, in cross-section, average growth is substantially lower in warmer countries over this period. While
interesting, this is less well identified than the first differenced results, which net out unobserved fixed country
characteristics.
27
   The Africa sample shows similarly large effects in poor countries as other specifications, but the standard errors
have increased with the substantially smaller sample size, so the result is not quite statistically significant.
28
   With so few observations, one might be concerned that a few outliers drive the results. However, we find very
similar results using median regressions, which give much less weight to outliers. For example, using median
regressions, the estimated impact on poor countries in column (1) is -2.30 (p = 0.075), as opposed to a coefficient of
-2.34 (p = 0.020) using OLS (results available on request).


                                                         23
larger than in the short-run panel analysis. Thus, just as the 5 and 10 year lag results (Tables 3

and 4) suggest that the growth effect strengthens the longer the time interval considered, the

longer-run relationship in Table 7 tends to show even larger point estimates. Put another way, we

find little evidence that poor countries adapt and eliminate the negative consequences of

warming over the time horizons considered here.


5.2.    Illustrative Projections
        This section considers potential economic implications of future climate change. Given

the wide range of assumptions required to make projections, any projections should be viewed

with considerable skepticism. Our purpose is simply to illustrate some of the longer-run issues

that the historical estimates might imply.

        Our analysis integrates the estimated marginal effects of climate change with standard

climate projections over the 21st century. The projection calculations follow two steps. First, we

use a standard climate model to determine projected temperature increases for each country and

year through 2099. 29 Second, we calculate marginal growth effects of these temperature

increases for each country and year. 30 Note that the marginal growth effect depends on whether

the country is rich or poor at the time, which depends partly on the country’s background growth

rate. We project the background growth rate using the country’s historical growth rate, allowing

for country-specific convergence rates to U.S. income levels. This methodology is detailed in

Appendix III.

        A key issue in making projections concerns the speed of adaptation to climate change.

Since our estimates suggest that the growth effects of climatic change persist over at least a 10-

29
   Climate projections depend on the greenhouse gas emissions scenario and the climate model. We use climate
predictions from a standard model, the Community Climate System Model (CCSM) v3.0 (UCAR 2007), and present
results from the A2 (high) emission scenario. More details can be found in IPCC (2007).
30
   These growth effects are taken from the 10-year panel model in column (1) of Table 4. The general patterns are
similar when employing alternative historical estimates.


                                                       24
year period, we take 10 years as a lower-bound adaptation horizon. We also consider adaptation

horizons of 25 and 50 years, and, for comparison purposes, present a benchmark scenario in

which adaptation never occurs. In the adaptation scenarios, we calculate temperature impacts by

assuming countries adjust completely to their climate N years in the past, so that the marginal

effect on growth is calculated using the difference between the temperature in a given year and

the temperature N years before. 31

         Table 8 illustrates the effects of climate change under these different adaptation horizons.

The results show that the cumulative growth effect in poor countries could be quite large. With a

10-year adaptation horizon, so that countries adapt quickly to climatic changes, the median

growth rate among poor countries appears 0.6 percentage points lower through 2099 compared to

the case of no warming. With a 50-year adaptation horizon, the median growth rate appears 2.3

percentage points lower than the no warming case. Moreover, because the growth effects are

large for poor countries – and because we estimate no impact on rich countries – the estimates in

Table 8 suggest that climate change could substantially widen world income inequality.

         To gauge what these growth rates imply, consider the Pritchett (1997) idea of a

subsistence-level consumption floor. Suppose that floor is the 1st percentile of per-capita income

in the Penn World Tables, which is $425 per capita in year 2000 purchasing-power-parity

dollars. In that case, 13 countries (11% of the sample) are projected to hit this floor in 2099 with

a 10-year adaptation horizon, and 37 (30%) are projected to hit this floor with a 50-year

adaptation horizon, compared to only 9 countries with no climate change. 32 Thus, depending on



31
   One may also imagine models where individuals adapt not to the level of temperature but to its rate of change.
This possibility is not pursued here.
32
   Note that the calculations in Table 8 do not account for this lower bound. If we assume countries cannot go below
this lower bound, the results are virtually identical, except that the rise in world 75/25 inequality in the no-adaptation
scenario is capped at 700% instead of 2100%.


                                                           25
the speed of adaptation, climate change could potentially move many countries towards the

historical consumption lower bound. 33

         Despite these large, negative effects for poor countries, we find very little impact of

climate change on world GDP. This result follows from (a) the absence of estimated temperature

effects in rich countries and (b) the fact that rich countries make up the bulk of world GDP.

Moreover, if rich countries continue to grow at historical rates, their share of world GDP

becomes more pronounced by 2099, so even a total collapse of output in poor countries has a

relatively small impact on total world output.34


5.3.     Discussion
         Our estimated effects differ from those predicted by traditional, IAM-based approaches,

which show neither the large effects we find in poor countries nor the large dichotomy between

rich and poor countries. These differences come primarily for three reasons. First, we rely on

aggregate data to estimate the effects, rather than assuming a set of channels and adding them up

as in IAM approaches. Estimating aggregate effects directly helps capture important channels,

and interactions between channels, which are not captured by the disaggregated approach.

Second, IAM approaches often build the underlying sector-specific models from evidence of

behavior in rich countries. As demonstrated in this paper, the effects of climate change in rich

and poor countries are different, so extrapolating analyses of rich-countries is likely to understate

the effects in poorer regions. Finally, most existing literature assumes that temperature will affect

the level of output, as opposed to the growth rate of output. In our method, we consider the




33
   As economies tend toward the lower bound for subsistence, historical evidence suggests that fertility, mortality,
and/or migration would respond to restore equilibrium (Lavely and Wong, 1998, Wrigley and Schofield, 1981).
34
   Note that the rapid growth of India and China suggest that they will quickly cross the ‘rich country’ threshold, and
therefore in the projections they are not assigned significant negative consequences of climate change.


                                                          26
possibility of both level and growth effects. Because growth effects compound over time, even

modest growth effects can accumulate into large income effects.

       While the estimated impacts of climate change may seem large, it is worth recalling the

strong cross-sectional correlation between per-capita income and temperature across the world.

A simple cross-section regression in the year 2000 shows that a 1°C increase in average

temperature predicts a fall in per-capita income by 0.085 log points (i.e. about 8 percent).

Viewed in this light, the estimated magnitudes in this paper seem less surprising. For example,

with a 10-year adaptation horizon and a 1.1 percentage point loss in growth for each 1°C

warming (i.e., the estimated effect in Table 2), a permanent increase in temperature of 1°C would

reduce income permanently by 0.11 log points (-0.011 * 10) – which is close to what the world

cross-section also predicts. While the magnitudes we estimate are large, when allowing for

reasonably rapid adaptation they suggest effects on the same order of magnitude as the overall

temperature-output relationship we observe in the world today.




6.     Conclusion
       This paper presents new estimates for the effect of climatic changes on national

economies. Our approach differs from standard “Integrated Assessment Models”, where authors

postulate a set of climate-economy mechanisms and sum them up. In this paper, we estimate

climate effects directly by examining the historical relationship between climate fluctuations and

economic growth.

       We find substantial effects of climatic changes, but only in poor countries. In poor

countries, a 1◦C rise in temperature in a given year reduces economic growth by 1.1 percentage

points on average. The estimates suggest that climate change may affect the rate of economic




                                                27
growth, rather than just the level of output. Moreover, estimates using the overall change in

climate from 1970 to 2000 rather than annual variation produce even larger estimates, suggesting

that adaptation may not undo these effects in the medium term.

       While higher temperatures reduce agricultural output in poor countries, we also find that

they lead to contractions in industrial output and aggregate investment and to increased political

instability. These results underscore the breadth of mechanisms underlying the climate-economy

relationship. The results also suggest that future climate change may substantially widen income

gaps between rich and poor countries, with many poor countries driven toward greater poverty,

other things equal. Further work is needed to identify precise causal mechanisms. This paper

suggests such analysis is of first-order importance, as the economic effects in poor countries

appear large.




                                                28
Appendix I: Climate Data
Our primary source for climate data is the Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation: 1900-
2006 Gridded Monthly Time Series, Version 1.01 (2007), compiled by Kenji Matsuura and Cort
Willmott in conjunction with NASA. The data are available at http://climate.geog.udel.edu/
~climate/html_pages/download.html. This dataset combines station data on mean air temperature
and precipitation from a number of sources, with the primary source being the Global Historical
Climatology Network (Peterson and Vose, 1997).

Matsuura and Willmott interpolate monthly averages of air temperature and precipitation to a 0.5
degree by 0.5 degree latitude/longitude grid. The gridded fields were estimated from monthly
weather-station averages using a combination of spatial interpolation methods: digital-elevation-
model (DEM) assisted interpolation (temperature only; Willmott and Matsuura, 1995);
traditional interpolation (Willmott et al., 1985); and climatologically aided interpolation (CAI)
(Willmott and Robeson, 1995). An average of twenty nearby stations influenced each grid-node
estimate.

We calculate the average yearly temperature and precipitation within each country using
geospatial software. We investigate several weighting schemes: landmass area, population, urban
population, and rural population. Landmass weights weight each temperature or precipitation cell
by the fraction of the country’s landmass it covers. Urban (rural) population weights limit the
sample to urban (rural) areas. Population and urban extents data for 1990 are at a resolution of 30
arc seconds (approximately one kilometer at the equator) and were produced by Columbia
University’s Center for International Earth Science Information Network (SEDAC, 2004).

Appendix II: Dynamic Regression Models
This section discusses and estimates a more general econometric model for identifying growth
effects in the context of a dynamic panel growth regression, following the derivation in Bond et
al. (2007). To begin, consider a general dynamic growth equation for the log-level of per-capita
output:
     yit = Ait + α 1 yit −1 + ... + α p yit − p + β 0Tit + β1Tit −1 + ... + β pTit − p + ε it (A1.1)
This equation generalizes equation (1) in the text by adding p lags of temperature, allowing
output to depend on p lags of past output, and adding an error term.
        We assume that Ait evolves according to a generalized version of the dynamic process
specified in (2) with p lags, i.e.
    ΔAit = g i + γ 0Tit + ... + γ pTit − p                                              (A1.2)
This form allows both current and lagged temperature to affect the growth rate of A.

Substituting (A1.2) into the first differenced version of (A1.1) yields a dynamic panel estimation
equation of the form:
   Δy it = g i + α 1 Δy it −1 + ... + α p Δy it − p
                                                                                           (A1.3)
         + γ 0Tit + ... + γ p Tit − p + β 0 ΔTit + β1 ΔTit −1 + ... + β p ΔTit − p + Δε it
Rewriting the ΔT terms as T terms yields


                                                 29
    Δy it = g i + α 1Δyit −1 + ... + α p Δyit − p +
                                                                                                                       (A1.4)
           (γ o + β 0 )Tit + (γ 1 + β1 − β 0 )Tit −1 + ... + (γ p + β p − β p −1 )Tit − p − β pTt − p −1 + Δε it
or, relabeling the coefficients on T,
                                                           p +1
    Δy it = g i + α 1 Δyit −1 + ... + α p Δy it − p + ∑ ρ j Tij + Δε it                                                (A1.5)
                                                           j =0

        To find the growth effect, consider what happens if temperature is constant and growth is
in steady-state, i.e., Δyit − j = Δy and Tij = T . Solving equation (A1.5) shows that
                                                p +1


                   gi                j =0
                                                ∑ρ     j

    Δy i =                    +                    Ti                                                                  (A1.6)
           1 − α 1 − ... − α p 1 − α 1 − ... − α p
                                                                             p +1


so that the growth effect of temperature is simply                          ∑ρ
                                                                             j =0
                                                                                    j
                                                                                            . From (A1.4), it is also clear that
                                                                       1 − α1 − ... − α p
                              p


this is identical to         ∑γ
                             j =0
                                    j
                                            , since the β terms all cancel.
                       1 − α1 − ... − α p
        As noted by Bond et al. (2007), estimation of (A1.5) is complicated by the fact that the
error term, Δε it , is correlated with the lagged dependent variable, Δyit −1 . Bond at al. suggest
instrumenting for Δyit −1 with further lags of growth. However, since growth is only very weakly
serially correlated (the correlation of growth and lagged growth is only 0.07), these instruments
are very weak.
        Given these issues, as well as the very low serial correlation in growth, we focus in the
text on (4), which imposes α j = 0 for all j. However, for completeness, Appendix Table 1
presents estimates of the growth effect for poor countries under a variety of alternative empirical
specifications that estimate α flexibly. For convenience, the first row of Appendix Table 1
replicates the equivalent results from Table 3, which imposes α j = 0 for all j. The second row of
Appendix Table 1 report estimates of (A1.5) with 1 lag of growth. The reported coefficients are
the implied growth effects for poor countries from equation (A1.6). The third and fourth rows of
Appendix Table 1 estimate (A1.5) with p lags of growth, where p = 1 in column (1), p = 4 in
column (2) and p = 9 in column (3), which means that a total of 1, 5 and 10 lags of temperature,
respectively, are included in the regression. The third row presents OLS results and the fourth
row presents results instrumenting for the first lag of growth with the p+1 lag.
        Broadly speaking, these results are very similar to the main results shown in the paper. If
anything, the estimated growth effects from the dynamic panel specifications tend to be slightly
larger in magnitude than the results that do not include lags of growth. As expected given the low
serial correlation of growth, the IV results are less precisely estimated than the OLS results,
although the 10 lag IV results remain statistically significant.
        Finally, as an additional check on the empirical specification, we have run Monte Carlo
analyses of (4) using actual output and climate data to ensure that this econometric specification
provides correct inference and unbiased estimates. Specifically, in each Monte Carlo iteration,
we randomly reassigned the temperature series from one to country to another country’s real
output series, and then tested for temperature effects in model (4).



                                                                  30
        With random reassignment, we rejected the null of no climate effects at the 5%
significance level approximately 4% of the time, suggesting that our inference is accurate against
the null hypothesis of no climate effects and, if anything, is slightly conservative. In additional
simulations, we again randomly reassigned the real climate series of one country to the real
output series of another country, but then adjusted each output series according to assumed
growth and level effects of temperature. These Monte Carlos showed that the distributed lag
coefficients, and the cumulated lags, provided unbiased estimates for both level effects and
growth effects of temperature. These Monte Carlo results are available from the authors upon
request.


Appendix III: Projections Methodology
1.      Future temperature
        The CCSM v3.0 model provides gridded, monthly air temperature projections with a
spatial resolution of 1.4x1.4 degrees. Annual country averages are calculated by taking
arithmetic, population-weighted means for each country. This aggregation method is the same as
that used for the historical climate data as described in the text. The CCSM projection data are
provided by the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR) and can be
downloaded at http://www.gisclimatechange.org.

2.       Future growth
         The marginal growth effect in any country in any future year is calculated in two parts.
First, we calculate the marginal increase in temperature in that country and year versus in the
baseline of no warming. Second, we calculate the marginal effect of the temperature change on
economic growth, which depends on whether the country is rich or poor in the given year. The
marginal growth effect of temperature for rich and poor countries is taken from the 10-lag model
presented in Column 1 of Table 4. In the historical data, the absolute level of income per-capita
that separates rich and poor countries is $3170 (PPP, year 2000 dollars). Regression models
based on finer gradations of income (3, 4, or 5 quantiles instead of 2) produce broadly similar
results.
         Whether a country is rich or poor in the future depends in part on the accumulation of
marginal growth effects from climate and in part on the background growth rate for the country.
To calculate the baseline growth rate, we assume that countries grow in the future at their
historical rate over the 1971-2003 period (or the 1991-2003 period if the longer period is not
available). This growth rate is further adjusted for “conditional convergence”, by correcting for
country-specific convergence rates to United States income levels. This ensures, for example,
that countries like China do not continue at high growth forever but ultimately slow as they come
closer to United States per-capita income. The convergence term, β i , for country i is calculated
such that
                         g i = g US + β i (ln yUS ,1971 − ln y i ,1971 )
where g i is the average growth rate in country i from 1971-2003, g US is the equivalent average
for the United States, and ln yUS ,1971 and ln y i ,1971 are log per-capita income in the US and country




                                                  31
i, respectively, in 1971. 35 The baseline growth rate for any year t in the future is then calculated
as
                        g iB,t = g US + β i (ln yUS ,t − ln y i ,t )
The estimated growth rate in year t is this baseline growth rate plus the marginal effect of
temperature in that year
                       g i ,t = g iB,t + γ P ΔTi ,t I i ,t + γ R ΔTi ,t (1 − I i ,t )
where ΔTi ,t is the change in temperature against the baseline of no warming, I i ,t is an indicator
equal to 1 if the country is poor, and γ P and γ R are the growth effects for poor and rich
countries, respectively, as calculated from the panel model. In the projections presented in Table
8, we set γ R = 0 . Starting in the present, we use these calculated growth rates to project per-
capita income forward year-by-year for each country. The results in Section 5 present economic
projections under the A2 scenario compared against the case of no climate change (where
ΔTi ,t = 0 for all i and t).




35
  For countries with growth data that begins after 1971 we use 1991 instead. If a country’s convergence term
appears negative (i.e. it grows more slowly than the U.S. historically), then we set the convergence rate to zero and
simply set the baseline growth rate to the country’s historical average.


                                                          32
References
Adams, Richard M. et al. “Global Climate Change and US Agriculture,” Nature 345, 219-224,
    1990.
Balk, Deborah et al. Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN),
    Columbia University; International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), the World Bank;
    and Centro Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT), 2004. Global Rural-Urban
    Mapping Project (GRUMP), Palisades, NY: CIESIN, Columbia University. Available at
    http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw, 2004.
Bond, Stephen R., Asli Leblebicioglu, and Fabio Schiantarelli, “Capital Accumulation and
    Growth: A New Look at the Empirical Evidence,” mimeo, University of Oxford, 2007.
Boyanowsky, Ehor. “Violence and Aggression in the Heat of Passion and in Cold Blood: The
    Ecs-TC Syndrome,” International Journal of Law and Psychiatry 22(3): 257-271, 1999.
Brohan, Phillip, John Kennedy, I. Haris, Simon Tett and Pete Jones. “Uncertainty estimates in
    regional and global observed temperature changes: A new data set from 1850,” Journal of
    Geophysical Research 111, 2006.
Carlsmith, J. Merrill and Craig A. Anderson, “Ambient Temperature and the Occurrence of
    Collective Violence: A New Analysis,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 37 (3),
    337-344, 1979.
Curriero, Frank C., Karlyn Heiner, Jonathan Samet, Scott Zeger, Lisa Strug, Jonathan A.Patz.
    “Temperature and Mortality in 11 Cities of the Eastern United States,” American Journal of
    Epidemiology 155(1):80-87, 2002.
Deschenes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, “The Economic Impacts of Climate Change:
    Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather,” American
    Economic Review 97, 354-385, 2007.
Deschenes, Olivier and Enrico Moretti, “Extreme Weather Events, Mortality, and Migration”,
    NBER Working Paper #13227, 2007.
Field, Simon. “The Effect of Temperature on Crime,” The British Journal of Criminology
    32:340-351, 1992.
Goemans, Hein, Kristian Gleditsch and Giacomo Chiozza. “Archigos: A Database of Leaders
    1875-2004”, http://mail.rochester.edu/~hgoemans/data, 2006.
Guiteras, Raymond. “The Impact of Climate Change on Indian Agriculture,” mimeo, MIT
    Department of Economics, 2007.
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.2, Center for
    International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
    Pennsylvania, September 2006.
Hornbeck, Richard, "Long-term Adjustment to Environmental Change: Evidence from the
    American Dust Bowl," mimeo, MIT Department of Economics, 2007.
Huntington, Ellsworth. Civilization and Climate, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1915.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, Working Groups
    I, II, and III (http://www.ipcc.ch/), 2007.
Jacob, Brian, Lars Lefgren and Enrico Moretti. “The Dynamics of Criminal Behavior: Evidence
    from Weather Shocks” Journal of Human Resources, 2007.



                                              33
Lavely, William and R. Bin Wong. ”Revising the Malthusian Narrative: The Comparative Study
    of Population Dynamics in Late Imperial China,” The Journal of Asian Studies 57(3), 716-
    718, 1998.
Link James and Robert Pepler. 1970. “Associated fluctuations in daily temperature, productivity and
    absenteeism.” No 2167 RP-57, ASHRAE Transactions, vol 76, Part II, 326-337, 1970.
Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics. London: Macmillan and Co. 1920 [1890].
Marshall, Monty G., and Keith Jaggers. Polity IV Project, Integrated Network for Societal
    Conflict Research Program and Center for International Development and Conflict
    Management, University of Maryland, 2004.
Matsuura, Kenji and Cort Willmott. Terrestrial Air Temperature and Precipitation: 1900-2006
    Gridded Monthly Time Series, Version 1.01, University of Delaware,
    http://climate.geog.udel.edu/~climate/, 2007.
Meehl, Gerald, Claudia Tebaldi, and Doug Nychka. “Changes in frost days in simulations of 21st
    century climate.” Climate Dynamics, Vol. 23, No. 5, 495-511, 2004.
Meese, G., R. Kok, M. Lewis, and D. Wyon. “Effects of Moderate Cold and Heat Stress on
    Factory Workers in Southern Africa” South Africa Journal of Science 78: 189-197, 1982.
Mendelsohn, Robert, Wendy Morrison, Michael Schlesinger and Natalia Andronova. “Country-
    specific market impacts of climate change,” Climatic Change 45(3-4): 553-569, 2000.
Mendelsohn, Robert, Ariel Dinar, and Apurva Sanghi. “The Effect of Development on the
    Climate Sensitivity of Agriculture,” Environmental and Development Economics 6, 85-101,
    2001.
Miguel, Edward, Shanker Satyanath and Ernest Sergenti. “Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict:
    An Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Political Economy 112(4), 725-753, 2004.
Montesquieu, Charles de. The Spirit of Laws, 1750.
Neng, Shi, Chen Luwen, and Xia Dongdong. “A Preliminary Study on the Global Land Annual
    Precipitation Associated with ENSO during 1948-2000,” Advances in Atmospheric Sciences
    19: 993-1003, 2002.
New, Mark, Martin Todd, Mike Hulme, and Phil Jones. “Precipitation measurements and trends
    in the twentieth century.” International Journal of Climatology 21, 1899-1922, 2001.
Nicholls, Robert and Stephen Leatherman (eds.) “Potential Impacts of Accelerated Sea-Level
        Rise on Developing Countries,” Journal of Coastal Research, Special Issue No. 14, 1995.
Nordhaus, William. “Geography and Macroeconomics: New Data and Findings,” Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Science 103, 3510-3517, 2006.
Nordhaus, William and Joseph Boyer, Warming the World: The Economics of the Greenhouse
    Effect, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.
Pritchett, Lant. “Divergence, Big Time,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11, 3-17, 1997.
PRIO, Armed Conflict Data Version 4. Available at http://new.prio.no/CSCW-Datasets/Data-on-
    Armed-Conflict/UppsalaPRIO-Armed-Conflicts-Dataset/, 2006.
Stern, Nicholas, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review, Cambridge, England:
    Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Tol, Richard. “Estimates of the damage costs of climate change – part II: dynamic estimates,”
    Environmental and Resource Economics 21, 135-160, 2002.



                                                34
U.S. Riot Commission. Report of the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. New
   York: Bantam Books, 1968.
University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR). GIS Climate Change Scenarios,
   http://www.gisclimatechnage.org, September 2007.
World Bank, 2007 World Development Indicators Online Edition, 2007.
Wrigley, Edward Anthony and Robert Schofield. The Population History of Britain 1541-1871:
   A Reconstruction. London, England: Edward Arnold, 1981.
Wyon, David. “Assessing the effects of moderate heat and cold stress on human efficiency,”
   Paper no. 6 of Proceedings of the Symposium, Factories for Profit – Environmental Design,
   National Building Research Institute, Pretoria, September 14-16 1976.




                                             35
Table 1: Observed climate variation, 1950-2003

                                                  Proportion of country-years with temperature […] degrees above/below country mean:
                                                 0.25             0.50            0.75           1.00            1.25           1.50
Raw data                                         0.570           0.294            0.144          0.065           0.029          0.011
After removing worldwide year fixed effects      0.508           0.213            0.085          0.034           0.013          0.005
After removing region × year and poor × year
   fixed effects                                 0.451           0.158          0.054           0.020           0.008           0.003

                                               Proportion of country-years with precipitation […] 100 mm units above/below country mean:
                                                   1                2               3                4              5              6
Raw data                                         0.480           0.229            0.123            0.072          0.044          0.029
After removing worldwide year fixed effects      0.495           0.222            0.113            0.063          0.039          0.025
After removing region × year and poor × year
   fixed effects                                 0.461           0.213          0.106           0.060           0.034           0.022




                                                                                 36
Table 2: Main panel results

                                                     Dependent variable is the annual growth rate
                                             (1)          (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)             (7)
Temperature                              -0.197        0.219                                             0.208            0.130           0.177
                                         (0.216)      (0.210)                                           (0.212)          (0.203)         (0.232)
Temperature interacted with…
  Poor country dummy                                   -1.305***                                        -1.282***        -1.303***       -1.400***
                                                       (0.479)                                          (0.482)          (0.477)         (0.526)
   Hot country dummy                                                                                                      0.262
                                                                                                                         (0.411)
   Agricultural country dummy                                                                                                            -0.120
                                                                                                                                         (0.390)

Precipitation                                                           -0.019          -0.071*         -0.072*          -0.125**        -0.088*
                                                                        (0.040)         (0.040)         (0.042)          (0.053)         (0.050)
Precipitation interacted with…                                                           0.118           0.102            0.096           0.142
   Poor country dummy                                                                   (0.075)         (0.076)          (0.076)         (0.093)
                                                                                                                          0.081
   Hot country dummy                                                                                                     (0.070)
                                                                                                                                          0.006
   Agricultural country dummy                                                                                                            (0.077)

Observations                               6014           6014             6014            6014            6014             6014            5432
R-squared                                0.14           0.14             0.14            0.14            0.15             0.15            0.15

Temperature effect in poor countries                 -1.087**                                           -1.074**         -1.173***       -1.223**
                                                        (0.442)                                         (0.446)          (0.404)         (0.525)
Precipitation effect in poor countries                                                   0.047           0.030           -0.029           0.054
                                                                                        (0.065)         (0.065)          (0.072)         (0.098)

Notes: All specifications use PWT data and include country FE, region × year FE, and poor x year FE. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at parent-
country level. Sample includes all countries with at least 20 years of growth observations. Poor is defined as a dummy for a country having below median PPP gdp per capita in its
first year in the data. Hot is defined as a dummy for a country having above median average temperature in the 1950s. Agricultural is defined as a dummy for a country having
above median share of GDP in agriculture in 1995. Temperature is in degrees Celsius and precipitation is in units of 100mm per year.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                       37
Table 3: Models with lags

                                   (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)             (9)            (10)
                                 No lags         1 lag         3 lags          5 lags        10 lags        No lags          1 lag         3 lags          5 lags        10 lags
Temperature × Poor               -1.087**       -0.954*       -0.932*         -0.933*        -1.112*        -1.074**        -0.945*       -0.925*         -0.925         -1.071*
                                 (0.442)        (0.559)       (0.560)         (0.562)        (0.586)        (0.446)         (0.558)       (0.557)         (0.559)        (0.585)
 L1: Temperature × Poor                         -0.351        -0.247          -0.328         -0.216                         -0.330        -0.213          -0.333         -0.217
                                                (0.854)       (0.919)         (0.909)        (0.958)                        (0.852)       (0.921)         (0.909)        (0.954)
 L2: Temperature × Poor                                       -0.210          -0.183         -0.120                                       -0.249          -0.226         -0.140
                                                              (0.441)         (0.459)        (0.485)                                      (0.443)         (0.458)        (0.484)
 L3: Temperature × Poor                                       -0.216          -0.096         -0.231                                       -0.189          -0.075         -0.262
                                                              (0.519)         (0.559)        (0.606)                                      (0.511)         (0.549)        (0.594)
Temperature × Rich                0.219          0.202         0.243           0.293          0.392          0.208           0.197         0.237           0.272          0.383
                                 (0.210)        (0.232)       (0.241)         (0.238)        (0.255)        (0.212)         (0.234)       (0.243)         (0.240)        (0.260)
 L1: Temperature × Rich                          0.047         0.074           0.094          0.093                          0.038         0.067           0.083          0.056
                                                (0.268)       (0.251)         (0.252)        (0.268)                        (0.269)       (0.250)         (0.252)        (0.266)
 L2: Temperature × Rich                                        0.062           0.115          0.043                                        0.064           0.143          0.098
                                                              (0.190)         (0.195)        (0.209)                                      (0.190)         (0.194)        (0.209)
 L3: Temperature × Rich                                       -0.019           0.120          0.203                                       -0.045           0.097          0.211
                                                              (0.197)         (0.186)        (0.198)                                      (0.197)         (0.185)        (0.197)
Includes precipitation vars.    NO            NO             NO              NO             NO            YES            YES            YES             YES            YES
Observations                   6014          6014           5905            5785           5449           6014           6014           5905            5785           5449
R-squared                         0.14          0.14           0.15            0.15           0.15           0.15           0.15           0.15            0.15           0.15

Sum of all temp. coeff.          -1.087**       -1.304*        -1.605**       -1.718**        -2.006**      -1.074**        -1.275*        -1.576**       -1.662**       -1.946**
   in poor countries             (0.442)        (0.677)        (0.641)        (0.720)         (0.866)       (0.446)         (0.689)        (0.651)        (0.737)        (0.881)
Sum of all temp. coeff.          -0.102          0.219          0.249          0.361           0.184         0.208           0.235          0.324          0.155         -0.147
   in rich countries             (0.647)        (0.210)        (0.268)        (0.331)         (0.455)       (0.212)         (0.271)        (0.332)        (0.460)        (0.654)

Notes: All specifications use PWT data and include country FE, region × year FE, and poor x year FE. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at parent-
country level. Sample includes all countries with at least 20 years of growth observations. Columns (6) – (10) also include Precipitation × Poor and Precipitation × Rich, with the
same number of lags as the temperature variables shown in the table. Columns (4) and (9) also include the 4th and 5th lags of Temperature × Poor, Temperature × Rich,
Precipitation × Poor and Precipitation × Rich. Similarly columns (5) and (10) also include the 4th through 10th lags of Temperature × Poor, Temperature × Rich, Precipitation ×
Poor and Precipitation × Rich; those coefficients are suppressed in the table to save space. Sum of all temperature coefficients in poor countries shows the sum (and calculated
standard error) of Temperature × Poor and all of the lags of Temperature × Poor included in the regression; sum of all temperature coefficients in rich countries is calculated
analogously.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                         38
    Table 4: Alternative specifications of panel results
                                           (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)           (8)             (9)           (10)
                                         Baseline      Country FE     Country FE     All FE and     Balanced           Add         GDP data        Area-           Sub-           Sub-
                                                          and          and Year       country        sample:        countries     from World      weighted        Saharan       Saharan
                                                       Region×Yr        FE only       specific     1971 - 2003      with < 20        Devel.     climate data       Africa        Africa
                                                        FE only                        trends                        years of      Indicators                      Only         Excluded
                                                                                                                       data
Panel A: Models with no lags
Temp. immediate effect – Poor            -1.074**       -0.753**      -0.986***       -1.009**        -1.423**       -0.892**      -1.535***       -0.927*        -1.774**         -0.404
                                          (0.446)        (0.354)       (0.295)         (0.438)         (0.560)        (0.381)        (0.397)       (0.501)         (0.826)        (0.402)
Temp. immediate effect – Rich              0.208         -0.026         -0.120         0.417*          0.473**        0.611**         0.306          0.333         -0.310           0.264
                                          (0.212)        (0.203)       (0.169)         (0.238)         (0.228)        (0.271)        (0.250)       (0.225)         (1.792)        (0.202)
Precip. immediate effect – Poor            0.030          0.008         0.007           0.032           0.013         -0.015         0.110**         0.047          0.185          -0.057
                                          (0.065)        (0.065)       (0.061)         (0.067)         (0.065)        (0.053)        (0.050)       (0.071)         (0.113)        (0.074)
Precip. immediate effect – Rich           -0.072*         -0.060        -0.028        -0.093**        -0.095**        -0.039        -0.089**        -0.074          0.210        -0.080**
                                          (0.042)        (0.041)       (0.039)         (0.045)         (0.047)        (0.051)        (0.039)       (0.047)         (0.209)        (0.039)
Observations                               6014            6014          6014           6014            4290           6347           4927          6014           1809           4205

Panel B: Models with 5 lags
Temp. cumulative effect – Poor           -1.662**        -1.087*         -1.002         -1.362        -2.257**       -1.300**       -1.375**       -1.592**         -1.767         -1.231
                                          (0.737)        (0.643)        (0.615)        (1.088)         (0.985)        (0.575)        (0.541)        (0.721)        (1.057)        (1.316)
Temp. cumulative effect – Rich              0.155         -0.284        -0.481          0.445           0.257          0.336          0.118           0.256          1.636          0.031
                                          (0.460)        (0.441)        (0.422)        (0.704)         (0.593)        (0.541)        (0.381)        (0.459)        (2.748)        (0.453)
Precip. cumulative effect – Poor            0.128          0.061         0.039          0.184           0.131         -0.034          0.339*          0.141          0.683         -0.083
                                          (0.146)        (0.142)        (0.138)        (0.175)         (0.172)        (0.106)        (0.197)        (0.146)        (0.412)        (0.123)
Precip. cumulative effect – Rich           -0.127         -0.097         -0.057       -0.237**        -0.191**         0.022         -0.143*         -0.128          0.694        -0.124*
                                          (0.085)        (0.091)        (0.079)        (0.117)         (0.078)        (0.143)        (0.078)        (0.086)        (0.646)        (0.073)
Observations                               5785            5785           5785           5785           4290           6029           4919           5785          1785           4000

Panel C: Models with 10 lags
Temp. cumulative effect – Poor             -1.946**       -1.553*        -1.486**        -1.655       -2.830**        -1.633**        -0.927       -1.811**         -1.897          -1.444
                                            (0.881)        (0.811)        (0.739)       (1.460)        (1.111)         (0.697)       (0.712)        (0.872)        (1.277)         (1.397)
Temp. cumulative effect – Rich               -0.147         -0.299         -0.816         0.033         -0.109           0.051         0.180         -0.043          3.669          -0.343
                                            (0.654)        (0.667)        (0.635)       (1.454)        (0.824)         (0.842)       (0.490)        (0.653)        (4.034)         (0.639)
Precip. cumulative effect – Poor              0.107          0.029         -0.011         0.222          0.119          -0.071       0.576**          0.122          0.516          -0.028
                                            (0.171)        (0.170)        (0.167)       (0.213)        (0.204)         (0.137)       (0.225)        (0.168)        (0.463)         (0.178)
Precip. cumulative effect – Rich             -0.112         -0.060         -0.033      -0.355**       -0.213**           0.061        -0.117         -0.115          0.472          -0.040
                                            (0.109)        (0.115)        (0.107)       (0.176)        (0.107)         (0.220)       (0.107)        (0.111)       (0.841)        (0.096)
Observations                                 5449           5449           5449          5449           4290            5563          4909           5449          1737            3712
    Notes: All specifications use PWT data and include country FE, region × year FE, and poor x year FE unless otherwise noted. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for
    clustering at parent-country level. Except where noted in the text, panel A follows the same specification as column (5) of Table 2, panel B follows the same specification as
    column (9) of Table 3, and panel C follows the same specification as column (10) of Table 3.
     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.


                                                                                             39
Table 5: Components of Output Growth
Panel A: Models with no lags
                                             Dependent variable is:
                                      (1)            (2)                (3)
                                   Growth in      Growth in          Growth in
                                  Agriculture Industrial Value      Investment
                                  Value Added      Added
Temperature                         No lags        No lags            No lags
   Immediate effect – Poor        -2.367***         -2.443**         -2.991**
                                  (0.816)           (0.958)          (1.189)
    Immediate effect – Rich       -0.340             0.410           -0.103
                                  (0.512)           (0.376)          (0.470)
Precipitation
    Immediate effect – Poor        0.242**           0.295**          0.040
                                  (0.117)           (0.133)          (0.170)
    Immediate effect – Rich        0.138*           -0.050           -0.425***
                                  (0.077)           (0.071)          (0.109)
Observations                    3812             3812             6014

Panel B: Models with lags
                                                                                                 Dependent variable is:
                                        (1)             (2)             (3)                (4)              (5)             (6)                (7)             (8)            (9)
                                         Growth in Agriculture Value Added                   Growth in Industrial Value Added                          Growth in Investment
Temperature                            1 Lag          5 Lags          10 Lags             1 Lag           5 Lags          10 Lags             1 Lag          5 Lags         10 Lags
   Cumulative effect – Poor       -1.078            -1.440           -1.800*          -2.842**          -2.076           -2.410           -2.078            -2.071           -2.118
                                  (0.777)           (0.880)          (1.044)          (1.235)           (1.672)          (2.129)          (1.325)           (2.070)          (2.896)
   Cumulative effect – Rich        0.419             0.346            0.662            0.517             0.473            0.852           -0.401            -1.194           -1.312
                                  (0.538)           (0.588)          (0.717)          (0.455)           (0.565)          (0.762)          (0.534)           (0.817)          (1.112)
    Immediate effect – Poor       -3.081***         -2.947***        -3.044***        -2.182**          -2.350**         -2.532**         -3.512**          -3.943***        -3.930***
                                  (1.056)           (1.008)          (1.019)          (0.930)           (0.999)          (1.000)          (1.417)           (1.338)          (1.386)
    Immediate effect – Rich       -0.791            -0.731           -0.861            0.369             0.323            0.292            0.091             0.316            0.303
                                  (0.640)           (0.625)          (0.641)          (0.372)           (0.381)          (0.389)          (0.600)           (0.638)          (0.719)
Precipitation
   Cumulative effect – Poor        0.153             0.118            0.087            0.416***          0.407**          0.390            0.196            -0.076           -0.030
                                  (0.105)           (0.129)          (0.169)          (0.132)           (0.166)          (0.301)          (0.192)           (0.269)          (0.305)
   Cumulative effect – Rich        0.174**           0.392***         0.495**         -0.118            -0.259           -0.147           -0.456***         -0.236           -0.512*
                                  (0.078)           (0.095)          (0.197)          (0.108)           (0.197)          (0.252)          (0.128)           (0.211)          (0.297)
    Immediate effect – Poor        0.270**           0.309**          0.331**          0.238             0.138            0.098           -0.037             0.032            0.000
                                  (0.127)           (0.130)          (0.132)          (0.145)           (0.125)          (0.117)          (0.209)           (0.209)          (0.209)
    Immediate effect – Rich        0.136             0.137            0.149           -0.030            -0.038           -0.027           -0.405***         -0.454***        -0.445***
                                  (0.091)           (0.093)          (0.093)          (0.068)           (0.071)          (0.072)          (0.123)           (0.135)          (0.146)
Observations                      3812            3804              3794               3812             3804              3794          6014              5785             5449
Notes: Growth in agriculture value-added and industrial value-added are from the World Development Indicators; growth in investment is from the Penn World Tables. All
specifications include country FE, region × year FE, and poor x year FE. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at parent-country level. Sample includes
all countries with at least 20 years of PWT growth observations (i.e., the same set of countries considered in the previous tables.)

                                                                                       40
Table 6: Political economy effects


                                    (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)               (7)
                                                         Political Stability                                          Conflict
                               Any change     POLITY          Leader         Regular       Irregular      Start of new     End of
                               in POLITY      interregnum     transition     leader        leader         conflicts        conflicts
                               score          period                         transition    transition     (conditional     (conditional
                                                                                                          on conflict =    on conflict >
                                                                                                          0 in t-1)        0 in t-1)
Temperature                      -0.008         -0.015**         -0.003        -0.002        -0.001          -0.005            0.019
                                 (0.009)        (0.007)          (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.051)
Temperature X Poor                0.031*         0.037**          0.040*       (0.001)        0.041***        0.014           (0.017)
                                 (0.018)        (0.018)          (0.022)       (0.017)       (0.013)         (0.012)          (0.056)
Precipitation                     0.000          0.001            0.002         0.002         0.000           0.001            0.009
                                 (0.003)        (0.001)          (0.002)       (0.002)       (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.015)
Precipitation X Poor             -0.010**       (0.005)          -0.006*       -0.006*        0.000          -0.003           -0.015
                                 (0.004)        (0.003)          (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.016)

Obs.                           5804           5804            7143           7143          7143           6087             966
R-squared                         0.14           0.21            0.18           0.2           0.11           0.09            0.43

Temperature effect in poor        0.023          0.023            0.037**      -0.002         0.039***        0.009           0.002
Countries                        (0.016)        (0.018)          (0.018)       (0.010)       (0.012)         (0.011)         (0.032)
Precipitation effect in poor     -0.010***      -0.005           -0.004        -0.004         0.000          -0.001          -0.006
Countries                        (0.004)        (0.003)          (0.003)       (0.002)       (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.006)

Notes: Columns (1) and (2) use data from the POLITY IV dataset; columns (3), (4), and (5) use data from the Archigos dataset; and columns
(6) and (7) use data from the PRIO dataset. Columns (1) – (5) include country FE, region × year FE, and poor x year FE; columns (6) and (7)
include country FE and year FE. Robust standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering at parent-country level. Sample includes all
countries with at least 20 years of PWT growth observations (i.e., the same set of countries considered in the previous tables.)
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                              41
Table 7: Changes in growth and climate in the medium-run

                                                       Dependent variable: change in mean growth rate
                                   (1)           (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)           (7)            (8)             (9)
                                Baseline                                                                                             Excluding        WDI
                                                                         Alternative comparison years                Africa Only
                                 Sample                                                                                               Africa           data
Change in Temperature            1.499         1.900*         1.014         -0.544         1.677*        0.854        -3.022          2.084*         1.403
                                (0.978)       (1.023)        (0.732)        (0.778)       (0.974)       (1.050)       (1.811)        (1.064)        (0.891)
Change in Temperature           -4.700***     -5.145***      -4.377***      -1.744        -4.194**      -2.168         0.081         -4.686**       -3.696**
  X Poor Country                (1.584)       (1.619)        (1.542)        (1.710)       (1.780)       (2.164)       (2.751)        (2.229)        (1.463)
Change in Precipitation          0.097         0.130          0.051         -0.014         0.016        -0.010         0.654          0.145         -0.066
                                (0.127)       (0.148)        (0.117)        (0.256)       (0.121)       (0.168)       (1.463)        (0.159)        (0.108)
Change in Precipitation         -0.157        -0.268         -0.164          0.121         0.046         0.114        -0.155         -0.428          0.100
  X Poor Country                (0.255)       (0.252)        (0.235)        (0.499)       (0.244)       (0.265)       (1.586)        (0.270)        (0.203)

Region FE                          No            Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            No             Yes           Yes

Poor Country Dummy                 Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes

Early Period                                                                                             1981-
                               1970-1985     1970-1985      1970-1987      1961-1970     1971-1980                   1970-1985       1970-1985     1970-1985
                                                                                                         1990

Late Period                                                                                              1991-
                               1986-2000     1986-2000      1988-2003      1991-2000     1991-2000                   1986-2000       1986-2000     1986-2000
                                                                                                         2000

Observations                      134            134            134             93           134          134             41             93            121
R-squared                        0.07           0.16           0.13          0.12           0.10          0.13         0.09            0.23           0.13

Temperature effect on poor      -3.201**      -3.245**       -3.363**       -2.289        -2.518        -1.314        -2.942          -2.602        -2.294*
Countries                       (1.245)       (1.348)        (1.426)        (1.523)       (1.592)       (2.037)       (2.071)         (2.108)       (1.188)
Precipitation effect on poor    -0.059        -0.137         -0.114          0.107         0.062         0.105         0.499          -0.284         0.035
Countries                       (0.221)       (0.207)        (0.203)        (0.418)       (0.219)       (0.212)       (0.614)         (0.215)       (0.168)

Notes: All specifications have one observation per country. Change in temperature and precipitation are computed for each country as the difference between the
mean value in the Late Period and the mean value in the Early Period (these periods are indicated in the table for each specification). The dependent variable is
the change in mean growth rate comparing the indicated Late and Early Periods. Region fixed effects and a dummy for being an initially poor country are
included as indicated for each specification. Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                               42
Table 8: Illustrated Growth Impacts of Temperature Change through 2099,
Compared to Baseline of No Temperature Change

                                                      Time Horizon for Adjustment
                                    10 years            25 years          50 years              No
                                                                                             adaptation
Poor countries
Median growth rate effect            -0.6%                -1.4%               -2.3%             -2.9%

World Economy
World GDP loss                       -0.2%                -0.3%               -0.3%            -0.3%
World 75/25 Inequality               +88%                 +340%              +1100%           +2100%

Lower bound income
Number of countries                    13                   21                  37                41

Notes: Projections are made for 122 countries under the A2 emissions scenario. The 10-lag model of column (1) in Table 4 is used for the estimated growth
effect in poor countries. Zero effect is assumed for rich countries, given the statistical insignificance of the historical estimates in rich countries. The lower bound
income is taken as the 1st percentile of income witnessed historically in the Penn World Tables. See further discussion in text.




                                                                                  43
Figure 1: Time trends in world average temperature and precipitation


                   Temperature                                                             Precipitation
                   Weighted by Population                                                  Weighted by Population
             20




                                                                                11
             19




                                                                         100s mm / year
   degrees




                                                                              10
             18




                                                                                9
             17




                  1950      1960        1970   1980   1990   2000 2006          8         1950      1960        1970   1980   1990   2000 2006
                                               year                                                                    year


Notes: Calculations are done using 1990 population weights.




                                                                                                       44
Figure 2: Changes and variability in climate


               Temperature                                                                                                                                   Precipitation
        30     Weighted by Population                                                                                                                        Weighted by Population




                                                                                                                                                        60
                                 NER  MLI     MRT
                                 TCDBFA                               DJI
                       KHM            SDN BEN SEN SLB             GUY
                                                                                                          BRN ARE
                             SOM
                               GNB     NGA GHA                      LKA SUR    THA
                                 TGOGMB              CIV      WSM                          MYS TTO             QAT
                      LBR    SLE                                  IDN         BLZ VCT            OMN      KWT
                                           STP            IND      PHL      CUB
                                            COM          GIN                      VEN
                                    CAF                         NIC
                                                                               DOM  PAN GAB     SAU BHS
                                          COG        VNMCMR VUT                GNQ             MUS
                                       MOZ        BGD
                                                    HTI
                                                      HND              FJI
                                                                       JAM
                                          LAO                             CPV
                ZAR                                                       PRY
                                 TZA UGA                                SLV
                                       YEM         AGO                PNG
                                  MWI                                             BRACRI
                                  ZMB
                                 MDG
                                                        IRQ            EGY COL
        20




                                          KENNPL               ZWE                                  TWNISR
                                                                     ECU
                                                                   GTM            BWASWZ LBY
                             BDI      RWA
                                                            BOL                     MEX              CYP
                                                                   JOR           TUN




                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                   SYR            MAR                     URY
                                                                             DZA
                                                                              LBN          ARG
                                                                                                           AUS




                                                                                                                                       100s mm / year
                                                                                               GRC PRT                                                                                                                                CRI
                                                                           IRN                         ESP                                                                        BTN
                                                                  CHN
                                                                   PER                                                USA
                                                                 ALB                                         JPN
     degrees




                                                   LSO                                                   NZL
                                                                          TUR            CHL               ITA                                                                                     SLB
                                 BTN
                                                                                                 KOR
                      AFG                                                                                                                                                                                      WSM
       10




                                                                                         HUN                                                                                                                             FJI
                                                                                 BGR                         FRA                                                                                                                                               BRN
                                                                                                               NLD
                                                                                                             BEL
                                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                                             IRL            LUX                                             SLE                                        PNG
                                                                         ROM
                                                                                                             DEU                                                                                               VUT                    PAN
                                                                                                                                                                     LBR                                                                     MYS
                                           PRK                                     POL                          DNK
                                                                                                               AUT                                                                                                GUY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PHL                                   TWN
                                                                                       BLR                                                                                                                            LKA     GNQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BLZ
                                                                                                             SWE                                                                           COM           GIN         GTM SUR
                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                              CAN                                                                                                                VCT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GAB




                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CMR                   COL                 TTO
                                                                                                           FINISL     NOR                                                                                                JAM
                                                                                                                                                                              GNB        LAO         VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SLV                                   JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DOM
                                                                                                                                                                      KHM                 STP                  NIC                              MUS
                                                                                                                                                                                MDG                   HND                     THA
        0




                                                                                                                                                               ZAR                 CAF      NPL      CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                         COG        HTI
                                                                                                                                                                                   GMBNGA GHA                    ALBECUPRY       BRA                            CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          IND             CUB
                                                                                                                                                                                TGO                                                                  BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                 MWI UGABEN      BGD                             VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          URY    KOR NZL
                                             MNG                                                                                                                            BDI      RWA KEN       AGO      BOL                                    PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                 ZMB MOZ PRK                       CHN                                   ITAIRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AUT  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                TZABFA        SEN                            LBN MEX                         AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CAN USA
                                                                                                                                                                                     MLI                                                   ARG               ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                TCD              LSO          ZWE PERCPV             SWZ                   GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BELNLD        LUX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BGR       CHL       ESP SWE   DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                NER                                      ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DZA       POL HUN             FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                     SDN                                         BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TUN     BLR
                                                                                                                                                                     AFG                     MRT SYR             MAR        IRN                         ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CYP
                                                                                                                                                                            SOM       YEM               IRQ       JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                             MNG                                         LBY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DJI                                          ARE
        −10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OMN       KWT QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EGY




                                                                                                                                                        0
                6                   7           8         9        10                                                       11                                6                     7           8         9        10                                                    11
                                        Log per−capita GDP in 2000                                                                                                                      Log per−capita GDP in 2000

                              Mean 1950−1959                                   Mean 1996−2005                                                                                Mean 1950−1959                                     Mean 1996−2005


Notes: These graphs present data on each country’s temperature (left graph) and precipitation (right graph), potted against per-capita PPP GDP from the Penn
World Tables in the year 2000. For each country, the circle symbols represent the mean level of temperature / precipitation in the first decade of our sample
(1950-1959), the plus symbols represent the mean level of temperature / precipitation in the last decade of our sample (1996-2005), and the gray lines indicate the
range of annual temperature / precipitation levels we observe for that country during our sample period. Country averages are calculated using population
weights, as discussed in the text.




                                                                                                                                  45
         Appendix Table 1: Dynamic Panel Estimates


                                         Implied growth effects for poor countries
                                            (1)            (2)              (3)
                                           1 lag          5 lag           10 lags
Model:
No lagged growth effects                 -1.275*         -1.662**         -1.946**
                                         (0.681)         (0.728)          (0.869)

1 lag of growth, OLS                     -1.397*         -1.794**         -2.058**
                                         (0.726)         (0.748)          (0.894)

p lags of growth, OLS                                    -1.780**         -2.382***
                                                         (0.807)          (0.877)

p lags of growth, IV                     -1.745          -1.275           -2.004**
                                         (1.174)         (1.053)          (0.806)

Notes: Each reported coefficient is the estimated growth effect of temperature in poor countries,
calculated using equation (A1.6), from a separate regression of the form in equation (A1.5). The
underlying equations include country fixed effects, region × time fixed effects, poor x year FE,
temperature and precipitation interacted with poor/rich dummies, and the number of lags of
temperature and precipitation shown in the column. Robust standard errors are in parentheses,
adjusted for clustering at the country level. Note that the estimates in the first row exactly
replicate the ‘sum of all temp. coefficients in poor countries’ shown in columns (7), (9), and (10)
of Table 3. In row 2, the equation includes 1 lag of growth as an independent variable. In row 3,
the equation includes 4 lags of growth in column (2) and 9 lags of growth in column (3). In row
4, the equation includes 4 lags of growth in column (2), with the 1st lag instrumented using the 5th
lag, and 9 lags of growth in column (3), with the 1st lag instrumented using the 10th lag.




                                                                    46
