NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE KNOWLEDGE TRAP:
HUMAN CAPITAL AND DEVELOPMENT RECONSIDERED
Benjamin F. Jones
Working Paper 14138
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14138

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2008

I wish to thank Daron Acemoglu, Pol Antras, Andrew Hertzberg, Jin Li, Pablo Montagnes, Ben Olken,
Scott Stern, Kane Sweeney and participants in presentations at Northwestern, Washington University,
Penn State, the LSE, and the BREAD conference for helpful comments. All errors are my own. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Benjamin F. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

The Knowledge Trap: Human Capital and Development Reconsidered
Benjamin F. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 14138
June 2008
JEL No. F22,F23,I20,J24,J31,O11,O15
ABSTRACT
This paper presents a model where human capital differences - rather than technology differences
- can explain several central phenomena in the world economy. The results follow from the educational
choices of workers, who decide not just how long to train, but also how broadly. A "knowledge trap"
occurs in economies where skilled workers favor broad but shallow knowledge. This simple idea
can inform cross-country income differences, international trade patterns, poverty traps, and price
and wage differences across countries in a manner broadly consistent with existing empirical evidence.
The model also provides insights about the brain drain, migration, and the role for multinationals in
development. More generally, this paper shows that standard human capital accounting methods can
severely underestimate the role of education in development. It shows how endogenous educational
decisions can replace exogenous technology differences in a range of economic reasoning.

Benjamin F. Jones
Northwestern University
Kellogg School of Management
Department of Management and Strategy
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
bjones@kellogg.northwestern.edu

1

Introduction

To explain several central phenomena in economics, from the wealth and poverty of nations
to patterns of world trade, economists often find it necessary to invoke "technology diﬀerences". This paper suggests an alternative explanation, based in human capital. I present
a model where endogenously acquired skills explain many stylized facts about the world
economy — including those facts often interpreted as evidence against human capital.
The model emphasizes cross-country diﬀerences in the quality of skilled workers. The
results follow from education decisions, which have two dimensions. One is duration - how
much time to put in education - which defines whether you become a skilled worker or not.
The other is content - what specific knowledge to acquire. In particular, given an investment
of time, one might become a "generalist" (e.g. a generalist doctor), with modest knowledge
about multiple tasks, or a "specialist" (e.g. an anesthesiologist) with deep knowledge at a
particular task. Quality advantages emerge in the collective productivity of skilled workers,
where specialists working in teams bring greater collective knowledge to bear in production.
The theory thus builds on Adam Smith’s foundational observation that specialization can
bring high productivity. The twist is to understand why these gains may go unrealized in
the educational phase. In the model, any gains from narrowly focused training are traded oﬀ
against the cost of both finding specialists with complementary skills and coordinating with
them in production. This tradeoﬀ may favor breadth over depth for three reasons. First,
deep, specialized knowledge may be hard to acquire locally; for example, heart surgery may
be hard to learn without guidance from existing heart surgeons. Absent expert instructors,
focused training provides less advantage.

Second, specialization may be worthwhile only

when a suﬃcient mass of complementary specialists already exists. For example, learning
heart surgery is less useful in the absence of anesthesiologists.

These two issues suggest

a variety of poverty trap where local deep knowledge is a prerequisite for individuals to
willingly and successfully seek deep knowledge. Finally, coordination costs in production
may be especially high.1 For any (or all) of these reasons, a low-productivity "generalist"
1 The idea that coordination costs of teamwork limit the gains from specialization follows Becker &
Murphy (1992). More broadly, the limits to specialization considered in this paper are based on local
frictions, rather than on the extent of the market as in Smith (1776).

1

equilibrium may persist. I call such outcomes a "knowledge trap" because the generalist
equilibrium features shallower collective knowledge.
Such quality diﬀerences are limited to skilled workers. Importantly, however, the real
wages of unskilled workers also rise in rich countries. This is a general equilibrium eﬀect
that follows when the output of skilled workers is relatively abundant, making the output
of unskilled workers relatively scarce.

This scarcity drives up unskilled wages.

More

precisely, when decisions to become skilled or remain unskilled are endogenous - the duration
dimension of education is a choice variable - the wage structure is pinned down in equilibrium
so that although quality diﬀerences are limited to skilled workers, real income gains are
shared equally by skilled and unskilled workers alike.
This equilibrium eﬀect is crucial, because it poses significant challenges to standard
human capital accounting methods. The standard approach infers cross-country skill differences from within-country returns to schooling, but in this model the entire wage distribution shifts, so that within-country wage equilibria on their own say nothing about
cross-country skill diﬀerences.

Estimation approaches based on immigrant behavior face

similar problems. The wage gains experienced by unskilled workers who immigrate from
poor to rich countries need not be explained by technology, as many authors infer; in this
model, the wage gains follow simply because unskilled workers are relatively scarce in the
rich country. For example, one may ask why taxi drivers earn so much more in rich countries. A natural explanation is that the taxi driver’s clients - skilled workers — have a much
higher opportunity cost of their time and hence will pay more for the ride.
In sum, rich countries are rich because they attain deeper collective knowledge among
skilled workers.

The relative scarcity of low skill means that the real wages of unskilled

workers also rise in rich countries, even though such workers have no more skill in rich than
poor countries. One thus finds a skill-based explanation for cross-country income diﬀerences
that can also get wages right.
Furthermore, the depth versus breadth tradeoﬀ means that (a) schooling duration is
insuﬃcient to assess skill and (b) the productivity of skilled workers is interdependent.
Workers are puzzle pieces, who fit together diﬀerently in diﬀerent economies. This richer
2

perspective on skill may inform phenomena such as international trade patterns (with knowledge traps, Heckscher-Ohlin can make a comeback), migrant behavior (why do skilled immigrants often take menial jobs?), and the brain drain (why don’t skilled workers move to
poor countries, where they are scarce?). The model further suggests pathways for escaping
poverty traps, including intriguing roles for multinationals in triggering development, which
may inform growth miracles in places like Hyderabad and Bangalore.
This paper is organized as follows.

Section 2 introduces the core ideas.

Section 3

presents a formal model, clarifying conditions for the existence of "knowledge traps" and
their general equilibrium eﬀects. Section 4 discusses several applications and relates them
to existing empirical evidence in addition to new evidence about the quality of skilled workers. I show that the model provides an integrated perspective on (i) cross-country income
diﬀerences, (ii) immigrant labor market outcomes, and (iii) poverty traps, as well as price
phenomena, including (iv) why some goods are especially cheap in poor countries and (v)
why "Mincerian" wage structures appear in all countries. The model provides additional
perspectives on (vi) the role of multinationals in development and (vii) international trade
patterns. Section 5 concludes.
Related Literature Many existing papers explore theoretical aspects of the division
of labor (e.g. Kim 1989, Becker and Murphy 1992, Garicano 2000). Other papers explore
multiple equilibria in human capital (e.g. Kremer 1993, Acemoglu 1996), and still others
explore specialization in intermediate goods, i.e. at the firm level, as the source of development failures (e.g. Ciccone and Matsuyama 1996, Rodriguez-Clare 1996, Acemoglu et al.
2006). A key innovation in this paper is to imagine specialization in education as a source
of multiple equilibria.

More precisely, this paper imagines a two-dimensional education

decision where both the breadth and duration of education are endogenous choices. There
is thus a division of labor among skilled workers (based on breadth), and a division of labor
between skilled and unskilled workers (based on duration).
This theoretical approach allows a reinterpretation of several empirical literatures, especially the "macro-Mincer" approach in the vast development accounting literature (surveyed
in Caselli 2005), which attempts to assess the role of human capital in cross-country income
3

diﬀerences. These empirical literatures will be discussed in detail below.
The primary contributions of this paper are two-fold. First, I show broadly how standard
accounting methods may underestimate the role of education in skill formation. Second, I
present a simple, specific mechanism, based on the division of skills, to show why large skill
diﬀerences may exist and persist across countries, providing a parsimonious interpretation
of many stylized facts in the world economy.

2

The Core Ideas

This section provides an introductory discussion of the core ideas in this paper.

First, I

introduce a "knowledge trap" to show how endogenous educational decisions can produce
large cross-country diﬀerences in skill.

Second, I show how standard macroeconomic ac-

counting methods will misaccount for these skill diﬀerences. Section 3 integrates these ideas
into a formal model.

2.1

A Knowledge Trap

Imagine there are two tasks, A and B, which are complementary in the production of a
good. For example, the good could be heart surgery, where one task is anesthesiology and
the other is the surgery itself.
Now imagine individuals must train to acquire skill, and one must decide how to use an
endowment of training time.
tasks.

One might train as a "generalist", developing skill at both

Alternatively, one might focus all their training on one task, becoming especially

adept at that task. For simplicity, let training as a generalist produce a skill level 1 at both
tasks, while training as a specialist produces a skill level m > 1 at one task and 0 at the
other.
As a simple example, let production be Y =

√
H A H B when working alone and cY

when pairing with another worker. This Cobb-Douglas production function captures the
complementarity between skills, and the term c < 1 represents a coordination penalty from
working in a team. Output is per unit of clock-time, and the amount of skill applied to a
particular task, e.g. H A , is the summation of skill applied per unit of clock-time.
4

In this setting, a generalist working alone does best by dividing his time equally between
tasks and earning Y = 12 . A pairing of complementary specialists optimally applies each
worker to their specialty, producing Y = mc for every unit of clock time, or 12 mc per team
member. The specialist organizational form is therefore more productive as long as mc > 1;
that is, as long as coordination penalties do not outweigh the benefits of deeper expertise.
A "knowledge trap" occurs when an economy of generalists is a stable equilibrium. In
a poor country, this may occur most simply because m is small. For example, becoming a
skilled heart surgeon may be diﬃcult without access to an existing skilled heart surgeon.
Alternatively, coordination penalties in production may be more severe in poor countries.
Hence, poor countries may feature m0 c0 < 1 while a rich country has mc > 1.
More subtly, an economy of generalists may persist due to thin supply of complementary
specialist types. To see this, imagine you are born into a world of generalists and consider
whether you would want to become a specialist instead. The best you could do as a lone
specialist would be to pair with an existing generalist.

In such a pairing, the specialist

focuses on the task in which they have expertise, the generalist on the other, and the
√
optimal output is Y = mc. The generalist would have to be paid at least their outside
option,

1
2,

to willingly join the specialist in such a team. The most income the specialist
√
could earn is therefore mc − 12 , which itself must exceed 12 for a player to prefer training as
√
a specialist. Hence the generalist equilibrium is stable to individual deviations if mc < 1.

We thus have a potential trap: for any coordination penalty in the range

1
m

<c<

√1
m

mutual specialization is more productive and yet the generalist equilibrium is stable.2
I call these specialization failures a "knowledge trap" because skilled workers in the
generalist equilibrium have shallower knowledge. This doesn’t mean that they have little
education. For example, the generalist doctor knows something about both anesthesiology
and surgery — not to mention oncology, infectious disease, psychiatry, ophthalmology, etc.
2 This type of knowledge trap would be resolved by mutual specialization in complementary tasks, and
one may ask why this coordination problem isn’t resolved naturally in the market, especially by firms. The
implicit assumption is that educational decisions are primarily made prior to the interactions of individuals
and firms, so that firms cannot coordinate major educational investments but rather make production
decisions given the skill set of the labor force. This seems a reasonable characterization empirically, since
skilled workers (engineers, lawyers, doctors, etc.) typically train for many years in educational institutions
that are distinct from firms, before entering the workforce. In this sense, it then falls to other institutions
to solve this type of coordination problem. These issues will be discussed further in Section 4.

5

Learning something about all these diﬀerent subjects may require a lot of education. But
this generalist doctor will likely be far less productive than a set of specialists who work
together.

The specialists may have no more schooling per person, but they have much

deeper knowledge about individual tasks, so that the collective body of knowledge across
the specialists may be far greater.

Quality diﬀerences thus follow here from the content

dimension of education. To see why potentially large quality diﬀerences will not be detected
by standard human capital accounting methods, we must further consider the duration
dimension of education, which we turn to next.

2.2

Human Capital and Wages

A large literature has concluded that schooling variation across countries is too small to
explain cross-country income diﬀerences (see Caselli 2005 for a survey). This inference is
primarily drawn using the "macro-Mincer" approach, which attempts to compute human
capital stocks from data on the wage-schooling relationship (e.g. Hall and Jones 1999, Bils
and Klenow 2000). If workers are paid their marginal products, then the wage gain from
schooling can inform how schooling influences productivity. Wage-schooling relationships
are usually taken to follow the log-linear, i.e. "Mincerian", form (Mincer 1974),
0

w (s) = w(s0 )erm (s−s )

(1)

where s is schooling duration, w(s) is the wage, and rm is the percentage increase in the
wage for an additional year of schooling.3
To see how such within-country wage relationships can be misused in inferring crosscountry skill diﬀerences, consider first that these wage structures emerge as a local equilibrium when labor supply is endogenous. In particular, define a worker’s lifetime income
as
y(s) =

Z

∞

w(s)e−rt dt

(2)

s

where individuals earn no wage income during their s years of training and face a discount
rate r. If in equilibrium workers cannot deviate to other schooling decisions and be better
3 Such log-linear wage-schooling relationships have been estimated in many countries around the world
(see Psacharopolous 1994).

6

oﬀ, then for any two schooling levels
y(s) = y(s0 )
and therefore (1) follows immediately with rm = r.4 The log-linear wage structure follows
through arbitrage. Individuals become skilled by investing time in education, which means
giving up wages today in exchange for higher wages later. In this simple setting, the rate
of return on a foregone dollar of wage income is pinned down by the expected return on
investment - i.e. the discount rate.5 Quality diﬀerences in education won’t appear in the
wage data, because educational duration decisions reallocate workers endogenously to ensure
this equilibrium rate of return.
Now consider how one can interpret skill from wages. Imagine that there are two goods,
good 1 (e.g. haircuts) produced by unskilled workers with no education and good 2 (e.g.
surgery) that requires S years of training to perform. Let preferences be the same in all
countries and demand for each good be downward sloping. Lastly, imagine as above that
skill, h, and time, L, are the only inputs to production, so that x1 = h1 L1 and x2 = h2 L2 .
The marginal product for each good is then w1 = p1 h1 and w2 = p2 h2 , and we have
h2 =

p1
h1 erS
p2

(3)

where w2 /w1 = erS follows from income arbitrage as above.
To compare skill across countries, standard accounting methods assume that unskilled
workers have the same innate skill, h1 , in all economies and estimate the skill of the educated
as
h2 = h1 erS
But this method for estimating h2 is clearly problematic. As just shown in (3), one must
also confront relative prices (p1 /p2 ), which are well known to diﬀer substantially across
4 This

arbitrage argument follows in the spirit of Mincer (1958). Integrating (2) gives y(s) =
0

1
w(s)e−rs
r

so that y(s) = y(s0 ) implies w(s) = w(s0 )er(s−s ) . Equivalently, (1) follows if workers choose schooling
duration to maximize lifetime income. That is, with s∗ = arg max y(s) we have
w0 (s∗ ) = rw(s∗ )
which is just the log-linear wage structure expressed as a marginal condition.
5 Here the interest rate and the return to schooling are equivalent. A richer model would introduce other
aspects, such as ability diﬀerences, progressive marginal income tax rates, out-of-pocket costs for education,
and finite time horizons which could drive the return to schooling above the real interest rate. See Heckman
et al. (2005) for a broader characterization of lifetime income.

7

countries.6

And it is easy to see how ignoring relative prices might substantially under-

state human capital diﬀerences.

Under the innocuous assumptions that poor countries

are relatively abundant in low skill and that demand is downward sloping, p1 /p2 will be
relatively small in poor countries. Hence the skill gains from education (h2 /h1 ) must be
adjusted upwards in rich countries relative to poor countries. Failing to account for these
price diﬀerences will dampen cross-country skill diﬀerences compared to the case where we
assume prices are the same everywhere.7
These observations suggest that skill diﬀerences might explain rather more about the
world economy than a large literature has suggested.

The following section presents a

general equilibrium model, integrating the quality diﬀerences of knowledge traps with endogenous schooling duration decisions.

Section 4 then details several applications and

reconsiders established empirical evidence from the model’s perspective.

3

The Knowledge Trap Economy

Imagine a world where workers are born, invest in skills, and then work, possibly in teams.
They can work in one of two sectors. One sector requires only unskilled labor, and output
is insensitive to the education level of the worker. Output in the other sector depends on
formal education.
The key decision problem for the individual is what skills to learn. Skill type is chosen
to maximize expected lifetime income. Once educated, the worker enters the labor force
and produces output, which occurs eﬃciently conditional on the education decisions made
and the ability to form appropriate teams. The educational decision is thus the key to the
model.
6 Such relative price diﬀerences are large and motivate the need for purchasing power parity (PPP) price
corrections when comparing real incomes across countries.
7 The standard accounting method assumes that the output of diﬀerent skilled workers are perfect substitutes. In this case p1 = p2 (eﬀectively, there is one good only). Under this assumption, one could
estimate h2 /h1 based purely on w2 /w1 . However, this assumption is unrealistic if we believe that worker
types are less than perfect substitutes. More realistically, any number of high school students are unlikely
to successfully perform angioplasty, assemble a jet engine, or write a contract consistent with the UCC.
Diﬀerent types of workers produce diﬀerent types of goods that face downward sloping demand. Hence,
skill endowments will matter in making inferences about human capital. This will be discussed further in
Section 4.

8

3.1

Environment

There is a continuum of individuals of measure L. Individuals are born at rate r > 0 and
die with hazard rate r, so that L is constant. Individuals are identical at birth and may
either start work immediately in the unskilled sector or invest S years of time to undertake
education.

If they choose to educate themselves, they may develop skill at two tasks, A

and B. We denote an individual’s skill level h = {hA , hB }. An individual may choose to
become a "generalist" and learn both skills, developing skill level h = {h, h}. Alternatively,
one may focus on a single skill and develop deeper but narrower expertise, attaining skill
level h = {mh, 0} or h = {0, mh} where m > 1.
3.1.1

Timing

For the individual, the sequence of events is:
1. The individual is born.
2. The individual makes an educational decision, becoming one of four types of workers,
(a) Type U workers ("unskilled") undertake no education, sU = 0, and have skill
level hU = {0, 0}.
(b) Type G workers ("generalists") undertake sG = S years of education and learn
both tasks, developing skill level hG = {h, h}.
(c) Type A workers ("A-specialists") focus sA = S years on task A, developing skill
level hA = {mh, 0}.
(d) Type B workers ("B-specialists") focus sB = S years on task B, developing skill
level hB = {0, mh}.
3. The individual enters the workforce.
(a) Unskilled workers (type U) go to work immediately in the unskilled sector.
(b) Skilled workers (types G, A, B) enter the skilled sector after S years and may
choose to work alone or pair with other skilled workers.
9

i. Unpaired skilled workers randomly meet other unpaired skilled workers with
hazard rate λ.
ii. If paired and your partner dies (at rate r), then you become unpaired again.
3.1.2

Income

The expected present value of lifetime income for a worker of type k is

k

W =

Z

∞

rV k e−rτ dτ

(4)

sk

where sk ∈ {0, S} is the duration of education.

Time subscripts are suppressed because

we will focus on steady-state equilibria. V k is the value of being a type k worker at the
moment your education is finished, which is the expected value of being an unpaired worker
of type k. This is defined by the Bellman equation,
rV k = wk + λ

X

j∈Ωk

¡
¢
Pr (j) V kj − V k

(5)

The flow value of being unpaired, rV k , equals the wage from working alone, wk , plus the
expected marginal gain from a possible pairing. You meet other unpaired workers at rate
λ, and the unpaired worker is type j with probability Pr(j). We assume a uniform chance
of meeting any particular unpaired worker, so that
Pr(j) = Ljp /Lp
where Ljp is the measure of workers of type j who are unpaired and Lp =

(6)
P

j

Ljp .8

You

accept the match if V kj ≥ V k and reject otherwise, which defines the "acceptance set",
Ωk ⊂ {G, A, B}, the set of types that a player of type k is willing to match with. If you
reject, you remain in the matching pool. If you accept, you leave the matching pool and
earn V kj , which is defined
¡
¢
rV kj = wkj − r V kj − V k

(7)

8 Note that this specification guarantees that the aggregate rate at which type k people bump into type
j people (λ Pr(j)Lkp ) is the same as the rate at which type j people bump into type k people (λ Pr(k)Ljp ).
Specifically,




λ Pr(j)Lkp = λ Ljp /Lp Lkp = λ Lkp /Lp Ljp = λ Pr(k)Ljp

10

The flow value of being paired, rV kj , is equal to the wage you receive in this pairing, wkj ,
less the expected loss from becoming a solo worker again, which occurs when your partner
dies (with probability r).
Paired workers split the value of their joint output by Nash Bargaining, dividing the
joint output such that
¡
¢1/2 ¡ jk
¢1/2
wkj = arg max V kj − V k
V −Vj

(8)

ŵkj

Meanwhile, a solo worker earns the total value of his output when working alone.
3.1.3

Output

There are two output sectors. Sector 1 produces a simple good, x1 , with unskilled labor
and with no advantage to skill in tasks A or B. Each worker in sector 1 produces with the
technology
x1 = z
Sector 2 produces a good where skill at tasks A and B matters.

Workers in sector 2

may work alone or with a partner, with the production function
α
α 1/α
+ HB
)
, Hk =
x2 = zc(n) (HA

X

tki hki

(9)

i

where σ =

1
1−α

is the elasticity of substitution between the two skills and we assume σ ≤ 1 ,

so that both inputs are necessary for positive production.9 The term c(n) ∈ [0, 1] captures
the coordination penalty from working in a team of size n. Without loss of generality set
c(1) = 1 and c(2) = c. The time devoted by individual i to task k is tki , and members of a
team split their time across tasks to produce maximum output.
3.1.4

Preferences

Utility is given by
k

U =

Z

∞

u(C k (t))e−rt dt

0

9 The CES production function in (9) is used for simplicity. The theory can be developed from a more
general production function, x2 = c(n)f (HA , HB ), where f (HA , HB ) is a symmetric, constant returns to
scale function. Gross complements (σ ≤ 1) provides substantial tractability but is not a necessary condition
for the main results (see also Footnote 36).

11

where u(C) is increasing and concave and the rate of time preference, r, is given by the
hazard rate of death. Individuals have access to a competitive annuity market which pays
an interest rate on loans of r.10 The equivalence of the interest rate and the rate of time
preference implies that an individual’s consumption does not change across periods, by the
standard Euler equation.11 Let preferences across goods be
C k (x1 , x2 ) = (γxρ1 + (1 − γ) xρ2 )
where ε =

3.2

1
1−ρ

1/ρ

(10)

is the elasticity of substitution between goods, which we assume is finite.

Equilibrium

An equilibrium is a decision by each worker that maximizes her utility given the decisions
of other workers. The choice involves (a) maximizing lifetime income, and (b) maximizing
utility of consumption given this lifetime income. We look at stationary equilibria where
all players of skilled type k have the same matching policy Ωk that is constant with time.
It is convenient to define the equilibrium in terms of aggregate variables. Let Lk be the
measure of living individuals who have chosen to be type k, and let Lq be the measure of
workers actively producing the good of type q.

Let XqS , XqD , and pq respectively be the

total supply, total demand, and price of good q.
Definition 1 A steady-state equilibrium consists of W k , V k , C k , Lk for all worker types
k ∈ {U, G, A, B}; V kj , Ωk , Lkp for all skilled worker types k, j ∈ {G, A, B}; and Lq , XqS ,
XqD , pq for each good q ∈ {1, 2} such that
1. (Income maximization: Choice of worker type) W k ≥ W j ∀k ∈ {U, G, A, B} such that
Lk > 0, ∀j ∈ {U, G, A, B}
2. (Income maximization: Matching policy) j ∈ Ωk for any j ∈ {G, A, B} such that
V kj ≥ V k , ∀k ∈ {G, A, B}
1 0 There is no capital in this model, so there is no rental rate of capital. However, there are loans, since
players are born with no wealth and therefore those in school must borrow to consume. We imagine a
zero-profit competitive annuity market where individuals hand over rights to their future lifetime income,
W , upon birth in exchange for a payment, a, every period. This payment must be a = rW by the zero
profit condition. Therefore, the rate of interest on loans is the same as the hazard rate of death.
1 1 The

Euler equation is

du0 /dt
u0

= r − r = 0, so that u(C) and hence C are constant with time.

12

3. (Consumer optimization) C k (x1 , x2 ) ≥ C k (x01 , x02 ) ∀x1 , x2 , x01 , x02 such that p1 x1 +
p2 x2 ≤ rW k and p1 x01 + p2 x02 ≤ rW k , ∀k ∈ {U, G, A, B}
4. (Market clearing) XqD = XqS ∀q ∈ {1, 2}
5. (Steady—state) Lk is constant ∀k ∈ {U, G, A, B} and Lkp is constant ∀k ∈ {G, A, B}
We will further focus on equilibria in the "full employment" setting, where λ → ∞.

3.3

Analysis

We analyze the equilibria in this model in two stages. First, we focus on the skilled sector.
We investigate two diﬀerent equilibria that can emerge in the organization of skilled labor, a
"generalist" equilibrium and a "specialist" equilibrium. Second, we introduce the unskilled
sector and demand to close the economy.
3.3.1

Organizational Equilibria in the Skilled Sector

The value of being a skilled worker of type k at the moment one’s education is complete is,
from (5) and (7),

P
λ
k
kj
1 w + 2r j∈Ωk Pr(j)w
V =
P
λ
r 1 + 2r
j∈Ωk Pr(j)
k

(11)

so that the value of being a type k worker depends on (a) the wage you earn if you work
alone, wk , (b) the wage you can earn in pairings you are willing to accept, wkj , and (c) the
rate such pairings occur, λ Pr (j). To solve this model, we consider the wages and pairings
that can be supported in equilibrium.
The equilibrium definition requires that no individual be able to deviate and earn higher
income. Hence we must have W k = W for all active worker types in any equilibrium and
therefore, by (4),
V k = V for all k ∈ {G, A, B}
That is, each type of skilled worker must have the same expected income upon finishing
school. If one type did better than the others, an individual would switch to become this
type.
This common value, V , means that in any equilibrium individuals have the same outside
option when wage bargaining. Defining xkj
2 as the maximum output individuals of type k
13

and j can produce when working together, it then follows from Nash Bargaining, (8), that
in any accepted pairing V kj = V jk and
wkj =

1
p2 xkj
2
2

(12)

so that in equilibrium a worker team splits its joint output equally. Meanwhile, if skilled
workers work alone, then they earn the total product, so that
wk = p2 xk2

(13)

where xk2 is the maximum output an individual of type k can produce when working alone.
These results lead to a limited set of matching behaviors that can exist in equilibrium.
©
ª
Lemma 1 (Matching Rules) In equilibrium, matching behavior is either ΩA , ΩB , ΩG =
©
ª
{{B}, {A}, {∅}} or ΩA , ΩB , ΩG = {{B, G}, {A, G}, {A, B}}
Proof. See appendix.

This result states in part that types never match with themselves. This is intuitive
because matching with one own’s type provides no productivity advantage but incurs coordination costs. The lemma also states that a specialist is always willing to match with
the other specialist type in equilibrium. This is intuitive because an AB pairing produces
the highest wages.

A second, intuitive equilibrium property follows from the symmetry

between specialists and their desire not to be unemployed.
Lemma 2 (Balanced Specialists) In equilibrium, LA = LB .
Proof. See appendix.
This lemma limits the class of possible equilibria.

If Ls is the total mass of skilled

workers, then we can distinguish three potential equilibria: (1) a "generalist" equilibrium
©
©
ª
ª
where LA , LB , LG = {0, 0, Ls }; (2) a "specialist" equilibrium where LA , LB , LG =
© A B Gª
©1 s 1 s ª
= {L0 , L0 , Ls − 2L0 } for
2 L , 2 L , 0 ; and (3) a "mixed" equilibrium where L , L , L
some L0 such that 0 < L0 < 12 Ls .

Proposition 3 (Knowledge Trap) With full employment, where λ → ∞, a "generalist"
AB
equilibrium exists iﬀ xAG
≤ 2xG
≥ 2xG
2
2 and a "specialist" equilibrium exists iﬀ x2
2 . With
14

full employment, any "mixed" equilibrium limits to the "generalist" equilibrium. For some
parameter values, both a generalist and specialist equilibrium can exist. These equilibria are
summarized in Figure 1.
Proof. See appendix.
The intuition for these results is straightforward.

As λ → ∞, workers meet at such

a high rate that they match instantaneously in equilibrium and are never unemployed.
Hence skilled workers choose matches based simply on wages.

In the "generalist" case,

skilled workers earn wG = p2 xG
2 . If a player deviates to be a specialist, say type A, then
the best he can do is pair with an existing generalist and earn p2 xAG
− wG .12 Hence, a
2
world of generalists is an equilibrium iﬀ p2 xAG
− wG ≤ wG , or
2
xAG
≤ 2xG
2
2
In the "specialist" case, skilled workers produce in teams and earn a wage wAB =
1
AB
2 p2 x2 .

If a player deviates to be a generalist, then he could either (a) work alone and

earn wG or (b) pair with an existing specialist and earn p2 xAG
− wAB . The latter option
2
cannot be worthwhile. In particular, since xAG
< xAB
2
2 , deviating to be a generalist only
to pair with a specialist is not better than remaining as a specialist in the first place.
We therefore only need consider the first case, where the deviating generalist works alone.
Hence, this world of specialists is an equilibrium iﬀ wG ≤ wAB , or
xAB
≥ 2xG
2
2
These existence conditions can be rewritten in terms of the model’s exogenous parameters, using the production functions, where the condition for specialist stability, xAB
≥
2
2xG
, is simply mc ≥ 1, and the condition for generalist stability, xAG
≤ 2xG
2
2 , is mc ≤
σ
¶ σ−1
µ2
2
. The equilibria are plotted in Figure 1.
1−σ
1+m

σ

1 2 With full employment, the deviating player captures the joint output net of the other player’s outside
wage. With finite λ, the possibility of unemployment further aﬀects the wage bargain - see Appendix.

15

m
Generalists
or
Specialists

Specialists
Only

Generalists
Only
1

c
1
Figure 1: The Knowledge Trap

A country where coordination costs are low (i.e. high c), or the skill gains from narrow
training are large (i.e. high m) will tend towards the specialist equilibrium. A country where
coordination costs are high or gains from focused training are modest will tend towards the
generalist equilibrium.

The failure to develop deep specialists could therefore be viewed

as institutional problems, where the important policy parameters are m and c, as will be
discussed below. There are also, however, regions of the parameter space where diﬀerent
equilibria may emerge even if m and c are the same. This model thus can produce multiple,
pareto-ranked equilibria. Moreover, the ratio of income between generalist and specialist
equilibria is potentially unbounded even where both are stable.
Corollary 4 (Gains from Specialization) Output in the skilled sector is mc times larger in a
"specialist" equilibrium than in a "generalist" equilibrium. Moreover, the range of potential
combinations mc where both a generalist and specialist equilibria exist is unbounded from
above.
Proof. See appendix.
Note the important roles of (1) coordination costs and (2) task complementarity in supporting a sub-optimal generalist equilibrium. Deviating to become a specialist only to pair
with an existing generalist is less appealing when coordination costs are high (i.e. smaller c)
16

or complementarities of tasks are high (i.e. smaller σ). With suﬃcient coordination costs or
complementarity, m (and hence mc) can become unboundedly large, so that the generalist
case is stable even though the specialist organization produces unboundedly higher income.
Lastly, note the role of a "thick market" problem for supporting a robust generalist
equilibrium despite large mc. The generalist equilibrium is stable to the extent that finding a complementary specialist type is challenging were you to deviate yourself.

With

finite λ, the generalist equilibrium is stable to trembles where positive masses of specialists
appear, because the search friction impedes easy matching.

The convenient case of "full

employment", where λ → ∞, is the limit of trembling hand perfect equilibria.13
3.3.2

The Equilibrium Economy

Given the possible organizational equilibria in the skilled sector, we now consider the influence of this organizational equilibrium on the economy at large. Denote with the superscript
n the organizational equilibrium in the skilled sector, where n = G defines the "generalist"
outcome and n = AB defines the "specialist" outcome. The equilibrium in the skilled sector
will influence the endogenous outcomes in both the skilled and unskilled sectors, including
labor allocations, prices, and wages.
The first result concerns wages.
Lemma 5 (Log-linear Wages). In any full employment equilibrium
w2n = w1n erS

(14)

Proof. See appendix.
This functional form follows from (a) exponential discounting and (b) the opportunity
cost of time.

Through endogenous decisions to become skilled or unskilled, an identical

Mincerian wage structure emerges regardless of the organizational equilibrium in the skilled
sector.
Given this wage relationship, we can now pin down prices. In equilibrium, workers in
1 3 In

the limit, the model still features a "needle in a haystack" friction where, although search is extremely
rapid (λ → ∞) there are so many workers (a continuum) that one cannot expect to find a particular worker
in finite time.

17

each sector are paid
w1n

= pn1 z

w2n

= pn2 2 σ−1 zh ×

1

½

1,
n=G
mc, n = AB

Therefore, using the wage ratio, the price ratio on the supply side is determined as a function
of exogenous parameters14
1
pn1
= 2 σ−1 he−rS ×
n
p2

½

1,
n=G
mc, n = AB

Now consider the demand side to close the model.
demands are such that
X1n
=
X2n

µ

γ
1−γ

¶ε µ

pn1
pn2

(15)

With CES preferences, aggregate

¶−ε

Market clearing implies pn1 X1n = w1n Ln1 and pn2 X2n = w2n Ln2 so that labor allocations are also
pinned down given relative prices
Ln1
=
Ln2

µ

γ
1−γ

¶ε µ

pn1
pn2

¶1−ε

erS

(16)

where Lnq is the measure of people actively working in sector q.15
Lastly, real income is also pinned down given relative prices
n

y =

w1n /pn

Ã

ε

ε

= z γ + (1 − γ)

µ

pn1
pn2

1
¶ε−1 ! ε−1

(17)

1
³
´ 1−ε
.16
where the aggregate price level, pn , is pn = γ ε (pn1 )1−ε + (1 − γ)ε (pn2 )1−ε

1 4 The price ratio is determined entirely by the supply side because both the skilled and unskilled sectors
exhibit constant returns to scale.
1 5 There are also a number of students who are training in sector 2 and not yet active workers. Given the
hazard rate of death r, we have ers Ln
2 people currently training and working in sector 2, so that total labor
rs n
supply is L = Ln
1 + e L2 .
1 6 Real national income (Y n ) is given by pn Y n = wn L + wn L , so that real per-capita income (y n ) is
1 1
2 2

 n
wn Ln
L1
pn y n = Y n /L = w1n
+ 2n 2 = w1n
L
w1 L

Thus average per-capita income is equivalent to the real wage in the low-skilled sector. This follows in
equilibrium because workers’ net present value of lifetime wage income is equivalent at birth. We can
alternatively write this in terms of sector 2 wages, since w1n = e−rs w2n .

18

4

Applications and Discussion

This section clarifies the model’s implications and discusses several phenomena and stylized
facts from the model’s perspective. We begin with prices, wages, and income diﬀerences
across countries, and then consider immigration, poverty traps, the role of multinationals
in development, and extensions to international trade and growth.

4.1

Prices, Wages, and Income Diﬀerences Across Countries

To understand cross-country income diﬀerences, we begin with prices and wages. We then
build from this foundation to discuss real output diﬀerences.
4.1.1

Relative Prices

A central observation in development is that certain goods are relatively cheap in poor countries (e.g. Harrod 1933, Balassa 1964, Samuelson 1964).17 This observation motivates the
need for PPP price corrections when comparing real income across countries. The knowledge trap model provides an endogenous mechanism to understand this price phenomenon,
where low-skilled goods (e.g. haircuts) are relatively cheap in a poor country because low
skill is relatively abundant there. In particular, the price ratio is given by (15), so that
AB
pAB
1 /p2
= mc
G
p1 /pG
2

and the low-skilled good is mc times cheaper in the poor country.18
4.1.2

Wages

The flexibility of prices and labor supply meanwhile ensures that equilibrium wage gains
from education are limited. Because people choose to be highly educated, excessive wage
gains to the highly-educated can be arbitraged away by an increase in the supply of such
workers.

In the model’s simple formulation, the cost of education is driven by foregone

1 7 Classic

explanations for this price phenomenon imagine exogenous cross-country diﬀerences in technology (Balassa 1964, Samuelson 1964) or factor endowments (Bhagwati 1984).
1 8 Relative price diﬀerences are often noted as a phenomenon of relatively cheap services (e.g. haircuts)
in poor countries. One may also observe that investment goods appear relatively expensive compared to
consumption goods in poor countries (Hsieh and Klenow, 2005). Testing whether skill endowments underly
these cross-country price diﬀerences is an interesting empirical question left to future work.

19

wages during the training phase. This generates the log-linear "Mincerian" wage structure
and pins the skilled wage premium to the interest rate, as in (14).19
More generally, with output prices and labor supply both adjusting, the wage returns to
schooling no longer capture the underlying human capital in an economy, as discussed next.
4.1.3

Real Income Diﬀerences

Many authors have concluded that physical and human capital cannot explain the wealth
and poverty of nations, leaving residual variation in "total factor productivity" as a major
explanation (see Caselli 2005 for a review). The above model challenges this conclusion by
reconsidering the role of human capital.
Standard human capital accounting uses Mincerian wage structures to count up human
capital stocks by assuming that diﬀerent skill classes produce perfect substitutes (Hall and
Jones 1999; Bils and Klenow 2000).

Under this strong assumption, the prices of any

worker’s output is the same and one can ignore output prices in inferring human capital.
In this paper, we build instead from the viewpoint where skilled and unskilled workers are
not perfectly substitutable (retail workers cannot perform heart surgery). Demands for the
outputs of diﬀerent skill classes are downward sloping so that output prices adjust when the
quantity or quality of a skill class changes. Countries that are very good at producing high
skill will find that goods produced by low-skill workers are scarce, which drives up low-skilled
wages. In fact, with relative wages pinned down by the discount rate, as in (14), workers will
allocate themselves between skilled and unskilled careers so that the percentage wage gains
for skilled and unskilled workers rise or fall in equal proportion. Wages are Mincerian in
each country, but the wage-schooling relationship shifts vertically depending on the skilled
equilibrium. This is shown in Figure 2 for the case of Cobb-Douglas preferences.20
1 9 Note that this simple perspective suggests a positive correlation between interest rates and returns to
schooling across countries. In fact, the literature finds both (a) higher interest rates in poor countries (e.g.
Banerjee and Duflo 2005) and (b) higher rates of return to schooling in poor countries (Psacharapolous
1994). Also see footnote 5.
2 0 An interesting feature of the model is that a country’s average educational attainment need not even
be positively associated with average income. For example, with Cobb-Douglas preferences (ε = 1) the
average schooling in a population is

Ln
2
= (1 − γ)Se−rS
L
a constant independent of which equilibrium is attained. For average schooling to be positively associated
with income (which it is), we require the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor to be
sn = S

20

Real
wage
w2AB = e rS w1AB
Rich country
(in specialist equilibrium)

w2G = e rS w1G
AB
1

w

1−γ

= (mc)

G
1

w

w1G

s

Poor country
(in generalist equilibrium)

Schooling

Figure 2: Equilibrium Wage-Schooling Relationships
To properly incorporate the eﬀects of skill in a cross-country analysis, one must consider the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor. Consensus estimates
suggest an elasticity between 1 and 2 (not infinity, as the perfect substitutes approach assumes). Observing this fact, Caselli and Coleman (2006) reconsider development accounting
in a setting where labor scarcity aﬀects wages. They estimate separate productivity terms
for skilled (s) and unskilled (u) workers using the production function
y = k α [(Au Lu )ρ + (As Ls )ρ ]

1−α
ρ

which is the analogue of (10) in this paper with the addition of physical capital, k.21 With
this estimation strategy, they find that the productivity advantage of rich countries is limited
to skilled workers. In particular, they find an enormous productivity advantage of skilled
workers (As ) in rich countries while the productivity of unskilled workers (Au ) is no higher
there.22 The "knowledge trap" model suggests exactly this eﬀect. The theory shows how
greater than 1. Then countries with high quality skilled-labor (i.e. specialization) will see an endogenous
increase in the supply of such skilled workers.
2 1 They calculate L and L by aggregating workers within lower schooling ranges (L ) and upper schooling
u
s
u
ranges (Ls ) with perfect substitutes assumed within each range.
2 2 In their prefered specification, Caselli and Coleman further argue that unskilled workers are actually
less productive in rich than poor countries. An explanation for this phenomenon may be selection on ability
within labor markets (see Footnote 26 below). More generally, their result for unskilled workers is sensitive
to the calibration parameters and how one defines "unskilled worker". If one classifies such workers as
having less than high school or less than college-level education, then unskilled workers in their calibration
become mildly more productive in rich countries. What appears highly robust about their specification is
that skilled workers have enormous productivity advantages in rich countries.

21

human capital diﬀerences can produce large skilled labor productivity diﬀerences and hence
provides a human-capital based interpretation of cross-country income diﬀerences.23

4.2

Immigrant Wages and Occupations

An alternative approach to assessing human capital’s role in cross-country income diﬀerences is to examine what happens when workers trained in poor countries are placed in
rich countries. If human capital diﬀerences were critical, authors argue, then such workers
should experience significant wage penalties in the rich country’s economy.

Noting that

immigrants from poor to rich countries earn wages broadly similar to workers in the rich
country, authors have concluded that human capital plays at most a modest role in explaining productivity diﬀerences across countries (Hendricks 2002).

However, this estimation

approach as implemented falls into the same pitfall of standard accounting approaches, by
limiting the eﬀect of scarce labor supply.24
The knowledge trap model predicts that low-skilled immigrants, who are the majority of
immigrants, will enjoy (a) much higher real wages than they left behind and (b) face no wage
penalty in the rich economy vis-a-vis other unskilled workers. Indeed, why would education
matter for the uneducated, working as taxi drivers, retail workers, and farm hands? Wage
gains follow naturally when the low-skilled immigrant moves to a place where his labor
type is relatively scarce.

The over-riding role of scarcity, rather than productivity, for

unskilled workers is corroborated by the calibration discussed above. The potentially more
informative implications of the knowledge trap model lie among skilled immigrants.
2 3 Another important calibration is Manuelli and Sheshadri (2005), who estimate human capital by considering it as an endogenous choice variable. They find large quality diﬀerences in human capital across
countries that, once accounted for, require little or no TFP diﬀerences. Their estimation suggests large
advantages in the quality of education in rich countries even at entrance to primary school. This skill
advantage at very low-education levels diﬀers from the "knowledge trap" approach, which emphasizes difference that are limited to the highly skilled and diﬀers from the Caselli and Coleman calibration, where
skill diﬀerences exist only among those with more education. Manuelli and Sheshadri’s imputed quality
diﬀerences at all skill levels appear to follow because their model does not allow for the relative price eﬀects
that occur when skilled and unskilled workers produce diﬀerent intermediate or final goods.
2 4 The main estimates in Hendricks (2002) assume workers output at diﬀerent skill classes are perfect
substitutes, thus eliminating any eﬀect of scarcity on the wages of the unskilled. To the extent calibrations
with less then perfect substitutes are considered, the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled
labor is assumed to be at least 5, which is far above the consensus estimates in the literature that range
between 1 and 2. The calibration of Caselli and Coleman (2006) (see discussion above) uses the consensus
range of elasticities, thus capturing the eﬀects of scarce labor supply and finding no general TFP advantages
in rich countries.

22

Corollary 6 (Immigrant Workers) An unskilled worker who migrates from a poor to a rich
country will earn a higher real wage. The skilled generalist who migrates from a poor to a
rich country will work in the unskilled sector and earn the unskilled wage, which may provide
more or less real income than staying at home.
Proof. See Appendix.
Skilled immigrants, as generalists, are unable to find local specialists willing to team with
them.

Moreover, they won’t work alone; the specialized equilibrium of the rich country

raises the low-skilled wage enough to make unskilled work a more enticing alternative to the
immigrant generalist than using his education. Hence, for example, we can see immigrant
Ph.D.’s who drive taxis.
Friedberg (2000) demonstrates that the source of education does matter to immigrant
wages, but the literature does not appear to have looked explicitly at higher education.
Descriptive facts can be assembled however using census data.25 I divide individuals in the
2000 U.S. Census into three groups: (1) US born, (2) immigrants who arrive by age 17, and
(3) immigrants who arrive after age 30. The idea is that those who immigrated by age 17
likely received any higher education in the United States, while those who immigrated after
age 30 likely did not.
Figure 3a shows two important facts. First, controlling for age and English language
ability, the location of higher education appears to matter. Among highly educated workers,
those who immigrate after age 30 experience significant wage penalties, of 50% or more.
Meanwhile there is no wage penalty if the immigrant arrived early enough to receive higher
education in the United States.
education does not matter.

Second — and conversely — the location of high-school

Wages do not diﬀer by birthplace or immigration age for

workers with an approximately high-school level education. Hence, the location of education
matters for high skill workers but not so much for low skill workers, as the "knowledge trap"
suggests.26
2 5 The

data and methods are detailed further in the Appendix.
also that immigrants with high school or less education have extremely similar wage outcomes
regardless of immigration age. This further suggests that early-age immigrants are an adequate control group
for late-age immigrants, highlighting that diﬀering labor market outcomes only occur at higher education
levels. Lastly, it is clear that very-low education immigrants (e.g. primary school) do significantly better
2 6 Note

23

Figure 3b considers related evidence based on occupation type. To construct this graph,
each occupation in the census is first categorized by the modal level of educational attainment for workers in that occupation. For example, taxi drivers typically have high school
degrees, physicians typically have professional degrees, and physicists typically have Ph.D.’s.
The figure shows the propensity for workers with professional or doctoral degrees to work in
diﬀerent occupations. We see that US born workers and early immigrants have extremely
similar occupational patterns. However, late immigrants with professional or doctoral degrees have a much smaller propensity to work in occupations that rely on such degrees.
Instead, they tend to shift down the occupational ladder into jobs that require only college
degrees and even, to a smaller extent, into occupations typically filled by those with high
school or less education. This pattern is further reflected in Figure 3a, which shows that
late immigrants with professional or Ph.D. degrees earn average wages no better than a
locally educated college graduate.
This evidence is consistent with the "knowledge trap" model but inconsistent with a
pure technology story, in which the location of education would not matter. More broadly,
the evidence is consistent with the idea that human capital diﬀerences across countries
exist primarily among the highly educated, as suggested independently by the calibration
of Caselli & Coleman (2006) discussed above.

4.3

Poverty Traps

Unlike poverty trap models that envision aggregate demand externalities, such as big push
models (e.g. Murphy et al., 1989), knowledge traps can be overcome locally, when workers
achieve greater collective skill.27 Booms are often local, whether it is city-states like Hong
Kong or Singapore, or cities within countries, like Bangalore, Hyderabad, and Shenzhen,
which have led growth in India and China. Yet such booms are also rare, and I consider
here challenges to collective skill improvement from the perspective of the model.
then very-low educated US born workers. Such limited education is very rare among the US born and likely
reflects individuals with developmental diﬃculties, which may explain that wage gap.
2 7 A challenge for aggregate demand models is that many poor economies are quite open to trade or have
large GDP on their own despite low per-capita GDP, so it is unclear that aggregate demand is a credible
obstacle.

24

4.3.1

The Quality of Higher Education

Income diﬀerences across countries may persist if countries are in diﬀerent regions of Figure
1. Countries with mc < 1 will have shallow knowledge and remain in poverty. This may
occur if acquiring deep skills is hard in poor countries (m is small). One can think of m
as a policy parameter, where, for example, m increases through public investment in higher
education. Small m also follows naturally if knowledge acquisition is limited by local access
to others with deep skill - i.e. expert teachers. For example, becoming skilled at protein
synthesis will be diﬃcult without access to existing skilled protein synthesists: their lectures,
advice, the ability to train in their laboratories, etc. In this setting, we can imagine a simple,
further type of knowledge trap.

If we write mn , where mG < mAB , then countries that

start in the generalist equilibrium will remain there if mG c < 1.
Escaping such a trap involves importing skill from abroad to train local students or
sending students abroad and hoping they will return. Both approaches face an incentive
problem however, since those with deep skills will earn higher real wages by remaining in
the rich country. The model thus suggests a "brain drain" phenomenon.
Corollary 7 (Brain Drain) Once trained as a specialist in the rich country, one will prefer
to stay.
Proof. See appendix.
Specialists in rich countries prefer to stay because they can work with complementary
specialists there and thus earn higher wages.

Hence students who migrate to the U.S.

for their Ph.D.’s face real wage declines if they go home - even though they are scarce at
home.28 Related, it is clear that students from rich countries do not migrate to developing
countries for their education, even though university and living expenses are considerably
lower. This may further suggest that the quality of education is low.29
2 8 More generally, the fact that skilled workers do not substantially flow from rich to poor countries
seems self-evident, and potentially mysterious since skilled workers are scarce in poor countries. A natural
explanation is that some complementary inputs are missing. The "knowledge trap" viewpoint suggests
that other skilled workers are an important complementary input, although of course one can imagine other
"missing" inputs that are complementary with skilled labor.
2 9 I thank Kevin Murphy for pointing this out.

25

This result suggests that wage subsidies or other incentives may be required to attract
skilled experts to the poor country and improve local training.
4.3.2

The Coordination of Higher Education

Even if poor countries can produce high-quality higher education, there is still an organizational challenge. Countries may be in the middle region of Figure 1, facing the same
parameters m and c but sitting in diﬀerent equilibria. Here a country cannot escape poverty
without creating thick measures of specialists with complementary skills. This may be hard.
Any intervention must convince initial cohorts of students to spend long years in irreversible
investments as specialists, which would be irrational if complementary specialists were not
expected. Hence we need a "local push".30 Yet it is not obvious what institutions have the
incentives or knowledge to coordinate such a push. A firm may have little incentive to make
these investments when students can decamp to other firms.31 Public institutions may not
produce the right incentives either. Developing deep expertise requires time, so that the
fruits of educational investments may not be felt for many years, depressing the interest of
public leaders (or firms), who may have short time horizons. Even if local leaders wish to
intervene, it may be challenging to envision the set of skills to develop, especially if there are
many required skills and deep knowledge does not exist locally. These diﬃculties suggest a
need for "visionary" public leaders. They also suggest an intriguing role for multinationals
in triggering escapes from poverty.
4.3.3

Multinationals and Poverty Traps

Intra-firm trade can allow for production teams that span national borders, and I discuss
here how a multinational can play a unique role in helping countries escape poverty.
3 0 Some authors see such coordination failures as easily solved due to trembling hand type arguments
(e.g. Acemoglu 1997). However, there are several reasons to think that small "trembles" are unlikely
to undo a generalist equilibrium. First, we are considering many years of education for an individual,
so that a "tremble" must be rather large. Second, while we consider two tasks for simplicity, there may
be N > 2 tasks needed for positive output, which would then require simultaneous trembles over many
specialties. Third, with greater search frictions in the market (smaller λ), trembles must occur over a large
mass of workers. Fourth, in tradeable sectors, one must leap to the skill equilibrium of the rich countries
to compete internationally - small skill trembles won’t suﬃce.
3 1 Contracts may help here, but labor contracts that prevent workers from departing a firm (i.e., in an
extreme form, slavery) are typically illegal. Labor market frictions may allow firms to do some training
if frictions give the firm some monopsony power (e.g. Acemoglu and Pischke 1998). Still, it is clear that
Ph.D.’s are produced in educational institutions, not in firms.

26

Corollary 8 (Desirable Cheap Specialists) A firm of specialists in a rich country would hire
specialists in poor countries, if they could be found.
Proof. See appendix.
This result follows because the skilled wage in the poor country is held down by the
Mincerian wage equilibrium, making a specialist there attractive. Hence, production would
shift to incorporate a skilled specialist in the poor country if such a type existed. But now
we have a cross-border coordination problem.

A multinational will only be able to find

these specialists if they exist in suﬃcient measure, and no one in the poor country will want
to become such a specialist unless the multinational will be able to find them.
The interesting aspect is that a multinational allows the local educational institutions
to avoid producing all required specialities locally.

The multinational provides the com-

plementary worker types from abroad. For example, in Hyderabad, governor Naidu both
subsidized a vast expansion in engineering education and personally convinced Bill Gates
to employ these workers in Microsoft’s global production chain, so that computer programmers in Hyderabad now team with other skilled specialists in advanced economies.32 Here,
the "visionary" leader need not recreate Microsoft but simply produce a suﬃcient quantity
of one specialist type that Microsoft will hire.

To the extent that a thick supply of this

specialist type triggers complementary specialization locally, the local economy may escape
from the trap broadly.33

4.4

Generalizations: International Trade and Growth

Knowledge traps may also provide a useful perspective on comparative advantage.

The

factor endowment model of trade, Heckscher-Ohlin, explains why Saudi Arabia exports oil
but is famously poor at predicting trade flows based on capital and labor endowments — the
so-called "Leontieﬀ Paradox" (Leontieﬀ 1953, Maskus 1985, Bowen et al. 1987, etc.).
3 2 See, e.g., Bradsher, Keith. "A High-Tech Fix for One Corner of India", The New York Times, December
27, 2002, p. B1.
3 3 With only two types of specialists, the emergence of one type in the poor country triggers the emergence
of the other, and the poor country will become rich. With more than two specialist types, the emergence
of one type may not inspire the local creation of the other types. Here, a multinational can continue to
employ a narrow type of skilled specialists in one country without triggering a general escape from poverty.
Here we will see both oﬀhsoring and persistently "cheap engineers".

27

With knowledge traps, the rich country has a comparative advantage in the skilled
good while the poor country has a comparative advantage in the low-skilled good.34

Yet

these comparative advantages - based in specialization - won’t appear in standard labor
classifications.35 With knowledge traps, rich countries are net exporters of skilled goods not
simply because they have more skilled workers, but because their skilled workers have so
much more skill.36
Finally, knowledge traps may help explain divergence over time in cross-country percapita income levels, thus confronting the typical empirical regularity in growth (Jones
1997, Pritchett 1997). To introduce growth in the model, one can let m increase with
time as advanced economies accumulate ideas.37

In fact, advanced economies appear to

accumulate an enormous amount of codified knowledge, which is associated with increasing
specialization and team-orientation among knowledge workers (Jones 2005, Wuchty et al.
2007). As one measure, the ISI Web of Science indexes 1.3 million science and engineering
journal articles published by US knowledge workers from 2001 to 2005. Divergence follows
naturally to the extent that such new knowledge is economically important and yet workers
in poor countries, for any of the reasons detailed above, do not learn these specialized ideas.

5

Conclusion

This paper oﬀers a human-capital based explanation for several phenomena in the world
economy and therefore a possible guide to core obstacles in development.

The model

3 4 In terms of the model, we can consider two small open economies who can trade both goods 1 and 2.
With world prices, p1 /p2 , such that
pAB
pG
p1
1
<
< 1AB
p
pG
p
2
2
2

the country in the generalist equilibrium exports the low-skilled good (1) while the country in the specialist
equilibrium exports the high skilled good (2).
3 5 For example, the degree of specialization won’t appear in designations like "professional" or "highly educated" worker, which can explain why attempts to save Heckscher-Ohlin through finer-grained classifications
of labor endowments have failed (e.g. Bowen et al. 1987).
3 6 Several studies find that augmenting factor-endowment diﬀerences with technology diﬀerences can produce more successful models empirically (Trefler 1993 and 1995, Harrigan 1997). These results, like the
cross-country income literature, leave unexplained technology diﬀerences as key explanatory forces. In the
knowledge trap model, productivity diﬀerences are seen as the result of diﬀerent, endogenous endowments
of skill.
3 7 In an endogenous growth framework, some fraction of skilled workers would produce productivity enhancing ideas that lead to growth in m. An accumulation of knowledge in an economy may require
innovators to become more specialized along the growth path, so that the number of tasks at the frontier
(2 in this model) becomes endogenous and increases with time. See Jones (2005) for such a growth model.

28

shows how large diﬀerences in the quality of skilled labor may (a) persist across economies
yet (b) not appear in the wage structure. Together, these ideas show how standard human
capital accounting may severely underestimate cross-country skill diﬀerences. Building from
a simple conception of human capital, the model provides an integrated perspective on crosscountry income diﬀerences, poverty traps, relative wages, price diﬀerences, trade patterns,
migrant behavior, and other phenomena in a way that appears broadly consistent with
important facts. Future work will test the model’s implications against other hypotheses
on each of these dimensions.
This paper speaks directly to a long-running debate over the roles of "human capital"
and "technology" in explaining income diﬀerences across countries. The model is centered
on human capital, but because it directly embraces "knowledge", it also comes close to some
conceptions of "technology". I close by further considering these distinctions.
In this paper, education is conceived of as the acquisition of knowledge: workers are
born with no knowledge, and education is the process of embodying existing knowledge
(techniques, methods, facts, theories, blueprints) into empty minds.

Rich countries are

more productive because they load deeper knowledge into these minds than poor countries
do. If we equate knowledge with "technology", then human capital and technology appear
tightly related. Human capital is the embodiment of technology into the labor force, much
as a microprocessor is the embodiment of technology into silicon. It is thus the emphasis
on embodiment, rather than the role of "ideas", that distinguishes this paper from other
approaches.
The focus on human capital does not suggest that technology is not an important, distinct
concept. Technology can be conceived as the set of discovered techniques, methods, facts,
models, et cetera that limits what can be embodied in minds or machines. At the frontier of
the world economy, technological progress, the expansion of this set, may still drive economic
development, but even here the eﬀects of knowledge will likely be felt — and understood —
not through a disembodied process but rather through the embodiment of these ideas into
the people and machines that actually produce things.

29

6

Appendix
Proof of Lemma (Matching Rules)

Proof. The lemma follows from five intermediate results.
(1) Workers are never willing to match with their own type (k ∈
/ Ωk ∀k)
In equilibrium, all skilled types have some V > 0. A type k never matches with type
k if V kk < V . For As or Bs, the joint output when teaming with one’s own type is zero.
Hence (7) implies V AA = V BB = 12 V < V . Therefore, neither As or Bs will match with
their own type. For Gs, (7) implies V GG = 12 wGG /r + 12 V . Noting that V ≥ wG /r (G’s
income if he never matches, from (5)) and that wGG < wG (GG matches provide no skill
advantage but incur a coordination penalty), it follows that V GG < V . Hence no type will
match with her own type.
(2) Type k is willing to match with type j iﬀ type j is willing to match with type k
(k ∈ Ωj ⇐⇒ j ∈ Ωk )
A type k is willing to match with type j if V kj ≥ V . With the Nash Bargaining Solution
and common V in equilibrium, it follows that V kj = V jk . Hence k ∈ Ωj ⇐⇒ j ∈ Ωk .
(3) As are willing to match with Gs iﬀ Bs are willing to match with Gs (G ∈ ΩA ⇐⇒
G ∈ ΩB )
As are willing to match with Gs if V AG ≥ V . In equilibrium, V AG = V BG . This
= xBG
follows from (7) because with (a) common V and (b) xAG
2
2 , Nash Bargaining implies
wAG = wBG . Hence, V AG ≥ V ⇐⇒ V BG ≥ V , so that As are willing to match with Gs
iﬀ Bs are willing to match with Gs.
(4) If an A or B is willing to match with Gs, then the A or B is also willing to match
with the complementary specialist type (G ∈ ΩA ⇒ B ∈ ΩA and G ∈ ΩB ⇒ A ∈ ΩB )
AB
=
If As are willing to match with Gs, then V AG ≥ V and wAG = 12 p2 xAG
2 . But w
1
1
AB
AG
AG
AB
AG
p
x
≥
p
x
=
w
and
hence,
from
(7),
V
≥
V
.
Hence
A
will
also
be
2
2
2
2
2
2
willing to match with Bs: G ∈ ΩA ⇒ B ∈ ΩA . A symmetric argument demonstrates that
G ∈ ΩB ⇒ A ∈ ΩB .
(v) As and Bs must match (Ωk 6= {∅} for k = A, B)
This result follows because tasks A and B are gross complements in production. Hence,
As or Bs who work in isolation do not produce positive output and earn no income.38
With these five properties, the only remaining, possible equilibrium matching policies
ª
©
ª
©
are ΩA , ΩB , ΩG = {{B}, {A}, {∅}} or ΩA , ΩB , ΩG = {{B, G}, {A, G}, {A, B}}.

3 8 Gross complements, σ ≤ 1, is a (strong) suﬃcient condition for this result but is not necessary. If σ > 1,
then positive production becomes possible when a specialist works alone. Nevertheless, it can be shown
1

that, with σ > 1, As and Bs still prefer to match in equilibrium so long as c > (1/2) σ−1 ; i.e. matching
occurs as long as coordination costs are not too severe (c is not too small) or the elasticity of substitution
between tasks is not too great (σ is not too large). The paper focuses on the case of σ ≤ 1 to enhance
tractability, brevity and intuition.

30

Proof of Lemma (Balanced Specialists)
Proof. (I) First consider the case where LA > 0 and LB > 0.
©
ª
1. In equilibrium V A = V B . Let ΩA , ΩB , ΩG = {{B, G}, {A, G}, {A, B}}. Equating
¢¤
£
¡
λ
Pr(G) wAB − wAG . Hence
V A = V B using (11) implies 0 = [Pr(A) − Pr(B)] wAB + 2r
ª
©
Pr(A) = Pr(B) in equilibrium. If, alternatively, ΩA , ΩB , ΩG = {{B}, {A}, {∅}}, it
follows directly from V A = V B using (11) that Pr(A) = Pr(B).
2. Next we show that Pr(A) = Pr(B) implies LA = LB . The probability of meeting a
worker of type j is Pr(k) = Lkp /Lp . To analyze Lkp , the mass of type k workers who are
unmatched, note that workers enter and leave the matching pool by four routes. Workers
enter the matching pool either because (a) they finish their studies or (b) their partner dies.
Workers exit the pool either by (c) dying themselves or (d) pairing with other workers.
These flows are defined as follows.
(a) There are Lk people in the population of type k. In steady state, they are born
at rate rLk and survive to their graduation with probability e−rs . The rate at which new
graduates enter the matching pool is therefore rLk e−rs .
(b) There are Lk e−rs − Lkp type k workers currently matched in teams. Since workers
¢
¡
die at rate r, the rate of reentry into the matching pool is r Lk e−rs − Lkp .
(c) Type k workers in the matching pool die at rate rLkp .
P
(d) Type k workers in the matching pool match other unpaired workers at rate λLkp j∈Ωk Pr(j).
Summing up these routes in and out of the matching pool, we have
X
Pr(j)
(18)
L̇kp = 2rLk e−rs − 2rLkp − λLkp
j∈Ωk

h
i−1
P
λ
In steady-state, L̇kp = 0, which implies that Lkp = 1 + 2r
Pr(j)
e−rs Lk .
k
j∈Ω
ratio of probabilities for an A and B meeting is therefore
P
λ
A
1 + 2r
Pr(A)
i∈ΩB Pr(i) L
=
P
λ
Pr(B)
LB
1 + 2r
l∈ΩA Pr(l)

The

(19)

It then follows directly, given the allowable matching rules defined by Lemma 1, that Pr(A) =
Pr(B) implies LA = LB .
(II) Second, consider the case where LA > 0 and LB = 0.
We rule this case out by contradiction. Since As earn zero if they work alone, As must
match in equilibrium. Hence an equilibrium with LA > 0 and LB = 0 would require LG > 0
with As and Gs matching. In equilibrium, common V then implies from (11) that
rV =

λ
2r

Pr(G) 12 p2 xAG
2
λ
1 + 2r
Pr(G)

(20)

Now consider a player who deviates to type B. This player could choose to match only

31

with Gs and earn the same V .39 Hence, when meeting an A, the B deviator would have
no worse outside option than V . Hence, if B chose to match with an A, wBA ≥ 12 p2 xAB
2 .
Hence if the B deviator chose to match with As or Gs then
rV B ≥

λ
2r

λ
Pr(A) 12 p2 xAB
+ 2r
Pr(G) 12 p2 xAG
2
2
> rV
λ
λ
1 + 2r
Pr(A) + 2r
Pr(G)

where the strict inequality follows because xAB
> xAG
2
2 . Therefore, by contradiction, there
A
B
is no equilibrium with L > 0, L = 0. By a symmetric argument there is no equilibrium
where LA = 0, LB > 0.
Hence in equilibrium the model must feature LA = LB .

Proof of Proposition (Knowledge Traps)
Proof. Consider the "generalist", "specialist", and "mixed" cases in turn.
ª
©
(I) The "generalist" case, where LA , LB , LG = {0, 0, Ls }.
In this case,
rV = wG
where wG = p2 xG
2.
Now consider whether an (infinitesimal) individual would deviate to a specialist type,
say type A. The type A worker earns wA = 0 when working alone. Hence from (11)
£λ ¡
¢¤ AG
λ
1
A
/ 1 + 2r
w , where wAG = 12 p2 xAG
rV A = 2r
2 − 2 r(V − V ) from the Nash Bargaining
AG
gives
Solution. Solving these to eliminate w
rV A =

λ
2r

2+

λ
2r

¡

− wG
p2 xAG
2

¢

Workers won’t deviate if rV ≥ rV A , or (after some algebra)
µ
¶
2r
AG
G
x2 ≤ 2x2 1 +
λ
If this condition holds, the "generalist" case is an equilibrium. With full employment,
≤ 2xG .
λ → ∞, the "generalist" case is an equilibrium iﬀ xAG
© A B G ª 2 © 1 s 21 s ª
= 2L , 2L , 0 .
(II) The "specialist" case, where L , L , L
In this case,
rV =

λ
2r

2+

λ
2r

wAB

where wAB = 12 p2 xAB
2 .
3 9 If

a player deviates to type B and chooses ΩB = {G}, then rV B =

λ Pr(G)wBG
2r
λ Pr(G)
1+ 2r

. Nash Bagaining

implies wBG = 12 p2 xBG
− 12 r(V − V B ). With V given in (20), and noting xBG
= xAG
2
2
2 , it then follows
that rV B − rV = 0. In this setting, deviating to be a player of type B and using the same matching policy
as the existing As provides the same income as the existing players receive.

32

The "specialist" case is an equilibrium iﬀ rV ≥ rV G . If you deviate to be a generalist
and don’t match with specialists, then rV G = wG = p2 xG
2 . If you do match with specialists,
¢
¡
λ GA
λ
, where wGA = 12 p2 xAG
w )/ 1 + 2r
− 12 r(V − V G ) from the Nash
then rV G = (wG + 2r
2
Bargaining Solution.
Assuming Gs match with As and Bs the condition that rV ≥ rV G is therefore (after
some algebra)
!µ
Ã
¶
λ
2 + 2r
4r G
AB
AG
x2 ≥
+
x
x
2
λ
λ 2
1 + 2r
Assuming alternatively that Gs do not match, the condition that rV ≥ rV G is
µ
¶
4r
AB
x2 ≥ 1 +
2xG
2
λ
So the condition for the specialist case to be an equilibrium is
"
!µ
Ã
¶#
λ
4r 2 + 2r
2r xAG
2
AB
G
x2 ≥ 2x2 max 1 + ,
+ G
λ
λ
λ
2x2
1 + 2r
£
¤
AG
As λ → ∞, the specialist case is an equilibrium iﬀ xAB
≥ max 2xG
. Noting that
2
2 , x2
AB
AG
AB
G
x2 > x2 , the binding condition can therefore only be x2 ≥ 2x2 with full employment.
ª
©
(III) The "mixed" case, where LA , LB , LG = {L0 , L0 , Ls − 2L0 }. There are two subcases: (i) Gs do not match with As and Bs and (ii) Gs do match with As and Bs (see Lemma
1).
(i) If Gs do not match, then the equivalence of rV across worker types in equilibrium
requires, using (11), that
λ
AB
2r P w
= wG
(21)
λ
1 + 2r P
AB
where P = Pr(A) = Pr(B), wG = p2 xG
=
2 , and with the Nash Bargaining Solution w
1
AB
2 p2 x2 .
(ii) If Gs do match, then the equivalence of rV across worker types in equilibrium requires
that
£
¤
λ
λ
AB
+ (1 − 2P )wAG
2P wGA
wG + 2r
2r P w
=
(22)
λ
λ
1 + 2r
[1 − P ]
1 + 2r
2P

where wAB and wG are as in (i) and, with the Nash Bargaining Solution, wAG = 12 p2 xAG
2 .
Deviating to another worker type has no eﬀect on payoﬀs, since players are infinitesimal.
These cases thus exist as equilibria if (a) a player would not change her matching policy
and (b) there exists a P ∈ [0, 1/2] that satisfies equality of income between specialists and
generalists.
Comparing a Gs payoﬀ when he doesn’t match with the payoﬀ when he does (the RHS
≥ 2xG
of equations (21) and (22)), it is clear that xAG
2
2 is necessary for G to match in
AG
G
equilibrium, and x2 ≤ 2x2 is necessary for G not to match in equilibrium. Rearranging
33

(21), we can define an equilibrium value P ∗ as
P∗ =

2r
xAB
λ( 2x2 G
2

− 1)

where P ∈ [0, 1/2] is necessary for an equilibrium to exist. Thus the "mixed" case where
AB
≤ 2xG
≥ 2xG
Gs do not match is an equilibrium iﬀ xAG
2 (Gs do not want to match), x2
2
£ 1 AB G
¤−1 2 ∗
∗
(P ≥ 0), and λ ≥ 4r 2 x2 /x2 − 1
(P ≤ 1/2).
As λ → ∞ (full employment), P ∗ → 0, so that this "mixed" equilibrium converges
towards the "generalist" equilibrium.
If G does match in equilibrium, then rearranging (22) produces a quadratic in P, with
either 0, 1, or 2 roots such that P ∈ [0, 1/2]. With some algebra, we can define an
equilibrium value P̂ as
r
´2
³ AB
´
¡ 2r ¢2 ³ xAB
xAG
x2
xAG
xAG
xAB
xAG
2
2
2
2
2
(
−
4
+
1)
±
+ 8 2r
+ 1 − 2x2 G )
( 2r
− 2r
G
G − 4 2xG + 1
G − 2xG
λ 2xG
λ
λ
λ
2x
2x
2x
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
³ AB
´
P̂ =
x2
xAG
2
4 2xG − 2xG
2
2
(23)
G
≥
2x
The "mixed" case where Gs do match with As and Bs is an equilibrium iﬀ xAG
2
2 (Gs
match with As and Bs) and P̂ ∈ [0, 1/2]. It can be shown that as many as 2 such equilibria
are possible for some parameter values.
As λ → ∞ (full employment), it follows directly from (23) that P̂ → 0, so that any such
"mixed" equilibrium also converges towards the "generalist" equilibrium.
Proof of Corollary (Gains from Specialization)
1

Proof. Output per specialist is 12 p2 xAB
= p2 mc2 σ−1 zh and output per generalist is
2
1
G
G
Hence
p2 x2 = p2 2 σ−1 zh, so that the ratio of these outputs is 12 p2 xAB
2 /(p2 x2 ) = mc.
the first part. For the second part, recall that the condition for the generalist equilibrium
≤ 2xG
to be stable is xAG
2
2 with full employment. Using the production function (9), this
σ
¶ σ−1
µ
2
.
condition is equivalently written in terms of underlying parameters as mc ≤
1−σ
1+m

σ

Recalling that tasks A and B are gross complements in production (σ ≤ 1), it follows that
σ
µ
¶ σ−1
2
= ∞. Hence the maximum possible mc for which generalists exist
limm→∞
1−σ
1+m

σ

in a stable equilibrium is unbounded from above.

Proof of Lemma (Log-Linear Wages)
Proof. Given that individuals have the same choice set at birth and maximize income, they
must be indiﬀerent across career choices so that W k = W for all worker types. With full
employment, this income arbitrage means from (4) that
Z ∞
Z ∞
w1n e−rt dt =
w2n e−rt dt
(24)
0

s

34

where w1n = rV U is the wage paid in the unskilled sector and w2n = rV is the wage paid in
the skilled sector. Integrating (24) gives w2n = w1n ers .
Proof of Corollary (Immigrant Workers)
Proof. The low-skilled immigrant earns a higher real wage by moving to the rich country
because, from (17)
y AB
w1AB /pAB
=
>1
yG
w1G /pG
Hence an unskilled worker who migrates from a poor to a rich country will earn a higher
real wage.
Now consider skilled immigrants.
Note first that the skilled generalist who migrates will never team with a specialist in the
rich country. Rather, he would always prefer to work alone, since he must give up too much
of the joint product to convince a specialist to partner with him. In particular, he would earn
¡ AG 1 AB ¢
G
AB
x2 − 2 x2 ,
pAB
2 x2 alone, while in a team (with full employment) he would earn p2
G
AG 1 AB
and there are no parameter values where x2 < x2 − 2 x2 . To see this, write this condition
1 AB
1 AB
G
G
G
AG
G
as 1 < xAG
2 /x2 − 2 x2 /x2 . Note that 2 x2 /x2 = mc and that x2 /x2 can be no greater
than mc + c.40 Hence the condition is equivalently 1 < c, which contradicts the assumption
of the model that there are coordination costs in production, c < 1.
Next, note that working alone as a generalist in the rich country is never preferred to
staying in the poor country. In either country, the generalist produces xG
2 units of output
per unit of time. Given that this good is relatively expensive in the poor country (i.e. recall
¡ AB AB ¢
G
), the real income is higher working as the generalist in the
that pG
2 /p1 = mc p2 /p1
poor country.
Lastly, note that the generalist may still prefer to migrate and work in the unskilled
wAB /pAB
sector. This occurs when the real wage gain across countries for unskilled work wG /p1G
1
(see above) is larger than the real wage gain locally for skilled work, ers , which is more likely
the greater the income diﬀerences between the countries; for example, the greater the gains
from specialization, mc.
In sum, skilled generalists may or may not be better oﬀ migrating to rich countries, but
if they do they will work in the unskilled sector.

Proof of Corollary (Brain Drain)
AG
G
Proof. The specialist who moves to the poor country will earn a wage w0 = pG
2 (x2 − x2 ).
AG
G
Since the poor country is in a generalist equilibrium, we must have x2 ≤ 2x2 which implies
G
G
that w0 ≤ pG
2 x2 = w . Hence, the skilled worker who moves from the rich to the poor
country will earn a wage no greater than the skilled worker wage in the poor country. Now
4 0 This

G
AG
G
follows because xAG
2 /x2 is increasing in σ, attaining a maximum x2 /x2 = mc + c as σ → ∞.

35

note that skilled workers receive a higher real wage in the rich country than the poor country
because, from (14) and (17),
y AB
w2AB /pAB
= G >1
G
G
y
w2 /p
Hence, specialists in the rich country will prefer to stay.
Proof of Corollary (Desirable Cheap Specialists)
AB
Proof. Think of the firm as a specialist in the rich country. He earns wAB = 12 pAB
2 x2 .
If he can alternatively form a cross-border team by locating an (oﬀ-equilibrium) specialist
AB
AB G
in the poor country, then he can earn at least w = pAB
2 x2 − p2 x2 , where he need provide
the specialist in the poor country no more than xG
2 , the going rate for generalists in that
1 AB
G
or
country. Hence, hiring a specialist in the poor country makes sense iﬀ xAB
2 − x2 ≥ 2 x2
AB
G
x2 ≥ 2x2 , which is just the condition for specialists to exist in the first place in the rich
country.

Data and Analysis for Figure 3
Data on wages and occupations is taken from the 1% microsample of the 2000 United
States census, which is available publicly through www.ipums.org.41 There are 2.8 million
individuals in this sample, including 320 thousand individuals who immigrated to the United
States.
The wage-schooling relationships in Figure 3a are the predicted values from the following
regression

ln wi = α+βM ALE+Agef e +Englishf e +Groupf e +Educationf e +Groupf e ×Educationf e +εi
where wi is the annual wage, M ALE is a dummy equal to 1 for men and 0 for women,
Agef e are fixed eﬀects for each individual age in years, Englishf e are fixed eﬀects for how
well the individual speaks English (the IPUMS "speakeng" variable which has 6 categories),
Educationf e are fixed eﬀects for highest educational attainment (the IPUMS "educ99"
variable, which has 17 categories) and Groupf e are fixed eﬀects for three diﬀerent groups:
(1) US born, (2) immigrants who arrive by age 17, (3) immigrants who arrive age 30 or
later. Figure 3a plots predicted values from this regression, plotting the log wage against
educational attainment for each of the three groups. For comparison purposes, the predicted
values focus on males between the ages of 30 and 40 who speak English at least well.
To construct Figure 3b, the modal educational attainment is first determined for each of
the 511 occupational classes in the data (using the IPUMS variable "occ"). Occupations are
4 1 Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (Steven Ruggles, Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine
A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series: Version 3.0 [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population
Center [producer and distributor], 2004.)

36

then grouped according to modal educational attainment. For example, lawyers are grouped
with doctors as typically having professional degrees, and taxi drivers are grouped with
security guards as typically having high school degrees. For each of the three groups defined
for the Groupf e above, Figure 3b shows the propensity of individuals with professional or
doctoral degrees to work in occupations with the given modal educational attainment.

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron. "A Microfoundation for Social Increasing Returns in Human Capital
Accumulation", Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1996, 111 (3), 779-804.
[2] Acemoglu, Daron. "Training and Innovation in an Imperfect Labor Market", Review
of Economic Studies, July 1997, 64, 445-464.
[3] Acemoglu, Daron and Jorn-Steﬀen Pischke. "Why do Firms Train? Theory and Evidence", Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113 (1), 79-120.
[4] Acemoglu, Daron, Pol Antras, and Elhanan Helpman. "Contracts and Technology
Adoption", mimeo, Harvard University, 2006.
[5] Balassa, Bela. "The Purchasing-Power-Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal", Journal of
Political Economy, December 1964, 72, 584-96.
[6] Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Duflo. "Growth Theory Through the Lens of Development
Economics", The Handbook of Economic Growth, Aghion and Durlauf eds., Elsevier,
2005.
[7] Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. "The Division of Labor, Coordination Costs,
and Knowledge", Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1992, 107 (4), 1137-1160.
[8] Bhagwati, Jagdish. "Why Are Services Cheaper in Poor Countries?", Economic Journal, June 1984, 94, 279-285.
[9] Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow. "Does Schooling Cause Growth?", American Economic Review, December 2000, 90 (5), 1160-1183.
[10] Bowen, Harry, Edward Leamer, and Leo Sveikauskas. "Multicountry, Multifactor Tests
of the Factor Abundance Theory", American Economic Review, December 1987, 77
(5), 791-809.
[11] Caselli, Francesco. "Accounting for Cross-Country Income Diﬀerences", The Handbook
of Economic Growth, Aghion and Durlauf eds., Elsevier, 2005.
[12] Caselli, Francesco and Wilbur J. Coleman. "The World Technology Frontier", American
Economic Review, June 2006, 96 (3), 499-522.
37

[13] Ciccone, Anotonio and Kiminori Matsuyama. "Start-Up Costs and Pecuniary Externalities As Barriers to Economic Development", Journal of Development Economics,
1996, 49, 33-59.
[14] Friedberg, Rachel. "You Can’t Take It With You? Immigrant Assimilation and the
Portability of Human Capital", Journal of Labor Economics, April 2000, 18 (2), 221251.
[15] Garicano, Luis. "Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production", Journal of Political Economy, October 2000, 108 (5), 874-904.
[16] Hall, Robert and Charles Jones. "Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output Per Worker Than Others?", Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999,
114 (1), 83-116.
[17] Harrod, Roy F. International Economics. Cambridge Economic Handbooks, London:
Cambridge University Press, 1933.
[18] Harrigan, James. "Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization: Estimating the Neoclassical Model," American Economic Review, September, 1997, 87 (4),
475-494.
[19] Heckman, James J., Lochner, Lance J., and Petra E. Todd. "Earnings Functions: Rates
of Return and Treatment Eﬀects: The Mincer Equation and Beyond", IZA Discussion
Paper Series No. 1700, August 2005.
[20] Hendricks, Lutz. "How Important Is Human Capital for Development? Evidence from
Immigrant Earnings", American Economic Review, March 2002, 92 (1), 198-219.
[21] Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Peter Klenow. "Relative Prices, Relative Prosperity", NBER
Working Paper #9701, 2003.
[22] Jones, Benjamin F. "The Burden of Knowledge and the Death of the Renaissance
Man: Is Innovation Getting Harder?" NBER Working Paper #11360, 2005.
[23] Jones, Charles I. "On the Evolution of the World Income Distribution", Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Summer 1997, 11 (3), 19-36.
[24] Kim, Sunwoong. "Labor Specialization and the Exent of the Market", Journal of
Political Economy, June 1989, 97 (3), 692-705.
[25] Kremer, Michael. "The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development", Quarterly Journal
of Economics, August 1993, 108 (3), 551-575.
[26] Leontieﬀ, Wassily W. "Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital
Position Re-examined." Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, September
1953, 97, 332-349.
38

[27] Manuelli, Rodolfo and Ananth Seshadri, "Human Capital and the Wealth of Nations",
mimeo, University of Wisconsin, June 2005.
[28] Maskus, Keith. “A Test of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Theorem: The Leontief Commonplace”, Journal of International Economics, November 1985, 9, 201-212.
[29] Mincer, Jacob. "Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution",
Journal of Political Economy, August 1958, 66 (4), 281-302.
[30] Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings, New York: Columbia University
Press, 1974.
[31] Murphy, Kevin P., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. "Industrialization and the
Big Push", Journal of Political Economy, October 1989, 97 (5), 1003-1026.
[32] Pritchett, Lant. "Divergence, Big Time", Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer
1997, 11 (3), 3-17.
[33] Psacharopoulos, George. "Retruns to Investment in Education: A Global Update",
World Development, 1994, 22 (9), 1325-43.
[34] Rodriguez-Clare, Andres. "The Division of Labor and Economic Development", Journal
of Development Economics, 1996, 49, 3-32.
[35] Samuelson, Paul. "Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems", Review of Economics and
Statistics, May 1964, 46, 145-54.
[36] Smith, Adam. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. 1776.
[37] Trefler, Daniel. "International Factor Price Diﬀerences: Leontief Was Right!", Journal
of Political Economy, 1993, 101 (6), 961-987.
[38] Trefler, Daniel. "The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries," American Economic Review, December 1995, 85 (5), 1029-1046.
[39] Wuchty, Stefan, Benjamin F. Jones and Brian Uzzi. "The Increasing Dominance of
Teams in the Production of Knowledge", Science, 2007, 318, 1036-39.

39

Figure 3a: Do Skilled Immigrants Experience Wage Penalties?
The Wage-Schooling Relationship

Log Annual Wage Income
10
10.5
11

11.5

Income by Educational Attainment

US born

Immigrate
<= age 17

9.5

Immigrate
>= age 30

im
Pr

ol
ho
Sc
y
ar

G
th
10

e
rad

S
gh
Hi

l
al ral
te
lor
oo
ci a
ion to
he
ch
ss Doc
so
ac
s
e
B
f
A
o
Pr

Educational Attainment
Males Age 30-40, Speak English Well

Figure 3b: Do Skilled Immigrants use their Education?
Typical Educational Level of Occupation for Workers with Professional or Doctoral
Degrees

0

Educational Class of Work, Frequency
.2
.4
.6

Workers with Professional or Doctoral Degrees

US born

Immigrate <= age 17

High School or less
Bachelors or Masters
Males Age 30-40, Speak English Well

40

Immigrate >= age 30

Some College
Doctoral or Professional

