                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ADJUSTED ESTIMATES OF WORKER FLOWS AND JOB OPENINGS IN JOLTS

                                           Steven J. Davis
                                          R. Jason Faberman
                                         John C. Haltiwanger
                                              Ian Rucker

                                        Working Paper 14137
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14137


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We thank Nathan Brownback for excellent research assistance and staff at the Bureau of Labor Statistics
for much help with this project. We are also grateful to Robert Hall, Charlotte Mueller, John Wohlford
and the editors for helpful comments on an earlier draft. The views expressed in this paper are our
own and do not reflect the opinions of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, the Federal Reserve System or their staffs. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Steven J. Davis, R. Jason Faberman, John C. Haltiwanger, and Ian Rucker. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Adjusted Estimates of Worker Flows and Job Openings in JOLTS
Steven J. Davis, R. Jason Faberman, John C. Haltiwanger, and Ian Rucker
NBER Working Paper No. 14137
June 2008
JEL No. C82,J63

                                             ABSTRACT

We develop and implement a method to improve estimates of worker flows and job openings based on the
Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS). Our method involves reweighting the cross-sectional
density of employment growth rates in JOLTS to match the corresponding density in the comprehensive
Business Employment Dynamics (BED) data. To motivate our work, we compare JOLTS to other
data sources and document large discrepancies with respect to aggregate employment growth, the
magnitude of worker flows, and the cross-sectional density of establishment growth rates. We also
discuss issues related to JOLTS sample design and nonresponse corrections. Our adjusted statistics
for hires and separations exceed the published statistics by about one-third. The adjusted layoff rate
is more than 60 percent greater than the published layoff rate. Time-series properties are also affected.
For example, hires exhibit more volatility than separations in the published statistics, but the reverse
holds in the adjusted statistics. The impact of our adjustment methodology on estimated job openings
is more modest, raising the vacancy rate by about 8 percent.


Steven J. Davis                                     John C. Haltiwanger
Graduate School of Business                         Department of Economics
The University of Chicago                           University of Maryland
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue                          College Park, MD 20742
Chicago, IL 60637                                   and NBER
and NBER                                            haltiwan@econ.umd.edu
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu
                                                    Ian Rucker
R. Jason Faberman                                   Bureau of Labor Statistics
Research Department                                 Rucker.Ian@bls.gov
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
10 Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Jason.Faberman@phil.frb.org
I. Introduction

           The Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) is an innovative data

program that delivers national, regional and industry estimates for the monthly flow of

hires and separations, and for the stock of unfilled job openings. Analysts have seized on

JOLTS data as a valuable source of insights about U.S. labor markets and an important

new research tool for evaluating theories of labor market behavior. Recent studies draw

on JOLTS data to investigate the cyclical behavior of hires and separations (Hall, 2005),

the Beveridge curve relation between unemployment and job vacancies (Valetta, 2005;

Fujita and Ramey, 2007; Shimer, 2007b), the connection between quits and employer

recruiting behavior (Faberman and Nagypál, 2007), and the relationship among

vacancies, hires and employment growth at the establishment level (Davis, Faberman,

and Haltiwanger, 2006, 2007). Given the key roles played by job vacancies and worker

flows in prominent search-based theories of unemployment along the lines of Mortensen

and Pissarides (1994), JOLTS will continue to attract keen interest from researchers.

           In addition to notable virtues, the JOLTS program presents measurement issues

that are imperfectly understood and not widely appreciated. Reasons for concern can be

seen in three simple comparisons to other data sources. First, the aggregate employment

growth implied by the flow of hires and separations in JOLTS consistently exceeds the

growth observed in its national benchmark, the Current Establishment Statistics (CES)

survey.1 Cumulating the difference between hires and separations from 2001 to 2006

yields a discrepancy of 6.6 million nonfarm jobs. Second, JOLTS hires and separations




1
    See Wohlford et al. (2003), Nagypál (2006) and Faberman (2005a).


                                                     1
are surprisingly small compared to similar measures in other data sources.2 Third, the

cross-sectional density of establishment growth rates shows much less dispersion in

JOLTS than in data sources with comprehensive establishment coverage.3

        These discrepancies arise, at least in part, from two aspects of JOLTS

methodology. First, the JOLTS sample excludes establishment openings and very young

establishments. Similar sample restrictions apply to many establishment surveys, but the

consequences are more significant for the key statistics derived from JOLTS. To see this

point, start with the observation that employees at new establishments have very short job

tenures, which, in turn, are associated with very high separation rates.4 Thus, the JOLTS

sample systematically excludes a set of establishments with unusually high employee

turnover. The volatility of employment growth rates is also extremely high at very young

establishments, even after conditioning on size.5 Greater volatility at the establishment

level involves larger worker flows, as we show below. In addition to these effects of

JOLTS sample design on worker flows, new establishments surely account for a

disproportionate share of job openings. Hence, the exclusion of new and very young

establishments imparts a downward bias to both job openings and worker flows. It

potentially affects cyclical patterns as well.

        The second issue with JOLTS methodology involves adjustments for non-

respondents. Survey nonresponse rates are likely higher for establishments that exit or

contract sharply. Compared to a randomly selected establishment, these establishments

have high separation and layoff rates and low rates of hires and job openings. However,


2
  See Faberman (2005a) and Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006).
3
  See Faberman (2005a).
4
  See, for example, Mincer and Jovanovic (1981), Topel and Ward (1992), and Farber (1994).
5
  See Davis and Haltiwanger (1999) and Davis et al. (2007).


                                                   2
the JOLTS practice effectively imputes to non-respondents the average rate among

respondents in the same region-industry-size category. If the response rate is lower for

exits and sharply contracting establishments, this imputation practice understates

separations and overstates hires and job openings. It also imparts an upward bias to the

employment change implied by the flow of hires and separations. Again, there are

potentially important effects on cyclical patterns as well.

           In light of these measurement issues, we develop and implement a method for

adjusting the published JOLTS estimates to more accurately reflect worker flows and job

openings in the U.S. economy. Our method involves reweighting the cross-sectional

density of employment growth rates in JOLTS to match the corresponding density in the

Business Employment Dynamics (BED) data. The BED, which derives from

administrative records in the unemployment insurance system, covers essentially all

private sector employers – including entrants, exits and very young establishments. We

apply the reweighted density of employment growth rates to calculate adjusted estimates

for worker flows and unfilled job openings (i.e., vacancies). In doing so, we exploit the

close cross-sectional relationship of worker flows and vacancy rates to the establishment-

level growth rate of employment.6

           To preview the main results, our adjusted measures of hires and separations

exceed the published JOLTS estimates by about one-third. The adjusted layoff rate

exceeds the published rate by more than 60 percent. Time-series properties are also

affected. For example, hires show more volatility than separations in the published

statistics, but the reverse holds in the adjusted statistics. The impact of our adjustment

methodology on estimated job openings is more modest, raising the average vacancy rate
6
    For evidence, see Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006, 2007) and Section III below.


                                                     3
by about 8 percent. Our adjustments virtually eliminate the discrepancy between

nonfarm private sector employment growth in the CES or BED and the cumulative

difference of hires and separations in JOLTS.

       In terms of mechanics, our adjustments to the published JOLTS statistics can be

understood by reference to two basic observations. First, the cross-sectional density of

establishment growth rates in JOLTS data deviates systematically from the density in the

underlying universe of establishment-level observations, as measured in the BED.

Second, rates of worker flows and job vacancies vary greatly with establishment growth

rates in the cross section. The cross-sectional relations are also highly asymmetric about

zero. The underweighting of establishments with sharp negative growth rates in JOLTS

yields an undercount of layoffs and an overstatement of the quit-layoff ratio. Correcting

for this aspect of the JOLTS data substantially raises the average layoff rate and amplifies

its variation over time.

       The more modest nature of our adjustments to the job openings rate reflects two

opposing effects. The underweighting of establishments with sharp negative growth

rates, which have low vacancy rates, imparts an upward bias to the published vacancy

rate. The omission of births and very young fast-growing establishments imparts a

downward bias. Our results indicate that the second effect dominates on average, so that

the adjusted vacancy rate exceeds the published rate.

       The next section reviews certain aspects of the JOLTS sample design, JOLTS

imputation and benchmarking methods, the BED data, and various measurement issues.

Section III compares JOLTS data to other sources. Section IV presents several striking

patterns in the cross-sectional relationships of worker flows and job openings to




                                             4
employment growth. These cross-sectional relations play a major role in our adjustment

method. They also shed new light on the cyclical behavior of labor market flows and

unemployment, as stressed by Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger (2006). Section V sets

forth our adjustment method and explains how we handle certain issues that arise in the

implementation. Section VI presents adjusted estimates for worker flows and job

openings and compares them to the published JOLTS estimates. We conclude in Section

VII with remarks about some broader implications of our results and several suggestions

for improving JOLTS statistics.


II. Data Sources and Analysis Samples

        Our study exploits BLS micro data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover

Survey (JOLTS) and the Business Employment Dynamics (BED) program.7 This section

reviews some important features of these two data sources, describes our analysis sample,

and discusses a few measurement issues.


II.A. The Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey

        The published JOLTS statistics on worker flows and job openings derive from a

sample of about 16,000 establishments per month. The JOLTS questionnaire elicits data

on employment for the pay period covering the 12th of the month, the flow of hires and

separations during the month, and the number of open job positions (vacancies) on the

last business day of the month.8 The JOLTS sample is stratified by major industry


7
  See Clark and Hyson (2001) and Faberman (2005b) for information about the JOLTS program and
Spletzer et al. (2004) for more information about the BED. Statistics derived from the JOLTS program are
available at http://www.bls.gov/jlt/home.htm.
8
  The JOLTS survey form instructs the respondent to report a job opening when “A specific position exists,
work could start within 30 days, and [the establishment is] actively seeking workers from outside this
location to fill the position.” Further instructions define “active recruiting” as “taking steps to fill a


                                                    5
groups, four Census regions, and several establishment size classes. JOLTS sample

observations are weighted so that the employment level for each industry-region-size cell

matches employment for the corresponding cell in the much larger Current Employment

Statistics (CES) survey. The sample frame for both JOLTS and CES derives from the

Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages (QCEW), which essentially covers the

universe of establishments with paid employees.9

         Simplifying somewhat, let Ei denote total employment in cell i of the JOLTS

sample frame, and let eik be employment at establishment k for the same cell.10 The

JOLTS sample weight for establishments in cell i is given by

                                    ωik = Ei     ∑e
                                                k∈all
                                                        ik   ,


where “all” refers to all sampled establishments that are in scope for the JOLTS survey.

Here, we index ω by the establishment identifier k, even though all sampled

establishments in cell i have the same sample weight. To construct the ω sample weights,

the BLS relies on establishment-level employment data from the comprehensive QCEW.

These data are available with a lag to the BLS and the JOLTS program.

         The ω sample weights do not account for unit nonresponse, i.e., the failure of a

sampled establishment to respond to the JOLTS survey. Hence, the BLS applies a

“nonresponse adjustment factor”: an employment-based ratio adjustment that scales up


position … [that] may include advertising in newspapers, on television, or on radio; posting Internet
notices; posting ‘help wanted’ signs; networking or making ‘word of mouth’ announcements; accepting
applications; interviewing candidates; contacting employment agencies; or soliciting employees at job fairs,
state or local employment offices, or similar sources.” Job openings are not to include positions open only
to internal transfers, promotions, recalls from temporary layoffs, or positions to be filled by temporary help
agencies, outside contractors, or consultants.
9
  Independent contractors and unincorporated self-employed persons are out of scope for the QCEW,
making them out of scope for the JOLTS, CES and BED as well.
10
   Our discussion in the text ignores outlier adjustments, sample rotation, and item nonresponse (as distinct
from unit nonresponse). For more on the JOLTS estimation methodology, see Crankshaw and Stamas
(2000).


                                                        6
the sample weights so that the resulting cell-level employment figure again matches the

sample frame employment for that cell. Specifically, the nonresponse adjustment factor

for cell i in month m is

                                NRAFm ,ik =   ∑ω
                                              k∈all
                                                       e
                                                      ik ik      ∑
                                                              k∈used ( m )
                                                                             ωik eik ,


where “used(m)” refers to the set of establishments that respond to the survey in month

m. Aside from the index set used(m), all quantities on the right side of this expression

reflect past employment values in the QCEW, i.e., prior to month m.

       The JOLTS sample weights are also adjusted over time to account for changes in

CES employment estimates. These changes come in two forms. The first occurs each

month because of regular BLS updates to the initial, preliminary CES estimates. The

second occurs because of the annual “benchmarking” of CES estimates to the most recent

data from the QCEW, which serves as the underlying population universe for both the

CES and JOLTS. The benchmarking adjustment ensures that the final CES (and JOLTS)

employment estimates are consistent with the administrative data in the QCEW.

       The JOLTS program accounts for each of these benchmark adjustments in a

similar manner. Each month, a “benchmark factor” is calculated for each establishment in

the sample. This factor involves another employment-based ratio adjustment, one that

constrains the JOLTS employment estimate to match the CES employment estimate for

each sample cell. To construct the benchmark adjustment factor, let

Eˆ m ,i ≡ ∑ k NRAFm ,ik ωik emJ ,ik be the initial (pre-benchmark) JOLTS employment estimate

for cell i, where emJ ,ik is the month-m employment level for establishment k in cell i




                                                 7
according to JOLTS. Also, let EmC,i be the month-m CES employment estimate for

sample cell i. The benchmark adjustment factor for sample cell i in month m is

                              BMFm ,ik = EmC,i Eˆ m ,i .

       Putting all this together, the final JOLTS sample weight for cell i in month m is

                      θ m,ik = ωik × NRAFm,ik × BMFm,ik .

All survey response data in the JOLTS program are multiplied by these final sample

weights to produce the published statistics on worker flows and job openings. Hereafter,

references to the “weight” or “adjusted weight” refer to the JOLTS final sample weight.

       At this point, it is essential to recognize that the nonresponse and benchmark

adjustments do not address the sources of bias identified in the introduction. These

adjustments ensure that sample-weighted JOLTS employment totals match CES

employment totals at the cell level, but they do not ensure unbiased estimates for worker

flows and job openings. In fact, the omission of establishment openings and very young

establishments means that the JOLTS sample is unrepresentative in key respects that

relate to worker flows and job openings. The administrative data that feed into the JOLTS

sample frame are compiled with a lag of eight months or more, mostly due to the time it

takes to transfer data from the states to the BLS. Once an establishment is captured by

the QCEW, it takes at least one more month before it can be selected for the JOLTS

sample. In sum, it takes at least nine months in the best-case scenario before a new

establishment becomes available for inclusion in the JOLTS sample.

       We have also suggested that JOLTS nonresponse rates are higher among

establishments that exit or contract sharply. This nonresponse pattern, coupled with the

current JOLTS procedure for handling unit nonresponse, also causes the JOLTS sample


                                               8
to be unrepresentative in key respects that relate to worker flows and job openings. We

do not offer direct evidence that unit nonresponse rates are higher for establishments that

exit or contract sharply, but Sections III and IV below show that the JOLTS sample

substantially under weights rapidly contracting establishments. Regardless of exactly

why this type of underweighting occurs, it leads to a systematic bias in JOLTS-based

estimates of worker flows and job openings.11


II.B. The Business Employment Dynamics Data

        The Business Employment Dynamics (BED) data are essentially a longitudinal

version of the QCEW. Hence, like the QCEW, the BED is a universe data set with

comprehensive establishment coverage. In particular, it captures exits, entrants and

continuing establishments, including very young ones. The BLS relies on the BED to

produce quarterly statistics on gross job gains and losses.12 We use the BED to obtain the

cross-sectional density of employment growth rates for the universe of private sector

establishments. We then adjust the cross-sectional density of employment growth rates

in JOLTS to conform to the corresponding BED density. The main complication that

arises in practice involves a difference in sampling frequency. The BED uses

employment data for the third month of each calendar quarter, whereas JOLTS contains

monthly observations.




11
   In general, a sample that is representative with respect to levels, such as employment, need not be
representative with respect to changes, such as employment growth rates. Worker flows and job openings
are much more closely related to employment changes than employment levels. Hence, the benchmarking
and nonresponse adjustments that constrain JOLTS employment totals to match sample frame employment
do not ensure unbiased estimates of worker flows and job openings. See the recent National Academy of
Sciences report by Haltiwanger et al. (2007) for additional discussion of the distinction between samples
optimized for levels and samples optimized for changes.
12
   Available at http://www.bls.gov/bdm/.


                                                    9
II.C. Analysis Sample and Measurement Concepts

        We consider a sample of JOLTS data from January 2001 to December 2006. We

limit attention to private sector establishments because the BED is restricted to the

private sector. We rely on JOLTS data to estimate how worker flows and job openings

vary with employment growth in the cross section of establishments. We calculate rates

for employment growth, worker flows and job openings using the average of current and

previous period employment in the denominator. Measuring rates in this manner yields

an employment growth rate measure that is symmetric about zero and bounded between

−2 and 2. It also affords an integrated treatment of entering, exiting and continuing

establishments.13

        As we remarked earlier, the JOLTS employment measure pertains to the payroll

period covering the 12th of the month, whereas JOLTS hires and separations are flows

during the month. This timing difference and the month-to-month changes in

establishment-level sample weights complicate our adjustment methods. To deal with

these complications, it is useful to compute lagged employment values that are consistent

with current-month JOLTS values for employment, hires and separations. We calculate

this internally consistent measure of lagged employment as

(1)                              emIC−1 = emJ − hm + sm ,

where hm and sm denote hires and separations during month m, and we have suppressed

cell and establishment identifiers.




13
  See Davis, Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996) for more on this growth measure. The BED program uses this
growth rate measure in its published statistics for gross job gains and losses.


                                                  10
       We use emIC−1 when calculating growth rates from m-1 to m. This approach ensures

that an establishment’s employment change equals the difference between its hires and

separations, and does so in a way that preserves reported hires and separations, a key

focus of our study. It also allows us to calculate flow rates entirely from current month

data, eliminating the need to restrict the sample to observations with consecutive months

of reporting. We use the same approach for emIC−3 when calculating quarterly growth rates.

See Appendix A for an explanation of how we treat sample weight changes within the

quarter when computing quarterly growth rates.


III. JOLTS Data Compared to Other Sources

       Figure 1 compares the growth of nonfarm employment in JOLTS and CES data.

For JOLTS, we measure the growth rate as the hires rate minus the separations rate. For

the CES, we use the percent change in employment from one period to the next. We show

quarterly growth rates because they are less noisy than monthly data. As seen in Figure 1,

the JOLTS-based measure of employment growth exceeds the CES measure in 21 of 24

quarters.

       Figure 2 compares the evolution of CES employment to the cumulative change

implied by hires minus separations in JOLTS. The thin line shows the cumulated

difference between hires and separations from December 2000, and the bold lines show

the cumulated difference from December of each year. Figure 2 demonstrates that the

employment path implied by JOLTS data diverges upward relative to the CES path in

each year except 2001. The divergence is large in four out of six years, and the

cumulative discrepancy of 6.6 million jobs amounts to 4.8 percent of the December 2006




                                            11
CES employment figure. The cumulative discrepancy is smaller but still sizable in the

private sector at 3.0 million jobs, or 2.6 percent of December 2006 CES employment.14

Figure 2 also confirms that the sample weight adjustments that constrain JOLTS

employment levels to match CES levels do not ensure consistency of employment

changes, as calculated from hires and separations.

        Turning to another issue, JOLTS statistics for worker flows are much smaller than

comparable statistics produced from other sources. The published JOLTS statistics for

hires and separations average about 3.3 percent of employment per month. Monthly

hires and separations computed from Current Population Survey (CPS) data on gross

worker flows are nearly twice as large, as reported in Table 1. In addition, monthly

analogs to quarterly accessions and separations computed from administrative wage

records are at least twice as large as monthly hires and separations in JOLTS (Davis,

Faberman and Haltiwanger, 2006). CPS gross flows and administrative wage records

present their own measurement issues, and there are reasons to suspect that both sources

overstate worker flows, but the much smaller magnitude of JOLTS worker flows

warrants a closer inspection of the underlying data.

        Delving into the micro data reveals that the JOLTS sample overweights stable

establishments with small employment changes. To develop this point, Table 2 compares

cross-sectional distributions of employment growth rates in JOLTS and BED data.

14
  Wohlford et al. (2003) point to education (mostly in State and Local Government) and temporary help
(part of Professional and Business Services) as the main sources of the JOLTS-CES divergence. Using
published JOLTS data, we confirm that the employment path implied by JOLTS hires and separations
exhibits an especially large divergence from the CES employment path in Professional and Business
Services. The cumulative discrepancy for this industry group is 3.6 million jobs, or 20.5 percent of the
industry’s December 2006 CES employment value. Education, Health, and Leisure and Hospitality also
exhibit large cumulative discrepancies in the same direction. There are large cumulative discrepancies in
the opposite direction in Construction (1.1 million jobs, 14.8 percent of employment) and Manufacturing
(1.1 million jobs, 7.5 percent of employment). In short, several major industry groups show big cumulative
discrepancies over the 2001 to 2006 period.


                                                   12
For the BED, Table 2 summarizes the distribution of quarterly growth rates in the full

universe and in a subset restricted to continuous units. A “continuous unit” in, say, the

second quarter of 2003 is one with paid employees in both March and June. For JOLTS,

the table summarizes three related objects: the distribution of monthly growth rates for all

private sector establishments, the distribution of monthly growth rates for a sample

restricted to establishments with employees in all three months of the quarter, and the

distribution of quarterly growth rates for the same restricted sample. This restriction

yields a JOLTS sample that is directly comparable to the BED subset with continuous

units.15 Note that the full and restricted JOLTS samples yield similar monthly growth

rate distributions.

        Table 2 reports large differences between the BED and JOLTS cross-sectional

growth rate distributions. For example, 24.8 percent of the mass in the JOLTS restricted

sample falls in the open interval from 0 to 5 percent, compared to only 18.0 percent for

the BED subset with continuous units. Similarly, 21.1 percent of the mass in the JOLTS

restricted sample lies in the open interval from 0 to negative 5 percent, compared to only

17.5 percent for BED continuous units. The excess mass in the interval (-5.0, 5.0) for the

restricted JOLTS sample amounts to 11.8 percent of employment relative to the BED

subset with continuous units and 12.6 percent relative to the full BED. These results

establish two important points: First, the JOLTS sample substantially overweights

relatively stable establishments. Second, the overweighting of stable establishments does


15
  Recall that we construct internally consistent measures of lagged employment using current-quarter
JOLTS data for hires, separations and employment. In particular, if an establishment has employees in all
three months of the current quarter, we calculate its growth rate using reported employment for the current
quarter and the internally consistent measure of previous quarter employment. Thus, the restricted JOLTS
sample captures establishments that operate continuously from the last month of the previous quarter to the
last month of the current quarter. The JOLTS sample restriction removes 11.2 percent of the observations
on a sample-weighted basis and a much smaller percentage when we further weight by size.


                                                    13
not arise mainly from the fact that births are out of scope for the JOLTS sample frame.

That is, the JOLTS sample substantially overweights stable establishments relative to the

BED even when we restrict attention to continuous units.

        Figure 3 illustrates the first point graphically by comparing smoothed histograms

of quarterly growth rate distributions in JOLTS and the BED. It is apparent to the naked

eye that the JOLTS sample substantially overweights stable establishments.16 Stable

establishments are likely to have smaller worker flows, a conjecture that we verify in the

next section.


IV. Cross-Sectional Patterns in Worker Flows and Job Openings

        Figures 4 and 5 show how worker flows and job openings vary with employment

growth rates in the cross section of establishments. To construct these figures, we pool

monthly JOLTS data from 2001 to 2006 for private sector establishments. We group the

roughly 572,000 observations into growth rate bins, calculate employment-weighted

mean outcomes in each bin, and plot the resulting relationships. We use narrow bins close

to zero (width of 0.001, or 0.1 percent) and progressively wider bins as we move away

from zero into thinner parts of the distribution. We also allow for a mass point at 0.

Figure 4 shows the relationships over the full range of growth rate outcomes, and Figure

5 zooms in to monthly growth rates from -25 to 25 percent. Figure 5 also shows cross-

sectional relations for the 12 months with the highest or lowest growth rates of aggregate


16
  The overweighting of stable establishments in Figure 3 and Table 2 is not caused by our use of hires and
separations to measure previous-period employment when calculating JOLTS-based measures of the
employment growth rate. This point can be seen by inspecting Figure 5 in Faberman (2005a), which shows
that the employment-weighted growth rate distribution in the JOLTS sample is extremely similar whether
we compute growth rates using the reported value of lagged employment or the imputed value based on the
identity linking employment changes to hires and separations. Figure 5 in Faberman also shows that the
JOLTS sample substantially overweights stable establishments relative to the BED for both approaches to
the calculation of employment growth rates in the JOLTS sample.


                                                   14
employment.17 The pattern for separations, not shown, is closely approximated by the

sum of quits and layoffs.18

         Figures 4 and 5 document several key results:

         1. Hires dominate the employment adjustment margin for expanding

             establishments. The hires rate is lowest for establishments with little or no

             growth, essentially unrelated to growth for contracting establishments, and

             rises almost linearly with the growth rate for expanding establishments.

         2. Separations dominate the adjustment margin for contracting establishments.

             Quit, layoff and separation rates are also lowest for establishments with little

             or no growth, and they rise sharply with the contraction rate.

         3. Layoffs dominate the adjustment margin for rapidly contracting

             establishments.

         4. The job openings rate is lowest for stable establishments. It rises in both

             directions moving away from zero, more so for expanding establishments.

         5. The cross-sectional relations are remarkably stable with respect to aggregate

             employment growth, especially for hires and layoffs. Conditional on

             establishment growth, quits occur more frequently when aggregate

             employment grows more rapidly. This cyclical aspect of quit behavior shows

             up mainly at contracting establishments.

         These results have important implications for JOLTS-based estimates of worker

flows and job openings.19 It is evident from Figures 4 and 5 that the overweighting of


17
   When ranking the months by aggregate growth rates, we do not seasonally adjust the data. The
unadjusted data have much larger variations in growth over time, so are better suited for this exercise.
18
   The other separations rate (not shown) rises with the contraction rate from about 0.3 percent of
employment per month for mild contractions to 7.4 percent for the largest contractions.


                                                     15
stable establishments in the JOLTS sample imparts a downward bias in estimated hires,

separations, quits, layoffs and job openings. Less obviously, the bias is likely to vary

systematically with aggregate employment growth. To see this point, consider the layoff

rate and recall our earlier discussion of nonresponse adjustments in the JOLTS program.

Suppose that nonresponse rates are higher among rapidly contracting establishments.

Because rapidly contracting establishments are more prevalent in downturns, higher

nonresponse rates among these establishments also has a greater effect on the estimated

aggregate layoff rate in downturns. In other words, the published JOLTS statistics

understate the amplitude of cyclical fluctuations in the layoff rate.

        Figure 6 confirms a key element of this cyclical bias story. As in Figure 3, Figure

6 shows smoothed histograms of quarterly establishment growth rates using JOLTS and

BED data. However, we now plot separate histograms for quarters with high and low

growth in aggregate employment. Figure 6 shows that the overweighting of stable

establishments in the JOLTS sample is more serious in downturns, i.e., quarters with low

aggregate growth. The BED-JOLTS difference in the 90-10 growth rate differential is

18.0 percentage points in high-growth quarters as compared to 20.3 percentage points in

low-growth quarters. Moreover, the cyclical variation in the BED-JOLTS discrepancy is

concentrated among contracting establishments: the BED-JOLTS difference in the 50-10

growth rate differential rises from 10.5 percentage points in high-growth quarters to 15.0

percentage points in low-growth quarters. This cyclical pattern in the BED-JOLTS

discrepancy, coupled with the cross-sectional layoff relation shown in Figures 4 and 5,

implies that JOLTS understates the amplitude of aggregate layoff fluctuations.


19
  In related work (Davis, Faberman and Haltiwanger, 2006), we argue that the cross-sectional relations in
Figures 4 and 5 also have important implications for the cyclical behavior of unemployment.


                                                   16
        Figures 4 and 5 also suggest a constructive approach to adjusting JOLTS-based

estimates of worker flows and job openings. In particular, if we use the universe data in

the BED to obtain the distribution of establishment growth rates, we can apply the cross-

sectional relationships in Figures 4 and 5 to obtain more accurate estimates for worker

flows and job openings. The next section of the paper formalizes this idea and sets forth

the details.


V. A Method for Adjusting the Published JOLTS Estimates

        Partition the range of establishment growth rates into bins indexed by b, allowing

for mass points at -2 (exits), 0 (no change) and 2 (entry). Let f m (b) be the month-m

share of employment for establishments with growth rates in bin b, and let xm (b) denote

the employment-weighted mean rate of hires, separations, layoffs, quits or job openings

for the bin. Express the corresponding month-m aggregate rate as

(2)                            X m = ∑ b xm (b) f m (b) .

        Sections III and IV show that the JOLTS sample is not representative with respect

to the f m (b) values. As a result, the current JOLTS program yields biased estimates for

the estimated X m values, i.e., for published statistics on worker flows and job openings.

We address this problem by relying on the BED to adjust the JOLTS f m (b) values. We

then combine the adjusted f m (b) weights with JOLTS estimates for the xm (b) values, i.e.,

the bin-specific rates of worker flows and job openings. We rely on other information for

the xm (exit) and xm (entry) values, which the JOLTS sample does not provide.

        In principle, this approach to adjusting JOLTS-based statistics on worker flows

and job openings is easy to implement. The main complication in practice arises from the


                                              17
need to use quarterly BED data to adjust the monthly growth rate distributions in the

JOLTS data. Readers who are uninterested in the details of this mapping between BED

and JOLTS data can safely skip Section V.A and resume the text in Section V.B.


A. Adjusting the JOLTS Monthly Growth Rate Distributions

       Some additional notation will be helpful. It will also be useful in this section to

distinguish between quarters, indexed by t, and months, indexed by m. Let ft B (b) be the

employment density of continuous BED establishments with quarter-t growth rates in bin

b. Let ft J (b) be the employment density of establishments with a quarter-t growth rate in

bin b, using the restricted JOLTS sample with three monthly observations in quarter t.

Finally, let f mJ,t (b) be the employment density of establishments with a monthly growth

rate in bin b during month m of quarter t in the restricted JOLTS sample. We use narrow

growth rate bins near zero (width of 0.25 percent), progressively wider bins as we move

away from zero to thinner parts of the distribution, and allow for mass points at -2, 0 and

2. The resulting partition involves 37 bins, although the JOLTS restricted sample and the

continuous BED data contain no observations in the entry and exit bins.

       After allocating the data to growth rate bins, the next step is to map the quarterly

growth rate densities for BED data to consistent monthly growth rate densities. We use

JOLTS data to model the mapping from quarterly to monthly densities, and we then

apply the fitted mapping to obtain estimated monthly BED growth rate densities. After

some experimentation with parametric and nonparametric methods, we settled on a

simple regression model. Specifically, for each bin b we fit a regression of the form

(3)                    f mJ,t (b) = α (b) +      ∑ β (b) f
                                              n∈TopN ( b )
                                                          n   t
                                                                  J
                                                                      (b) + ε m,t (b)



                                                    18
to 72 monthly observations from 2001 to 2006, where α (b) is a bin-specific constant, the

 f t J (b) are quarterly densities, β n (b) is a regression coefficient that varies across five

groupings of growth rate bins (two to the left of zero, two to the right of zero and one that

includes only zero), ε m ,t (b) is an error term, and TopN(b) is a set of N quarterly growth

rate bins that varies with b.20

         To select the bins in TopN(b), we compute the mapping from quarterly growth

rate bins to monthly growth rate bins in JOLTS data pooled over the entire sample from

2001 to 2006. For each monthly bin b in the pooled sample, this mapping gives the

fraction of mass derived from the quarterly bins. We then identify the N quarterly bins

that contribute the most mass to monthly bin b to form the set TopN(b) for that b. We use

N = 5 in our reported results but obtained similar results for values up to N = 10.21

         Next, we construct three monthly counterparts for each quarterly BED density by

substituting the BED density values into the right side of (3) along with estimated

parameters in the OLS regressions (3) fit to JOLTS data. These substitutions yield

(4)                         f%m,t (b) = αˆ (b) +      ∑
                                                   n∈TopN ( b )
                                                                  βˆn (b) ft B (b) ,


which, after rescaling to ensure that the adjusted densities sum to one, is our mapping

from quarterly BED densities for continuous units to the corresponding monthly

densities.




20
   Allowing the β coefficients to vary by individual growth rate bin yields noisy estimates because of
sparsely populated bins, particularly at the tails of the growth rate distribution. After some experimentation,
we set the boundary for the two bins to the left and to the right of zero at ±9 percent.
21
   The choice of N has little effect on the magnitude or time-series volatility of our adjusted worker flow
rates and vacancy rates. However, alternative choices of N imply different paths for cumulative
employment growth over the six-year sample period. The choice of N = 5 minimizes the absolute difference
of cumulative employment growth between the adjusted JOLTS figures and the BED.


                                                           19
       As a final step, we append entry and exit mass points to the estimated monthly

distributions. We take a simple approach and set the monthly entry and exit rates to one

third of their values in the full BED distribution for the quarter. This approach involves

two assumptions: first, that entry and exit rates are constant during the quarter and,

second, that establishments do not enter and exit in the same quarter. One could relax

these assumptions and improve upon this approach, but they are adequate for present

purposes.

       In a slight abuse of notation given our previous definition of ft B (b) , let

ft B ( entry ) and ft B ( exit ) denote the entry and exit mass point values in the full BED for

quarter t. Then we can write the estimated monthly growth rate densities as follows:

                fˆm,t (entry) = ft B (entry) / 3 and fˆm ,t (exit) = ft B (exit) / 3; and
(5)
                fˆm,t (b) = ⎡⎣1 − f t B (entry) / 3 − ft B (exit) / 3⎤⎦ f%m,t (b), otherwise.

These equations describe our mapping from the BED growth rate distribution for quarter

t to the corresponding monthly distributions.

       Our method for obtaining (5) does not capture time variation in the monthly

densities within a quarter. To address this shortcoming, one could estimate a richer

regression specification (3) with covariates that capture within-quarter movements in the

shape and location of the aggregate employment growth rate density. This approach

could be implemented with any data source that provides monthly observations on the

distribution of employment growth rates. We leave such refinements for future work.




                                                    20
B. Calculating the Adjusted Estimates

       Henceforth, we suppress the quarterly index t except when needed for clarity. To

calculate adjusted rates for worker flows and job openings, we apply (2) by combining

the fˆm (b) values in (5) with JOLTS-based estimates for the xm (b) . For continuous units,

we estimate the xm (b) values using the bin-specific employment-weighted mean rates for

worker flows and job openings in month m, which we denote by xˆm (b) .

       The JOLTS data do not provide estimates for worker flows and job openings in

the entry and exit bins. For these bins, we use the following values.

                      Rates for Entry and Exit Bins
                                                  Other   Job
Bin                   Hires   Quits Layoffs Separations Openings
b = entry              2        0        0          0    0.382
b = exit               0      0.124    1.802      0.074    0


We obtain these values as follows. For exits, we assume no job openings or hires in the

exit month, and we set quits and other separations to their average rates in the bin with

the most rapidly contracting continuous establishments. These assumptions yield the

values reported in the second row above. For entrants, we assume no separations in the

entry month, which implies a hires rate of 2. This assumption is conservative in the sense

that it understates the level of worker flows at entrants. There are two sources of job

openings not captured by the JOLTS sample design. First, some entrants have job

openings at the end of their first month in operation. Second, new employers seek

workers before they begin operations. For the first source, we use the end-of-month

vacancy rate in the bin with the most rapidly growing continuous establishments, scaled

to match the hires-to-vacancies ratio and the amount of hiring in excess of growth in the



                                             21
bin. This source yields a vacancy rate equal to 17.4 percent. For the second source, we

set (beginning-of-month) vacancies to the lagged vacancy rate in the bin with the fastest-

growing continuing establishments, again scaling for the hires-vacancy ratio and hiring in

excess of growth. This source yields a vacancy rate of 20.8 percent. Summing these two

sources yields the figure for job openings in the top row. 22

           As a final step, we make an adjustment for sampling variability in our bin-specific

estimates. Sampling variability is a significant concern in the tails of the growth rate

distribution over continuous establishments. For example, the (-2.0, -1.0) and (1.0, 2.0)

bins are quite wide, yet very few establishments in the JOLTS sample fall into these bins

in a given month. In such cases, the bin-specific estimates can vary widely within a wide

interval based on realized outcomes at very few establishments. To address this issue, we

adjust the within-bin means for all but the zero bin (which is a mass point and thus

immune to this form of variability) so that the implied difference between hires and

separations equals the mean growth rate for the same bin in the BED. Appendix provides

details.

           Putting the pieces together, our adjusted estimates for worker flows and job

openings in month m are given

(6)                                 Xˆ m = ∑ b am (b) xˆm (b) fˆm (b),

where the fˆm (b) are the mass values in the reweighted monthly growth rate density given

by (5), the xˆm (b) are the JOLTS-based bin-specific means for worker flows and job



22
  This discussion suggests that the JOLTS program would benefit from retrospective questions about pre-
entry job openings for new establishments. A similar point applies to other establishment surveys that seek
to capture activities that are correlated with entry. For example, it would be helpful to add retrospective
questions about initial investments for entrants in the Annual Capital Expenditures Survey.


                                                    22
openings, and the am (b) are the adjustments for sampling variability. We seasonally

adjust the estimated Xˆ m (b) using the Census X-12 technique.


VI. Adjusted Statistics for Hires, Layoffs, Quits and Job Openings

         Table 3 reports adjusted estimates for worker flows and job openings in the U.S.

private sector and compares them to published JOLTS statistics. The adjusted worker

flows are much larger than the published estimates. Hires and separations are about 5

percent of employment per month according to the adjusted estimates, as compared to 3.7

or 3.8 percent in the published statistics. The adjusted layoff rate, at 2.3 percent of

employment per month, is nearly two thirds greater than the published layoff rate.23 Our

adjustments also lead to a higher quit rate. The adjusted job openings rate is 2.9 percent

of employment per month compared to 2.7 percent for the published rate. Clearly,

reweighting the cross-sectional growth rate density to conform to the BED and capturing

the role of entry and exit has a major impact on the estimated levels of worker flows and

job openings.

         Table 3 also shows that the adjustments substantially alter the time-series

properties of JOLTS statistics.24 Focusing on quarterly data, the adjustments lower the

variability of hires by about one third, roughly double the variability of layoffs and

modestly reduce the variability of job openings. The quarterly standard deviation of hires

is 47 percent greater than that of separations in the published data but 20 percent smaller


23
   To understand the large upward adjustment in the layoff rate, recall that layoffs are disproportionately
concentrated in establishments that exit or contract sharply (Figures 4 and 5). These establishments are
heavily underweighted in the JOLTS sample, as documented in Table 2.
24
   Given the limitations of our data and methods, we think our adjustments produce more reliable evidence
for quarterly than for monthly fluctuations. For this reason, Table 3 reports standard deviations of monthly
and quarterly values, and the lower panel focuses on volatility statistics in quarterly data. However, the
upper panel suggests that the choice between quarterly and monthly data matters little in this regard.


                                                    23
in the adjusted data. Quits are more than twice as variables as layoffs in the published

data but equally variable in the adjusted data.25 The relative volatility of hires to job

openings declines by about one-quarter. The relative volatility of job openings to

unemployment, a statistic that receives much attention in the search and matching

literature, declines by about ten percent.26

         Figure 7 shows that sizable level differences between published and adjusted

estimates persist throughout the 2001-2006 period. The decline in the layoff rate after the

middle of 2003 is noticeably larger in the adjusted data. Figure 8 shows that adjusted

quits exceed layoffs in the relatively strong labor market of 2005 and 2006 but are

otherwise very similar in magnitude.

         As we remarked above, the cumulative employment growth implied by the flow

of hires and separations in JOLTS exceeds employment growth in the Current

Establishment Statistics and the BED. Our adjustments largely eliminate this

discrepancy. The published JOLTS statistics imply an average monthly growth rate of

0.08 percent for private sector employment. The corresponding growth rate in the CES is

about 0.04 percent and the monthly analog of the BED growth rate is 0.03 percent. Our

adjusted estimates imply a mean growth rate of 0.03 percent. This is in line with the

monthly BED growth rate, the appropriate comparison since it is the rate our adjustment

is constructed to reproduce. It is also quite close to the CES growth rate.




25
   A careful inspection of Figure 5 suggests that the impact of our adjustments on the relative volatility of
hires and separations, or quits and layoffs, would be somewhat smaller if we extended the regression
specification (3) to capture time variation in the cross-sectional relations.
26
   For example, see Shimer (2005), Gertler and Trigari (2005), and Hagedorn and Manovskii (2007).


                                                      24
VII. Concluding Remarks

       JOLTS data are a valuable resource for understanding labor market dynamics and

for evaluating theories of unemployment and worker turnover. They also present

measurement issues that are not well understood or fully appreciated. A key point is that

the JOLTS sample overweights relatively stable establishments with low rates of hires

and separations, and underweights establishments with rapid growth or contraction. The

unrepresentative nature of the JOLTS sample with respect to the cross-sectional density

of employment growth rates matters because hires, quits, layoffs and job openings vary

greatly with establishment growth rates in the cross section. As a result, the current

JOLTS program produces downwardly biased estimates for worker flows and job

openings. The extent of bias varies systematically with the growth rate of aggregate

employment.

       We develop and implement an adjustment method to address these issues. Our

method reweights the cross-sectional density of employment growth rates in JOLTS to

match the corresponding density in comprehensive BED data. In addition, our method

supplements JOLTS data on worker flows and job openings at continuing establishments

with estimates for worker flows and job openings at entering and exiting establishments.

Our adjustments have a large effect on JOLTS-based estimates. Adjusted hires and

separations exceed the published statistics by about one-third. Layoffs are much larger

and much more variable in the adjusted statistics, and they account for a bigger share of

separations.

       There are several steps that the BLS can undertake to improve the JOLTS sample

and JOLTS-based statistics. First, as part of a regular program to monitor the JOLTS




                                            25
sample, the BLS should compare the cross-sectional densities of employment growth

rates in JOLTS data to the corresponding densities in the BED or other comprehensive

source. Because of lags in the availability of administrative records that feed into the

BED, it is not feasible to reweight the JOLTS density to conform to the BED as part of a

real-time monthly production process. It is feasible to reweight the JOLTS density to

conform to the growth rate distribution in the monthly CES, as adjusted for systematic

differences between the CES and comprehensive sources in historical data.

       Second, the BLS should explicitly incorporate adjustments for worker flows and

job openings at establishments that are outside the JOLTS sample frame. The BLS

already models the effects of entry and exit in its CES employment estimates. Adapting

and extending BLS models to capture the effects of entry and exit on hires, separations

and job openings is entirely feasible using information available from JOLTS, BED and

CES data. It would also be useful to conduct special surveys with retrospective questions

about worker flows and job openings at new establishments, including questions about

the number job openings before an entrant began operations. Information obtained from

this type of survey would provide a strong basis for imputing worker flows and job

openings to new establishments as part of a monthly production process.

       Third, the BLS should investigate the potential payoff from sample stratification

on establishment age and from corrections for the exclusion of very young establishments

from the JOLTS sample frame. As discussed in the introduction, young establishments

have unusually high worker flows, even after conditioning on establishment size. Our

adjustment method does not directly address this source of downward bias in JOLTS-




                                             26
based estimates for hires and separations.27 We suspect that very limited sample

stratification on establishment age and simple corrections for the exclusion of very young

establishments would go a long ways to address this source of bias, because hires and

separations decline very rapidly with establishment age initially but then flatten out.

Here as well, special surveys could provide a reliable basis for imputing worker flows

and job openings to young establishments that are underweighted or excluded from the

JOLTS sample frame.

        Fourth, the BLS should carefully investigate how the unit nonresponse rate varies

with the establishment growth rate in the JOLTS sample. In this regard, it is essential to

evaluate the nonresponse rate throughout the entire distribution of growth rates. Suppose,

for example, that the response rate is very high on average but is smaller in certain parts

of the growth rate distribution. This type of nonresponse pattern leads to biased estimates

for aggregate worker flows and job openings because these measures vary greatly with

establishment growth rates in the cross section. Determining whether, and how, the unit

nonresponse rate varies with the establishment growth rate is a straightforward exercise.

It can be carried out by matching JOLTS micro data to data from the BED or other

comprehensive source and then directly computing nonresponse rates as a function of the

establishment growth rate. Having obtained this function, it would be a simple matter to

adjust JOLTS-based estimates of worker flows and job openings for unit nonresponse

rates that vary with the establishment growth rate.




27
   Our adjustment method relies on JOLTS data to provide unbiased estimates for xˆ (b) in equation (6).
However, the underweighting of younger establishments in JOLTS data imparts a downward bias to the
xˆ (b) estimates.


                                                   27
       Another potential issue in JOLTS data is respondent error – the propensity of

establishments to misreport their true number of hires, separations or job openings to the

BLS. Wohlford et al. (2003) and Faberman (2005a) express concerns about respondent

error as a source of bias in JOLTS-based statistics. The methods we develop in this

paper do not address respondent error. Thus, this paper should be viewed as part of a

broader effort to better understand and improve JOLTS-based statistics.

       While measurement issues are our main focus in this paper, our findings have

implications for the broader study of labor market dynamics. In this regard, some authors

have interpreted data on the relative volatility of separations and hires as favoring a hires-

driven view of recession (Hall, 2005; Shimer, 2007a). We find that using a

representative growth rate distribution to estimate worker flows substantially increases

the variability of separations relative to hires – so much so that separations are more

variable than hires according to our adjusted estimates.

       The adjustment method we introduce in this paper is potentially useful in other

settings as well, and these settings are relatively easy to identify. In particular, when the

outcome measure of interest varies with micro growth rates in the cross section, it is

important to evaluate whether the sample produces a representative cross-sectional

growth rate distribution. If the sample is not representative in this respect, and if the

outcome variable varies systematically with growth rates in the cross section, then sample

means of the outcome variable are biased. That is the essence of the problem in the

JOLTS sample that we consider in this paper. Analogous problems potentially arise in

surveys of capital investment and disinvestment, because investment outcomes differ

systematically between declining and growing businesses.




                                              28
       Finally, we note that our adjustment method can be applied to “backcast” worker

flows and job openings before the period covered by the JOLTS sample. In particular,

one could combine historical data on the cross-sectional distribution of establishment

growth rates from the CES, BED or other source with JOLTS-based data on the cross-

sectional relations displayed in Figures 4 and 5 to construct historical time series for

worker flows and job openings. Such an endeavor would greatly expand the time-series

dimension of data available for the study of labor market dynamics.




                                             29
References

Clark, Kelly A., and Hyson, Rosemary, 2001. “New Tools for Labor Market Analysis:
JOLTS.” Monthly Labor Review, 124(12): 32-37.

Crankshaw, Mark and George Stamas (2000) “Sample Design in the Job Openings and
Labor Turnover Survey,” 2000 Proceedings of the Annual Statistical Association [CD-
ROM]. Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association.

Davis, Steven J., Faberman, R. Jason, and Haltiwanger, John, 2006. “The Flow Approach
to Labor Markets: New Evidence and Micro-Macro Links.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 20(3): 3-24.

Davis, Steven J., Faberman, R. Jason, and Haltiwanger, John C., 2007. “The
Establishment-Level Behavior of Vacancies and Hiring,” mimeo.

Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger (1999) “Gross Job Flows,” Handbook of Labor
Economics, Volume 3B, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, editors, Amsterdam: North-
Holland.

Davis, Steven, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, C.J. Krizan, Javier Miranda, Alfred Nucci
and Kristin Sandusky (2007), NBER Working Paper No. 13226. Forthcoming in
Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, edited by Timothy Dunne, J.
Bradford Jensen and Mark J. Roberts.

Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996).

Faberman, R. Jason, 2005a. “Analyzing the JOLTS Hires and Separations Data.” 2005
Proceedings of the Annual Statistical Association [CD-ROM]. Alexandria, VA:
American Statistical Association.

Faberman, R. Jason, 2005b. “Studying the Labor Market with the Job Openings and
Labor Turnover Survey.” Bureau of Labor Statistics Working Paper No. 388.
Forthcoming in Producer Dynamics: New Evidence from Micro Data, edited by Timothy
Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen and Mark J. Roberts.

Faberman, R. Jason, 2006. “Job Flows and the Recent Business Cycle: Not All
‘Recoveries’ Are Created Equal,” BLS Working Paper No. 391.

Faberman, R. Jason, and Éva Nagypál, 2007. “The Effect of Quits on Worker
Recruitment: Theory and Evidence,” mimeo.

Fallick, Bruce and Charles A. Fleischman, 2004. “Employer-to-Employer Flows in the
U.S. Labor Market: The Complete Picture of Gross Worker Flows,” Federal Reserve
Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper No. 2004-34.


                                          30
Farber, Henry S. (1994) “The Analysis of Interfirm Worker Mobility,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 12, no. 4 (October), 554-593.

Fujita, Shigeru, and Gary Ramey, 2007. “Job Matching and Propagation,” forthcoming,
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.

Gertler, Mark and Antonella Trigari, 2005. “Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered
Nash Bargaining,” mimeo, New York University.

Hagedorn, Marcus and Iourii Manovskii, 2007. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium
Unemployment and Vacancies Revisited,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Hall, Robert E., 2005. “Job Loss, Job Finding, and Unemployment in the U.S. Economy
over the Past Fifty Years,” forthcoming, 2005 NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Haltiwanger, John, Lisa Lynch and Chris Mackie (eds.), 2007. Understanding Business
Dynamics: An Integrated Data System for America's Future, Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.

Mincer, Jacob and Boyan Jovanovic (1981) “Labor Mobility and Wages,” in Studies in
Labor Markets, edited by Sherwin Rosen. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Mortensen, Dale T., and Pissarides, Christopher A., 1994. “Job Creation and Job
Destruction and the Theory of Unemployment.” Review of Economic Studies 61(3): 397-
415.

Nagypál, Éva, 2006. “What Can We Learn About Firm Recruitment from the Job
Openings and Labor Turnover Survey?” forthcoming, Producer Dynamics: New
Evidence from Micro Data (Timothy Dunne, J. Bradford Jensen, and Mark J. Roberts,
editors), University of Chicago Press.

Shimer, Robert, 2005. “The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and
Vacancies,” American Economic Review 95(1): 25-49.

Shimer, Robert, 2007a. “Reassessing the Ins and Outs of Unemployment.” University of
Chicago: mimeo.

Shimer, Robert, 2007b. “Mismatch,” American Economic Review, 97(4): 1074-1101.

Spletzer, James R.; Faberman, R. Jason; Sadeghi, Akbar; Talan, David M. and Clayton,
Richard L., 2004. “Business Employment Dynamics: New Data on Gross Job Gains and
Losses,” Monthly Labor Review, 127(4), pp. 29-42.




                                          31
Topel, Robert H. and Michael P. Ward (1992) “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young
Men,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, no. 2 (May), 439-479.

Valetta, Robert, 2005. “Why has the U.S. Beveridge Curve Shifted Back? New Evidence
Using Regional Data,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper No. 2005-
25.

Wohlford, John, Phillips, Mary Anne, Clayton, Richard, and Werking, George, 2003.
“Reconciling labor turnover and employment statistics.” 2003 Proceedings of the Annual
Statistical Association [CD-ROM]. Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association.




                                          32
Appendix

A. Calculating Quarterly Flows and Growth Rates

       In comparing JOLTS and BED data in Table 2 and Figures 3 and 6, we need a

consistent measure of quarterly growth rates. There is an issue of how to measure

quarterly growth rates in the JOLTS data because JOLTS sample weights change from

month to month. To deal with this issue, we measure quarterly flows as the sum of

weighted monthly values divided by the weight for the last month in the quarter:

                                  θ m,t x m,t + θ m −1,t x m −1,t + θ m − 2,t x m − 2,t
                           xt =                                                         ,
                                                        θ m ,t

where xt is the quarterly rate for quarter t, xm ,t is the monthly rate for month m in quarter

t, θ m,t is the weight for month m in quarter t, and we have suppressed the index for

establishments. When computing the internally consistent measure of lagged quarterly

employment analogous to equation (1) in the main text, we use the level of employment

in the last month of the quarter together with the quarterly measures of hires and

separations defined above.

B. Adjusting the bin-specific estimates for sampling variability

       The sampling-variability adjustment factor for the estimate xˆm,t (b) is given by

                             am,t (b) = ntB (b) ⎡⎣ hm,t (b) − sm ,t (b) ⎤⎦ ,

where ntB (b) is the mean net growth rate for bin b in quarter t in the BED data, and h and

s denote rates of hires and separations, respectively in the JOLTS data. This adjustment

factor constrains the resulting mean net growth rate in bin b in the adjusted JOLTS data

to equal the mean net growth rate in the corresponding bin in the BED data. It would be



                                                       33
better to impose this constraint using CES rather than BED data; however, the CES micro

data were not available to us for this project.




                                              34
                              Figure 1. CES and JOLTS Employment Growth Rates Compared

 1.2               Percent of                                                                                                                                                                                                  CES Net Growth Rate
 1.0               Employment                                                                                                                                                                                                  JOLTS Net Growth Rate
 0.8

 0.6

 0.4

 0.2

 0.0

 -0.2

 -0.4

 -0.6

 -0.8
        Dec-2000

                              Mar-2001

                                                    Jun-2001



                                                                                                Dec-2001

                                                                                                                      Mar-2002

                                                                                                                                            Jun-2002



                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec-2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mar-2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jun-2003



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec-2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mar-2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jun-2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar-2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2005



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dec-2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mar-2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jun-2006



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dec-2006
                                                                          Sep-2001




                                                                                                                                                                  Sep-2002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep-2003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sep-2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sep-2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2006
Notes: Figure depicts the quarterly net employment growth rates calculated from the JOLTS and CES data.
The JOLTS growth rate is measured from the difference in total hires and total separations for each quarter.
The CES growth rate is measured from the net change in employment levels between the third month of
each quarter. Both rates are calculated using the average of the current and previous quarter’s employment
in the denominator.

Figure 2. CES Employment Path Compared to Cumulated Differences between
Hires and Separations in JOLTS
 144.0                  Employment                                                                                                                                           Cumulative JOLTS Implied Employment
                        (000s)                                                                                                                                               Employment Implied by JOLTS Hires - Separations
 142.0
                                                                                                                                                                             CES Employment
 140.0

 138.0

 136.0

 134.0

 132.0

 130.0

 128.0
                   Dec-2000

                                         Mar-2001

                                                               Jun-2001



                                                                                                           Dec-2001

                                                                                                                                 Mar-2002

                                                                                                                                                       Jun-2002



                                                                                                                                                                                                   Dec-2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar-2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jun-2003



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jun-2004



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec-2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mar-2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Jun-2005



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec-2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mar-2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jun-2006



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Dec-2006
                                                                                     Sep-2001




                                                                                                                                                                             Sep-2002




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep-2003




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Sep-2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sep-2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sep-2006




Notes: Figure depicts the employment levels implied from the JOLTS hires and separations data and
reported in the CES data. The JOLTS level is reported two ways: as an accumulation of the difference
between hires and separations each month (added to the December 2000 total) and as the accumulation
over each year of the survey, added to the beginning-of-year employment level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 35
Figure 3. Cross-Sectional Densities for Establishment Growth Rates, 2001-2006

 0.18
                                                                           JOLTS                  BED
 0.16

 0.14

 0.12

 0.10

 0.08

 0.06

 0.04

 0.02

 0.00
    -25.0     -20.0    -15.0     -10.0     -5.0      0.0      5.0      10.0      15.0      20.0         25.0
                                 Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)


Notes: The densities are constructed as smoothed histograms of quarterly employment growth rates using
establishment-level observations in JOLTS (restricted sample) and BED (all observations) from 2001Q1 to
2006Q4. Histograms are constructed over the full growth rate distribution, but the figure zooms in on
growth rates from -25 to 25 percent per quarter. Histogram bins are narrower for smaller growth rates and
allow for mass points at growth rates of -2.0 (exit), 0 (no change) and 2.0 (entry).




                                                   36
Figure 4. Cross-Sectional Relationships of Worker Flows and Job Openings to Establishment Growth Rates,
Monthly JOLTS Data from 2001 to 2006, Full Range of Growth Rates
                         (a) Hires Rate                                               (c) Quits Rate
  160.0      Rate                                                                                             160.0
                                                                                                                      Rate

  140.0                                                                                                       140.0

  120.0                                                                                                       120.0

  100.0                                                                                                       100.0

   80.0                                                                                                        80.0

   60.0                                                                                                        60.0

   40.0                                                                                                        40.0

   20.0                                                                                                        20.0

    0.0                                                                                                         0.0
         -200.0     -160.0    -120.0     -80.0    -40.0   0.0    40.0   80.0     120.0   160.0   200.0            -200.0     -160.0   -120.0    -80.0      -40.0   0.0   40.0   80.0     120.0   160.0   200.0
                                       Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)                                                                 Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)

                                         (b) Job Openings Rate                                                                                           (d) Layoffs Rate
  20.0       Rate                                                                                             160.0
                                                                                                                      Rate

                                                                                                              140.0
  16.0
                                                                                                              120.0

                                                                                                              100.0
  12.0

                                                                                                               80.0

   8.0
                                                                                                               60.0

                                                                                                               40.0
   4.0
                                                                                                               20.0

   0.0                                                                                                          0.0
     -200.0       -160.0     -120.0     -80.0    -40.0    0.0   40.0    80.0     120.0   160.0   200.0            -200.0     -160.0   -120.0     -80.0     -40.0   0.0   40.0   80.0     120.0   160.0   200.0
                                       Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)                                                                 Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)




                                                                                                         37
Figure 5. Cross-Sectional Relationships of Worker Flows and Job Openings to Establishment Growth Rates,
Monthly JOLTS Data from 2001 to 2006, Zoomed in on Growth Rates from -25 and 25 Percent
                         (a) Hires Rate                                               (c) Quits Rate
   30.0   Rate                                                                                       30.0   Rate


   25.0                                                                                              25.0


   20.0                                                                                              20.0


   15.0                                                                                              15.0


   10.0                                                                                              10.0


    5.0                                                                                               5.0


    0.0                                                                                               0.0
      -25.0      -20.0   -15.0    -10.0    -5.0    0.0     5.0    10.0     15.0   20.0   25.0           -25.0      -20.0   -15.0    -10.0     -5.0   0.0     5.0    10.0     15.0   20.0   25.0
                                 Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)                                                           Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)

                                   (b) Job Openings Rate                                                                                    (d) Layoffs Rate
   15.0   Rate                                                                                       30.0   Rate


                                                                                                     25.0
   12.0


                                                                                                     20.0
    9.0

                                                                                                     15.0

    6.0
                                                                                                     10.0


    3.0
                                                                                                      5.0


    0.0                                                                                               0.0
      -25.0      -20.0   -15.0    -10.0    -5.0    0.0     5.0    10.0     15.0   20.0   25.0           -25.0      -20.0   -15.0    -10.0     -5.0   0.0     5.0    10.0     15.0   20.0   25.0
                                 Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)                                                           Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)

Notes: Thick lines are constructed from the full 2001-2006 sample. Thin lines are constructed from samples restricted to the 12 months with the highest or lowest
growth rate of aggregate employment. The upper thin lines typically correspond to the high-growth sample.




                                                                                                38
Figure 6. Quarterly Growth Rate Distributions in High- and Low-Growth Quarters,
JOLTS and BED Data
                             (a) BED Distributions
 0.18                           Low-Growth Quarters (10th Pctile.: - 32.0 pct., 90th Pctile.: 14.5 pct.)
                                High-Growth Quarters (10th Pctile.: -22.0 pct., 90th Pctile.: 20.5 pct.)
 0.16

 0.14

 0.12

 0.10

 0.08

 0.06

 0.04

 0.02

 0.00
    -40.0     -32.0     -24.0    -16.0      -8.0     0.0       8.0      16.0      24.0      32.0     40.0
                                 Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)

                                         (b) JOLTS Distributions
 0.20                           Low-Growth Quarters (10th Pctile.: - 17.0 pct., 90th Pctile.: 9.3 pct.)
                                High-Growth Quarters (10th Pctile.: - 11.5 pct., 90th Pctile.: 13.0 pct.)
 0.18

 0.16

 0.14

 0.12

 0.10

 0.08

 0.06

 0.04

 0.02

 0.00
    -40.0     -32.0     -24.0    -16.0      -8.0      0.0      8.0      16.0      24.0      32.0     40.0
                                 Establishment Net Growth Rate (Percent)
Notes: Figures depict employment densities at establishments with quarterly growth rates within a given
interval in the BED (top panel) and a restricted panel of JOLTS data (bottom panel, see text for details of
restriction) for 2001Q1 – 2006Q4. The distributions are split into the 6 quarters of highest growth and 6
quarters of lowest growth, based on their seasonally unadjusted aggregate growth rates in the BED. Vertical
lines represent the growth rates at the 10th (shaded lines) and 90th (dashed lines) percentiles of the
distribution, with the leftmost of each pair associated with each low-growth distribution.



                                                    39
                                                                                                                                                                            1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                  2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                              3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.0
                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2000                                                                                    Dec-2000

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2001                                                                                    Mar-2001

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2001                                                                                    Jun-2001

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2001                                                                                    Sep-2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Percent of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Employment




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Percent of
                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2001                                                                                    Dec-2001




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Employment
                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2002                                                                                    Mar-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2002                                                                                    Jun-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2002                                                                                    Sep-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2002                                                                                    Dec-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2003                                                                                    Mar-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2003                                                                                    Jun-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2003                                                                                    Sep-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2003                                                                                    Dec-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2004                                                                                    Mar-2004

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2004                                                                                    Jun-2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (a) Hires Rate




                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2004                                                                                    Sep-2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (b) Job Openings Rate
                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2004                                                                                    Dec-2004

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2005                                                                                    Mar-2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Published Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Published Rate




     estimates (solid line). See text for details of the adjustment.
                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2005                                                                                    Jun-2005

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2005                                                                                    Sep-2005

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2005                                                                                    Dec-2005

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2006                                                                                    Mar-2006

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2006                                                                                    Jun-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Adjusted Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sep-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Adjusted Rate




                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2006

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2006                                                                                    Dec-2006




40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.5




                                                                                                                                                                            1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                        2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                    3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3.5




                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2000                                                                                      Dec-2000

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2001                                                                                      Mar-2001

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2001                                                                                      Jun-2001

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2001                                                                                      Sep-2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Percent of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Percent of




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Employment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Employment




                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2001                                                                                      Dec-2001

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2002                                                                                      Mar-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2002                                                                                      Jun-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2002                                                                                      Sep-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 7. Adjusted and Published Estimates of JOLTS Worker Flows and Job Openings




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-2002

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2003                                                                                      Mar-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2003                                                                                      Jun-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2003                                                                                      Sep-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2003                                                                                      Dec-2003

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2004                                                                                      Mar-2004

                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2004                                                                                      Jun-2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (c) Quits Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (d) Layoffs Rate




                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2004                                                                                      Sep-2004

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2004                                                                                      Dec-2004

                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2005                                                                                      Mar-2005
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Published Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Published Rate




                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2005                                                                                      Jun-2005

                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2005                                                                                      Sep-2005

                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2005                                                                                      Dec-2005
                                                                                                                                                                 Mar-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mar-2006
     Notes: Each panel illustrates a worker flow or job openings rate, seasonally adjusted, from the published JOLTS statistics (dashed line) and our adjusted




                                                                                                                                                                 Jun-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jun-2006
                                                                                                                                                                 Sep-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sep-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Adjusted Rate




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Adjusted Rate




                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Dec-2006
Figure 8. Adjusted Quit and Layoff Rates, JOLTS Data
 3.5
                  Percent of
                  Employment                                                                                                                                          Adjusted Quits                                                Adjusted Layoffs

 3.0



 2.5



 2.0



 1.5



 1.0
       Dec-2000

                   Mar-2001

                              Jun-2001



                                                    Dec-2001

                                                               Mar-2002

                                                                          Jun-2002



                                                                                                Dec-2002

                                                                                                           Mar-2003

                                                                                                                      Jun-2003



                                                                                                                                            Dec-2003

                                                                                                                                                       Mar-2004

                                                                                                                                                                  Jun-2004



                                                                                                                                                                                        Dec-2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mar-2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jun-2005



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Dec-2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar-2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jun-2006



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Dec-2006
                                         Sep-2001




                                                                                     Sep-2002




                                                                                                                                 Sep-2003




                                                                                                                                                                             Sep-2004




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Sep-2005




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Sep-2006
Notes: The figure illustrates the quit rate and layoff rate, seasonally adjusted, from our adjusted estimates.
See text for details of the adjustment.




                                                                                                                                      41
Table 1. Average Monthly Worker Flows as a Percent of Employment, 2001-2006
                                           Hires Rate       Separations Rate
JOLTS, Published Statistics                                      3.4                          3.3

CPS Gross Flows, Fallick-Fleischman                              6.4                          6.4
Note: Table entries report mean monthly rates for hires and separations from January 2001 to December
2006. The statistics on CPS gross flows are from Fallick and Fleischmann (2004), as updated at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2004/200434/200434abs.html. CPS hires and separations include
employment-to-employment flows.




Table 2. Cross-Sectional Growth Rate Distributions, 2001 to 2006
                               JOLTS                                BED
                  Monthly,     Monthly,    Quarterly,     Quarterly,   Quarterly,
 Growth Rate         Full     Restricted   Restricted         All      Continuous
    Interval       Sample      Sample       Sample      Observations Observations
-2.0 (exits)          ---         ---          ---            0.7          ---
(-2.0, -0.20]         1.6         1.5          4.3            7.5          7.6
(-0.20, -0.05]        7.1         7.0         13.2           16.5         16.7
(-0.05, -0.02]        7.9         7.8          9.5            9.6           9.7
(-0.02, 0.0)         14.7        14.6         11.6            7.6          7.8
0.0                  33.6        34.1         17.1           15.4         15.7
(0.0, 0.02)          16.5        16.6         13.1            7.9          8.0
[0.02, 0.05)          9.2         9.1         11.7            9.9          10.0
[0.05, 0.20)          7.9         7.8         15.1           16.7         16.9
[0.20, 2.0)           1.6         1.5          4.5            7.5          7.6
2.0 (entrants)        ---         ---          ---            0.7          ---
Note: Table entries report employment shares for the indicated establishment growth rate intervals in
JOLTS and BED micro data from 2001 to 2006. Calculations on JOLTS data make use of the JOLTS final
sample weights described in Section II.A. Each column in the table reports results for a different data set or
sample. See the text for a detailed explanation of how the data sets and samples differ.




                                                     42
Table 3. JOLTS Summary Statistics, Published and Adjusted Statistics
                                           Published Statistics Adjusted Statistics
Means (Monthly, Quarterly Standard Deviations)
                                                   3.78                4.99
Hires Rate (H)
                                               (0.25, 0.23)        (0.17, 0.16)
                                                   3.70                4.96
Separations Rate (S)
                                               (0.18, 0.16)        (0.21, 0.20)
                                                   2.06                2.36
  Quits Rate (Q)
                                               (0.17, 0.17)        (0.17, 0.15)
                                                   1.40                2.29
  Layoffs and Discharges Rate (L)
                                               (0.09, 0.07)        (0.16, 0.15)
                                                   0.24                0.31
  Other Separations Rate (R)
                                               (0.03, 0.02)        (0.07, 0.05)
                                                   2.71                2.94
Job Openings Rate (V)
                                               (0.39, 0.38)        (0.36, 0.34)
                                                   5.29
Unemployment Rate (U)                                                   ---
                                               (0.57, 0.58)

Quarterly Relative Volatilities
σ(H)/ σ (S)                                                      1.47                        0.80
σ (Q)/ σ (L)                                                     2.35                        1.00
σ (H)/ σ (V)                                                     0.61                        0.47
σ (V)/ σ (U)                                                     0.66                        0.59
Notes: Table lists the noted monthly statistics from the publicly available JOLTS estimates and the adjusted
estimates (see text for details). Standard deviations of the monthly data, followed by the quarterly means of
the monthly data (or third-month values in the case of the vacancy and unemployment rate), are in
parentheses below each mean. Relative volatilities are the ratios of the quarterly standard deviations of the
listed estimates. The period covers January 2001 – December 2006. The unemployment rate comes from
the Current Population Survey.




                                                     43
