                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION:
              A NEW VIEW FROM A LONG-TERM PERSPECTIVE, 1936-2005

                                           Carola Frydman
                                            Raven E. Saks

                                        Working Paper 14145
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14145


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




We would like to thank George Baker, Edward Glaeser, Claudia Goldin, Caroline Hoxby, Lawrence
Katz, and Robert Margo for their advice and encouragement throughout this project. Very helpful
comments have also been received from Doug Elmendorf, Eric Hilt, Antoinette Schoar, Dan Sichel,
and seminar participants at the DAE NBER meetings, AEA meetings, AFA meetings, and EHA meetings.
 We would also like to thank the staff at the Historical Collections and Danielle Barney of Baker Library
for making the data collection possible and Brian Hall and Jeff Liebman for providing us with their
data. Yoon Chang, Yao Huang, Michele McAteer, Timothy Schwuchow, James Sigel, and Athanasios
Vorvis provided outstanding research assistance. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from
the Economic History Association, the Multidisciplinary Program in Inequality & Social Policy at
Harvard University, and the National Science Foundation's Dissertation Completion Fellowship. The
views in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, its staff, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Carola Frydman and Raven E. Saks. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Executive Compensation: A New View from a Long-Term Perspective, 1936-2005
Carola Frydman and Raven E. Saks
NBER Working Paper No. 14145
June 2008
JEL No. G30,J33,M52,N82

                                              ABSTRACT

We analyze the long-run trends in executive compensation using a new panel dataset of top executives
in large publicly-held firms from 1936 to 2005, collected from corporate reports. This historic perspective
reveals several surprising new facts that conflict with inferences based only on data from the recent
decades. First, the median real value of compensation was remarkably flat from the end of World
War II to the mid-1970s, even during times of rapid economic expansion and aggregate firm growth.
This finding contrasts sharply with the steep upward trajectory of pay over the past thirty years, which
coincided with a period of similarly large increases in aggregate firm size. A second surprising finding
is that the sensitivity of an executive's wealth to firm performance was not inconsequentially small
for most of our sample period. Thus, recent years were not the first time when compensation arrangements
served to align managerial incentives with those of shareholders. Taken together, the long-run trends
in the level and structure of compensation pose a challenge to several common explanations for the
widely-debated surge in executive pay of the past several decades, including changes in firms' size,
rent extraction by CEOs, and increases in managerial incentives.


Carola Frydman
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive
E52-436
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
frydman@mit.edu

Raven E. Saks
U.S. Federal Reserve – Division of Research and St
20th and C Streets NW
Washington, DC 20551
raven.e.saks@frb.gov
   1. Introduction

The compensation paid to CEOs of large publicly-traded corporations rose dramatically during

the 1980s and 1990s, stimulating much debate on the determinants of managerial pay (Murphy

1999, Hall and Murphy 2003). The discussion has been largely inconclusive, due partly to the

short time span of available data. By constructing a new long-run time series of executive pay

we are able to analyze the trends in the level and composition of pay over most of the twentieth

century.   This new dataset allows us to differentiate between some of the most popular

explanations for the recent surge in compensation: managerial rent-seeking, a competitive labor

market for executives, and increases in managerial incentives.

       To document the long-run trends in pay we hand collected a comprehensive panel dataset

on the compensation of individual executives based on proxy statements and 10-K reports from

1936 to 2005. Although our sample is mainly composed of executives employed in the largest

corporations in the economy, our results are broadly characteristic of the largest 300 publicly-

traded firms.

       The data from earlier decades reveal several surprising facts that go against the current

view of top executive pay, which is primarily based on data from recent decades.          First,

executive compensation was remarkably flat from the end of World War II to the mid-1970s, a

time in which firms grew rapidly. This stability contrasts sharply with the evidence from the

1980s to the present, when executive pay and firms expanded at almost the same rate. Thus, the

strong correlation between executive compensation and the aggregate market value of firms

documented in recent decades (Hall and Murphy 2003, Jensen and Murphy 2004, Gabaix and

Landier 2008) was much smaller prior to the mid-1970s.




                                                1
         A second finding that is surprising in light of inferences based on more recent data is that

stock option grants have been an important part of the compensation package since the 1950s.

Even though the value of option grants was low prior to the 1980s, executives have owned a

substantial number of stock options for the past 50 years. Using a measure of an executive’s

firm-related wealth that includes changes in the value of his holdings of stock and stock options,

we calculate consistent measures of the correlation between wealth and firm performance (often

called “pay-to-performance”) over the past 70 years.           We confirm that this relationship

strengthened considerably from the 1980s to the present (Hall and Liebman 1998, Murphy

1999). However, this increase was not part of a long-run upward trend. The sensitivity of

changes in wealth to performance was about the same in the 1930s, 1950s and 1960s as it was in

the 1980s, but somewhat lower in the 1940s and 1970s. Although accurate for the 1970s, Jensen

and Murphy’s (1990) view that CEOs were paid as bureaucrats was not generally true in the past.

The strength of the incentives provided by these correlations is difficult to assess, but we find

that the magnitude of the correlation for most of our sample was not inconsequentially small.

Throughout most of the twentieth century, the wealth of an executive would have increased by

30 to 60 percent if she had been able to raise the firm’s rate of return from the 50th to the 70th

percentile of firm performance.       Thus, recent decades were not the first period in which

compensation arrangements generated a strong link between the executives’ wealth and firm

value.

         Although a comprehensive analysis of the causes of these trends is beyond the scope of

the present paper, the long-run data provide new evidence to evaluate some of the major

hypotheses for the recent surge in executive compensation. First, the run-up in CEO pay and the

expanded use of stock options have been linked to managers’ ability to extract rents from the




                                                  2
firm (Bebchuk and Fried 2003, Bebchuk and Fried 2004, Kuhnen and Zwiebel 2007). However,

both the level of pay and the use of options were lower from the 1950s to the 1970s than in more

recent years, even though corporate governance was arguably weaker in the earlier period. Thus,

this explanation does not seem to fit well with the changes in executive pay over time.

        A second set of explanations relate executive pay to changes in firm size. High levels of

pay may be the result of firms’ competition for scarce managerial talent (Lucas 1978, Rosen

1981, Rosen 1982, Tervio 2007), leading to higher compensation in larger firms. Consistent

with this prediction, the cross-sectional correlation between the level of pay and a firm’s position

in the distribution of firm size was about 0.3 for most of our sample period. Extensions of this

theory also predict that compensation should rise along with increases in the size of the typical

firm in the market (Gabaix and Landier 2008). However, we find that shifts in the distribution of

firms’ market values over time were only weakly correlated with compensation prior to the mid-

1970s, casting doubt on the validity of this theory for earlier time periods. In addition, the

appearance of a strong correlation in more recent decades may be spurious, suggesting that this

model may not even explain the post-1970 growth in executive pay.

        Another explanation for the high level of pay in recent years is the need to compensate

executives for the risk generated by a greater use of incentive pay since the 1980s.1 However,

we find a considerable sensitivity of managerial wealth to firm performance in the 1950s and

1960s and much weaker incentives in the 1970s without notable changes in the level of pay.

Thus, changes in pay-to-performance were not always accompanied by changes in the level of

compensation.




1
  The optimal sensitivity of managerial wealth to firm performance may have increased in recent decades due to
rising business risk (Inderst and Mueller 2006) or greater international competition (Cuñat and Guadalupe 2006)


                                                      3
        It seems unlikely that these explanations can account for the long-run trends that we

document in this paper, suggesting that the major determinants of pay may have changed over

time. It is possible that the labor market for corporate executives operated differently in the past.

Other factors, such as improvements in board monitoring and changes in social norms, may also

have altered compensation arrangements.               Thus, further studies of executive compensation

should address these long-run trends to improve our understanding of how the determinants of

pay have evolved over time.



        2. Executive compensation data

A large fraction of the empirical research on executive compensation has focused on the period

after 1992 because data on managerial pay since that date are easily available in Compustat’s

Executive Compensation database (ExecuComp).                    The sources of these data are the proxy

statements of publicly-held corporations, which report the remuneration of the firm’s highest-

paid officers.     Although ExecuComp does not start until 1992, the SEC has had similar

disclosure requirements since its inception in 1934.2 Thus, we construct a long-run panel dataset

on executive compensation by hand-collecting data for the years 1936 to 1991 from historical

proxy statements and 10-K reports, and using ExecuComp from 1992 to 2005.3 Although

disclosure requirements have evolved over time, firms’ corporate reports provide sufficiently

detailed information to allow us to track executive pay in a consistent manner over the longer



2
  Corporations were required to disclose the compensation of top officers in 10-K reports starting in 1934, but many
firms were reluctant to do so in the early years. By 1936 most of the firms included data on remuneration in these
reports, and so we start our sample in that year.
3
  Studies that have used proxy statements to study executive pay prior to1992 (although over shorter time periods
than our sample) include Baker (1938), Roberts (1959), Lewellen (1968), Wattel (1978), Murphy (1985), Yermack
(1995), and Hall and Liebman (1998). Due to differences in sample design and in the methodologies used to value
the components of pay, these data cannot be used to provide a consistent description of the long-run evolution of
pay.


                                                         4
run.4    These data are particularly important for constructing consistent measures of stock option

use, because options were valued differently in research conducted prior to the 1970s than the

common practice today.

         To construct our dataset, we select the largest 50 publicly-traded corporations in 1940,

1960 and 1990. We identify the largest firms in 1960 and 1990 by ranking corporations in

Standard & Poor’s Compustat database according to their total value of sales. Compustat’s data

do not extend back to 1940, so for that year we rank firms in the Center for Research in Security

Prices (CRSP) database according to their market value.5 Because some firms appear among the

largest 50 in more than one year, our dataset covers a total of 101 companies. For each firm, we

collect annual data on the pay of the top officers for as many years as our sources allow. When a

firm in our sample merges with a firm outside of the sample, we continue to follow the

executives in the merged firm if the new firm retains the same name or if the industrial

classification of the new firm does not change (see Appendix Section 1.1 for details). The

resulting dataset is an unbalanced panel as companies enter and leave the sample over time.6

         About 75 percent of the firms in our sample are in manufacturing industries, but our

dataset also contains communications, public utilities, and retail companies. Appendix Table A1

lists all of the firms in our sample and Appendix Table A2 shows the distribution of firms by 2-

digit SIC code.



4
  Not only do these documents report information on salaries, bonus payments, stock options, and stock holdings,
but they also contain detailed descriptions of compensation plans that allow for consistent measurement of each
component of pay over time.
5
  The considerable size of the data collection effort caused us to select a small number of firms based on rankings in
three particular years. However, our intention was to select companies that were large for a reasonable period of
time. Therefore, we use the value sales to measure firm size whenever possible, since it is less susceptible to
transitory shocks than market value. A detailed description of the sample design is provided in the Data Appendix.
6
  Firms enter the sample when they go public or when corporate records become available in the collection at the
Baker Library of Harvard Business School (our main source of corporate reports). Companies exit the sample as
they go bankrupt, become private, or are acquired by a foreign firm, among other reasons.


                                                          5
         Because our dataset includes firms that were large at different points in time, it captures

some of the structural changes that were experienced by the economy over this 70-year period.

Although this sample is not representative of the economy as a whole, it comprises at least 20

percent of the market value of the S&P 500 in every decade, and more than 40 percent prior to

1970 (see Appendix Table A3). Because the sample includes all of the available years for each

of the selected firms, it reflects a broader segment of the economy than the largest 50 publicly-

traded firms alone. We discuss the representativeness of our sample in Appendix Section 3, and

conclude that it is representative of the largest 300 publicly-traded corporations. On the other

hand, the sample does not reflect the compensation practices of smaller or private firms.

         Table 1 reports basic descriptive statistics of our main sample, which includes the three

highest-paid officers in each firm.7 There are more than 15,800 executive-year observations

between the years 1936 to 2005, for a total of 2,862 individuals. The job titles held by the

executives in our sample suggest that these officers were the main decision-makers in the firm

(see Table 2). More than 47 percent of these managers held the title “CEO,” “president,” or

“chairman of the board.”8 Furthermore, more than 80 percent of these officers also served on the

board of directors.



    3. Long-Run Trends in Compensation

3.1 Trends in total compensation

7
  Although we collected data on the five highest-paid officers in each firm whenever possible, corporate reports
consistently listed only the three highest-paid officers prior to 1978. We limit our analysis to the top three officers
in order to maintain a consistent group of individuals over time, but the results are robust to including the 4th and 5th
highest-paid executives.
8
  Restricting the analysis to CEOs is useful for comparing our sample to previous research, which has mainly
focused on chief executive officers. Because the term “CEO” was not frequently used until the 1970s, identifying
who held this title is not always straightforward. Previous studies suggest that this person was most often the
president of the company, so we identify the president as the chief executive where the CEO is not explicitly
mentioned (Mace 1971). In cases where we observe neither a CEO nor a president, we identify the chairman of the
board as the CEO (about 2 percent of the observations).


                                                           6
Figure 1 shows the median real value of total compensation from 1936 to 2005.9 We define total

compensation as the sum of salaries, bonuses, long-term incentive payments, and the Black-

Scholes value of stock option grants. The figure reveals three distinct phases that form a J-

shaped pattern over the course of our sample period. During the first 15 years, the real value of

compensation fell from about $0.9 million to $0.75 million. Although more pronounced during

World War II, the decline in executive pay continued from the end of the war until the early

1950s. This period of deterioration was followed by 25 years of slow growth, averaging 0.8

percent per year from 1950 to 1975. Finally, the level of executive pay has climbed at an

increasing rate since the mid-1970s. Although compensation dipped briefly from 2001 to 2003,

it resumed a rapid rate of growth during the last two years of our sample. Thus, the rapid

increase in pay in the 1990s did not end with the collapse of the stock market boom in 2000.

           More than 95 percent of the individuals in our sample fall above the 99.9th percentile of

the national distribution of wage and salary income documented by Piketty and Saez (2003).

Therefore, a comparison of executive pay to the earnings of a typical worker provides insight

into the evolution of earnings inequality at the top of the income distribution. We calculate

relative executive pay by dividing median compensation in our sample by average earnings per

full-time equivalent worker from the National Income and Product Accounts.

           This measure of earnings inequality follows an even-more pronounced J-shaped pattern

over our sample period than the dollar value of executive pay (see the dashed line in Figure 1).

The real value of average earnings in the economy increased during the early years of our sample

even as the level of executive pay declined, leading to a sharp contraction in the gap between

these two groups from 1940 to 1944. Relative executive pay declined further until 1970, at

which point executive earnings began to rise faster than those of the average worker. By 1990,
9
    Throughout the paper, real values are measured in year 2000 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.


                                                          7
relative executive pay had recovered its Depression-era level. The gap between executives and

workers expanded even further during the most recent 15 years, and by 2005 the median

executive in our sample earned 110 times average worker earnings—about twice the

corresponding ratio prior to World War II. Despite differences in the underlying source data

between our sample and the income tax records used by Piketty and Saez to calculate wage and

income shares, the trend in relative executive pay is similar to the share of the top 0.1 percent of

the national distribution of wage and salary income.10



3.2 The structure of executive compensation

Figure 2 decomposes the real value of total compensation into its three main components. The

short dashed line shows the median value of salaries plus any bonus that was both awarded and

paid out within the same year, which we refer to as a current bonus.11 These bonuses were

generally paid in cash, but some were also paid in company stock. The long-dashed line adds the

amount paid to each executive as part of a deferred bonus or long-term incentive payment.12 The

solid line, which replicates the real value of total compensation shown in Figure 1, adds the

Black-Scholes value of stock option grants.


10
   Piketty and Saez use income tax records to estimate shares of aggregate wage and salary income. One
disadvantage of income tax data is that they only contain information on the gains from exercising options. We use
the value of stock option grants, which reflects the value of pay at the time of the award more accurately, and are not
affected by subsequent movements in the firm’s share price or by the executive’s decision when to exercise the
options. Moreover, the vast majority of employee stock options during the 1950s and 1960s were taxed as capital
gains, and so would not have been reported on income tax returns as wages and salaries. Rather, they would have
appeared as capital gains, but only upon the sale of the stock that had been purchased when the option was
exercised.
11
   Although it would be useful to separate salaries from current bonus payments, many firms reported only the sum
of the two prior to 1992. In firms that did report these payments separately between 1947 and 1991 (about 20
percent of the sample in these years), the value of current bonus payments usually ranged between 20 and 45 percent
of current pay, with no obvious trend. Therefore, grants of current bonuses do not appear to have followed the same
upward trend as the use of long-term pay (discussed below).
12
   We measure bonuses as the amount received during the year rather than the amount awarded (to be paid in the
future) for consistency, because Compustat and some earlier proxy statements do not report information on the value
of bonuses awarded.


                                                          8
        During the first twenty years of our sample, compensation was composed mainly of

salaries and current bonuses. Although long-term bonuses were awarded to some executives as

early as the 1940s, they were not common enough to make a noticeable impact on median pay

until the 1960s.13 These long-term bonuses were usually based on the firm’s profits or net

income, with payment in cash or stock distributed in equal installments over a certain number of

years.14 These bonuses became a greater share of compensation over time, reaching more than

35 percent of total pay by 2005.

        Stock option grants have also become a larger fraction of compensation over the course

of our sample period. Among executives receiving an option award, the median value of grants

fluctuated between 15 and 30 percent of total compensation from the mid-1950s to the mid-

1980s. The upper end of this range is not much less than the median value of 37 percent during

the option boom of the late 1990s, suggesting that options have been an important component of

executive pay since mid-century.15

        Because the value of an option award relative to the total pay of those executives being

granted options has not risen greatly over time, the increasing importance of stock options

relative to median total compensation is largely due to an upward trend in the frequency of

grants. The use of employee stock options was almost negligible during the 1930s and 1940s. In

1950, tax reform legislation introduced the restricted stock option, a special type of option that

was taxed as a capital gain instead of as labor income. Consequently, executives paid a marginal

13
   The 1950s were not the first period when incentive compensation mechanisms were a part of managerial pay.
Historical accounts suggest that both current and deferred forms of incentive compensation were almost negligible
prior to WWI but became commonly used during the 1920s (Taussig and Barker 1925, Baker and Crum 1935, Baker
1938, Roberts 1959). With the onset of the Depression and large declines in firm profits, many bonus plans were
abandoned or suspended (Baker 1938).
14
   The deferral period was generally around 5 years, although individual plans varied from 2 to 10 years.
15
   The popular press also highlighted the significance of options as a form of executive remuneration during this
earlier period, with headlines such as “Option Opulence” (Wall Street Journal, Feb. 1 1955) and “Stock Options
Popular” (New York Times, Mar. 26, 1958).



                                                       9
tax rate on these options of only 25 percent instead of the 70 to 90 percent marginal rate they

faced on labor income. More than 40 percent of the firms in our sample instituted a restricted

stock option plan in the 5 years following this reform, suggesting that this tax policy had a

significant impact on executive pay.

         Despite the proliferation of restricted stock option plans during this period, the awards

made under these plans were sporadic at first. Throughout the 1950s, only about 16 percent of

the executives in our sample were awarded an option in any given year. The frequency of stock

option grants has increased steadily since then.                By the 1990s, the fraction of executives

receiving an option had reached 82 percent (see Figure 3).

         Prior research on executive pay has found more infrequent option use during the 1970s

and the early 1980s than we find in our sample (Hall and Liebman 1998, Jensen and Murphy

2004, and Murphy 1999).16 The difference between our results and prior research can be partly

explained by firm size. Our sample is more heavily weighted towards large firms than other

samples, and large firms tend to grant options more frequently. However, several measurement

issues are also important in explaining these discrepancies. First, prior work on option use in the

1970s has relied on data on the gains from exercising options rather than direct evidence on

option grants. In our data, the probability of being granted an option during the 1970s was 16

percentage points higher than the probability of exercising an option, possibly due to poor stock

market performance during this period.17 The high frequency of stock option grants in our

sample is also related to the treatment of multi-year reporting of options. Many proxy statements



16
   There is little evidence in prior research on the use of employee stock options prior to the 1970s. Lewellen (1968)
provides a notable exception for the period 1940 to 1963. Although he claims that stock options were a much more
important share of executive pay than our data suggest, his method of valuing options is substantially different from
ours and is likely biased upward. See Section 3.2 of the Appendix for details.
17
   The downturn in the market made the repricing of options a common practice during the 1970s. We exclude
repriced options from our estimates of grants whenever it is possible to identify them.


                                                         10
issued from the late 1960s to the late 1980s reported option grants and exercises as 3- or 5-year

cumulative totals, making it difficult to ascertain the actual number granted or exercised in each

year. While our treatment of multi-year reporting biases the frequency of grants upwards, the

average and median values of options granted are unbiased. See Sections 2.2 and 3.2 of the

Appendix for further details.



3.3 Other forms of compensation

Our analysis does not include information on two other components of pay: pensions and

perquisites. Although proxy statements provide descriptions of pension plans, we are unable to

estimate the value of these benefits because many plans were based on an age-tenure profile of

the managers and we lack this information on most of the managers in our sample. We exclude

perquisites because firms were not required to report any information on this type of pay until the

late 1970s.18

        The omission of pensions and perks may bias our estimate of the trend in total

compensation because they are not subject to personal income taxes at the time they are awarded,

so these methods of pay may have been more common in the 1950s and 1960s when tax rates

were particularly high.        Thus, the growth rate in total pay (including both observed and

unobserved forms of compensation) may have been faster during these earlier decades than in

later years when the tax advantage of pensions, perks, and other non-taxable benefits was

smaller.



18
  Regulation introduced in 1978 required firms to disclose the total amount of remuneration distributed or accrued
in the form of securities or property, insurance benefits or reimbursement, and personal benefits. Perquisites and
other personal benefits (above a minimum threshold) have been separately reported since 1993. However, the
accuracy of data on perks is limited, and so most research has focused on whether a certain perk was offered rather
than on its actual value (Rajan and Wulf 2006, Yermack 2006)


                                                        11
       On the other hand, evidence from Lewellen (1968) suggests that pensions cannot account

for the low rate of growth in executive compensation observed during the 1950s and 1960s. He

reports that the after-tax value of retirement benefits was 15 percent of after-tax total pay from

1950 to 1963. Because pensions were taxed at a lower rate than cash compensation, the pre-tax

value of pensions relative to total pay was even lower than 15 percent. By contrast, Sundaram

and Yermack (2006) find increases in the actuarial value of pensions to be about 10 percent of

total CEO pay from 1996 to 2002, and Bebchuk and Jackson (2005) report a ratio of executives’

retirement benefits to total pay received during their entire service as CEO of about 34 percent in

2004. Thus, pensions do not appear to have been a larger fraction of total compensation in the

1950s or 1960s than they are today.

       Furthermore, the following back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that the combined

value of pensions, perquisites and other untaxed benefits would need to have been implausibly

large to explain the low growth rate of pay during the 1950s and 1960s. For the observable types

of compensation in our dataset, median pay increased from $0.74 million in 1950 to $0.82

million in 1970, an annual average growth rate of 0.5 percent. By contrast, median pay increased

by a factor of 4.4 from 1980 to 2000. If we assume that the value of unobserved forms of pay

was zero in 1950, these unobserved benefits would need to have amounted to $2.4 million in

1970 in order to achieve a rate of increase in total compensation similar to the 1980 to 2000

period ($0.74*4.4-$0.82=$2.4 million). This amount is almost three times higher than the

median level of salaries, bonuses and stock options at that time and strikes us as implausibly

large. Moreover, this number underestimates the necessary value of non-taxable benefits in 1970

if the actual level of unobserved benefits was greater than zero in 1950. Thus, while pensions

and perks may partly explain the slow growth rate of pay documented during the 1950s and




                                                12
1960s, it is doubtful that including these benefits would alter our finding of a much lower rate of

increase in total pay during this period relative to later decades.



3.4 Differences among executives

Table 3 shows total compensation at the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th percentiles of our sample.

The general pattern over time is similar across all groups, with relatively slow growth from the

1950s to the 1970s followed by large increases in the past 25 years. In contrast, the decline in

real pay that occurred during the 1940s was experienced only by executives at the higher end of

the distribution. Thus, this sharp contraction in the income distribution of executives suggests

that the “Great Compression” (Goldin and Margo 1992) occurred even among some of the

highest-paid individuals in the nation.

       Increases in compensation during the last 20 years of our sample were more pronounced

for higher-paid executives. Whereas the ratio of pay at the 90th to the 50th percentile fluctuated

between 1.8 and 2.4 from 1936 to 1986, by 2005 this gap had risen to more than 3.5. This

widening inequality among managers is also reflected in the average level of executive pay (see

Table 3), which is more influenced by large outliers than the median. The difference between

mean and median compensation was relatively small and stable prior to the 1980s, but grew

substantially since then. In the 2000-2005 period, the average executive in our sample earned

nearly twice the remuneration of the median officer.

       The fanning out of the distribution in executive pay has coincided with an increase in the

return to holding the title of “CEO.” The median ratio of a CEO’s total compensation relative to

the average pay of the other two highest-paid officers in his firm was 2.6 in the 2000-2005

period, a marked increase from the relatively steady ratio of 1.4 that prevailed prior to 1980 (see




                                                  13
Table 3).19     Nevertheless, increases in level of pay for non-CEOs were also substantial.

Therefore, the patterns documented in this paper are not specific to CEOs, but characterize the

remuneration of top management more generally.



3.5 Representativeness of the sample

Although the trends in pay are roughly similar for all of the executives in our sample, it is not

clear how well they reflect more general patterns in the compensation of top officers in the

economy. For one reason, the individuals in our sample were employed mainly in the largest

publicly-traded firms, where pay tends to be higher (Roberts 1956, Kostiuk 1990, Rosen 1992).

Thus, our data do not necessarily reflect remuneration practices in smaller firms. An added

consideration is how to interpret our data at points in time that are not close to 1940, 1960, or

1990—the years in which the firms in our sample were selected to be among the largest in the

economy.      We evaluate the representativeness of our sample in Appendix Section 3, and

highlight the main results of that analysis here.

        A simple graph of median pay in firms of different sizes shows that the trends in total pay

are similar in both the larger and smaller firms in our sample (see Figure 4). Managers of larger

firms were paid more, but compensation increased markedly in all firm-size categories during the

last 25 years. Similarly, compensation stagnated from 1950 to 1980 in firms of all sizes in our

sample. In Appendix Section 3.1 we evaluate the representativeness of salaries and bonuses in

our sample from 1970 to 2005 by comparing them to pay in similar-sized firms from other larger

datasets. Our data are similar to the other samples for firms that are among the largest 300 in the

economy, suggesting that salaries and bonuses in our sample are representative of this group.


19
  We identify the CEO as the president of the company in firms where the title “CEO” is not used (see footnote 8).
Results are similar if the chairman of the board is used instead.


                                                       14
We also evaluate the representativeness of our data over our entire sample period by assigning a

weight to each firm that is inversely proportional to its probability of being selected among the

500 largest publicly-held firms in each year. The unweighted median level of pay in our entire

sample closely matches the weighted median of the largest 300 firms in the economy.

       In addition to offering a higher level of pay, large firms may also structure the

compensation package differently. Somewhat surprisingly, we do not find a strong correlation

between firm size and the share of stock options in total pay. Hall and Liebman (1998) find a

stronger positive relationship between option use and firm size in a sample that is more

representative of publicly-traded firms in the S&P 500 from 1980 to 1994. We attribute this

discrepancy to the fact that the smaller firms in our sample are only included if they were large

earlier on, if they will grow larger later in the sample, or if they are experiencing a temporary

negative shock. Therefore, the structure of pay in these firms may not be representative of the

typical small firm in the economy. In Appendix Section 3.3, we use the relationship between

option grants and firm size in the Hall-Liebman data to correct the level of total pay for the firms

in our sample. This exercise has little effect on the median level of total compensation in our

data and does not alter our conclusions about the long-run evolution of executive pay.



3.6 Interpreting the trends in the level of pay

It is doubtful that any single factor can explain the long-run trends in executive compensation,

and an analysis of all of the potential determinants of pay is beyond the scope of this paper.

Nevertheless, a long-run perspective adds new evidence against which to examine some of the

proposed explanations for the recent growth in compensation. We discuss some of these theories

below and investigate two in greater detail in the remaining sections of the paper.




                                                  15
        Outsized increases in the level of total pay and stock option grants in recent decades have

often been related to managers’ ability to extract rents (Bebchuk and Fried 2004). However, the

long-run trends in pay seem inconsistent with this theory because both external and internal

corporate governance mechanisms were most likely weaker earlier in the century (Jensen 1993,

Holmstrom 2005). Among the firms in our sample, the median fraction of the board of directors

occupied by officers of the firm fell from 0.42 in 1950 to 0.18 in 1990.20 More generally, proxy

fights and takeovers were rare prior to the 1980s (Holmstrom and Kaplan 2001), boards of

directors have become smaller and more independent since mid-century (Lehn, Patro, and Zaho

2003), and both the ownership of institutional shareholders and shareholder activism have

increased since the 1950s (Khurana 2002, Gillian and Starks 2007). These aspects of corporate

governance are not comprehensive, nor do they rule out a positive effect of poor corporate

governance on compensation, but nevertheless they suggest that the ability of executives to set

their own pay may have diminished over time.21 On the other hand, improvements in board

diligence over time may actually have contributed to the upward trend in executive pay

(Hermalin 2005).

        A second proposed explanation for recent increases in executive pay is related to

managerial talent and the labor market for executives. Theories of the span of control (Lucas

1978, Rosen 1982, Rosen 1992), superstars (Rosen 1981), and competitive assignment of CEOs

to heterogeneous firms (Tervio 2007, Gabaix and Landier 2008) predict a positive correlation in

the cross-section between firm size and compensation. In fact, a vast number of studies have

documented that CEO pay tends to be 0.3 percent higher in firms that are 1 percent larger (Rosen

20
   Board membership was constructed by matching the names of the executives in our data to a list of the board
directors from Moody’s Manual of Investments. Thus, the fraction of insiders in the board is probably
underestimated since we lack information on grey directors.
21
   For example, Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) find that executives in corporations with weak corporate
governance are remunerated for lucky outcomes.


                                                     16
1992). Moreover, extensions of these models propose that the variation in compensation over

time is related to aggregate firm size (Gabaix and Landier 2008). This framework seems

promising because recent decades have experienced large increases in both the level of pay and

the value of publicly-traded firms (Hall and Murphy 2003, Bebchuk and Grinstein 2005, Gabaix

and Landier 2008). However, the long-run trends are inconsistent with this hypothesis, as the

relationship between compensation and the market value of firms has not always been as strong

as it was in the past 25 years. Aggregate market capitalization (measured by the S&P 500 index)

increased considerably during the 1950s and 1960s, but the level of pay experienced little change

(see Figure 5).22 In Section 4 we present further evidence on the link between executive

compensation and firm size in order to better assess the role that this connection may have in

explaining the long-run evolution of managerial pay.

         A third proposal relates the upward trend in compensation to the rising use of incentive

pay since the 1980s, as higher remuneration may be necessary to compensate executives for a

riskier stream of income. Among other problems, this hypothesis has been difficult to assess

because consistent estimates of the correlation between pay and performance are only available

since to the 1980s, a period of simultaneous increases in the level of pay and in pay-to-

performance. We return to this issue in Section 5 by calculating consistent measures of pay-to-

performance that span the past 70 years.



     4. The relationship between the level of executive pay and firm size
4.1 Decomposition of the correlation between total compensation and firm size



22
  Prior studies of executive pay relied on the gains from exercising options to value options prior to 1980, but these
values are mechanically correlated with the market value of firms. Because we calculate the value of stock options
granted using the Black-Scholes formula for the entire sample, our measures of total pay are not subject to this
concern.


                                                         17
To better understand the relationship between firm size and the level of pay, Table 4 fully

decomposes this correlation into three main components:                          average firm size in each year

(reflecting the size of a typical firm in the market), average size of each firm across all years

(reflecting firm-specific factors), and the difference of firm size in each year from these year-

specific and firm-specific averages (reflecting transitory changes in firm size that are unrelated to

market fluctuations).         We estimate the correlation between each of these factors and the

compensation of each executive in our sample from the following OLS regression:

     Ln(Compensationijt ) = β 0 + β1 Ln( St ) + β 2 Ln( S j ) + β 3 ⎡⎣ Ln( S jt ) − Ln( St ) − Ln( S j ) ⎤⎦ + ε ijt [1]


where Sjt is firm j’s size in year t, St is the average size across all firms in our sample in year t,

and S j is the average size of firm j across all years. We measure firm size using the firm’s

market value and break the sample into two periods in order to examine how these correlations

have changed over time.23

         Firm-specific and idiosyncratic components of firm size had a positive and significant

effect on compensation over the entire sample period (the coefficients were both around 0.2 to

0.3, and did not vary noticeably across periods). However, the role of aggregate market value

has changed markedly over time. During the second half of our sample, the relationship between

executive pay and the average market value of firms was roughly 1-for-1 (col. 3).24 However,

we estimate a much smaller coefficient of 0.1 in the first 40 years of our sample (col. 1). This




23
   We use the average across firms to represent aggregate market size because it fits easily into a variance
decomposition framework. However, our results are robust to using other proxies for aggregate market size
including the median market value in our sample, average and median market value in the largest 500 publicly-
traded firms, and the S&P index.
24
   These results are in line with the effects reported by Gabaix and Landier (2008), who use a much larger sample of
firms from ExecuComp from 1992 to 2004.


                                                            18
result cannot be explained by unusual factors related to the Depression or World War II, as we

find a similarly small coefficient for the period 1946 to 1975 (col. 2).25

         The bracketed values in Table 4 report the fraction of the variance in compensation that

can be accounted for by each of the independent variables.26 The firm-specific component of

size explains between 13 and 17 percent of this variation in both periods, while idiosyncratic

shocks to firm size account for another three to four percent. By contrast, the importance of

aggregate firm size has changed substantially over time: it explains between 25 to 30 percent of

the variation in pay from 1976 to 2005, but only two percent in the first half of our sample. The

second panel of the table replaces the average size of each firm with a firm fixed effect,

providing a more flexible way to control for firm-specific factors. The estimated coefficients on

the other two variables are unchanged. Thus, the cross-sectional relationship between firm size

and executive pay has remained relatively stable over the past 70 years, while upward and

downward shifts in the distribution of firm size have only affected the level of compensation

more recently.27



4.2 Potential explanations for the changing role of aggregate market size

These preliminary results suggest that the dynamics of compensation arrangements have changed

over time. One reason for this change could be that the level of pay is currently tied to

contemporaneous fluctuations in firm size, whereas it was more responsive to lagged firm size in

25
   These results also cannot be explained by an asymmetric response of pay to increases and decreases in firm size.
When we interact average market size with a dummy variable indicating years of decline in aggregate market size,
the estimated coefficient on the interaction term is zero in both sample periods and the coefficients on average firm
size are unchanged.
26
   These results are based on an ANOVA decomposition for each sample period. The fraction of the variance
explained by each independent variable is the sum of squared residuals explained by that variable relative to the total
sum of squared residuals of ln(compensation).
27
   In Appendix Table A7, we show that the strong correlation between compensation and aggregate firm size was
limited to the 1980s and 1990s. For all other decades in our sample, average market value accounts for less than 1
percent of the variation in executive pay.


                                                         19
the past. For example, this difference in timing would result from switching from accounting-

based to market-based measures of firm performance when determining incentive pay.

However, panel 3 of Table 4 shows little support for this conjecture. Although the average

market value in the previous year had a larger effect on compensation than the current value

during the earlier sample period, the sum of these two coefficients is still considerably smaller

than the corresponding sum in recent years.

         Alternatively, our estimated coefficients in the earlier period may be biased downwards if

firms responded to the high personal income tax rates during this period by increasing

components of pay that we do not observe, such as pensions and perks. However, an exercise

similar to our back-of-the envelope calculation in Section 3.3 suggests that it is unlikely that

these components alone can explain the significant change in the correlation between aggregate

market size and the level of pay.28 If the growth rate of total compensation has a one-to-one

correlation with aggregate firm size (as we find for the recent period), the level of compensation

should have increased by a factor of 3.3 from 1950 to 1968. In this case, unobserved forms of

pay would need to have amounted to $1.6 million by 1968, an improbably high level of perks

and other benefits.

         A third potential explanation is that the relevant measure of firm size has changed over

time. However, our results are robust to using the value of sales instead of market value (see

cols. 3 and 4 of Table 4).29 Although the coefficients are two to three times larger for aggregate

sales than aggregate market capitalization, the distribution of sales is far more dispersed (as

indicated by the standard errors) and the fraction of the variance of compensation explained by

28
   To further study the implications of tax policy for the correlation of the level of pay and firm size, we have also
analyzed the relationship between after-tax compensation and size. While the after-tax correlation of pay with
average market size is stronger for the 1945-1975 period than the correlation with pre-tax compensation, it is still
markedly weaker than the relationship between pay and firm size in later decades.
29
   We could also consider firm earnings as a size proxy, but we lack data on this variable prior to the 1950s.


                                                         20
each of these variables is about the same. Thus, using the value of sales as an alternative

measure of firm size still suggests that the importance of the aggregate market was much smaller

earlier in the century.

         It is tempting to conclude that aggregate firm size has become a key determinant of

executive pay during the past 30 years. However, these coefficients are only correlations and

may be biased by spurious upward trends in firm size and the level of compensation. Indeed,

adding a quadratic time trend to the regression reduces the coefficient on average market value a

bit (panel 4 of Table 4). Moreover, tests for non-stationarity cannot reject the null hypothesis

that there is a unit root in the residuals of equation 1 in either period.30 To address this concern,

we estimate the relationship between changes in compensation and changes in firm size (panel 5

of Table 4). The estimated effects of both the average size of the market and the idiosyncratic

component of firm size are notably smaller in this specification, and they both explain a much

smaller fraction of the variance in changes in pay than the corresponding specification in

levels.31 Thus, the seemingly-strong correlation between average firm size and the level of pay

of the past several decades may be driven by spurious correlation between the two variables.

         In sum, a firm’s relative position in the distribution of firm size has accounted for about

20 percent of the variation in the level of compensation for our entire sample period. By

contrast, aggregate market size has become more strongly correlated with the level of executive

pay since the 1970s, although this relationship may be spurious.


30
   Using Pesaran's (2007) panel unit root test, the null hypothesis of non-stationarity in the residuals of the second
period has a p-value of 0.59. Therefore the presence of a unit root in the residuals cannot be ruled out. The p-value
for the residuals in the early period is 0.01, suggesting that there is less likely to be a trend in the residuals in the first
half of the sample.
31
   Evidence from both Hall and Liebman’s 1980-1994 and ExecuComp’s 1992-2005 datasets confirms this result.
Using the Hall-Liebman data, we find an elasticity of CEO pay with respect to average market value of 0.85 and the
elasticity with respect to the idiosyncratic component of firm size of 0.32. The coefficients are -0.10 and 0.28
respectively for the specification in changes. Using all of the executives in ExecuComp, we find that the effect of
average market value falls by half when the regression is estimated in changes instead of in levels.


                                                             21
5. The evolution of pay-performance sensitivities over time
Sparked by the rise in stock option use and a concurrent surge in the level of executive pay, a

marked increase in the correlation between managerial wealth and firm performance during the

past 20 years has brought agency problems to the forefront of research in executive

compensation (Murphy 1985, Jensen and Murphy 1990, Gibbons and Murphy 1990, Aggarwall

and Samwick 1999, Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001, Bebchuk and Fried 2004). Although the

recent surge in attention may lead to an impression that the conflict between managers and

shareholders was not important in earlier times, this topic has been a concern ever since the

separation of corporate ownership from corporate control in the early twentieth century (Baker

and Crum 1935, Berle and Means 1932, Chandler 1977). However, a scarcity of data from

earlier time periods has limited empirical studies of the long-run evolution of managerial

incentives.32 The availability of detailed information is particularly important for the case of

options, because changes in the value of stock option holdings account for a considerable portion

of the increase in pay-to-performance during recent decades (Hall and Liebman 1998). Studies

of option use prior to the 1970s used different methods to value options, and most estimates of

managerial incentives did not include stock option revaluations. Because our dataset allows us

to construct the portfolio holdings of stock and stock options for each executive, we are able to

calculate consistent estimates of the sensitivity of managerial wealth to firm performance over

the longer run.



5.1 Defining the appropriate measure of executive pay


32
  We are only aware of one study that measures pay-to-performance using a long-term series. Boschen and Smith
(1995) provide estimates from 1948 to 1990, but their sample may not show the entire picture because it is based on
only 16 firms and does not include executives’ holdings of stock and stock options.


                                                        22
Managerial decisions are influenced not only by the remuneration awarded in a given year but

also by any other change in wealth that is tied to the performance of the firm (Jensen and

Murphy 1990, Hall and Liebman 1998). Since the value of equity and stock options in the firm

depends on firm value, a comprehensive analysis of pay-to-performance should include

revaluations of an executive’s stock and stock option holdings.33

         By depicting the long-run evolution of option awards and holdings, Figure 3 shows that

stock options were already a major component of wealth by the 1960s. Although the fraction of

executives receiving stock options prior to the 1980s was relatively modest, the fraction of

individuals holding options was large. For example, 28 percent of the executives were granted

an option in any given year in the 1960s, but more than 64 percent held options during this

period. This difference arises because options had a long duration and vested slowly over time.

Options are now a regular part of the compensation package, so almost all executives receive and

hold options in a given year.

         Equity holdings of top executives have declined over the century relative to the firm’s

total number of shares outstanding, with a more pronounced contraction among individuals who

hold a larger fraction of the firm (see Table 5).34 By 2005, median fractional stock holdings

were about one third of their pre-war level.35




33
   Even though we consider a broader measure of changes in wealth than executive pay, we keep in line with the
literature by referring to this correlation as pay-to-performance.
34
   We collect information on equity holdings after 1942 from proxy statements. From 1935 to 1941, we construct
stock holdings from an initial SEC report on holdings in 1935 and bi-monthly reports on the equity transactions of
each officer The use of transactions data introduces noise in our measure of stock holdings, but we do not find
evidence of a large bias. See the Appendix Section 2.4 for further details.
35
   These results differ from Holderness, Kroszner and Sheehan (1999), who find higher stock ownership in 1995
than in 1935. There are two main explanations for this discrepancy. First, the increase in fractional holdings does
not occur among the largest publicly-held firms in their sample, which are more comparable to our sample of firms.
In addition, they focus on the holdings of all top officers and directors. When they restrict the sample to the top of
the hierarchy, they find a similar decline in ownership: the holdings of the median CEO in their sample fell from
0.09 percent of shares outstanding in 1935 to 0.06 percent in 1995.


                                                         23
         Table 6 compares the level of total compensation to changes in an executive’s wealth

brought about by revaluations of his stock and option holdings.36                             We calculate these

revaluations based on the number of shares held at the end of the previous year and firm’s stock

market return during the fiscal year (adjusted for stock splits and dividends). The dollar value of

these changes in wealth increased in the past 25 years as the number of shares held by corporate

officers rose. For most of the post-war period, the median change in wealth—including all forms

of remuneration and revaluations of stock and option holdings—was 12 to 45 percent higher than

the median level of total compensation. Revaluations of stock and option holdings were larger in

the 1990s, as they amounted to 68 percent of total pay.



5.2 Defining measures of pay-to-performance

The empirical literature on executive compensation has used a wide range of specifications to

measure the correlation between pay and firm performance.37 Two common alternatives are the

dollar change in executive wealth per dollar change in firm value (or the Jensen-Murphy

statistic), and the dollar amount of wealth that an executive has at risk for a one percent change

in the firm’s value (or the value of equity at stake). The Jensen-Murphy statistic and the value of

equity at stake are each an appropriate measure of incentives for a specific type of managerial

decision.38 In a simple agency model that allows the marginal product of managerial effort to

vary with the value (or size) of the firm, the optimal level of effort (or strength of managerial

36
   A limitation of our data is the lack of information on forms of wealth and earnings that are not related to
compensation, such as dividends, capital gains, and non-firm related wealth. Unless otherwise specified, we use the
term “wealth” throughout the paper to refer to firm-related wealth.
37
   For a discussion of the statistics, see Jensen and Murphy (1990), Joskow and Rose (1994), Garen (1994), Hall and
Liebman (1998), Murphy (1999), Aggarwall and Samwick (1999), and Baker and Hall (2004).
38
   Both these statistics give an empirical measure of the correlation between pay and firm performance. While a
higher pay-to-performance correlation will likely influence managerial actions, it is not clear that this correlation is
caused by firms’ desire to provide incentives. Pay-to-performance correlations can also be the result of a bargaining
or fairness model (Blanchflower, Oswald, and Sanfey 1996, Benjamin 2005). Although we cast our findings as
incentives, we want to stress that we are only calculating a correlation.


                                                          24
incentives) depends on the type of CEO activity being considered (Baker and Hall 2004). The

Jensen-Murphy statistic is the correct measure of incentives for activities whose dollar impact is

the same regardless of the size of the firm, like buying a corporate jet, and the value of equity at

stake is appropriate for actions whose value scales with firm size, like restructuring the firm.

         Studies that focus solely on compensation and ignore revaluations of equity and option

holdings often report a third measure of incentives: the percentage change in compensation for a

1 percent change in firm value (the elasticity of compensation). An analogous measure that

includes revaluations of wealth would be the elasticity of wealth to firm performance (i.e. the

percentage change in wealth for a percentage change in firm value). A log-log functional form

for incentives can be obtained theoretically as the optimal contract if utility is CRRA

(Himmelberg and Hubbard 2000) or from a model that embeds incentive pay in a competitive

labor market (Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier 2007).39 However, calculating this measure is

problematic because we do not observe the level of an executive’s total wealth but only firm-

related wealth.        If non-firm-related assets trended upward or downward over the century,

ignoring these forms of wealth would lead to a systematic bias in our estimates of the level of

total wealth, and consequently a bias in estimates of the percent change in wealth. Therefore, we

focus on the Jensen-Murphy statistic and the value of equity at stake, but we return to this issue

in Section 5.5 by calculating the elasticity of changes in wealth to firm performance.40



5.3 Estimating pay-to-performance correlations




39
   An additional benefit to calculating the elasticity is that it is not sensitive to changes in firm size, as are the other
two measures we consider.
40
   This concern is less important for the other two measures of pay-to-performance because the correlation between
changes in non-firm related wealth and firm performance is less likely to have changed over time.


                                                            25
The value of equity at stake is the dollar value of wealth that an executive has at risk for a one
                                                            )
percent change in firm value. We estimate this statistic as β tES from the following regression:

                                     Δ( Exec. Wealth)ijt = α tES + βtES rjt + ε ijt                               [2]

where the firm’s j (real) rate of return during fiscal year t, r jt , measures the percentage change in

firm market value.41 To assess how βtES has changed over time, we estimate the regression

separately for the periods 1937-40, 1941-1949 (excluding 1946), 1950-59, 1960-69, 1970-1979,

1980-1989 and 1990-1999, and 2000-2005.42 The dependent variable is the change in the real

value of all types of an executive’s firm-related wealth, calculated as the sum of total

compensation (salaries, bonuses, long-term incentive pay and stock option grants), changes in

the value of stock option holdings, and changes in the value of firm stock holdings.

         We use a similar regression to estimate the Jensen-Murphy statistic, where the firm’s rate

of return is replaced by the dollar change in the market value of the firm:

                Δ( Exec. Wealth)ijt = αtJM + βtJM Δ(Shareholder Value) jt + ε ijt                                 [3]

where we measure the dollar change in shareholder value as r jtV j ,t −1 , firm’s j rate of return

during fiscal year t multiplied by firm’s j market value in the previous year.

         Because the distributions of compensation and wealth are highly skewed, OLS

regressions will not provide an accurate picture of the pay-to-performance sensitivity facing the




41
   We ignore issues of repurchases of shares during the fiscal year, and use the rate of return to approximate the
percentage change in firm value.
42
   The distribution of rates of return in our sample of firms is unusually low and highly skewed in 1946, possibly due
to the end of war contracts. Therefore, we exclude this year from all regressions. When this year is included, the
Jensen-Murphy statistic estimated over the 1944-1948 period falls from $0.44 to $0.24, and the value of equity at
stake goes from $8,664 to $7,822. Therefore, our finding of an unusually low pay-to-performance correlation in the
1940s would only be strengthened by including 1946.


                                                         26
typical executive in our sample.43 Therefore, we estimate equations [2] and [3] using a quantile

regression to fit the conditional medians of the data.44 Table 7 reports coefficient estimates and

standard errors for the Jensen-Murphy statistic and the value of equity at stake.45 With the

exception of the first and last decades of the sample, the magnitude of the standard errors

suggests that the coefficients are significantly different from one another.46 In accordance with

prior research, both measures show a large increase in pay-to-performance during the 1980s and

1990s (Hall and Liebman 1998, Murphy 1999).47 However, a historical perspective reveals a

more nuanced picture. The value of equity at stake trended upward over time, while the Jensen-

Murphy statistic followed a U-shaped pattern over the century.48

         The correlation between pay and performance has been mainly driven by stock and stock

option revaluations (see Table 8). Prior to the 1970s, equity holdings were the primary factor

linking executive wealth to firm performance. Pay-to-performance has strengthened over time

with the increase in the number of options held by executives, and options have become the most

important type of wealth tying pay to performance in recent decades. However, the role of

equity holdings is still significant, and their correlation with firm performance has also increased

in recent decades.

43
   For example, Aggarwall and Samwick (1999) find that OLS estimates of pay-performance sensitivities are
between 2 to 7 times larger than those obtained from median regression.
44
   Alternatively, we computed a robust regression that uses Huber and biweight iterations to down-weight large
outliers (the rreg command in Stata), and estimated an OLS regression after trimming the highest and lowest
percentiles from the distribution of changes in wealth. These methods yielded similar results.
45
   Standard errors are bootstrapped, and account for correlation of observations within the firm.
46
   The estimates for the 1930s do not appear to be significantly different from the 1940s, and the 2000s may not be
different from the 1990s. The larger standard errors in these decades may be due to smaller sample sizes in these
periods. Extreme heteroskedasticity prevents estimation of the entire sample in one regression to directly test the
significance of the changes in the coefficients over time.
47
   Our estimates of the value of equity at stake are consistent with those reported by Hall and Liebman (1998), but
the Jensen-Murphy statistic is smaller. This discrepancy is partly due to larger firm size in our sample. Limiting our
data to CEOs between 1993 and 1995, we obtain an estimate of $1.11 for a $1000 increase in firm value in firms
among the top 100 of the S&P 500, $2.62 in firms ranked from 100 to 200, and $3.37 for the smallest firms in our
sample. Hall and Liebman report a sensitivity of $5.29 for 1994, which is based on a random sample of about 500
of the largest firms between 1980 and 1994.
48
   The trends in pay-to-performance are similar for both CEOs and other top executives.


                                                         27
5.4 Accounting for changes in the size of firms over time

The divergence between these two measures of pay-to-performance prior to the 1970s is partly

due to growth in the size of firms. While the Jensen-Murphy statistic tends to be negatively

correlated with firm size, the value of equity at stake is higher for larger firms.49 Because the

average market value of the firms in our sample increased by a factor of 3.5 from 1936 to 1970,

it is not surprising that the value of equity at stake increased while the Jensen-Murphy statistic

declined over this period. On the other hand, both measures rose from the 1970s to the 2000s

despite another 3.5-fold increase in firm size. Thus, the growth in pay-to-performance during the

past 30 years was strong enough to offset the natural downward trajectory of the Jensen-Murphy

statistic as firms became larger.

        To correct the long-run trends in pay-to-performance for the secular increase in firm size,

we develop a regression-based method that relies on estimating pay-to-performance correlations

for firms in specific size categories in each decade, and then comparing estimates for a given

firm size from one decade to the next (see Appendix Section 4 for details). Since our firm-size

adjustments are formed by comparing pay-to-performance correlations in subsequent decades,

they do not provide size-adjusted estimates of the level of these correlations but only estimates of

how these correlations would have changed over time if firm size had remained the same.

Therefore, we index both the Jensen-Murphy statistic and the value of equity at stake to equal

one in the 1930s and use average size-adjusted growth rates in pay-to-performance to obtain a

new index value in each successive decade (see Figure 6). For comparison, the dashed lines in

Figure 6 show indexes based on growth in the unadjusted statistics.

49
   Executives’ wealth constraints and risk aversion are plausible explanations for the well-known negative
correlation between the Jensen-Murphy statistic and firm size (Demsetz and Lehn 1985, Schaefer 1998). See Baker
and Hall (1998) for further discussion of the value of equity at stake.


                                                      28
          Adjusted for firm size, pay-to-performance followed a W-shaped pattern from the 1930s

to the 1980s: its magnitude was about the same in the 1930s, the 1950s, the 1960s and the

1980s, and was somewhat lower in the 1940s and the 1970s. This pattern is largely driven by

changes in the correlation of equity holdings with firm performance.                           Pay-to-performance

strengthened considerably in the 1990s and 2000s, mostly due to a rising contribution from stock

option wealth. Thus, even after accounting for changes in firm size, the pay-to-performance

correlation was higher in the last 15 years of our sample than in any previous period.50

          The unusually low correlations in the 1940s and 1970s are not easy to explain. Although

the correlation in the 1940 to 1945 period may have been held down by war-related

compensation practices, we find low pay-to-performance for the 1946 to 1949 period as well.

Thus, the war could only explain this lower correlation if its effects persisted for the entire

decade. Alternatively, the decline in incentives in the 1940s and 1970s might be driven by a

prevalence of negative economic shocks if executives’ wealth responds more strongly to

improvements than to deterioration in firm performance. However, this explanation is also

unlikely because we obtain the same W-shaped pattern when estimating pay-to-performance

with only positive changes in firm outcomes.51



5.5 Quantifying the size of the pay-to-performance correlation

In the standard principal-agent model, the optimal degree of managerial incentives is based on a

number of unobservable factors such as the agents’ risk aversion and the cost of managerial

effort.    Therefore, there is no theoretical benchmark of the “optimal” degree of pay-to-

50
   The small sample size for the 2000-2005 period makes it difficult to tell whether this increase reflects a transitory
spike in pay-to-performance or whether it will be long lasting.
51
   Jensen and Murphy (1990) interpret the low degree of pay-to-performance in the 1970s relative to the late 1930s
as the result of political constraints following the increase in pay disclosure in 1942. The significantly higher
correlations that we find in the 1950s and 1960s suggest that this was not the case.


                                                          29
performance against which to contrast our results (Haubrich 1994). Nevertheless, we gauge the

strength of incentives by calculating an executive’s monetary return for a meaningful

improvement in firm performance. Following Hall and Liebman (1998), we define a meaningful

(but modest) improvement in firm performance as a movement from the median rate of return to

the 70th percentile rate of return.

        To estimate the wealth at stake from this improvement, we calculate the dollar change in

each executive’s stock and option holdings if the price of the firm increased from the median rate

of return in our sample (8.4 percent) to the 70th percentile rate of return (22.7 percent).52 The

median change in wealth across executives was over $2 million in the 1990s and 2000s, but

considerably smaller in earlier decades (col. 1 of Table 9). Even though the dollar value of these

changes in wealth rose significantly over time, the upward trend is not as steep when comparing

these dollar values to a broad measure of compensation that includes salaries, bonuses, stock

option grants, and revaluations of stock and options holdings at the median rate of return (col. 2).

With the exception of the 1940s, an improvement in firm performance from the 50th to the 70th

percentile has typically led to at least a 30 percent increase in this broad measure of

compensation.53 Moreover, the executive’s return to this improvement in firm outcomes was

about 50 percent of broad compensation in the 1960s, about as high as it was in the 1990s. Thus,

the incentive for an executive to undertake actions leading to an improvement in firm

performance of this magnitude has been substantial for most of our sample period. In other

words, it appears that managerial incentives have not been “wildly inefficient” for most of the

20th century, to paraphrase Hall and Liebman.

52
   Table 8 shows that revaluations of stock and stock options account for virtually all of the relationship between
wealth and performance. Therefore, we ignore changes in compensation for this exercise.
53
   Although the median percent increases in the 1970s and in the 1980s are about the same, the pattern is U-shaped
from the early 1970s to the late 1980s. Thus, we find a steady increase in managerial incentives from the mid-1970s
to the late 1990s, a result consistent with Hall and Liebman’s 1980-1994 estimates.


                                                        30
        Finally, we divide the percent increase in compensation broadly defined (col. 2 of Table

9) by the improvement in the rate of return from the median to the 70th percentile of

performance. Because the numerator is calculated from changes in wealth as opposed the level

of wealth, this measure reflects the elasticity of changes in wealth, a concept related to the

elasticity of wealth discussed above. This elasticity was greater than 1.9 for every decade in our

sample except the 1940s, and almost as large in the 1960s as it was in the 1990s and 2000s.

Thus, this measure of pay-to-performance also suggests that managerial incentives were not

small for most of the 20th century.

        Although incentives were never inconsequential, we do find significant fluctuations in

pay-to-performance over time, as this correlation was much stronger in recent decades.54 This

result is not inconsistent with the theory that higher levels of pay have been needed to

compensate executives for optimal increases in the strength of incentives.                   However, this

explanation seems unlikely to fit the long-run trends in the level of pay because we find

meaningful increases in pay-to-performance in periods that experienced little change in

compensation.

        We cast our findings in terms of managerial incentives, but we want to stress that we

simply document changes in the correlation between executive wealth and the market value of

firms. This correlation may motivate executives to improve firm value, but it does not reveal the

intentions of shareholders. Although the evolution of pay-to-performance may reflect changes in




54
  One explanation for this regime shift in pay-performance sensitivities could be an increase in the aggregate
demand for top executives (Himmelberg and Hubbard 2000).


                                                     31
the optimal contract between managers and shareholders, it also may be an unintentional

byproduct of other factors that have altered the structure of executive pay.55



6. Conclusion

In this paper, we document important changes in the level and the structure of executive pay

from 1936 to 2005. The real value of total compensation followed a J-shaped pattern over our

sample period. After a sharp decline during World War II, the level of pay increased at a modest

rate from the mid-1940s to the mid-1970s, and then rose at an increasing rate from the 1970s to

the present. The composition of executive compensation also changed considerably since the

1950s, as both stock options and other forms of incentive pay became larger shares of total

compensation over time.

        The relative stagnation of compensation during the 1950s and 1960s is surprising because

the level of executive pay did not keep pace with the growing size of firms during this period.

By contrast, pay and firm size have been more strongly correlated in recent decades.

Decomposing the relationship between compensation and firm size into its cross-sectional and

time series components, we find that the cross-sectional relationship has remained relatively

stable over the past 70 years. On the other hand, while the level of pay moved almost one-to-one

with the average market value of firms over the past 30 years, this correlation was one-tenth to

one-third as large in the 1946-1975 period. Moreover, the strong correlation that we find in the

later period may be biased upward by spurious correlation in the market value of firms and the

level of pay.



55
  Examples of these other possible factors include changes in the corporate governance of firms (Bebchuk and Fried
2004, Bertrand and Mullainathan 2001), tax advantages of certain instruments of pay (Hall and Liebman 2000),
regulation (Rose and Wolfram 2000), and product market competition (Cuñat and Guadalupe 2006).


                                                       32
       The transformation in the structure of compensation over the past fifty years has

important implications for managerial incentives because incentive pay ties an executive’s

wealth to the performance of the firm. Using a broad measure of executive compensation that

includes salaries, bonuses, stock option grants, and revaluations of stock and stock option wealth,

we find that the pay-performance sensitivities were considerable in most decades except the

1940s and the 1970s.     Thus, compensation arrangements have served to tie the wealth of

managers to firm performance — and perhaps to align managerial incentives with shareholders’

interests — for most of the twentieth century.

       The long-run trends in executive compensation allow us to reassess several common

explanations for changes in the level and structure of pay over the past several decades. The data

prior to the 1970s are inconsistent with theories of managerial rent-seeking, a competitive labor

market for executives, and increases in managerial incentives. These explanations may still help

to explain the recent surge in compensation, but only if the determinants of executive pay were

different in the past. Plausible reasons for such a shift may involve changes in the nature of the

tasks carried out by top executives (Murphy and Zábojník 2004, Frydman 2005), or in social

norms that may have constrained inequality in earlier decades (Piketty and Saez 2003).

Alternatively, changes in managerial pay over time may have been driven by other factors, such

as the development of alternative job opportunities for executives (Kaplan and Rauh 2006),

improvements in board diligence (Hermalin 2005), and the rise in peer group benchmarking

(Murphy 1999). By providing a contrast to recent data, the long-run trends in managerial pay

present a challenge that we hope will further our understanding of the determinants of executive

compensation.




                                                 33
References


Aggarwal, Rajesh K., and Andrew A. Samwick. 1999. “The Other Side of the Trade-Off: The
 Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, No.1:
 65-105

Baker, George and Brian Hall. 2004. “CEO Incentives and Firm Size,” Journal of Labor
   Economics, Vol. 22, Issue 2: 767-798.

Baker, John Calhoun, and William L. Crum. 1935. “Compensation of Corporation Executives:
   The 1928-1932 Record.” Harvard Business Review (Spring): 321-333.

Baker, John Calhoun. 1938. Executive Salaries and Bonus Plans. New York: McGraw-Hill
   Book Company.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Jesse M. fried. 2003. “Executive Compensation as an Agency
   Problem,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, Summer.

Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Jesse M. Fried. 2004. Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled
   Promise of Executive Compensation. Cambridge: Harvard University Press

Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Robert J. Jackson.      2005. "Executive Pensions," Journal of
   Corporation Law, Vol. 30, No. 4: 823-855

Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, and Yaniv Grinstein. 2005. “The Growth of Executive Pay.” NBER
   Working Paper # 11443

Benjamin, Daniel J. 2005. “A Theory of Fairness in Labor Markets,” Harvard University
   mimeo, November

Berle, Adolf A. and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. The Modern Corporation and Private Property.
   New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. “Are CEOs Rewarded for Luck? The
   Ones Without Principals Are.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(3): 901-32.

Blanchflower, David G., Andrew Oswald and Peter Sanfey, 1996. "Wages, profits and rent
   sharing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, Issue 1: 227-251

Boschen, John F and Kimberly J. Smith. 1995. “You Can Pay Me Now and You Can Pay Me
   Later: The Dynamic Response of Executive Compensation to Firm Performance,” Journal of
   Business, Vol. 68 (4): 577-608.




                                           34
Chandler Jr., Alfred D. 1977. The Visible Hand. The Managerial Revolution in American
   Business. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press

Cuñat, Vicente and Maria Guadalupe. 2006. “Globalization and the Provision of Incentives
   Inside the Firm: The Effect of Foreign Competition,” Working Paper.

Demsetz, Harold and Kenneth Lehn. 1985. “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes
  and Consequences,” Journal of Political Economy 93: 1155-1177

Edmans, Alex, Xavier Gabaix, and Agustin Landier. 2007. “A Calibratable Model of Optimal
   CEO Incentives in Market Equilibrium,” Working Paper.

Frydman, Carola. 2005. “Rising through the Ranks: The Evolution of the Market for Corporate
   Executives, 1936-2003,” Working Paper.

Gabaix, Xavier and Agustin Landier. 2008. “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(1): 49-100.

Garen, John E. 1994. “Executive Compensation and Principal-Agent Theory,” Journal of
   Political Economy 102: 1175-1199

Gibbons, Robert, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990. “Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief
   Executive Officers”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43, No. 3

Gillan, Stuart L., and Laura T. Starks. 2007. “The Evolution of Shareholder Activism in the
    United States,” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 19: 55-73

Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo. 1992. “The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in
   the United States at Mid-Century.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February): 1-34.

Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid like Bureaucrats?”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (August): 653-691.

Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2000. “The Taxation of Executive Compensation.” In Tax
   Policy and the Economy, vol. 14, edited by James Poterba. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hall, Brian J. and Kevin J. Murphy. 2003. “The Trouble with Stock Options.” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives 17 (Summer): 49-70.

Haubrich, Joseph G. 1994. “Risk Aversion, Performance Pay, and the Principal-Agent
   Problem,” Journal of Political Economy 102: 258-276

Hermalin, Benjamin E. 2005. “Trends in Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance 60: 2351-
   2384




                                             35
Himmelberg, Charles P. and R. Glenn Hubbard. 2000. “Incentive Pay and the Market for
   CEOs: An Analysis of Pay-for-Performance Sensitivity,” Columbia University mimeo.

Holderness, Clifford G., Randall S. Kroszner and Dennis P. Sheehan. 1999. “Were the Good
   Old Days That Good? Changes in Managerial Stock Ownership Since the Great Depression,”
   Journal of Finance, Vol. 54 (2): 435-469

Holmstrom, Bengt. 2005. “Pay without Performance and the Managerial Power Hypothesis: A
   Comment,” Journal of Corporation Law, Vol. 30: 675-702

Holmstrom, Bengt, and Steven N. Kaplan. 2001. “Corporate Governance and Merger Activity
   in the U.S.: Making Sense of the 1980s and 1990s,” NBER Working Paper No. 8220

Inderst, Roman, and Holger M. Mueller. 2006. “CEO Compensation and Private Information:
   An Optimal Contracting Perspective,” Working Paper.

Jensen, Michael C. 1993. “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of Internal
   Control Systems,” Journal of Finance 48: 831-880

Jensen, Michael and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990. “Performance Pay and Top-Management
   Incentives,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(2).

Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy. 2004. “Remuneration: Where We’ve Been, How We
   Got to Here, What are the Problems, and How to Fix Them.” ECGI Working Paper Series in
   Finance 44 (July).

Joskow, Paul L. and Rose, Nancy L. 1994. "CEO Pay and Firm Performance: Dynamics,
   Asymmetries, and Alternative Performance Measures," NBER Working Paper No. W4976

Kaplan, Steven N. and Joshua Rauh. 2006. “Wall Street and Main Street: What Contributed to
   the Rise in the Highest Incomes?,” Working Paper

Kostiuk, Peter. 1990. “Firm Size and Executive Compensation,” Journal of Human Resources
   25: 90-105.

Kothari, S.P., Jay Shanken and Richard G. Sloan. 1995. “Another Look at the Cross-section of
   Expected Stock Returns.” Journal of Finance 50: 185-224.

Kuhnen, Camelia M., and Jeffrey H. Zwiebel. 2007. “Executive Pay, Hidden Compensation and
   Managerial Entrenchment,” Working Paper.

Khurana, Rakesh. 2002. Searching for a Corporate Savior.           The Irrational Quest for
   Charismatic CEOs. New Jersey: Princeton University Press

Lehn, Kenneth, Sukesh Patro, and Mengxin Zhao. 2003. “Determinants of the Size and
   Structure of Corporate Boards: 1935-2000.” Working Paper.



                                             36
Lewellen, Willbur G. 1968. Executive Compensation in Large Industrial Corporations. New
   York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lucas Jr., Robert E. 1978. “On the Size Distribution of Business Firms,” The Bell Journal of
   Economics 9, No.2: 508-523

Mace, Myles L. 1971. Directors, Myth and Reality. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Moore, Lyndon and Steve Juh. 2006. “Derivative Pricing 60 Years before Black-Scholes:
  Evidence from the Johannesburg Stock Exchange,” Journal of Finance Vol. 61 No. 6: 3069-
  3098

Murphy, Kevin J. 1985. “Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration: An Empirical
  Analysis.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 7: 11-42.

Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. “Executive Compensation.” In Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3B,
  edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card. Amsterdam, New York: North Holland.

Murphy, Kevin J. and Ján Zábojník. 2004. “CEO Pay and Turnover: A Market Based
  Explanation for Recent Trends." American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings) 94:
  192-196

Pesaran, M. Hashem. 2007. “A Simple Panel Unit Root Test in the Presence of Cross-Section
   Dependence,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 22: 265-312

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States: 1913-
   1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118: 1-39.

Rajan, Raghuram G and Julie Wulf. 2006. “Are Perks Purely Managerial Excess?,” Journal of
   Financial Economics 79: 1-33

Rose, Nancy L., and Catherine Wolfram. 2000. “Has the “Million-Dollar Cap” Affected CEO
   Pay?,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, Vol. 90 No. 2: 197-202

Roberts, David. 1956. “A General Theory of Executive Compensation Based on Statistically
   Tested Propositions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70: 270-294

Roberts, David. 1959. Executive Compensation. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.

Rosen, Sherwin. 1981. “The Economics of Superstars,” American Economic Review 71: 845-
   858

Rosen, Sherwin. 1982. “Authority, Control and the Distribution of Earnings,” Bell Journal of
   Economics 13: 311-323




                                            37
Rosen, Sherwin. 1992. “Contracts and the Market for Executives.” In Contract Economics,
   edited by Lars Werin and Hans Wijkander. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.

Schaeffer, Scott. 1998. “The Dependence of Pay-Performance Sensitivity on the Size of the
   Firm,” Review of Economics and Statistics 80: 436-443

Smith, Clifford W. Jr. and Jerold L. Zimmerman. 1976. “Valuing Employee Stock Option Plans
   Using Option Pricing Models,” Journal of Accounting Research 14: 357-364

Sundaram, Rangarajan K. and David Yermack. 2005. "Pay Me Later: Inside Debt and its Role in
   Managerial Compensation," NYU, Law and Economics Research Paper No. 05-08

Taussig, F. W. and W. S. Barker. 1925. “American Corporations and Their Executives: A
   Statistical Inquiry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 40 (November): 1-51.

Tervio, Marko. 2007. “The Difference That CEOs Make: An Assignment Model Approach,”
   Working Paper

Wattel, Harold L. 1978. Chief Executive Officer Compensation. New York: Hofstra University.

Yermack, David. 1995. “Do Corporations Award CEO Stock Options Effectively?” Journal of
   Financial Economics 39: 237-269.

Yermack, David. 2006. “Flights of Fancy: Corporate Jets, CEO Perquisites, and Inferior
   Shareholder Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics 80: 211-242




                                             38
                                           Table 1
                                  Sample Summary Statistics
                                                                          1936-2005
                Total # of person-year observations                         15883
                Total # of executives                                        2862
                Average # of firms in each year                                 76
                Average # of years each executive is observed                  5.6
                Median # of years each executive is observed                     4
                Fraction of obs. in firms with market value
                   Ranked 1-50                                                 39.0
                   Ranked 50-100                                               19.6
                   Ranked 100-200                                              19.1
                   Ranked 200-500                                              16.7
                   Ranked 500+                                                  5.4
         Note: Based on the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960
         and 1990 (a total of 101 firms). Rankings by market value are based on all firms
         appearing in the CRSP database, which includes all publicly-traded firms in the
         NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stock exchanges. Annual market value is measured at
         the end of the fiscal year.




                                             Table 2
                                    Distribution of Job Titles
                                                           Fraction of observations
                                                  Entire sample 1936-1969         1970-2005
     Chairman of the board                              21.2            15.8        25.9
     Vice-chairman                                       6.4             2.0        10.3
     President                                          28.5            31.6        25.9
     Chief executive officer                            15.3             2.3        26.8
     Chief financial officer                             1.8             0.0         3.4
     Chief operating officer                             5.0             0.2         9.1
     Executive or senior vice-president                 21.6            15.3        27.2
     Vice-president                                     15.2            27.8         4.1
     Treasurer                                           1.2             2.4         0.1
     Comptroller                                         0.6             1.3         0.1
     Other job title                                     8.7             8.4         9.0

     Director                                           84.7               91.7          78.6
Note: Based on the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and 1990 (a total
of 101 firms). Job titles were obtained from firm’s proxy statements and 10-K reports. The sum of
each column is greater than 100 percent because some officers hold multiple titles. Other categories
not listed include “secretary,” “chairman of the executive committee,” and officers of subsidiaries.
Director is the fraction of the executives in the sample that are also members of the board of directors,
as reported by the firm’s proxy statements and 10-K reports.




                                                  39
                                                     Table 3
                                 Real Value of Total Compensation by Percentile
                                               (Millions of $2000)
                                1936 -       1940 -    1946 -    1950 -      1960 - 1970 -        1980 -     1990 -    2000 -
                                1939         1945      1949      1959        1969 1979            1989       1999      2005
Three Highest-Paid Officers
   10th percentile                  0.36        0.4      0.36        0.39     0.45        0.47       0.57      0.91      1.31
   25th percentile                  0.53       0.59      0.53        0.55     0.60        0.64       0.85      1.35      2.19
   50th percentile                  0.85       0.80      0.72        0.77     0.83        0.93       1.33      2.36      4.08
   75th percentile                  1.24       1.15      1.01        1.09     1.18        1.31       2.05      4.43      9.42
   90th percentile                  1.80       1.59      1.53        1.63     1.66        1.84       3.18      8.29      16.9
   average                          0.97       0.95      0.85        0.94     0.99        1.09       1.74      4.35      7.63

Median CEO                          1.11       1.07      0.90        0.97     0.99        1.17       1.81      4.09      9.20
Median Other Top Officers           0.74       0.70      0.65        0.67     0.74        0.82       1.12      1.89      3.02
Within-Firm Ratio of CEO to
                                    1.50       1.48      1.38        1.43     1.29        1.42       1.58      2.00      2.58
Other Top Officers
Note: Distribution of total compensation in the sample executives from 1936 to 2005. Total compensation is the sum of salaries,
bonuses, long-term bonus payments, and the Black-Scholes value of stock option grants. Based on the three highest-paid officers
in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and 1990 (a total of 101 firms). In firms where the title “CEO” is not used, the CEO is
identified as the president of the company. Other top officers include any executive among the three highest-paid who is not the
CEO. The within-firm ratio is the median across firms of the ratio of the CEO’s total compensation to the average compensation
of the two other highest-paid officers in the firm.




                                                                40
                                                   Table 4
                             The Correlation between Compensation and Firm Size
                                                       Firm Size = Ln(Market Value)                        Firm Size = Ln(Sales)
                                                  1936-1975      1946-1975     1976-2005                 1946-1975      1976-2005
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)                       (4)           (5)
Panel 1: DV = Ln(Compift)
                                                      .088**             .137**            .935**            .157**           2.65**
   Average Size in Year t
                                                     (.026)             (.025)            (.035)            (.032)           (0.11)
   [fraction variance explained]
                                                     [.010]             [.020]            [.332]            [.017]           [.259]
                                                      .208**             .212**            .292**            .305**           .358**
   Average Firm Size
                                                     (.033)             (.032)            (.032)            (.037)           (.041)
   [fraction variance explained]
                                                     [.145]             [.164]            [.135]            [.220]           [.113]
                                                      .182**             .199**            .264**            .240**           .346**
   Size – Firm Avg. – Year Avg.
                                                     (.038)             (.041)            (.032)            (.052)           (.048)
   [fraction variance explained]
                                                     [.039]             [.036]            [.043]            [.041]           [.032]
Panel 2: With Firm Fixed Effects
  Average Size in Year t                                                 .135**             .969**            .149**          2.63**
                                                                        (.024)            (.037)            (.031)           (0.11)
   Size – Year Avg.                                                      .218**            .313**            .277**            .389**
                                                                        (.040)            (.028)            (.046)           (.046)
Panel 3: Including Lagged Size and
Firm FE
   Average Size in Year t                                               -.019               .622**            .240**          2.31**
                                                                        (.037)            (.086)            (.074)           (0.23)
   Average Size in Year t-1                                              .152**            .378**           -.088             .362*
                                                                        (.041)            (.083)            (.063)           (.210)
   (Size – Year Avg.) in Year t                                          .183**             .369**            .203**          .401**
                                                                        (.040)            (.038)            (.045)           (.067)
   (Size – Year Avg.) in Year t-1                                        .020             -.064**            .084**          -.040
                                                                        (.041)            (.029)            (.030)           (.043)
Panel 4: Including Quadratic Time
Trend and Firm FE
  Average Size in Year t                                                 .035              .750**             .143*          -.312*
                                                                        (.032)            (.082)            (.079)           (.171)
   Size – Year Avg.                                                      .217**            .309**            .272**          .391**
                                                                        (.038)            (.028)            (.046)            (.042)
Panel 5: DV = ∆Ln(Compift)
  ∆ Average Size in Year t                                               .012              .210**            .087*            .172
                                                                        (.031)            (.080)            (.049)           (.174)
   ∆ Size – ∆ Year Avg.                                                  .092**            .277**            .077**           .145
                                                                        (.032)            (.035)            (.024)           (.116)
Note: The dependent variable in panels 1 to 4 is the logarithm of total compensation for each executive and the dependent variable in
panel 5 is the change in ln(compensation). Total compensation is the sum of salaries, bonuses, long-term bonus payments, and the
Black-Scholes value of stock option grants, measured in $2000 and based on the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in
1940, 1960 and 1990 (a total of 101 firms). Size is measured by the logarithm of the firm’s market value in columns (1) to (3) and by
the logarithm of the firm’s total sales in columns (4) to (5), both measured in $2000. Standard errors are shown in parentheses and are
clustered by firm. Panel 1 decomposes firm size into three components: the average size of all firms in the sample in year t (to proxy
for aggregate market size), the average size of the firm the executive works for over the entire sample, and the deviation in the size of
the executive’s firm from its average firm size and the average size of all firms in that year. Panel 2 controls for firm fixed effects.
Panel 3 includes firm fixed effects and measures of firm size in the prior year. Panel 4 includes firm fixed effects and a quadratic time
trend. Panel 5 controls for changes in firm size. Values in brackets show the fraction of the total variance explained by each
independent variable based on an ANOVA decomposition for each sample period. Standard errors are in parentheses and are
clustered by firm. * denotes significance at the 10% level and ** denotes significance at the 5% level.




                                                                  41
                                     Table 5
             Managerial Stock Holdings Relative to Shares Outstanding
                               (Percentage Points)
                                                                                    Other Highest-
                     25th           50th           75th             CEOs
                                                                                    Paid Officers
                  percentile     percentile     percentile         (median)
                                                                                      (median)
 1936-1940           .019           .111           .402              .130                .088
 1941-1949           .010           .038           .159              .048                .031
 1950-1959           .011           .035           .109              .043                .031
 1960-1969           .012           .037           .103              .047                .034
 1970-1979           .008           .023           .064              .039                .019
 1980-1989           .008           .019           .054              .029                .015
 1990-1999           .011           .030           .084              .069                .021
 2000-2005           .010           .028           .074              .072                .018
Note. The proportion of managerial stock holdings relative to shares outstanding at the 25th, 50th, and
75th percentiles are based on the three-highest paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960,
and 1990 (a total of 101 firms). In firms where the title “CEO” is not used in the proxy statement, the
CEO is identified as the president of the company. Other top officers include any executive among the
three highest-paid who is not the CEO. The ownership of stock by each executive was obtained from
SEC bi-monthly reports on security holdings and transactions from 1935 to 1942, from firm’s proxy
statements from 1942 to 1992, and from ExecuComp from 1992 to the present.




                                                 42
                                                     Table 6
                                   Mean and Median Changes in Executive Wealth
                                               (Millions of $2000)
                   Salaries       Value of         Total              Revaluation     Revaluation of       Total change in
                     and           option       Compensation           of option       firm equity           executive
                   bonuses         grants                              holdings          holdings              wealth
                     (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)              (5)                   (6)
                                    Panel A: Mean Change in Executive Wealth
 1936-1940           1.00            0.00             1.00               0.00                1.32                 2.45
 1941-1949           0.89            0.00             0.89               0.01                0.07                 1.28
 1950-1959           0.88            0.06             0.93               0.24                0.86                 2.21
 1960-1969           0.89            0.10             0.99               0.18                0.62                 2.12
 1970-1979           0.91            0.18             1.09               0.08               -0.52                 1.95
 1980-1989           1.28            0.45             1.74               0.57                2.14                 5.05
 1990-1999           2.43            1.92             4.35               3.64                8.03                 17.4
 2000-2005           4.50            3.15             7.65               0.78                1.92                 11.4
                                   Panel B: Median Change in Executive Wealth
 1936-1940           0.86             0               0.87                0                  0                    0.90
 1941-1949           0.76             0               0.76                0                 0.03                  0.92
 1950-1959           0.74             0               0.77                0                 0.08                  1.10
 1960-1969           0.77             0               0.83                0                 0.04                  0.98
 1970-1979           0.80            0.04             0.93                0                 0.01                  1.04
 1980-1989           1.03            0.19             1.33               0.11               0.08                  1.93
 1990-1999           1.58            0.59             2.36               0.35               0.23                  3.97
 2000-2005           2.48            1.21             4.11                0                 0.13                  4.03
Note. Based on the three-highest paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990 (a total of 101 firms).
Col. (1) is the value of salaries plus bonuses (both current and long-term, in stock or in cash). Col. (2) is the Black-Scholes
value of stock option grants. Col. (3) is the sum of salaries, bonuses and stock options grants. Col. (4) is the change in the
value of stock options held in the end of the previous year. Col. (5) is the change in the value of firm equity held in the end
of the previous year. Col. (6) is the sum of total compensation and revaluations of stock and option holdings. The
revaluations of stock and option holdings are calculated based on the number of shares held at the end of the previous year
and the firm’s stock market return during the fiscal year. Panel A shows the mean across all executives for each type of
compensation by decade. Panel B shows the median across all executives for each type of compensation by decade. The
medians in Panel B are the median of the sum and thus do not add up to the sum of the medians. The year 1946 is
excluded because the distribution of rates of return is unusually low and highly skewed in that year, possibly due to the end
of World War II (see footnote 42 for more details).




                                                                 43
                                     Table 7
Correlation of Changes in Executive Wealth with Firm Performance, 1936-2005
                                   Dollar change in wealth       Dollar change in wealth
                                  for $1000 change in firm       for a 1 percent increase
                                        market value              in firm’s rate of return
                                      (Jensen-Murphy)                (Equity at Stake)
                                             1.14                          18,075
            1936 – 1940
                                            (0.66)                          (5,122)
                                            0.380                            7,738
            1941 – 1949
                                           (0.121)                          (1,867)
                                            0.359                          23,378
            1950 - 1959
                                           (0.096)                          (2,865)
                                            0.292                          40,269
            1960 - 1969
                                           (0.125)                          (7,067)
                                            0.128                          22,822
            1970 - 1979
                                           (0.048)                          (3,710)
                                            0.258                          37,086
            1980 - 1989
                                           (0.072)                          (5,151)
                                            0.774                         135,527
            1990 - 1999
                                           (0.270)                        (22,986)
                                            0.474                         151,508
            2000 - 2005
                                           (0.092)                        (30,123)
      Note. Based on the three-highest paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960,
      and 1990 (a total of 101 firms). The change in executive wealth is defined as the sum
      of total compensation (salary, bonuses, and stock options granted during the year) and
      the revaluation of stock and stock option holdings. The Jensen-Murphy statistic is
      calculated by regressing the dollar change in each executive’s wealth on the dollar
      change in the executive’s firm market value during the year (measured in thousands).
      The Equity at Stake is calculated by regressing the dollar change in each executive’s
      wealth on the percentage change in the executive’s firm value, measured by the firm’s
      rate of return. Results are based on median regressions estimated separately for each
      decade. Bootstrapped standard errors are given in parentheses and are clustered by
      firm. The year 1946 is excluded because the distribution of rates of return is unusually
      low and highly skewed in that year, possibly due to the end of World War II (see
      footnote 42 for more details).




                                               44
                                            Table 8
                        Pay-to-Performance Correlations by Type of Wealth
                   Dollar change in compensation for $1000          Dollar change in compensation for a 1
                      dollar change in firm market value            percent increase in firm’s rate of return
                               (Jensen-Murphy)                                  (Equity at Stake)
                                       Option       Stock                             Option         Stock
                   Compensation       Holdings    Holdings         Compensation Holdings           Holdings
1936 - 1940                 0.051           0        1.015                 276              0        18,132
                           (0.030)          --      (0.487)               (891)            --        (3,878)
1941 - 1949                 0.118           0        0.315                 516              0          5058
                           (0.061)          --      (0.094)               (595)            --        (1,131)
1950 - 1959                 0.061           0        0.195               1,170              0        11,602
                           (0.016)          --      (0.036)               (638)            --        (2,423)
1960 - 1969                 0.010       0.043        0.167                -472         6,654         21,939
                           (0.007)    (0.010)       (0.080)               (657)       (1,623)        (3,680)
1970 - 1979                -0.003       0.032        0.084                    5        4,201         12,374
                           (0.004)    (0.014)       (0.034)               (610)         (922)        (2,395)
1980 - 1989                 0.035       0.099        0.094               3,509        10,496         13,825
                           (0.015)    (0.021)       (0.027)             (1,284)       (1,955)        (2,260)
1990 - 1999                 0.109       0.357        0.219              16,839        57,587         37,408
                           (0.017)    (0.046)       (0.098)             (4,076)       (9,680)        (7,907)
2000 - 2005                 0.011       0.263        0.167               8,951        84,901         44,401
                           (0.037)    (0.045)       (0.053)            (11,242)     (22,390)         (6,783)
Note. Based on the three-highest paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990 (a total of 101).
Compensation is the sum of salaries, bonuses, and the Black-Scholes value of stock option grants. Option holdings
are the revaluation of stock options held at the end of the previous year. Stock holdings are the revaluation of
company stock held at the end of the previous year. The Jensen-Murphy statistic is calculated by regressing the
dollar change in the corresponding remuneration measure on the dollar change in the executive’s firm market value
during the year (measured in thousands). The Equity at Stake is calculated by regressing the dollar change in the
corresponding remuneration measure on the percentage change in the executive’s firm value, measured by the firm’s
rate of return. Estimates are based on median regressions estimated separately for each type of wealth in each
decade. Totals across each row do not add up to the correlation of changes in total wealth reported in Table 6
because the estimates are based on median regressions. Bootstrapped standard errors are given in parentheses and
are clustered by firm. The year 1946 is excluded because the distribution of rates of return is unusually low and
highly skewed in that year, possibly due to the end of World War II (see footnote 42 for more details).




                                                       45
                                                  Table 9
                                  The Strength of Managerial Incentives:
         Change in Wealth Due to Raising the Firm’s Rate of Return from the 50th to the 70th Percentile
                                                               Median Across Executives
                                                         Percent change in wealth =                             Elasticity =
                       $ change in wealth                        (1)                                         (2)
                                                total comp.+Δwealth at rate of return 50th
                                                                                           rate of return − rate of return 50th
                                                                                                         70th


                                (1)                                    (2)                                           (3)
   1936 – 1940                 278,611                                29.6                                          2.07
   1941 – 1949                103,838                                 9.8                                           0.68
   1950 - 1959                246,359                                 27.7                                          1.93
   1960 - 1969                624,862                                 51.9                                          3.63
   1970 - 1979                353,664                                 30.4                                          2.12
   1980 - 1989                652,647                                 30.3                                          2.11
   1990 - 1999              2,212,950                                 55.8                                          3.90
   2000 - 2005              3,851,259                                 60.9                                          4.26
Note. Based on the three-highest paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990 (a total of 101). The dollar change in
wealth is defined as the revaluation of stock and option holdings assuming a rate of return at the 70th percentile (22.7%) minus the
revaluation evaluated at the 50th percentile rate of return (8.4%). Col. (1) shows the median of this value across executives in each decade.
The percent change in wealth is the dollar change in wealth for each individual executive divided by the total change in an executive’s
wealth at median firm performance, defined as the revaluation of stock and option holdings at the 50th percentile rate of return plus
salaries, bonuses and stock option grants. Col. (2) presents the median of this value across executives in each decade. Col. (3)
approximates an elasticity of changes in wealth to changes in firm performance by dividing col. (2) by the percentage difference in firm
value between the 50th and 70th percentiles of firm performance (22.7 – 8.4 = 14.3%). The year 1946 is excluded because the distribution
of rates of return is unusually low and highly skewed in that year, possibly due to the end of World War II (see footnote 42 for more
details).




                                                                    46
                                                                                                        Figure 1
                                                                                      Median Value of Total Compensation, 1936-2005
                                                                                                 real value (left)                     rel. to avg. worker (right)

                                                                               4.8                                                                                   120.0
                                                                               4.2
                                                                               3.6
                                                                                                                                                                     100.0
                                                                               3.0




                                                                                                                                                                             Ratio to Average Earnings
                                                Millions of 2000 Dollars




                                                                               2.4
                                                                                                                                                                     80.0
                                                                               1.8

                                                                                                                                                                     60.0
                                                                               1.2


                                                                                                                                                                     40.0



                                                                               0.6                                                                                   20.0
                                                                                        1940         1950        1960        1970    1980      1990       2000
                                                                                                                              year


Note: Total compensation is composed of salary, bonuses, long-term bonus payments, and stock option grants.
Relative compensation is defined as total compensation divided by total wage and salary accruals per full-time
equivalent employee from table 6.6 of the National Income and Product Accounts. Based on the three highest-paid
officers in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and 1990 (a total of 101 firms).

                                                                                                              Figure 2
                                                                                            Structure of Total Compensation, 1936-2005
                                                                                            salary+bonus                             sal.+bonus+long-term pay
                                                                                            sal.+bonus+ltp+options granted

                                                                           5

                                                                           4
         Millions of 2000 Dollars (log scale)




                                                                           3



                                                                           2




                                                                           1




                                                                                     1940         1950        1960       1970        1980       1990        2000
                                                                                                                          year

Note: Each line shows the median value of compensation defined as an increasing number of types: salary and
current bonuses (paid out in stock or in cash); salary, current bonuses, and long-term incentive payments (paid out in
stock or in cash); and salary, current and long-term bonuses, and the Black-Scholes value of stock options granted.
Based on the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and 1990 (a total of 101 firms).


                                                                                                                              47
                                          Figure 3
               Fraction of Top Executives Granted and Holding Stock Options
                                                                            option grants > 0                  option holdings > 0

                                                              1



                                                             .8


                 Fraction of Executives
                                                             .6



                                                             .4



                                                             .2



                                                              0
                                                                     1940         1950          1960   1970    1980       1990       2000
                                                                                                        year

Note: Based on the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and 1990 (a total of 101
firms). Option grants>0 shows the fraction of executives in the year that were granted at least one stock
option. Option holdings>0 shows the fraction of executives in the year that held at least one stock option.
When not explicitly listed in proxy statements, stock option holdings are calculated based on the history of
stock option grants and stock option exercises for each individual. The fraction of executives granted options
includes imputations for cases when the annual grants are not listed, but the cumulative number options
awarded to each individual over a multi-year period is reported. See Appendix Section 2.3 for details on the
imputation.
                                                                                  Figure 4
                                                                   Median Total Compensation by Firm Size
                                                                            rank<=100                          100<rank<=300
                                                                            300<rank

                                                            11.0
                                                             8.0
                      Millions of 2000 Dollars, log scale




                                                             5.0



                                                             2.0


                                                             1.0


                                                             0.5




                                                                     1940          1950         1960   1970    1980      1990        2000
                                                                                                        year

  Note: Total compensation is composed of salary, bonuses, long-term bonus payments, and stock option
  grants. Based on the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and 1990 (a total of
  101 firms). Rank<=100 is the median total compensation across all executives in the sample in firms
  ranked among the top 100 according to market value in the year; 100<rank=300 is median total
  compensation for the executives in firms ranked 101 to 300; 300<rank is median total compensation for the
  executives in all firms in the sample that ranked bellow 300 in the year. Rankings by market value are
  based on all firms appearing in the CRSP database, which includes all publicly-traded firms in the NYSE,
  AMEX and NASDAQ stock markets. Market value for each firm is measured at the end of the fiscal year.


                                                                                                48
                                                                        Figure 5
                                                           Total Compensation and the S&P Index
                                                                    Median Compens ation (left)        S&P Index (right)

                                                  5                                                                                       1.2
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                  4
                                                                                                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                    S&P Index Relative to CPI (2000=1)
                                                  3                                                                                       .6
            Millions of 2000 Dollars




                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                  2



                                                                                                                                          .2


                                                  1

                                                                                                                                          .1



                                                           1940        1950      1960      1970     1980          1990        2000
                                                                                            year


  Note: Total compensation is composed of salary, bonuses, long-term bonus payments, and stock
  option grants. Based on the three highest-paid officers in the largest 50 firms in 1940, 1960 and
  1990 (a total of 101 firms). The S&P index is expressed relative to the CPI and equals 1 in 2000.
                                                               Figure 6
                                       Unadjusted and Size-Adjusted Indexes of Pay-to-Performance
                                                                      unadjusted JM                             adjusted JM
                                                                      unadjusted ES                             adjusted ES

                                                      9



                                                      7
                                        1930s=1




                                                      5



                                                      3



                                                      1


                                                          1936-40      1941-49   1950-59   1960-69    1970-79      1980-89      1990-99   2000-05
                                                                                                 decade

Note. Based on the three-highest paid executives in the 50 largest firms in 1940, 1960, and 1990 (a total of 101
firms). All measures are indexed to 1 for the 1936-40 period. Results are based on median regressions
estimated separately for each decade. The unadjusted ES is the value of equity at stake and the unadjusted JM
is the Jensen-Murphy statistic estimated from equations 2 and 3 in the text. The Jensen-Murphy statistic is
calculated by regressing the dollar change in the corresponding remuneration measure on the dollar change in
the executive’s firm market value during the year (measured in thousands). The Equity at Stake is calculated by
regressing the dollar change in the corresponding remuneration measure on the percentage change in the
executive’s firm value, measured by the firm’s rate of return. To control for the effect of changes in firm size
on these statistics, the adjusted JM and ES statistics are computed from similar regressions that include controls
for firm size and their interaction with firm performance. Size adjustments are described in detail in Section 5.4
and Appendix Section 4. The year 1946 is excluded because the distribution of rates of return is unusually low
and highly skewed in that year, possibly due to the end of World War II (see footnote 42 for more details).



                                                                                            49
