                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   BIOLOGICAL INNOVATION AND PRODUCTIVITY
                  GROWTH IN THE ANTEBELLUM COTTON ECONOMY

                                         Alan L. Olmstead
                                          Paul W. Rhode

                                    WORKING PAPER 14142
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14142


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2008




A number of talented students have contributed to the collection and analysis of the data. Heading
this list are Jeffery Graham and Janine L. F. Wilson who have served as the project's lead research
assistants. Amir Amadi, Raphael Avraham, Audrey Goodwater, Rowena Gray, Pablo Jenkins,
Teresa Nguyen, and Joanna Parks at UC Davis; Edward Esau of UC Riverside and the Historic
Natchez Foundation; Tiffany Hamelin, University of Mississippi; Peter Malaspina, University of
North Carolina; Jeremy Meiners, Washington University; Kristi Barnes, Auburn University; and
Eric Sumral, Millsaps College, have all spent countless hours poring over plantation records. We
give special thanks to Shelagh Mackay, whose attention to detail and insights have left a positive
mark on our research. Librarians across the South have been of great assistance in identifying
sources. We would like to recognize Henry Fulmer, South Caroliniana Library, University of South
Carolina; Laura Clark Brown, Southern History Collection, University of North Carolina; Elizabeth
Dunn and Linda McCurdy, Duke University; Tara Z. Laver, Louisiana State University; Andrea
Cantrell, University of Arkansas; Donnelly Lancaster, University of Alabama; Melissa Smith,
Tulane University; Burt Altman, Florida State University; Clinton Bagley, Mississippi Department
of Archives and History; and Jennifer Ford, University of Mississippi, for their special efforts. Mimi
Miller at the Historic Natchez Foundation has been a font of information. Dale Flesher and Mary
Jones both graciously opened their private records to us. We have benefited from the comments,
assistance, and interest of Julian Alston, Lety Arroyo-Abad, Jeremy Atack, Louis Cain, Lee Craig,
Gregory Clark, Peter Coclanis, Stanley Engerman, Price Fishback, Timothy Guinanne, Mary
Jackman, Zorina Khan, Thomas Mayer, Stephanie McCurry, John Hebron Moore, Joel Mokyr,
Chiaki Moriguchi, Thomas Mroz, Carl Pray, Richard Steckel, Richard Sutch, and Gavin Wright, as
well as participants at our presentations at UC Davis and UC Riverside, Duke, Northwestern,
Stanford, Vanderbilt, and Yale universities, the NBER-DAE Summer Institute, and the universities
of Arizona, Athens, Carlos III, Pennsylvania, and Zaragoza and two anonymous referees. This
research is supported by National Science Foundation Collaborative Research Grants, "Seeds and
Slaves: Technological Change, Plantation Efficiency, and Southern Economic Development," SES-
0550913 and SES-0551130. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2008 by Alan L. Olmstead and Paul W. Rhode. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Biological Innovation and Productivity Growth in the Antebellum Cotton Economy
Alan L. Olmstead and Paul W. Rhode
NBER Working Paper No. 14142
June 2008
JEL No. J43,N11,N5,O3

                                             ABSTRACT

The Cliometrics literature on slave efficiency has generally focused on static questions. We take a
decidedly more dynamic approach. Drawing on the records of 142 plantations with 509 crops years,
we show that the average daily cotton picking rate increased about four-fold between 1801 and 1862.
We argue that the development and diffusion of new cotton varieties were the primary sources of the
increased efficiency. These finding have broad implications for understanding the South's preeminence
in the world cotton market, the pace of westward expansion, and the importance of indigenous technological
innovation.


Alan L. Olmstead
Institute of Governmental Affairs
UC, Davis
Davis, CA 95616
alolmstead@ucdavis.edu

Paul W. Rhode
Economics Department
Eller College of Management
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
and NBER
prhode@email.unc.edu
         Biological Innovation and Productivity Growth in the Antebellum Cotton Economy




        American slavery has long fascinated scholars. Over the past 40 years few issues have so sharply

divided cliometricians as the performance and nature of the slave economy. These debates have generally

focused on static questions such as the relative efficiency of slave and free-labor enterprises. Much of this

research has relied on the Parker-Gallman sample which provides a cross-sectional view of cotton farms

and plantations as recorded in the 1859 census. We take a decidedly more dynamic approach. Our goal is

to explain the forces which propelled the rapid expansion of the American cotton economy and made the

South the world’s dominant producer of the Industrial Revolution’s key raw material. In doing so we

place the history of slavery and cotton plantations into the context of the more general literature on the

sources of American productivity growth.

        Standard accounts treat the technology of cotton production as static following the invention and

refinement of Eli Whitney's 1793 saw gin. Given that cotton cultivation remained a hand labor task

throughout the slavery period and that no machines comparable to the reaper gained acceptance, this view

seems plausible at first glance. All early attempts to develop mechanical cotton harvesters failed. The

stereotype of an “uninventive South” is reinforced by the region’s low level of patenting activity. Implicit

in this treatment is the assumption that all Upland cotton was alike. But cotton was not cotton. The

qualitative accounts of planter-historian B. C. L. Wailes, agronomist J. O. Ware, historian John Hebron

Moore, and others, asserted that southern planters created superior cotton varieties that significantly

increased cotton yields, fiber quality, and the amount of cotton that could be picked in a day.

        The surviving archival records of 142 plantations allow us to construct a panel dataset including

509 crop years and 704,800 daily observations of the cotton production activities of 6,200 individual

enslaved African Americans. The data clearly document the revolution in cotton picking efficiency—

between 1801 and 1862 the average amount of cotton picked per slave in a day quadrupled. This rapid

                                                      1
growth in picking efficiency—2.3 percent per annum—was substantially faster than the advance in labor

productivity in the overall economy.

        Although many have declared this period of the South’s history bereft of indigenous

technological advances, the region was the undisputed world leader in the creation of superior cotton

varieties. Despite concerted efforts, the British were unable to replicate the results in their far-flung

colonial empire. The achievements of antebellum southern cotton breeders well surpassed those of

northern wheat breeders. Our findings shed light on these advances in cotton breeding, as well as the

movements in slave, cotton, and land prices; the factors responsible for the growth of cotton output and

the spread of cotton cultivation; the sources of the differences in regional production and productivity

between the Old and New South; as well as the conventional static comparisons of plantation and non-

plantation efficiency.

        The paper takes the following form. First, we explore the macro trends in the antebellum cotton

economy. The data on cotton and slave prices, coupled with the observation that cotton output was

growing at a faster pace than the labor force in the cotton-producing counties, suggest that labor

productivity was rising between 1800 and 1860. These macro trends suggest a dynamic South.

Contemporaries, and many historians, viewed the introduction and improvement of large-boll cottons

from Mexico as a revolutionary innovation that rivaled the importance of Whitney’s gin. We follow this

lead by analyzing the creation and diffusion of Upland cotton varieties. Next, we introduce a new dataset

drawn from the archival records of 142 plantations. These data show that the amount of Upland cotton the

typical slave picked in a day increased approximately four times in the 60 years preceding the Civil War.

We go on to explore a number of hypotheses for the increase in picking efficiency, concluding that

improved cotton varieties likely accounted for most of the change. We further argue that our measured

increase in picking efficiency captures only part of the impact of biological innovation on cotton

production because the new varieties also offered higher yields and rendered higher quality fiber than

most earlier cottons. Finally, we note that due to increasing insect and disease problems, cotton yields and

picking efficiency would have likely fallen in the absence biological innovation.

                                                       2
Neglected Signs of Rapid Productivity Growth

        Figure 1 plots the long-run trends in cotton production (in logs) along with the real prices of both

cotton and prime-age male slaves. The data depict a dynamic and expanding economy. From 1800 to

1860, the quantity of cotton produced increased by 6.6 percent per annum as the real price of cotton fell

by 0.5 percent per annum. Over a slightly shorter period beginning in 1804, the U.S. slave population rose

by 2.4 percent while the real price of prime-age male slaves rose by 1.9 percent per year. Obviously not

all slaves worked in cotton and not all cotton was produced by slaves (although by the 1850s the

overwhelming bulk of the crop was).1 We can develop refined estimates of the cotton labor force by

totaling the Lee A. Craig and Thomas Weiss numbers of agricultural workers (both slave and free) for

only those counties producing cotton commercially.2 As the growth rates for slaves and for all workers in

Table 1 indicate, cotton output expanded faster than the number of workers over the 1800-60 period and

for each of the subperiods, 1800-20, 1820-40, and 1840-60. For the entire antebellum era, the gap

between the growth rates of cotton output and the enslaved agricultural labor force in cotton counties

averaged 2.4 percent per annum. Hints of rising labor productivity also appear on the dual-side (cost-

function) of the production function. Slaves were a major input in the production of cotton, yet their real

prices were soaring at a time when real cotton prices were declining.

        In Time on the Cross, Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman recognized that productivity was

rising: “The basic cause of this long-term decline [in cotton prices] was the steady increase in

productivity. Among the developments which made cotton farming increasingly more efficient were the

improvements in the varieties of cottonseeds, the introduction of the cotton gin, the reduction in

1
  Foust, Yeoman Farmer, pp. 161, 233-37, reported that slave plantations produced roughly 95 percent of American
cotton in the 1850s.
2
  Craig and Weiss, Rural Agricultural Workforce. To identify the cotton counties for the 1800-40 period, we used
the well-known cotton production maps of O. C. Stine and O. E. Baker, USDA, Atlas, pt. 5, sec. A, pp. 16-17, and
used Census of Agriculture data for the 1840-60 period as reported in Craig, Haines, and Weiss, Development,
Health, Nutrition, and Mortality, and U.S. Censuses of Agriculture. Following Foust, Yeoman Farmer, we restricted
the Census counties to those reporting 1,000 or more 400-lb. bales. For a discussion of these maps see Whartenby,
Land and Labor Productivity, pp. 60-61.


                                                        3
transportation and other marketing costs, and the reallocation of cotton production in the more fertile

lands of the New South.”3 This brief passage is the only acknowledgement we have found in the post-

1970 cliometrics literature of the impact of new cotton varieties. In subsequent cliometrics exchanges, the

quest to understand the sources and timing of productivity growth in the southern cotton economy, as well

as its role in making the region the dominant world supplier, took a backseat to addressing static

questions such as the self-sufficiency of southern plantations, the distribution of wealth, and the relative

efficiency of slave and free-labor farms. This emphasis was in part due to the heavy lifting done by

William Parker, Robert Gallman, and their students in constructing the 1859 Census micro-sample.4

        A handful of agricultural and economic historians have touched on the issue of long-run

productivity growth. Noting the divergent movement of cotton and slave prices, Alfred H. Conrad and

John R. Meyer hinted to the importance of productivity increases, which they attributed to the movement

of cotton production to more fertile western lands.5 Building on a long tradition of agricultural writers,

John Hebron Moore argued that antebellum southern planters developed and adopted a succession of new

cotton varieties that increased yields per acre, quality, disease resistance, and picking efficiency.6

Drawing on a limited sample, Franklee Whartenby estimated that between 1800 and 1840 cotton yields

per acre increased 46 to 78 percent and suggested that improved varieties allowed slaves to pick much

cotton in a day. “With the advent of Petit Gulf cotton in the late 1820’s, the daily picking averages

jumped from about fifty or sixty to about 125 to 150, with as much as 300 or more sometimes reported.”7

Stanley Lebergott also called attention to a change in picking rates. Relying on an assortment of

retrospective secondary sources, he surmised that the amount of cotton harvested in a day increased from




3
  Fogel and Engerman, Time on the Cross, pp. 91-93, and Without Consent, pp. 71, 95. For a more general statement
regarding productivity changes see Fogel and Engerman, “Explaining the Relative Efficiency,” p. 282.
4
  Parker and Gallman, Southern Farms Study, 1860.
5
  Conrad and Meyer, Economics of Slavery, pp. 75-78.
6
  Moore, “Cotton Breeding,” p. 96, Agriculture, pp. 13-36, and Emergence, pp. 30-34. Moore built on the work of a
number of prominent historians including B. C. L. Wailes, Report, James L. Watkins, King Cotton, and Louis Cecil
Gray, History.
7
  Whartenby, Land and Labor Productivity, pp. 54, 104-05.


                                                        4
50 pounds in 1800 to 200 pounds in the 1850s.8 The cliometrics literature has all but ignored these claims

of sustained productivity advances. There has been little appreciation of how the evolution of cotton

varieties helped shape southern development.



The Creation of American Upland Cotton Varieties

        The dynamism of the cotton-producing sector bears directly on the very foundations of the

Industrial Revolution.9 The usual story focuses on the inventions of Richard Arkwright, Samuel

Crompton, James Hargreaves, and John Kay, which mechanized spinning and weaving. Homage is also

paid to Eli Whitney whose saw gin helped ensure a supply of raw cotton to meet growing industrial

demands.10 However, this account neglects another set of innovators—the farmers and plant breeders who

developed cotton varieties suited to the new spinning technologies and, as importantly, to the diverse

North American environment.

        According to Ware, the varieties that became the basis for the South’s economic development

were a local invention, a distinctive “Dixie product.” “Although the stocks of the species were brought

from elsewhere, new types, through [a] series of adaptational changes, formed this distinctive group the

final characteristics of which are a product of the Cotton Belt of the United States.”11 The cottons that

came to be cultivated in the United States belonged to one of two species. Sea Island (Gossypium

barbadense) was grown primarily along the coasts and on the offshore islands of Georgia, South

Carolina, and Florida. Cottons of the second and more important species (Gossypium hirsutum) were




8
  Lebergott, Americans, pp. 168, 176-77. Also see Parker, “Labor Productivity,” p. 235. Campbell, “Gender
Division,” emphasized the importance of new varieties in the southeast. Relying on Moore, Hayami and Ruttan,
Agricultural Development, p. 209, also alluded to productivity enhancing innovations. The only other reference to
biological innovation in antebellum cotton production we found in the economic history literature appears in
Scheiber, Vatter, and Faulkner, American Economic History, p. 131.
9
  This section and the next extend the analysis in Olmstead and Rhode, Creating Abundance, chapter 4.
10
   Landes, Unbound Prometheus, p. 202. Lakwete, Inventing the Cotton Gin, pp. 1-96, made a strong case that the
ginning bottleneck was not as severe as generally thought.
11
   Ware, “Origin,” p. 1. Modern plant scientists concur with Ware’s general assessment. See Poehlman and Sleper,
Breeding Field Crops, pp. 374-76.


                                                        5
commonly referred to as Upland cottons because they were grown in the more variable climates away

from the coast. None of these cottons were native to British North America.12

        In its native environment in Central America, Upland cotton was a frost-intolerant, perennial

shrub with short-day photoperiod response. It flowered in the late summer and autumn. At more northern

latitudes of the American South, the conditions that triggered flowering occurred later in the year, but the

first frost typically hit before the cotton could mature. Initial attempts to grow Upland cotton in the areas

that now constitute the United States faced severe difficulties. Success depended on finding a

mutation/cross or introducing a variety with the appropriate photosensitivity characteristics.13 Adaptation

was assisted by the genetic heterozygosity of the initial imports which made them relatively malleable.

The varieties that eventually prevailed in the United States flowered in early to mid-summer and began to

mature by the end of August or early September. The process of molding Upland cotton to the

environment was repeated again and again. According to Ware, cotton-producing technologies were never

static. “The vast differences in climate and soil that obtain over the Cotton Belt undoubtedly brought

about a kind of natural selection which eliminated many of the kinds that were tried, while others became

adapted to the several conditions under which they were grown and selected over a period of years.”14

These new American Upland cotton varieties proved “much more suitable, than any other kind, for

general factory use.”15




12
   Modern genetic research recognizes 50 species of cotton (genus Gossypium) of which four major species were
domesticated independently in different parts of the world. G. hirsutum (Upland cotton), which accounts for about
90 percent of world production, originated in southern Mexico and Guatemala. It was probably first domesticated in
Yucatan and then adapted by generations of farmers for the Mexican highlands. The origin of G. barbadense (Sea
Island cotton) is debated, with Brazil, the Caribbean, and Peru being the leading contenders. The two Old World
species, G. arboretum and G. heraceum originated in Africa and Asia. Genetic studies of 50 Upland cultivars grown
in the United States in the 1990s showed the overwhelming influence of Mexican and Guatemalan G. hirsutum.
Wendel, Brubaker, and Percival, “Genetic Diversity,” pp. 1291-1310; Brubaker and Wendel, “Reevaluating the
Origin,” pp. 1309-26; Brubaker, Bourland, and Wendel, “Origin and Domestication of Cotton,” pp. 3-31; Fryxell,
Natural History; and Wendel and Cronn, “Polyploidy,” pp. 139-86.
13
   Stephens, “Some Observations,” pp. 409-18; Purseglove, Tropical Crops, pp. 340, 345, 352-54.
14
   Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 659. Also see Handy, “History,” pp. 17-66.
15
   Ware, “Origin,” pp. 1-2. This American advantage changed over time as varieties developed in the United States
were adopted in other regions.


                                                        6
         The most common Upland variety in the colonial period was Georgia Upland (aka Green Seed,

Georgia Green Seed), which was introduced to North America in 1733/34. By later standards, Georgia

Green Seed was a low quality, low yielding, low value, short staple variety that was hard to pick. Its seeds

were “fuzzy,” meaning that the lint clung to the seed, making their separation difficult. Whitney’s

achievement was to develop a saw gin that could economically remove these seeds.16 Upland cottons

evolved as farmers acclimatized the standard Georgia Green Seed to different conditions. By the end of

the eighteenth century an improved variety, Tennessee Green Seed, had been developed in the

Cumberland Valley, and by 1801 seed for this variety was being grown in South Carolina and advertised

for sale as far away as Savannah. It was lauded as being easier to pick and earlier to mature.17

         There were two parallel development paths, one focused on Sea Island varieties and the other on

Creole Black Seed varieties. In the late eighteenth century (1786 is a commonly cited date), Georgia

planters introduced high quality cottons from the Caribbean (or possibly Brazil).18 After considerable

effort, some of these plants were acclimatized to become the Sea Island cottons. Sea Island types were

low yielding and difficult to pick, but they produced a longer, finer fiber than Upland varieties, and their


16
   Again, see Lakwete, Inventing the Cotton Gin, for an assessment of Whitney’s contribution. Variants of Upland
cotton could have naked, black seeds much like Sea Island cotton. But these Upland strains were typically less
productive and more disease-prone than the green or brown fuzzy seeded variants. A small number of alleles
controlled these characteristics and the black trait is recessive. Thus, while it would be technically possible to
produce an Upland crop that did not need a saw gin (or its equivalent), it would be associated with lower yields and
subject to “invasion” by Green Seed germplasm. In Green Seed cotton, black seeds would occasionally appear (as
Mendel’s laws predict). Tyler, “Varieties,” p. 17, stated that growers and breeders generally believed that “entirely
naked seeds should be picked out and discarded from choice seed intended for planting.” He further reported the
results from a test comparing fuzzy and naked seed from the same row of plants, which revealed that the plants
grown from fuzzy seed yielded 40 percent lint whereas those from naked seeds yielded 28 percent.
17
   Watkins, King Cotton, pp. 100, 254; Ware, “Plant Breeding,” pp. 658-59; Kilpatrick, “Historical and Statistical
Collections,” pp. 632-33; 1 November 1801, 1801-1812 Register Book, Guignard Family Papers, South Caroliniana
Library, University of South Carolina [hereafter SCL/USC]; Georgia Gazette (30 April 1801), p. 1. The seller of the
Cumberland seed noted that it produced a low bushy cotton that was of inferior quality to Sea Island but had the
virtue of “generally producing one month earlier than the former.”
18
   A widely accepted account is based on a letter from Patrick Walsh of Jamaica who asserted that he sent three
sacks of seed to Frank Leavet (sometimes spelled Levett). Donnell, Chronological and Statistical History, p. 48.
Smith’s account, Crop Production, p. 296, of the introduction of Sea Island suggested that the variety was native to
Brazil. There are at least four other contemporary claims of first introduction. See Watt, Wild and Cultivated Cotton
Plants, pp. 16-17; Stephens, “Origin of Sea Island Cotton,” pp. 391-99; Rosengraten, Tombee, p. 50; and Lakwete,
Inventing the Cotton Gin, p. 24. Porcher and Fick, Story of Sea Island Cotton, pp. 93-99, concluded that the “plants
of Gossypium barbadense that came to be called sea island cotton originated in 1786 with its conversion to day-
neutral flowering.”


                                                          7
smooth black seeds could be removed easily with a roller gin—a machine widely available in the

colonies. Persistent attempts to extend the range of Sea Island by acclimatizing it to grow away from the

coast met with little success.

        As with Upland cottons, Sea Island cottons were genetically diverse and mutable. South Carolina

planter Whitemarsh Seabrook noted in 1846 that decades of breeding had resulted in up to 15 subvarieties

of Sea Island cotton.19 Ware asserted that “more than one species and no doubt several varieties were

brought in during the early period. . . . From these introductions the sea-island growers doubtless

developed their own distinct varieties and strains.”20 Just as the early mechanical inventors whose genius

stimulated the Industrial Revolution knew little of the laws of mechanics, “these early breeders knew little

of genetics or the science of plant breeding, but they were artists in knowing their plants. They sought

practical ends and concentrated on the development of the long silky types of cotton that the English

spinners of the time demanded. . . . The result was the development of many special strains of the finest

cotton the world has ever known.”21

        Historians usually depict crops and farm technologies as spreading from east to west, but French

colonists in the Mississippi Valley actually began continuous commercial production of cotton before

planters in the Carolinas and Georgia. During the early 1720s, French settlers experimented with Sea

Island cottons with limited success in a narrow band along the Gulf. The repeated failure of Sea Island

elsewhere led farmers to test other options. By 1733 a new variety had been imported from Siam. Dubbed

Black Seed, or Creole, it soon became the dominant cotton in the region. In the early nineteenth century,

lower Mississippi Valley planters considered Creole their “native” cotton. Like Sea Island, it had smooth

seeds that could be extracted with a roller gin. Creole was far more reliable and out-yielded Sea Island in

this area but produced lower quality fiber. As with Sea Island, Creole was difficult to pick due to its small

bolls and because the lint clung to the pods. But Creole was superior in many respects to the Green Seed


19
   Chaplin, Anxious Pursuit, p. 221.
20
   Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 658. Also, Rosengraten, Tombee, p. 76.
21
   Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 658.


                                                        8
Upland cottons and commanded a higher price.22 The Black Seed varieties first developed in the Gulf

States moved eastward and mixed with local stocks of Black and Green Seed to create an array of

varieties of differing quality and ripening characteristics. In the first two decades following Whitney’s

1793 invention, Southeastern planters experimented with myriad varieties to find suitable stock for their

local conditions.23



The Introduction of Mexican Cotton

         The first in a long chain of events that would revolutionize southern cotton production occurred

in 1806. While visiting Mexico City, Walter Burling obtained seeds of a high quality cotton which he

passed on to his Natchez neighbor, William Dunbar, for experimentation. This “required some reselection

for adaptation before satisfactory responses under Mississippi Valley conditions were obtained. Fresh

seed from Mexico during the first year or two of planting was said to produce no more than one-half

crop.”24 By 1808, Dunbar sent samples of fiber to Liverpool to be tested for spinning quality and received

a positive response.25

         By 1820, southern breeders had out-crossed Mexican highland cotton with Green Seed, Creole,

and possibly even Sea Island varieties, creating many new genotypes.26 Word of the new white-seeded

cottons had already reached Baltimore by 1820 because an article in the American Farmer noted that the

new “Mexican cotton” variety was “found to ripen, in a greater degree at one time: has a shorter season

22
   Moore, Agriculture, pp. 13-36.
23
   For an example of the interregional exchange of cotton seeds see, Edmund Bacon of Augusta to Joseph Pannile of
Natchez, 3 December 1807, and Edmund Bacon to Agnes Pannile of Natchez, 24 December 1815, Edmund Bacon
Letters, Mss. 2178, Louisiana and Lower Mississippi Valley Collections, LSU Libraries. For a description of seed
varieties and planter attention to detail, see records for 1788 in the Elias Lynch Rivers Family Papers, 51-542, South
Carolina Historical Society; and Lewis Du Pre, Observations on the Culture of Cotton, pp. 6-7. Also, Moore and
Moore, Cotton Culture, pp. 4-36, and telephone interview with John Hebron Moore, 20 April 2005.
24
   Ware, “Origin,” p. 50.
25
   Dunbar to Green & Wainewright, 2 October 1807, Dunbar, Life, p. 356, also pp. 357, 360, 388-90; Moore,
“Cotton Breeding,” pp. 95-104, and Agriculture, pp. 32-33; Gray, History, pp. 673-77; Collings, Production of
Cotton, p. 201; and Watkins, King Cotton, p. 165. The papers of John Minor, a Natchez-area planter, include letters
(2 May 1817 and 17 September 1820) from Liverpool factors mentioning Dunbar cotton as a distinct type trading at
premium prices, in the Minor Family Papers, Coll. 1564, Southern Historical Collection, Wilson Library, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill [hereafter SHC/UNC].
26
   Smith, Crop Production, pp. 296-97.


                                                          9
than any other cotton known among us: and is collected in much greater quantities, by a labourer, in one

day. The cotton wool is represented to hang out of the pods of this species of the plants, and even to drop

at times from them.”27 In addition, contemporaries lauded the Mexican cotton for out-yielding Creole and

Green Seed and for producing a fiber superior to the latter. Perhaps most importantly, at least initially it

was relatively resistant to a disease called “the rot” which was causing large losses throughout the

South.28

           On top of all of these qualities, Mexican cotton (and subsequent Mexican hybrids) had higher

lint-to-seed ratios than the varieties they replaced. According to Lewis Cecil Gray, “the older varieties

yielded lint weighing only 25 per cent of the total weight of seed cotton.” This may have been an upper

estimate. By contrast, many published accounts noted that the new varieties yielded closer to 33 percent

lint.29 This implies more than a 30 percent premium after ginning. Plantation records generally confirm

the increase in lint yield but suggest a more complicated story of continual improvement. Mississippi

planter Francis Terry Leak chose seeds with an eye on lint ratios. His records showed a gradual upward

trend in lint turnout well after the first introduction of Mexican varieties. Between 1841 and 1846 he

averaged 26 percent lint and by 1853-1857 he obtained a 30 percent yield.30 The Mexican cotton’s many



27
   “Cotton,” American Farmer (7 July 1820), p. 116. For other examples of the benefits of the new cotton see, “Free
Produce Society,” Genius of Universal Emancipation (30 October 1829), p. 58; H. B. Croom, “Some Account of the
Agricultural Soil and Products of Middle Florida,” Farmers’ Register (June 1834), p. 2; and Charles Jones, “On
Cotton Culture,” The Cultivator (June 1840), p. 98.
28
   Prominent secondary accounts reproduced these claims regarding the benefits of the Mexican hybrids. Claiborne,
Mississippi, pp. 140-43; Watkins, King Cotton, p. 172; Gray, History, pp. 689-90; Moore, Agriculture, pp. 13-36,
and “Cotton Breeding,” p. 97. These writers all had a thorough understanding of cotton production technologies and
Claiborne was a prominent antebellum planter.
29
   Gray, History, p. 703; Watkins, King Cotton, p. 172; H. B. Croom, “Some Account,” Farmers’ Register (June
1834), p. 2.
30
   See, James Winchester of Cragforn, Tennessee to John R. Eaton of Granville, North Carolina, 9 December 1801,
in the John Rust Eaton Papers, Coll. 234-z, SHC/UNC. The 1812 records of John Palfrey of Attakapas, Louisiana
confirm a turnout of 0.25 pounds of lint for every pound of seed cotton in the early nineteenth century, Palfrey
Family Papers, 1776-1918, Stampp, Records of Ante-bellum Southern Plantations [hereafter RASP], Ser. I, pt. 1,
reel 1, p. 94. The records of William Reynolds of Barnwell report a turnout ratio of 0.30-0.32 in 1844, Reynolds
Family Papers, SCL/USC. In 1847, Walter Wade of Jefferson County, Mississippi found a lint yield of “not quite
1/3 but more than 1/4,” Walter Wade Plantation Diaries, 1834-1854, RASP, Ser. N, reel 18, p. 879. In the next year
John Carmichael Jenkins, of the Natchez, Mississippi area, reported a ratio of 0.27, Elgin Plantation Journal # 7,
January 1848, p. 2 (typescript housed at the Historic Natchez Foundation). Francis Terry Leak Papers, 1839-1865,
RASP, Ser. J, pt. 6, reel 24, pp. 407, and 531. As another indication that the jump in lint turnout was not a one time


                                                         10
attributes led M. W. Phillips of Edwards, Mississippi to proclaim that the improved seed “can hardly be

regarded as of less importance than the introduction of the gin stand.”31

         The early success of Mexican cotton stimulated others to seek fresh introductions. In 1827

Timothy Flint noted that in Louisiana, Mexican cotton was “getting into common adoption, and the

importation of seed from Tampico and Vera Cruz is becoming a considerable business.”32 This further

increased the genetic material available to breeders. Cotton breeders had several competing objectives

including higher yields; longer, finer, and stronger fibers; ease of picking; and resistance to pests. Early

maturing cottons could be harvested before insects and diseases could multiply and destroy much of the

crop, but such cottons generally had lower yields and fiber quality. The trick for breeders was to select

crosses or mutations that combined the best qualities of different varieties. They did this by planting

different varieties near to each other in experimental plots, by carefully selecting seed from plants that

had desired qualities, and by isolating their premium cottons to prevent cross-pollination.

         By the late 1820s two new Mexican hybrids, Petit Gulf and Alvarado, gained acclaim. Petit Gulf

was developed by Dr. Rush Nutt of Rodney, Mississippi. The Nutt family began as local suppliers of

superior cottonseed, but by the 1830s acquired a regional and even international reputation.33

Contemporary observers proclaimed that Petit Gulf was of higher quality than the first Mexican imports,

its lint was less likely to fall to the ground if not picked promptly, and it ripened earlier. Petit Gulf

widened the already considerable productivity gap separating the Mexican cottons from the Green Seed

and Creole cottons.



affair, M. W. Philips (often Phillips) noted that his new Hogan seeds yielded 31 percent lint. This is “the largest
yield I have ever found, and I have been thus testing all cotton for many years.” Turner, Cotton Planter’s Manual, p.
106.
31
   Phillips, “Mexican Cotton Seed,” p. 279. Variants of this comparison with the cotton gin were repeated by
Affleck, “Early Days,” pp. 668-69; Watkins, King Cotton, p. 13; Gray, History, p. 689; and Moore, Emergence, p.
28.
32
   Timothy Flint, “Agriculture of Louisiana,” American Farmer (3 August 1827), p. 154.
33
   For orders for cottonseed, including one from India, from the Nutt plantations, see items NU 29, 49, 113, 221:18,
245, 271 in Papers of Rush and Haller Nutt, 1805-1933, Mss NU 1-365, Huntington Library, Art Collections and
Botanical Gardens. The term “Alvarado” evidently applied to both cotton imported from the Veracruz region of
Mexico and to crosses subsequently developed based on this parent.


                                                         11
The Diffusion of Mexican Cottons

           Plantation records as well as press accounts document the gradual spread of Mexican cottons

throughout the Gulf region in the 1820s. In 1820 the American Farmer reported that Mexican cotton had

recently been introduced to Louisiana and recommended that travelers to that state from other cotton

growing regions “procure seeds and instructions for the culture of this … very important cotton.”34 We

know that by 1824, John Garnier of the Santa Rosa Sound in the far western part of Florida was growing

a mix of varieties including Mexican seed.35 The plantation records of James T. Magruder of Jefferson

County, Mississippi first noted on 1 May 1824 that he was planting Mexican seed. In the same year, A.

Penquite sought Mexican seed (as well as other types) from Rush Nutt. At the start of the 1825 planting

season, the manager of John Quitman’s Port Gibson, Mississippi plantation was “very desirous to procure

some Mexican Cotton seed.” Planters often experimented with Mexican for a few seasons before

committing to the new seed. David Rees of Saint Martin’s Parish, Louisiana may have tested Mexican

cotton as early as 1822, but the first explicit mention appeared in May 1826 when he had planted Mexican

seed in several fields. Rees’s main concern was to find a variety resistant to rot. Rees was also growing

Tennessee Green Seed and Creole. But in 1827 the American Farmer implied that Creole and Tennessee

were still in use in Louisiana but losing favor.36 Clearly two decades after William Dunbar first received

the Mexican seed, many planters in the lower Mississippi Valley were just beginning to adopt the new

variety.

34
   Columbianus, “On the Cultivation, Management, and Employment of Cotton, No. 4,” American Farmer (7 July
1820), p. 116.
35
   In November 1824, Secretary of War John C. Calhoun sent samples of Garnier’s cotton to John S. Skinner of the
American Farmer. Skinner had Massachusetts cotton manufacturers appraise the samples and the Mexican cotton
generally met with their approval. See Hemphill, Papers of John C. Calhoun, pp. 404-05, and J. C. Calhoun,
“Florida Cotton,” American Farmer (4 February 1825), p. 362.
36
   James T. Magruder Cotton Book, 1818-1830, RASP, Ser. N, reel 12, p. 733; A. Penquite to Rush Nutt, 19 January
1824, item NU 271, Papers of Rush and Haller Nutt, 1805-1933, MssNU 1-365, Huntington Library, Art
Collections and Botanical Gardens; Quitman Family Papers, 1784-1978, RASP, Ser. J, pt. 6, reel 5, p. 235; 1822 and
1826 plantation journals in Davis Rees Papers, 1803-1835, RASP, Series H, Reel 29, p. 807, and Reel 30, pp. 5, 9,
15. Timothy Flint, “Agriculture of Louisiana,” American Farmer (3 August 1827), p. 154. Furthermore, in the 1840s
and 1850s when rot reappeared in the lower Mississippi Valley, some planters unsuccessfully experimented with the
“old greenseed” imported from Tennessee in the hope that it might prove resistant. See several references in Elgin
Plantation Journal # 6, March through December 1847, and Walter Wade Plantation Diaries, 1834-1854, RASP, Ser.
N, reel 18, p. 673.


                                                       12
        Previous accounts suggest that there was a lag of up to two decades between the spread of

Mexican cottons (including hybrids such as Petit Gulf and Alvarado) in the West and their appearance in

the Southeast. However, our examination of archival records reveals that many southeastern planters had

begun experimenting with the new varieties by the 1820s. Ware reports that Mexican cotton first appeared

in South Carolina in 1816 but offered no source, and we have not substantiated this early sighting.

Archival accounts document that John Connors of Lancaster, South Carolina was growing Mexican

cotton by 1825; Calvin Jones of Wake County, North Carolina and John Walker of King and Queen

County, Virginia both reported the variety in 1827; as did Bryan Croom of Rocky Comfort, Florida by

1829.37 We know that Mexican cotton was still a novelty in Alabama in 1826 because David Moore,

whose plantation was near Huntsville, caused “unusual excitement” when on 28 and 29 August his 27

hands picked “the enormous quantity of 8921 pounds of seed cotton, being an average of 330 to the hand

for two days. . . . It was Mexican cotton, which bears very large bolls, and was beautifully opened.”38

        Retrospective accounts indicate that many others were experimenting with Mexican cotton in the

1820s. As an example, James Davis of the Fairfield District, South Carolina noted that between 1825 and

1827 he “substituted what is called the Mexican cotton in the place of the green seed.” By 1835 he was

unable “to find a single plant of the green seed kind growing the neighborhood” to test its performance

against Petit Gulf, the then-dominant Mexican hybrid in his region.39 Davis appears to have been totally

committed to Mexican soon after his first experiments, but most planters continued to grow other varieties

for years. There are several explanations for this coexistence. In some settings the Mexican cottons either

were not overwhelmingly better or still needed to be acclimated. Farmers may have been playing it safe.

Growing different varieties could also help spread out the planting and harvest seasons. In addition, many

37
   Ware, “Origin,” p. 13; John Connors Papers, SCL/USC, 28 April 1825; Calvin Jones noted in his farm journal that
the Mexican cotton “hangs out of the boles (sic) to the ground,” Calvin Jones Papers, 1785-1929, RASP, Ser. J, pt.
8, reel 4, frame 0708; John Walker Papers, 1824-1844, RASP, Ser. J, pt. 9, reel 32, p. 996 and various entries on
reels 32-33. Letter from Byran Croom to Hardy B. Croom, 25 July 1829, in the H. B. Croom Papers, Coll. 3372,
SHC/UNC.
38
   American Mercury (10 October 1826), p. 2.
39
   James Davis, “On the Different Kinds of Cotton,” Farmer & Gardener, and Live-Stock Breeder and Manager (22
December 1835), p. 271.


                                                       13
farmers were unwilling to pay for large quantities of commercial seed, and it could take years to produce

sufficient planting seed for an entire plantation.40

         The diffusion of the new Mexican hybrids outside the Mississippi Valley was also much earlier

than many presumed. South Carolinians John Connors and William Richardson both planted Alvarado in

1829, as did John Lawton in 1833, and James Calhoun in 1834. In 1834, William Proctor Gould of

Greene County, Alabama was planting Petit Gulf as well as Mexican. In addition, he gave a neighbor,

Dr. Means, both types of seed. In 1836 Carolina planter Walter Peyre grew Alvarado, Petit Gulf, and both

Green Seed and Black Seed varieties.41 Others in the southeast had already adopted Petit Gulf, at times

with enthusiasm. For example, James Henry Hammond of South Carolina noted in 1833, “planted some

Petit Gulf cotton and well pleased with it.” In 1834 he observed, “planted half my crop in Petit Gulf. . . .

Shale [sic] plant all Petit gulf hereafter.”42

         Several forces facilitated the diffusion of the new cotton varieties. The praise for the new seeds in

agricultural journals and newspapers helped spread the word. In addition, a regional market in cotton

seeds emerged. Here again the press played an important role by providing a medium for both sellers and

buyers to advertise. As early as 1770, advertisements for cotton seed appeared in the Georgia Gazette of

Savannah. In 1798 another Savannah paper noted that William Belcher was offering “Sea Island, White

Nankeen, and the common green Seed, of the upper country.”43 By the spring of 1833, dealers were

advertising Mexican seed in Alabama, and by 1835 there was an explosion of ads in the southeastern

press for “Alverado” and Petit Gulf.44



40
   As one of many examples, John Walker noted in 1834 that he was experimenting with one-half gallon of
“blackseed” cotton, John Walker Papers, 1824-1844, RASP, Ser. J, pt. 9, reel 33, p. 109.
41
   25 April 1829 entry in John Connors Papers, SCL/USC; 24 September, 1 October, and 5 December 1829 entries,
William Guignard Richardson Papers, SCL/USC; Thomas Walter Peyre Plantation Journal, 1812-1851, RASP, Ser.
B, reel 5, pp. 90, 98, 114; Alexander Robert Lawton Papers, 1774-1897, RASP, Ser. J, pt. 3, reel 26, p. 737; James
Edward Calhoun Plantation Journal, 1830-1834, in John Ewing Colhoun Papers, 1774-1961, RASP, Ser. J, pt. 3,
reel 29, pp. 512-29. William Proctor Gould Diary, 1828-1856, M-1192, pp. 20-21, SHC-UNC.
42
   Papers of James Henry Hammond, 1795-1865, RASP, Ser. A, pt. 1, reel 14, p. 67.
43
   Georgia Gazette (25 April 1770), p. 4; Columbian Museum (27 March 1798), p. 1.
44
   For several examples of early ads for Petit Gulf and Alvarado seed, see Alabama State Intelligencer (2 March
1833), p. 3 and (25 July 1835), p. 4; Southern Patriot (20 January 1835), p. 3, (27 January 1835), p. 3, (30 January


                                                         14
        In the vernacular of the day, the older varieties tended to “run down.” This could be for a number

of reasons—what passed for Petit Gulf might have been accidently crossed with inferior cottons, it could

have become more susceptible to diseases, and the like. Although advertisements found in southern farm

journals and plantation records show Petit Gulf remained popular throughout the antebellum era, a large

number of new varieties came on the market in the 1840s and 1850s. Some represented improvements for

specific locales, others were disappointments.45 Among the most popular was One Hundred Seed, which

was bred and distributed by Col. Henry W. Vick of Vicksburg, Mississippi in the mid-1840s.46 In 1839

Vick began the annual process of having his most able slaves make special pickings in which they

harvested only the finest bolls from the largest and most prolific plants. This cotton was ginned separately

and then grown in isolated fields. Vick often ventured into the fields himself in search of valuable

mutations and crosses. He personally selected the progenitor of the One Hundred Seed cultivar in 1843

from the particularly appealing bolls of a single plant he discovered while visiting another plantation in

the Delta.47 He then increased this seed for a few years before marketing it. Most planters typically bought

small quantities of commercial seed which they then tested and increased themselves. They had to be very

careful to maintain seed quality given the potential for cross-pollination in the fields and seed mixing at

the gin. Specialized seed producers such as Vick were particularly diligent to separate their test fields and

to clean their gins between runs.48

        Other important varieties produced by antebellum Mississippi Valley breeders were Sugar Loaf

(1843), Mastodon (before 1846), Boyd’s Prolific (before 1847), and Banana (before 1848). Sugar Loaf

was first in the line of cluster types (that is, the plant tended to have multiple bolls at each node on its

short fruiting limbs, making the bolls cluster together). Boyd’s Prolific was the pioneer variety in the


1835), p. 3, (2 February 1835), p. 3, (3 February 1835), p. 3, (3 March 1835), p. 3, and (19 March 1935), p. 3; and
Macon Weekly Telegraph (26 February 1835), p. 4.
45
   Smith, Crop Production, p. 297; Ware, “Origin,” pp. 12-14.
46
   Moore, “Cotton Breeding,” pp. 95-104, and Emergence, pp. 12-16. From reading Moore, one might surmise that a
rot disease wiped out the Green Seed varieties. To the contrary, in 1880 Tennessee farmers reported that Green Seed
varieties were widely grown in the state. Hilgard, Report, p. 99.
47
   Moore, “Cotton Breeding,” pp. 99-101; Vicksburg Sentinel (7 July 1847), p. 1.
48
   Moore, Emergence, p. 13; Ware, “Origin,” pp. 12-14; Smith, Crop Production, p. 297.


                                                        15
semi-cluster line (which possessed the clustering habit in a less pronounced form). Varieties such as

Mastodon were highly popular in certain regions but were considered “humbugs” in others.49

         In 1868 Joseph Lyman reflected on the dynamics of the seed industry : “Beginning with the year

1820, and from that time forward, various planters in different parts of the cotton growing States have

devoted themselves to the development and sale of improved varieties of cotton seed, and certain styles of

cotton have for two, three, or four years, enjoyed a great, though ephemeral popularity, and, then, as

suddenly, been pushed aside for a new reigning favorite. The improvement of a cotton seed as a business,

and sale of the improved varieties, has enabled quite a number of prominent and enterprising planters

throughout the South to realize handsome fortunes.”50 Cotton improvement was not the monopoly of a

few well-known breeders. Our reading of plantation diaries suggests that most planters large and small

typically grew more than one variety in a given year, carefully observing the many pros and cons of each.

Planters such as John Carmichael Jenkins, Francis Leak, and Charles Whitmore regularly grew three or

more varieties and were testing others in garden plots.51 Antebellum observers were impressed and at

times astounded at the high prices the new seeds brought in the market. Ordinary cotton seed might sell

for 25 cents per bushel (when used for manure) and was often simply discarded. By contrast, Petit Gulf

seed regularly fetched twice as much. Seeds of choice varieties such as Sugar Loaf, Brown, Hundred

Seed, Banana, Multibolus, and Prolific, “under ordinary circumstances, command from one to three

dollars per bushel.” And when first introduced, Mastodon seed netted five dollars a bushel, Banana “at

first sold for a hundred dollars a bushel [and] some paid ten cents apiece [again roughly $100 per bushel]

for ‘Hogan’ seeds.”52




49
   Watkins, King Cotton, pp. 173, 195, 217, 243.
50
   Lyman, Cotton Culture, p. 121.
51
   Charles Whitmore Plantation Journal, Coll. 2406, SHC/UNC. As an example of the care devoted to selecting
cotton, Mississippi planter Everard Green Baker includes instructions in his diary to “label each kind accurately”
regarding “length of lint,” “quality & quantity,” and “easiness to pick” when taking samples from the stalk. 1861
diary transcript, p. 4, in the EverardGreen Baker Papers, Coll. 41, SHC/UNC.
52
   Lyman, Cotton Culture, pp. 121, 125. Also see Moore, “Cotton Breeding,” pp. 100-02.


                                                         16
        New varieties gained considerable attention in the southern and even the northern press. As an

example, in 1854 Harper’s Magazine reported that “whenever, by good fortune, a higher-yielding cotton

plant appears ‘instantly . . . the local newspapers teem with advertisements and commission houses are

filled with the magic seed [for marketing].’”53 Improved cottons of both the Sea Island (from Seabrook)

and Upland (Petit Gulf and extra-prolific) varieties were included in the Great Exhibition when it opened

in New York in 1853. The writer for the Times observed that “although the Crystal Palace contains many

articles which make more show, and will attract more attention, it has none which have exercised a

greater influence upon the civilization of world,” than these cottons.54

        In the late antebellum period, some of the seed producers who had started as planters, such as

Martin W. Philips, conducted ambitious privately-funded agricultural experiments and disseminated their

findings and latest creations for free. In time, Philips was “drawn into a profitable seed business selling

name brands from his Mississippi plantation.”55 Other seedsmen, such as David Dickson of Hancock

County, Georgia, were commercial operators from the beginning. Much like those of northern

manufacturers of agricultural machinery, Dickson’s advertisements in the 1850s (such as Figure 2)

featured testimonials from satisfied local customers.56 The new seeds were not protected by patents, yet

the innovations continued to flow. The speed of innovation appears to have been more rapid in the Upland

cotton sector, where an ethos of greater openness prevailed, than in the Sea Island sector where planters

closely guarded their improved seeds and cultural practices as trade secrets.



The Picking Revolution

        Advances in the efficiency of cotton picking are of special interest. On most cotton plantations,

picking represented the largest single use of labor. During the year, slaves on cotton plantations worked


53
   Thorpe, “Cotton and Its Cultivation,” p. 449.
54
   New York Times (26 July 1853), p. 1.
55
   Norse, “Southern Cultivator,” pp. 245-46.
56
   David Dickson Advertisement for Boyd's Extra Prolific, 1854, Hargrett Library Broadside Collection, 1850-1859,
Mss. 2622, Hargrett Rare Book & Manuscript Library, University of Georgia Libraries.


                                                       17
on many tasks, but the non-cotton activities were chiefly inputs into the production of the cotton cash

crop. Jobs such as raising corn and peas, tending animals, and clearing new land were, when possible,

scheduled to fill down times in the year-long cotton cycle. Although the cotton cycle varied with location

and weather, in general, preparing the land by clearing dead stalks started in January, plowing and

working to control weeds began soon thereafter, and planting and chopping accelerated the work pace

beginning in April. Depending on latitude and other factors, the picking season stretched from late August

into December and in some seasons even later. The rate of picking tended to peak in October and early

November when more cotton was open. Picking required dexterity and diligence. It involved stoop labor

to gather the low-lying bolls and repetitive motions of the hand amidst the plant’s thorny burrs. But it did

not require great physical strength, which contributed to the high rate of participation of the slave

population, including children and the elderly, during the picking season.

           Picking was the key binding constraint on cotton production. Capturing a sentiment often noted in

antebellum accounts, Gallman asserted that “a field hand could raise very much more cotton than he

could pick” and the plantation’s “capacity to pick . . . governed the volume of land put to cotton.”57

However, most estimates of labor requirements fail to appreciate that this constraint was not fixed over

time. As a rough approximation, in the early period, an individual slave could pick only one-half of the

acreage of cotton that he/she could plant and cultivate. With improvements in picking rates, this ratio

increased, allowing planters to expand cotton acreage and more evenly employ labor in higher value

tasks.58

           One sign of the importance of the harvest operations is that many slave masters kept extensive

logs detailing the daily picking output of individual slaves. Absentee owners often required their

overseers to keep such records so that the owners could better assess day-to-day farm activities, but many


57
   Gallman, “Self-Sufficiency,” p. 23, also 19-23. Also see Phillips, American Negro Slavery, p. 207; Anderson and
Gallman, “Slaves as Fixed Capital,” p. 36; and Wright, Political Economy, pp. 57-60.
58
   Mendenhall, “History of Agriculture in South Carolina,” p. 119, notes that in the early 1820s laborers could pick
only ½ to ¾ of the acreage they could plant and cultivate, but, p. 189, that the introduction of Mexican cottons
“practically eliminated” this imbalance.


                                                         18
resident owners also caught the recordkeeping bug.59 The data allowed for comparisons with past years,

and helped set expectations for tasking the pickers. These records were precursors to the time-in-motion

studies initiated by Frederick Taylor and the “Scientific Management” movement in the early twentieth

century.60

         Failing to meet picking standards had severe consequences. In 1834, S. A. Townes of Marion,

Alabama threatened to “make those bitches go at least 100 [pounds] or whip them like the devil.”61 In the

1830s, Dr. J. W. Monett of Mississippi asserted that after weighing an individual’s daily picking, masters

would whip slaves for light or trashy picking.62 On several occasions, Louisiana planter Bennet Barrow

ordered a whipping for all hands because the output was too low. As yet another example, John Edwin

Fripp of South Carolina recorded “popping” and “switching” his slaves for light picking. On the

Mississippi plantation of John Quitman and Henry Turner, a number of enslaved African-Americans ran

away rather than face punishment for light or trashy picking.63




59
   Absentee owners also desired the records to evaluate their overseers and to prevent shirking, malfeasance, and so
on. This motivation is suggested in the following passage in a 4 May 1834 letter from President Andrew Jackson in
Washington to his son, Andrew Jackson, Jr., back in Tennessee: “My son, when you left me we had a right to
believe our cotton crop would have yielded at least fifty thousand pounds baled cotton; we had a right from
information to believe we would have 180 thousand in the seed, to 200. Now it appears that there was not raised
more than about 114 to 120 thousand in the seed. I name this, that this fall you may guard against such imposition,
and have a cotton Book on which must be entered the daily picking of each hand, and make the overseer responsible
for the accuracy of the cotton Book.” Bassett, Correspondence of Andrew Jackson, pp. 263-64. Affleck’s Southern
Rural Almanac 1854, p.15, opined that it was “preposterous” to place an enterprise worth $50,000 to $200,000 in the
hands of an overseer who was unable or unwilling to keep accurate records.
60
   Fogel, Without Consent, p. 27; Metzer, “Rational Management,” pp. 123-50.
61
   Townes to George Franklin Townes of Greenville, South Carolina, 18 September 1834, in Townes Family Papers,
SCL/USC.
62
   In an appendix of Ingraham, Southwest, pp. 281-94, J. W. Monett wrote: “After the weighing is over, and the
baskets are emptied, or turned bottom upward, upon the scaffolds, the overseer takes the slate, and examines the
weights attached to each name. Those who are found to have brought in less than their usual quantity, unless for
good reasons, are called in the order of their names; the individual advances, and if his reasons are insufficient, he is
ordered to lie down upon his face, with his back exposed; when he receives ten, twenty, or fifty stripes with the
whip, according to his deserts. In this way the overseer goes over the list, punishing only those who have idled away
their time. . . . No one knows that he is to be punished until his name is called, when he has an opportunity of giving
his reasons for his imperfect day’s work.”
63
   Davis, Plantation Life, p. 162; on 19 October 1858, Fripp wrote: “gave nearly all of them a poping [sic] as they do
not go over more than a task a day - they should go over more ground or bring more cotton,” John Edwin Fripp
Papers, 1817-1905, RASP, Ser. J, pt. 3, reel 25, p. 712; Quitman family papers, 1784-1978, Ser. J, Pt. 6, reel 6, pp.
889, 891, 895.


                                                          19
A New Cotton Picking Dataset

         Plantation managers recorded picking data in various documents including plantation journals,

diaries, cotton books, ledgers, letters, and the like. Over time recordkeeping became more formalized with

many planters employing bound account books with printed templates designed especially for this

purpose. Such preprinted records, which appeared by the 1810s, undermine any romantic notion of a

sleepy plantation system run by pre-capitalist masters. The most popular cotton account book was

produced by Thomas Affleck, a noted nurseryman, experimenter, and farm journalist. The first edition of

the Affleck Plantation Journal and Account Book appeared in 1847. Within a few years he offered three

different volumes—one for small plantations with up to 40 slaves, one for mid-size plantations with 80

hands or less, and one for plantations with up to 120 hands.64 In addition to the pages efficiently laid out

for recording picking, the Affleck (and competing) books provided forms for listing the slaves’ names,

ages, and values, births and deaths, stock and equipment inventories, the weight of individual cotton

bales, and other valuable information. The volumes also contained space for a diary. The daily entries

(and marginal notes found with the picking records) often give a detailed sense of the pulse of plantation

life, including information on work assignments, plant varieties, crop damage due to insect and disease

infestations and bad weather, owner-overseer relations, cotton sales and quality, days lost to rain, and

whether or not the slaves worked a full or half day, whether the slaves worked on Saturdays and Sundays,

and the like. Of course the overseers and owners differed significantly in their attention to detail, but in

many instances we were able to supplement the information found in the picking records with

commentary extracted from diaries, letters, and other types of farm journals. Figure 3 shows an example

of two unusually legible and reasonably complete pages from an Affleck book. These two pages capture




64
  Williams, “Thomas Affleck,” pp. 40-48. In 1860 Affleck published a fourth book for plantations with more than
120 slaves, p. 46. Given Affleck’s practice of employing several different printers, it is difficult to determine the
total number of books issued. In letters to B. H. Norman (1 January 1851) and to Robert Sears (9 January 1851),
Affleck anticipated a combined market of 5,000 copies per annum for his cotton and sugar account books.
Letterbook 5-90, Thomas Affleck Papers, Special and Archival Collections, Texas A&M University.


                                                          20
the activities for the week of 22 October 1860 on the Eustatia Plantation in Mississippi detailing the

picking output of 54 slaves with about 260 individual picking entries.65

         Our dataset captures 704,800 individual picking entries from 142 separate plantations over a total

of 509 plantation-crop years spanning the period from 1801 to 1862. 474 of the crop years are from

Upland cotton operations and 35 are from Sea Island operations.66 The quantity and quality of the data

differ greatly from plantation to plantation. For 52 plantations we have data for just one, or only part of

one, picking season. At the other extreme we have data for 22 years for the Leak plantation located in

Tippah (now Benton) County, Mississippi. The Leak plantation sets the record for the most entries for a

single plantation at 79,602. To expand coverage for our investigation of changes in picking rates, we also

mined plantation records containing aggregate daily picking totals and the numbers of pickers. There are

40 plantation years in our sample for which we have only aggregate data.67

         We scoured public archives and private collections across the United States for plantation

records. The resulting sample is not distributed uniformly with cotton production over space or time.

Figure 4 displays the geographical distribution of our sample. The Old South region accounts for 103 of

our 474 Upland plantation year observations, with coverage extending from 1801 to 1862. The New

South makes up 371 Upland observations, beginning in 1805.68 Mississippi with 200 crop year

observations and Louisiana with 72 are especially well represented and coverage for this region extends

65
   Eustatia Plantation, Mississippi, Account Book 1861, Ohio Historical Center Archives. This plantation book is
featured on the PBS “Slavery and the Making of America” Web site.
66
   Sea Island cotton operations include 12 plantations and roughly 24,000 daily observations. For the James
Guignard plantation of Edisto, South Carolina we separate its Sea Island and Green Seed cotton operations.
Guignard Family Papers, SCL/USC. One of the Upland operations, the farm of German emigrant J. F. Leyendecker
of Colorado County, Texas may include only free workers. Leyendecker Family Papers, 1817-1987, The Center for
American History, University of Texas at Austin.
67
   As an example, over the 1840s, the records for James Henry Hammond’s plantation include a type of workbook
(pre-dating the Affleck publication) recording the number of workers performing each task or operation including
picking cotton, another set of accounts recording the total weight of cotton picked from each field each day, and a
third set of records tabulate total output by field. By combing these accounts we can derive a well-documented
estimate of the aggregate picking efficiency of the slaves on the Silver Bluff plantation. Such data are not as rich as
the individual-level records, but they are sufficiently informative to warrant inclusion in the plantation-level
analysis.
68
   We follow the convention of defining the Old South as including the members of the original 13 colonies
(Georgia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia) and the New South as those states entering the Union after
Independence (Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Texas).


                                                          21
back to 1805. In general, the data become more abundant over time. Over all states, we have data for 31

plantation years before 1820; 24 for the decade of the 1820s; 47 for the 1830s; 122 for the 1840s; 214 for

the 1850s; and 71 for the early 1860s.



Changes in Picking Efficiency

         Figure 5 documents the changes in daily picking rates on cotton plantations between 1801 and

1862. Panel A displays mean daily picking rates on a log scale for Upland cotton operations; Panel B does

the same for Sea Island cotton operations. Each data point represents the mean amount of cotton picked

per day for a plantation crop year. Thus a plantation with 300 entries covering only part of the picking

season has equal weight as a plantation with 5,000 entries spread across the entire season. The labels on

the observations indicate their locations by state (MS=Mississippi, LA=Louisiana, and so on) or their type

(SI=Sea Island).

         Table 2 reports regressions of the log of the mean picking rates on the linear and quadratic time

trends.69 The results are displayed in Figure 5 as the solid trend line. By these estimates, the mean pounds

picked increased over 2.3 percent per annum, rising from 28.1 pounds in 1801 to 114.2 pounds in 1862.

This represented an increase of 4.1 times. Our sample provides a better sense of the timing of the

transition, with the quadratic term indicating that the rise in picking rates was slowing down by the 1850s.

In the additional regressions, we also control for size of the picking labor force, gender composition,

seasonality of activity, and region, Old vs. New South.70 Including these controls reduces the size of the

sample by 78 observations. Evaluating equation (3) for Upland cotton operations at the sample means of

these controls indicates that adjusted picking rates more than tripled (3.19 times) between 1801 to 1862,


69
  Substituting the median for the mean does not significantly alter the results.
70
  Controlling for the age distribution of the labor force is difficult at the plantation level. In our future empirical
analysis of the individual-level picking data, we intend to include both gender and age controls. Such an analysis
should help separate the direct effects of gender on picking rates from indirect effects arising from the correlation of
labor force composition with other productivity-related attributes of the plantations that is suggested in the fixed-
effect regression results reported in Table 3. Non-peak activity is measured by picking in months other than
September, October, and November.


                                                          22
growing at a rate of 1.90 percent per annum. Note this calculation does not allow for regional shifts in

production; the coefficient on New South location in equation (3) indicates picking rates per day were

almost 57 percent (that is, exp[0.451]) higher in the New South than in the Old South.

        The picking rates do display increasing variation over time. The standard errors reported in Table

2 use the White robustness correction and the picking rates have already been transformed into logs

(percentage terms). But rather than viewing the heterogeneity as merely a statistical problem, we believe

that the high and increasing variance in plantation mean picking rates is an important phenomenon calling

for further investigation and interpretation. Focusing on the 1850s and early 1860s, the coefficient of

variation (the ratio of the standard deviation to the overall mean) of the average picking rates on Upland

operations was 0.404. Thus, on late antebellum era plantations, there was a one-standard-deviation spread

of roughly 40 percent in the average productivity per worker performing the key task in producing a

relatively standardized commodity trading in world markets. Yet as wide as the variation was in the 1850s

and early 1860s, all but one or two percent of the operations in that period had higher picking rates than

the median operation in the period before 1820; indeed, the breakpoint for the bottom 25 percent in the

later period was above the highest operation in the earlier period.



Why Did Picking Rates Increase?

        To explain the increase in picking rates we explore four hypotheses. First we ask if the increase in

economies of scale associated with the more efficient use of the gang system accounted for the upswing

in picking efficiency. We then look at a related issue by asking if planters learned to be more efficient

managers. Although both of these hypotheses play a prominent role in the cliometrics story of cross-

sectional efficiency differences, neither attracted much contemporary notice and neither appears to

explain much of the increase in picking efficiency in our sample. We next explore the impact of the

movement of cotton production onto superior western lands. We follow this discussion with an analysis

of the biological revolution in cotton varieties and the breeding activities that reshaped the antebellum

economy.

                                                     23
Scale and Gangs:

         Fogel and Engerman have argued that slave plantations had a significant efficiency advantage

because of their ability to exploit the “gang system.” According to this view, the gang system was an

innovation akin to the moving assembly line of the early twentieth century. Slaves “who toiled in the

gangs of the intermediate and large plantations were on average over 70 per cent more productive than

either free farmers [northern and southern] or slaves on small plantations.” Fogel asserts that under the

gang system slaves worked more intensely but for fewer hours than free workers. The “greater intensity

of labor per hour, rather than more hours of labor per day or more days of labor per year, is the reason the

index of total factor productivity is 39 percent higher for the gang-system plantations than for free

farms.”71

         One might expect that such significant productivity enhancing innovation would have been

widely discussed at the time—certainly Henry Ford’s assembly line did not go unnoticed.72 In fact, the

use of the term gang was rare in discussions of picking operations in the hundreds of cotton books and

plantation journals that we reviewed, usually occurring with reference to a trash, house, or children’s gang

performing some unusual activity. More generally, we have seen almost no slave era testimony extolling

the productivity advantages of the gang system (under any name) in any cotton production activity.

Nevertheless, was the gang system somehow responsible for the growth in picking efficiency? This is


71
   Fogel, Slavery Debates, pp. 28-39. Fogel argues that small slaveholders (those with 1-15 slaves) could not
effectively capture the benefits of the gang system, so plantations with more than 15 slaves account for nearly all of
the productivity advantage. Large plantations were only slightly more efficient than intermediate size units. The
gang system propelled slaves to work with less wasted motion, with an “unremitting, machine-like quality.” “It was
the gang system that forced men to work at the pace of an assembly line (called the gang) that made slave laborers
more efficient than free laborers.” Fogel, Without Consent, pp. 78-79. The work schedule was the result of a
conscious decision by slave owners. Long rest periods during the day and time off on the Sundays were not “boons
that slaveholders granted to their chattel but . . . conditions for achieving the desired level of intensity.” Fogel,
Slavery Debates, p. 33.
72
   Based on his careful review of the accounts of Mississippi plantations, Moore, Emergence, pp. 77-84, 95-96,
suggests that the traditional gang labor system was passing out of use in the 1840s. Philip Morgan has further argued
that U. B. Phillips’ claim that the gang labor system was employed on virtually all short staple cotton plantations
oversimplifies matters. Morgan, “Task and Gang Systems,” pp. 189-90, 197-98, 206-07. See also Wright, Slavery,
pp. 95-96.


                                                         24
very unlikely because by all accounts, including those of Fogel and Engerman, cotton picking was not a

gang activity. Picking was performed on an individual basis conceivably because of the widely different

skill levels of the pickers and the ability to easily monitor and measure output.73 But perhaps larger crews

were more efficient picking forces.

         To test for the effects of scale economies we introduce controls in specifications (2) and (3) of

Table 2 for plantation size as measured by the average number of pickers working per day. Plantations

with larger picking crews tended to have higher rates of picking per person (which is consistent with

economies of scale, positive correlations between size and managerial efficiency, and other

explanations).74 The measured effect of (the log of the) size of the average number of pickers as shown in

specification (2) for the Upland cotton operations appears quite large at 0.196. This would imply that

doubling the size of the crew would lead to a roughly 20 percent increase in daily output per picker.

Controlling for crew size reduces somewhat the estimated time effects, with the adjusted daily picking

rates increasing by 1.92 percent per annum.75 But including controls for seasonality, gender, and location

as shown in specification (3) of Table 2 for the Upland cotton operations measurably reduces the picking

crew coefficient.76

         Wright and others have long argued that a plantation’s size was correlated with its management

structure, location (climate and soil type), and other productivity-related attributes, which makes


73
   Fogel and Engerman, Time on the Cross, p. 206, observed that “harvest operations do not appear to have offered
the opportunities of division and specialization that existed during the planting and cultivation seasons. . . . In the
absence of an interdependence that could be exploited to promote an intense rhythm of work, planters attempted to
achieve the same objective by dividing harvest hands into competing groups. There were daily as well as weekly
races, with prizes (bonuses) offered to the winning team and to the leading individual picker. There were daily
weigh-ins of the cotton picked, and those who did not respond to the positive incentive had to face the abuse, verbal
or physical, of the driver, if they fell too far below the expected pace.” Our reading of a large number of plantation
records suggests that contests were far less common than the literature portrays. Moreover, contests continued into
the post-bellum era. As an example, the Hammond plantation records report a picking contest in September 1873,
Papers of John Henry Hammond, 1795-1865, RASP, Ser. A, pt. 1, reel, 1, p. 798.
74
   Wright, Political Economy, passim, “Efficiency of Slavery,” pp. 219-26, and Slavery, pp. 94-112.
75
   Our “test” of the scale hypothesis does not directly confront the essence of Fogel and Engerman’s hypothesis.
They claimed that the effect of scale was discontinuous—plantations with more than about 15 field hands were more
efficient than those with fewer hands. The vast majority of plantations in our sample had more than 15 field hands.
76
   This change is not an artifact of the downsized sample in specification (3); using the same sample with
specification (2) results in a coefficient on the Log(Pickers) variable of 0.193, (robust s.e. 0.028).


                                                          25
disentangling the separate effects difficult using cross-sectional data. Our panel data allow us to address

this issue. Table 3 presents results on the determinants of daily picking rates controlling for plantation

fixed effects. (This requires dropping 46 Upland cotton operations for which only one year of data is

available.) Adding these controls eliminates the crew-size effect.77 It also diminishes the coefficient on

gender, suggesting that the fraction of pickers who were male was correlated with other unmeasured

productivity-related attributes of the plantations. The time effects remain strong, consistent with a 1.87

percent increase per year in picking rates even while holding location constant. Consistent with Wright’s

hypothesis, plantation characteristics such as location and soil quality clearly had a strong effect on

picking productivity.



More Efficient Exploiters:

         To control for the possibility that picking rates increased because slave owners learned over time

to exploit larger picking crews more efficiently, we also included a term interacting the year and log of

the picking crew size. Its coefficient had a statistically insignificant effect (at the 10 percent level) and its

inclusion provided no additional explanatory power. If planters were becoming better managers (or just

more callous and more demanding, i.e. better slave drivers) this increased “skill” should have allowed

them to utilize their slaves more effectively in other activities besides picking Upland cotton. We can test

this managerial hypothesis by looking at a closely related activity—the production of Sea Island cotton.

As Panel B of Figure 5 indicates and specifications (1) and (3) for Sea Island operations in Table 2 show,

picking rates for this type of cotton changed little over the antebellum period. This is precisely what one

would expect from reading contemporary accounts. While there was considerable testimony proclaiming

the wonders of new Upland varieties, there was no parallel trumpeting of the productivity virtues of new




77
  This change again is not an artifact of changing the sample. Running specification (2) without fixed effects on the
sample of Upland operations with multiple observations yields a coefficient on the Log(Pickers) variable of 0.186,
(robust s.e. 0.030).


                                                         26
Sea Island varieties. Our conclusion at this juncture is that managerial innovations (our first two

hypotheses) unlikely accounted for much of the increase in picking efficiency.



The Shift in Output to Better Lands:

        The territorial expansion of the cotton-slave frontier was one of the most controversial issues of

the antebellum era, with claims and counterclaims regarding the importance of new lands in preserving

the political and economic power of the slave South. Much of this literature lies at the foundation of the

early debates over the profitability of the slave system.78 For all the discussion of the political and

economic implications of the spread of slavery, there has been no precise measure of the actual spread of

cotton culture and little understanding of how technological forces help explain the pattern of settlement

of the cotton South. We offer a fresh perspective on the geographical movement of cotton production. In

the early 1790s, U.S. production was concentrated along the coast of Georgia and South Carolina. By

1839 the geographic center (median) of the production of Upland cotton was near Greensboro in west

central Alabama, and by 1859 the center was just west of the Mississippi-Alabama border. To provide

perspective, it was not until the 1880s that the median geographic center of wheat production shifted west

of this longitude. The speed of cotton’s westward movement before the Civil War is all the more

impressive when one realizes that over the entire period from 1860 to 1920, the geographic center of

cotton production remained within the boundaries of the state of Mississippi.79 Figure 6, which plots

annual state-level commercial cotton production between 1800 and 1860, offers another perspective on

the enormous regional shift in cotton production.80 The shift away from the Old South began in earnest in

the early 1810s. By 1833 its share had fallen from over 95 percent of total output to less than one-half and



78
   Phillips, American Negro Slavery, pp. 169-86, 332-37; Ramsdell, “Natural Limits,” pp. 151-71; Passell and
Wright, “Efficiency,” pp. 1188-1202; and Lee, Westward Movement. The same forces that contributed to the
western movement of slavery also help explain the movement of slaves from urban to agricultural employment. Our
analysis adds to Goldin’s, Urban Slavery, emphasis on “pull” factors in explaining the decline in urban slavery.
79
   Olmstead and Rhode, Creating Abundance, chapter 13.
80
   Watkins, King Cotton, passim.


                                                      27
by 1859 to less than one-quarter. In fact the westward shift was even more pronounced than the aggregate

state-level data reveal because Georgia’s production shifted markedly to the interior.

        The effects of the westward shift in production and the increase in picking rates were closely

intertwined. Figure 7 and Table 4 address this issue by decomposing our picking sample into the Old and

New South. Focusing on specification (1) in Table 4 and on the period when data exist for both regions,

we observe that estimated picking rates in the Old South increased from 38.7 pounds per day in 1811 to

84.4 pounds by 1862. This represented an increase of 1.52 percent per annum. Estimated picking rates in

the New South in 1811 were 42.3 pounds per day, about 9 percent higher than in the Old South at that

year (and likely within error bounds of the estimate). But picking rates grew much more rapidly in the

New South, reaching an estimated 125.4 pounds in 1862. This was 49 percent higher than in the Old

South the same year. It was three times higher—consistent with a growth rate of 2.13 percent per

annum—than in the New South in 1811. Note that growth in the Old South was roughly linear in time

(the quadratic coefficient is small) whereas growth in the New South was rapid in the 1820s and 1830s

and then slowed. As a result, the gap between picking rates in 1840 was huge—the average picker of the

New South gathered 110.7 pounds per day whereas his or her counterpart in the Old South collected only

61.3 pounds. (This calculation does not control for picker characteristics.)

        Table 5 reports the results controlling for plantation fixed effects for the Old and New South

samples. The regional differences in the growth rates become smaller with these controls. The reported

levels, reflecting differences in both observable and unobservable variables, remain significantly higher

for the New South plantations than for the Old South plantations.

        The dynamics of southern development were a function of the interaction of biological

innovations and western movement. The existing view emphasizes that the West enjoyed a productivity

advantage because the land in its vast alluvial basins was inherently better than the land common in the

East. Moreover, the virgin land in the West had not yet been mined of its nutrients as had purportedly

occurred in the East. However, these long-standing explanations of East-West productivity differences tell

only part of the story because the rapid westward movement in cotton production in the years before 1833

                                                     28
occurred precisely when western cotton producers enjoyed their greatest varietal advantage over eastern

producers. Most of the new cotton varieties were invented in the West, and they were undoubtedly best

suited for the area where they first evolved thereby enhancing the West’s comparative advantage. The

new varieties gradually were adapted to displace older varieties in a wide spectrum of geoclimatic

conditions, but the new technologies were particularly suited for more fertile lands. The large plantation

regions of the West had better soils to start with, but in a sense biological innovation made these soils

even better. The rapid increase in picking rates before 1840 followed by a leveling off displayed in Panel

B of Figure 7 probably reflects the earlier and more rapid diffusion of new varieties in the West.



Biological Innovation:

        We have explored the importance of biological innovation at several points earlier in this article.

We can gain further insight into the impact of varieties by examining changes in picking efficiency on the

same plantation over time, thus controlling partially for geoclimatic conditions. To qualify for this

experiment a plantation had to have records for the years before and after the probable introduction of

Mexican cotton. The Locust Grove plantation located in Jefferson County, Mississippi and the Oakland

Plantation located in West Feliciana Parish, Louisiana both met this test.

        The managers of the Locust Grove plantation kept picking records for 19 consecutive years

beginning in 1825.81 (The surviving records do not indicate the types of cotton grown.) For the first five

years of this period the mean picking rates averaged 84.6 pounds a day. It is likely that Mexican cotton

was introduced in these early years. Over the last five years the mean averaged 119.6 pounds. This

implies an annual growth rate of about 2.5 percent. The records of Nathaniel Evans (and family) are

particularly valuable because they begin well before the widespread introduction of Mexican cotton. In

the years 1811-1817, Evans planted Creole Black Seed. The individual picking records for this period


81
  Locust Grove Slave Ledger, MUM00275, The Department of Archives and Special Collections, J.D. Williams
Library, The University of Mississippi; Barney and Flesher, “Early Nineteenth-Century Productivity Accounting,”
pp. 275-94.


                                                       29
(1811-13 and 1817) show unweighted mean picking rates of 68.5, 66.6, 83.6, and 64.3 pounds, with an

overall mean for the four years of 70.8 pounds.82 Nathaniel Evans died in 1819, and the management of

his Oakland Plantation passed to his wife Sarah and son John N. Evans. For the 1819 season, the

plantation diary enumerates the number of slaves picking and the total amount of cotton picked for 50

days (1,542 slave work days) starting 1 January 1820 and ending 7 April 1820. This was a very late

picking season and the mean daily picking rate for this period was only 43.6 pounds per worker.83

         We can connect the early pre-Mexican picking rates with cotton picking data for 1839-1840 and

1866. For a total of 10 days in September 1839 and November 1840, John N. Evans recorded the number

of slaves picking and the total quantity of cotton harvested. The daily mean per slave for this period was

146.7 pounds.84 For 1866 we again have individual picking data, albeit only a fragment, consisting of the

names and quantity picked by 20 freedmen and women on 18 and 19 October. For these two days the

mean picking rate was 157.3 pounds, or over 2 times that recorded in the pre-Mexican era. Because

picking rates varied significantly over the season and October would typically be a peak period, it is

important to fine-tune our comparison. In the 1811 to 1817 period the mean picking rate during October

was 74 pounds. In 1866, 12 of the 40 observations exceeded 200 pounds and one exceeded 300 pounds.

By comparison, in October of the four years for which we have data in the 1810s, only two out of the

1,695 observations exceeded 200 pounds. It is most likely that these comparisons significantly understate

the differences in picking rates that would have occurred had we had data comparing the 1810s with the

late 1850s when slavery still flourished, because picking rates in the later stages of the Civil War and in




82
   Nathaniel Evans and Family Papers, 1791-1865, RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reel 9, pp. 754-65, 781-85, 794, 804-13.
83
   Ibid., pp. 725-35. Given that these data for the 1819/20 season are for late in the picking season (picking season
seldom stretched beyond early January), the average for the entire 1819 season would surely have been higher. On
the other hand, the individual picking data for 1813 are limited to the peak of the picking season in late September
and October, and more complete data would undoubtedly lead to a significant lowering of that year’s recorded mean
of 83.6 pounds. In 1839 and 1840 Evans regularly noted the amount of cotton picked every day, but he was less
conscientious in noting the number of slaves picking. There were no systematic differences in the quantities picked
per day on days that he listed the number of workers, thus it is reasonable to presume that the mean for these ten
days was in rough accordance with the more general picking performance.
84
   Ibid., pp. 507-15.


                                                         30
the immediate postwar years fell significantly on other plantations for which we have data.85 Overall, the

evidence drawn from the Oakland Plantation is consistent with the general trends shown in Figures 5 and

7.86

         We noted earlier that there was almost no contemporary testimony extolling the productivity

virtues of the gang system. By contrast there was a wealth of statements attributing the increase in picking

efficiency to the change in cotton varieties. As an example, in 1852 De Bow’s Review reproduced a week

of picking data from the 1817 cotton book of G.W. Lovelace of Sicily Island, Louisiana. Over a six day

period his slaves averaged 46 pounds of hard to pick Tennessee Green Seed cotton a day, and the most

anyone picked in a day was 78 pounds. The article noted that Lovelace “was a good thrifty planter in his

time, and had some choice negroes,” but that by 1852 comparable quality hands could pick as much in a

day as Lovelace’s pickers could pick in a week because of the change in cotton varieties.87



Measured Performance in a Deteriorating Environment

         Our estimates of the actual increase in cotton picking rates only partially capture the full effects

of biological innovations because they do not account for negative shocks borne by producers. The

economic history of cotton is often written as if the boll weevil, which first appeared in 1892, was the

crop’s only serious pest. However, plantation accounts, the nineteenth century southern press, and

entomologists’ reports clearly show that antebellum planters paid keen attention to the insects and

diseases that preyed upon their cotton. Without the infusion of new varieties, yields and picking rates

85
   This finding is in line with Shlomowitz’s, “Origins,” pp. 557-75, depiction of unsettled labor markets during the
postwar years. Although we do not know the variety planted in 1866, we can be fairly confident that it was a
Mexican hybrid. The records of Nathaniel’s son, John N. Evans, show that between 1845 and 1859, he planted over
10 varieties on his Oakland Plantation, including Mexican, White Mexican, Mastodon, Prolific, and seed from Nutt,
Vick, McGhees, Herbert, Hamilton, and other breeders. Nathaniel Evans and Family Papers, 1791-1865, RASP, Ser.
I, pt. 2, reel 9, pp. 568-600, and 945-87.
86
   A further indication of the effect of new cottons on picking rates comes from the Stirling Plantation in West
Feliciana Parish, Louisiana. For 1847, Stirling’s plantation accounts record that the slaves picked Mastodon cotton
on four of the 86 picking days. (The cotton picked on the other days was almost undoubtedly of Mexican stock.)
Regression analysis controlling for the fixed effects of the 58 individual slaves and for the date in the season reveals
that picking rates were 32 percent higher when the Mastodon cotton was picked. Lewis Stirling and Family Papers,
1784-1865, RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reel 25.
87
   Kilpatrick, “Historical and Statistical Collections,” pp. 632-33.


                                                          31
would have declined significantly in response to the increase in disease, pest, and weed problems. The

most menacing disease was cotton rot and the most destructive insects were the boll worm and the cotton

worm (known also in the antebellum era as the caterpillar, the army worm, and le chenille). The damage

caused by these two insects increased significantly in the period after 1840. In addition, the introduction

from foreign lands and subsequent spread of a number of weeds led to a deteriorating environment. As an

example, Johnson grass, which became a problem in 1840s, significantly increased the problem of weed

control and even with increased diligence sapped cotton yields and picking efficiency.88

        A disease called “the rot” takes center stage in our discussion because it played a major role in the

early transition in varieties. As noted earlier, historians of Mississippi Valley agriculture, where the rot

was first mentioned, relate how it wiped out the early Creole Black Seed cotton popular in the region.

According to this story, around 1810 to 1815 planters turned to Tennessee Green Seed in desperation, but

soon it too became susceptible to rot. Planters then turned to Mexican cotton which gained acceptance in

the 1820’s in the Mississippi Valley and which by many accounts was initially totally immune to the

disease.89 Many of these renditions of rot relied on statements made in agricultural journals, in which

observers reflected on events decades after the fact. Such retrospective accounts must be taken with some

skepticism given the blurring effect of time on memories. Contemporary newspapers and plantation

records offer a more exact sense of the disease’s impact.

        The first mention of the disease that we located was in a letter from Natchez, Mississippi

Territory published in the Alexandria Gazette on October 12, 1812. “The cotton crops will be late and

short, on account of the wetness of the season causing the early balls to rot off.”90 Our search of

contemporary newspapers housed in the Mississippi Department of Archives and History found rot first

referenced in March 1814 when the commission merchant John Henderson advertised that he had “just


88
   For an analysis of this problem in the wheat economy see Olmstead and Rhode, “Red Queen,” pp. 929-66.
89
   See for example, Wailes, Report, pp. 143-45; Watkins, King Cotton, pp. 3, 98-99, 164, 167-68, 193; Sydnor,
Slavery in Mississippi, p. 182; Gray, History, pp. 677, 689-90; Moore, Emergence, pp. 11-12, and Agriculture, pp.
31-36.
90
   “Extract of a letter dated Natchez (M. T.) September 7, 1812,” Alexandria Gazette (12 October 1812), p. 3.


                                                        32
received a quantity of Tennessee Cotton Seed. A change of seed is said to secure the crop against the rot.

Planters wishing to make the experiment will do well to apply soon.”91 This account suggests that the

change to Tennessee seed was still in the experimental stages several years after some historians have

declared that the transition was complete. In the autumn of 1814, letters from New Orleans reported that

“rot is destroying the cotton dreadfully.”92 In 1815 and 1816 news accounts continued to describe an

“alarming” situation in the lower Mississippi Valley with loss rates around fifty percent of the crop.93 By

1817 the disease was hitting cotton in Georgia, Alabama Territory, South Carolina, and possibly other

areas. One news account reported rot in Alabama Territory in 1817/18, with one-half of the crop

destroyed.94 In 1819 there was severe damage across a wide range of South Carolina. The switch to Green

Seed cottons as a defensive measure clearly continued in some regions into the 1820s. In 1819 James H.

Dearing ran an advertisement aimed at Alabama planters offering 2,000 bushels of green cotton seed. The

seller implied that the seed was free of rot.95 In that same year Georgia planter and former U.S. Senator

George W. Troup described the disease’s devastation with crop losses ranging from 25 to 75 percent.

Farmers did not limit their search for a cure to Green Seed cotton as Troup requested that an enterprising

merchant import seeds from the “Brazils” in the hope that they would prove rot resistant.96 In the

meantime dire reports continued from Mississippi and Louisiana.

        Plantation diaries reinforce the impression that the rot arrived in parts of the Mississippi Valley

well after 1810 and that the transitions away from Black Seed to Green Seed varieties and subsequently to

Mexican varieties were drawn out processes that took place only after considerable experimentation—

with farmers often testing all three varieties simultaneously. The disease hit Nathanial Evans’ Louisiana


91
   Mississippi Republican (23 March 1814), p. 1. At about the same time another merchant, E. Turner, advertized
that “three flat boats loaded with good sound Cotton Seed, of the growth of last year one their way from Madison
county to Natchez,” Mississippi Republican (2 March 1814), p. 1.
92
   American Watchman (5 November 1814), p. 2; and Rhode-Island Republican (2 November 1814), p. 3.
93
   For example see the Boston Gazette (20 November 1815), p. 1.
94
   Baltimore Patriot & Mercantile Advertiser (20 February 1818), p. 2.
95
   The Halcyon and Tombecbe Public Advertiser. From the context this advertisement was published in 1819,
probably January.
96
   Troup’s appeal was reproduced widely in the press. For different versions see The New-York Columbian (12
October 1819), p. 2, and American Farmer (22 October 1819), p. 237.


                                                        33
plantation hard in 1813. In August he noted that “the Bolls continue to Rott and the forms fall off.” John

Palfrey of Attakapas, Louisiana reported in October 1815 that the disease was causing financial

embarrassment, and in October 1817 John Bisland of the Natchez area lamented that he expected to “lose

one half of the cotton by the rot.”97 Louisiana planter David Rees was fighting the disease into the latter

part of the 1820s, experimenting with Black Seed, Green Seed, and Mexican cottons. Rees was clearly

growing all three varieties at one time and his account suggests that his Black Seed cottons often did

better than his Green Seed. The statements of other contemporaries contradict the standard rendition that

Green Seed cottons were universally more rot resistant than Black Seed. Alexander Lawton of Beauford,

South Carolina reached this conclusion in 1817 when he lamented that “we were visited by the black rot

also, which destroy'd from one fourth to one half of the planters crops of green seed cotton, it did not

affect black seed cotton.” John Connors of Lancaster, South Carolina also reported that the disease did

more damage to his Green Seed than to his Black Seed cotton.98 Other plantation documents confirm that

the disease caused terrible damage into the mid-1820s in South Carolina. The decline in the frequency of

the disease’s mention corresponded with the introduction of Mexican cottons and there was a strong

causal connection in the minds of many planters. However, early accounts of Mexican cottons also being

damaged undermine the frequent claims that the new cottons were totally resistant. Nevertheless, there is

little doubt that the transition to Mexican cottons helped ward off losses due to diseases and insects, both

because of direct genetic resistance to disease and the cotton’s relatively early ripening characteristics. In

the 1840s and 1850s both disease and insect problems increased significantly with the reappearance of rot

and the aforementioned attacks by the boll worm and cotton worm. These problems further propelled the

search for resistant varieties. The upshot is that the measured efficiency improvements that we report in

this paper understate the productivity impacts of biological innovation in the antebellum years.

97
   Nathaniel Evans and Family Papers, 1791-1865, RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reel 9, p. 792; Palfrey Family Papers, 1776-
1918, RASP, Ser. I, pt. 1, reel 1, p. 184; Letter to James Ure, 25 October 1817, Bisland-Shields Family Collection,
1773-1969, RASP, Ser. N, reel 1, p. 522.
98
   1822 and 1826 plantation journals in Davis Rees Papers, 1803-1835, RASP, Ser. H, reel 29, pp. 784-858, and reel
30, pp. 5-15; Alexander Robert Lawton Papers, 1774-1897, RASP, Ser. J, pt. 3, reel 26, p. 672; 22 August 1822,
John Connors Papers, SCL/USC, p. 65.


                                                        34
Conclusion

         Technological changes revolutionized southern cotton production in the 60 years preceding the

Civil War. The amount of cotton a typical slave picked per day increased about 2.3 percent per year due,

primarily, to the introduction and perfection of superior cotton varieties. The increase in picking

efficiency correlated with yield and quality improvements which further increased the incentives to grow

cotton. These technological changes help make sense of the long-run movements in cotton and slave

prices.99 They also provide new perspectives on many long-standing issues, including the rapid westward

march of cotton production and the slave population; the movement of slaves out of industrial and other

urban pursuits into cotton; and the roles of scale, the gang labor system, geography, and other factors in

determining productivity. The increase in picking rates and in the quality of U.S. cotton also increased the

competitiveness of U.S. producers relative to those in the West Indies, Brazil, India, and Egypt. By the

1850s, the U.S. accounted for over 80 percent of the cotton consumed in Europe and America. British

cotton interests were aware of the cotton variety changes underway in the United States, but in spite of

repeated efforts they were unable to adapt the new technologies to their Asian colonies.100 The location-

specific nature of the innovation process was tailored to fit the environment of the U.S. South and did not

immediately spillover to benefit competing regions. The United States maintained the quality advantage

in world cotton markets until the boll weevil largely wiped out the production of long and medium staple

varieties in the American South roughly 40 years after the Civil War.

        To put the pre-Civil War increase in picking efficiency into perspective, the early (circa 1860)

mechanical reaper, which represents the textbook example of an antebellum laborsaving mechanical

innovation, increased wheat harvest labor efficiency relative to using a cradle by roughly 50 to 100

99
   We have focused on biological innovations, but cotton farmers also adopted many laborsaving mechanical
innovations. As two examples, scrapers that allowed hands to weed about two-thirds more land per day than was
possible with traditional hoeing gained popularity in the 1840s, and machine seeders became common by the 1850s.
Gray, History, pp. 689-702, 797. Adjustments in the time of planting, the density of seeding, and in plowing
practices, all effected land and labor productivity. Moore, Agriculture, pp. 46-47, and Emergence, pp. 30-34, 50.
100
    Compiled from Dana, Cotton From Seed to Loom, p. 251.


                                                       35
percent.101 The data on the impact of Mexican hybrids suggest that their impact on cotton harvest

efficiency likely surpassed that of the reaper on the grain harvest in the antebellum era.102 The total

impact of the Mexican hybrids would of course have been even greater because of their effects on yields

and cotton quality. The mechanical reaper had no parallel impact on either yields or quality. But the

Mexican cottons did have one important point in common with the reaper and many other mechanical

innovations. The new easier picking cotton varieties helped smooth out the peak-load labor demands so

that the labor hours needed for the harvest more closely approximated those needed for non-harvest tasks.

This led to a decline in the often-heard comment that farmers planted more cotton than they could pick,

and (as with the diffusion of the reaper) it presumably led to an increase in acres planted. These were

some of the ways that biological innovations reshaped the opportunities cotton farmers faced and

fundamentally altered the antebellum southern economy.




101
    In actuality it was the reaper and the use of additional horsepower that yielded this result.
102
    Mechanical technologies were not static—the reaper of 1860 represented a step in a sequence of developments
that eventually led to the grain combine. But the biological learning of the pre-1860 era also laid the foundation for
later spinoffs important in the development of American agriculture.


                                                          36
References

Affleck, Thomas. "The Early Days of Cotton Growing in the South-West." De Bow's Review 10,

       no. 6 (1851): 668-9.

Affleck, Thomas. Affleck’s Southern Rural Almanac, and Plantation and Garden Calendar for

       1854. Washington, MS: Thomas Affleck, 1853.

Alabama State Intelligencer [Tuscaloosa, AL], Various issues.

Alexandria Gazette [Alexandria, VA], 12 October 1812.

American Farmer [Baltimore, MD], Various issues.

American Mercury [Hartford, CT], 10 October 1826.

American Watchman [Wilmington, DE], 5 November 1814.

Anderson, Ralph, and Robert E. Gallman. "Slaves as Fixed Capital: Slave Labor and Southern

       Economic Development." Journal of American History 64, no. 1 (1977): 24-46.

Baltimore Patriot & Mercantile Advertiser [Baltimore, MD], 20 February 1818.

Barney, D., and D. L. Flesher. "Early Nineteenth-Century Productivity Accounting: The Locust

       Grove Slave Ledger." Accounting, Business and Financial History 4, no. 2 (1994): 275-

       94.

Bassett, John Spencer, ed. Correspondence of Andrew Jackson. Vol. 5. Washington, DC:

       Carnegie Institution of Washington, 1926-1935.

Boston Gazette [Boston, MA], 20 November 1815.

Brubaker, Curt L., and Jonathan F. Wendel. "Reevaluating the Origin of Domesticated Cotton

       (Gossypium Hirsutum; Malvanceae) Using Nuclear Restriction Fragment Length

       Polymorphisms (RFLPs)." American Journal of Botany 81, no. 10 (1994): 1309-26.




                                              37
Brubaker, Curt L., E. M. Bourland, and Jonathan F. Wendel. "The Origin and Domestication of

       Cotton." In Cotton: Origin, History, Technology, and Production, edited by C. Wayne

       Smith and J. Tom Cothren, 3-31. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1999.

Campbell, John Douglas. "The Gender Division of Labor, Slave Reproduction, and the Slave

       Family Economy on Southern Cotton Plantations, 1800-1864." PhD, University of

       Minnesota, 1988.

Carter, Susan B., et al., eds. Historical Statistics of the United States: Earliest Times to the

       Present. Millennial ed. 5 Vols. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Chaplin, Joyce E. An Anxious Pursuit: Agricultural Innovation and Modernity in the Lower

       South, 1730-1815. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1993.

Claiborne, J. F. H. Mississippi, as a Province, Territory, and State with Biographical Notices of

       Eminent Citizens. 1. Jackson, MS: Power and Barksdale, 1880.

Collings, Gilbeart H. Production of Cotton. New York: John Wiley, 1926.

Columbian Museum [Savannah, GA], 27 March 1798.

Conrad, Alfred H., and John R. Meyer. The Economics of Slavery and Other Studies in

       Econometric History. Chicago: Aldine, 1964.

Craig, Lee A., and Thomas Weiss. Rural Agricultural Workforce by County, 1800 to 1900

       [Computer file]. Oxford, OH: EH.Net, Miami University [distributor], 1998. Available

       from http://eh.net/databases/agriculture/.

Craig, Lee A., Michael R. Haines, and Thomas Weiss. Development, Health, Nutrition, and

       Mortality: The Case of the ‘Antebellum Puzzle’ in the United States. NBER Working

       Paper Series on Historical Factors in Long Run Growth, Historical Paper 130.

       Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, 2000.



                                                  38
Craig, Lee A., Michael R. Haines, and Thomas Weiss. U.S. Censuses of Agriculture, by County,

       1840-1880 [Computer file]. Raleigh, NC: Unpublished files graciously provided by the

       authors, Dept. of Economics, North Carolina State University, 2000.

The Cultivator [Albany, NY], June 1840.

Dana, William B. Cotton From Seed to Loom: A Handbook of Facts for the Daily Use of

       Producer, Merchant and Consumer. New York: William B. Dana & Co., 1878.

Davis, Edwin A., ed. Plantation Life in the Florida Parishes of Louisiana, 1836-1846, As

       Reflected in the Diary of Bennet H. Barrow. New York: AMS Press, 1967.

Donnell, E. J. Chronological and Statistical History of Cotton. Reprint of 1872 ed. Wilmington,

       DE: Scholarly Resources, 1973.

Du Pre, Lewis. Observations on the Culture of Cotton. Georgetown, GA: Elliot and Burd, 1799.

Dunbar, William. Life, Letters, and Papers of William Dunbar: of Elgin, Morayshire, Scotland,

       and Natchez, Mississippi: Pioneer Scientist of the Southern United States. Edited by Eron

       Rowland. Jackson, MI: Press of the Mississippi Historical Society, 1930.

Farmer & Gardener, and Live-Stock Breeder and Manager [Baltimore, MD], 22 December

       1835.

Farmers' Register [Shellbanks, VA], June 1834.

Fogel, Robert W. The Slavery Debates, 1952-1990: A Memoir. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State

       University Press, 2003.

Fogel, Robert W. Without Consent or Contract: The Rise and Fall of American Slavery. New

       York: W. W. Norton, 1989.




                                              39
Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Engerman, eds. Without Consent or Contract: The Rise and

       Fall of American Slavery: Technical Papers. 1st ed. Vol. 1, Markets and Production.

       New York: Norton, 1992.

Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Engerman. "Explaining the Relative Efficiency of Slave

       Agriculture in the Antebellum South." American Economic Review 12 (1977): 275-96.

Fogel, Robert W., and Stanley L. Engerman. Time on the Cross: The Economics of American

       Negro Slavery. 1st ed. Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1974.

Foust, James D. The Yeoman Farmer and Westward Expansion of U. S. Cotton Production. New

       York: Arno Press, 1975, c1969.

Fryxell, Paul A. The Natural History of the Cotton Tribe (Malvaceae, Tribe Gossypieae). 1st ed.

       College Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 1979.

Gallman, Robert E. "Self-Sufficiency in the Cotton Economy of the Antebellum South."

       Agricultural History 44, no. 1 (1970): 5-23.

Genius of Universal Emancipation [Mount Pleasant, OH], 30 October 1897.

Georgia Gazette [Savannah, GA], 30 April 1801.

Goldin, Claudia. Urban Slavery in the American South, 1820-1860: A Quantitative History.

       Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976.

Gray, Lewis Cecil. History of Agriculture in the Southern United States to 1860. Reprint ed. Vol.

       2. New York: Peter Smith, 1941.

Halcyon and Tombecbe Public Advertiser [St. Stephen's, AL], ca. 1819.

Handy, R. B. "History and General Statistics of Cotton." In The Cotton Plant: Its History,

       Botany, Chemistry, Culture, Enemies, and Uses, edited by Charles Dabney, 17-66.

       Washington, DC: GPO, 1896.



                                               40
Hayami, Yujiro, and Vernon Ruttan. Agricultural Development: An International Perspective.

       Rev. and exp. ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985.

Hemphill, W. Edwin, ed. The Papers of John C. Calhoun. Vol. 9, 1824-1825. Columbia, SC:

       University of South Carolina Press, 1976.

Ingraham, Joseph Hilt. The Southwest by a Yankee. Vol. 2. New York: Harper and Brothers,

       1835.

Kilpatrick, Dr. "Historical and Statistical Collections of Louisiana: The Parish of Catahoula, Part

       2." De Bow's Review 12, no. 6 (1852): 631-46.

Lakwete, Angele. Inventing the Cotton Gin: Machine and Myth in Antebellum America.

       Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003.

Landes, David S. The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development

       in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University

       Press, 1969.

Lebergott, Stanley. The Americans: An Economic Record. New York: Norton, 1984.

Lee, Susan P. The Westward Movement of the Cotton Economy, 1840-1860: Perceived Interests

       and Economic Reality. New York: Columbia University Press, 1975.

Lyman, Joseph B. Cotton Culture. New York: Orange Judd, 1868.

Mendenhall, Marjorie Stratford. "A History of Agriculture in South Carolina 1790 to 1860: An

       Economic and Social Study." PhD diss., University of North Carolina, 1940.

Metzer, Jacob. "Rational Management, Modern Business Practices, and Economies of Scale in

       the Ante-bellum Southern Plantations." Explorations in Economic History 12, no. 2

       (1975): 123-50.

Mississippi Republican [Natchez, MS], 23 March 1814.



                                                41
Moore, John Hebron, and Margaret D. Moore. Cotton Culture on the South Carolina Frontier:

       Journal of John Baxter Fraser, 1804-1807. N.p.: Privately printed, 1997.

Moore, John Hebron. "Cotton Breeding in the Old South." Agricultural History 30, no. 3 (1956):

       95-104.

Moore, John Hebron. Agriculture in Ante-Bellum Mississippi. New York: Bookman Associates,

       1958.

Moore, John Hebron. The Emergence of the Cotton Kingdom in the Old Southwest, Mississippi,

       1770-1860. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1988.

Morgan, Philip D. "Task and Gang Systems: The Organization of Labor on New World

       Plantations." In Work and Labor in Early America, edited by Stephen Innes, 189-220.

       Chapel Hill, NC: Published for the Institute of Early American History and Culture by

       the University of North Carolina Press, 1988.

New York Times [New York, NY], 26 July 1853.

The New-York Columbian [New York, NY], 12 October 1819.

Norse, Clifford C. "The Southern Cultivator, 1843-1861." PhD diss., Florida State University,

       1969.

Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. "The Red Queen and the Hard Reds: Productivity

       Growth in American Wheat, 1800-1940." Journal of Economic History 62, no. 4 (2002):

       929-66.

Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. Creating Abundance: Biological Innovation and

       American Agricultural Development. New York: Cambridge University Press,

       forthcoming 2008.




                                              42
Parker, William N. "Labor Productivity in Cotton Farming: The History of a Research."

       Agricultural History 53, no. 1 (1979): 228-44.

Parker, William N., and Robert E. Gallman. Southern Farms Study, 1860 [Computer file]. Ann

       Arbor, MI: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [producer and

       distributor], 1991. Available from

       http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/ICPSR/STUDY/07419.xml [Membership required

       for access].

Passell, Peter, and Gavin Wright. "The Efficiency of Pre-Civil War Territorial Expansion on the

       Price of Slaves." Journal of Political Economy 80, no. 6 (1972): 1188-202.

Phillips, M. W. "Mexican Cotton Seed." Commercial Review of the South and West 2, no. 4

       (1846): 279-80.

Phillips, Ulrich B. American Negro Slavery. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press,

       1966.

Poehlman, John Milton, and David Allen Sleper. Breeding Field Crops. 4th ed. Ames: Iowa

       State University Press, 1995.

Porcher, Richard Dwight, and Sarah Fick. The Story of Sea Island Cotton. 1st ed. Charleston,

       SC: Wyrick, 2005.

Purseglove, J. W. Tropical Crops: Dicotyledons. Vol. 2. New York: John Wiley, 1968.

Ramsdell, Charles W. "The Natural Limits of Slavery Expansion." Mississippi Valley Historical

       Review 16, no. 2 (1929): 151-71.

Rhode-Island Republican [Newport, RI], 2 November 1814.

Rosengraten, Theodore. Tombee: Portrait of a Cotton Planter. New York: William Morrow,

       1986.



                                              43
Scheiber, Harry N., Harold G. Vattner, and Harold U. Faulkner. American Economic History.

       New York: Harper & Row, 1976.

Shlomowitz, Ralph. "The Origins of Southern Sharecropping." Agricultural History 53, no. 3

       (1979): 557-75.

Slavery and the Making of America. [Web site]. Washington, DC: Public Broadcasting Service.

       Available from http://www.pbs.org/wnet/slavery/experience/living/e4.html.

Smith, C. Wayne. Crop Production: Evolution, History, and Technology. New York: John Wiley

       and Sons, 1995.

Stampp, Kenneth M., ed. Records of Ante-bellum Southern Plantations from the Revolution

       through the Civil War [Microfilm]. Frederick, MD: University Publications of America,

       1985-2000.

Stephens, S. G. "Some Observations of Photoperiodism and the Development of Annual Forms

       of Domesticated Cottons." Economic Botany 30 (1975): 409-18.

Stephens, S. G. "The Origin of Sea Island Cotton." Agricultural History 50, no. 2 (1976): 391-9.

Sydnor, Charles S. Slavery in Mississippi. Gloucester, MA: P. Smith, 1965, c1933.

Turner, Joseph Addison. The Cotton Planter's Manual: Being a Compilation of Facts from the

       Best Authorities on the Culture of Cotton. New York: C. M. Saxton and Co., 1857.

Tyler, Frederick J. "Varieties of American Upland Cotton." U.S. Bureau of Plant Industry

       Bulletin, no. 163 (1910).

U.S. Dept. of Agriculture. Atlas of American Agriculture. 8 vols. Washington, DC: GPO, 1917-

       1935.

Vicksburg Sentinel [Vicksburg, MS], 7 July 1847.




                                               44
Wailes, B. C. L. Report on the Agriculture and Geology of Mississippi. Jackson, MS: State

       Printer, 1854.

Ware, Jacob Osborn. "Origin, Rise and Development of American Upland Cotton Varieties and

       their Status at Present." University Of Arkansas College of Agriculture, Agricultural

       Experiment Station Mimeo (1950).

Ware, Jacob Osborn. "Plant Breeding and the Cotton Industry." In U.S. Dept. of Agriculture

       Yearbook 1936, 657-744. Washington, DC: GPO, 1936.

Watkins, James L. King Cotton: A Historical and Statistical Review, 1790 to 1908. Reprint of

       1908 ed. New York: Negro Universities Press, 1969.

Watt, George. The Wild and Cultivated Cotton Plants of the World. London: Longmans, Green,

       1907.

Wendel, Jonathan F., and Richard C. Cronn. "Polyploidy and the Evolutionary History of

       Cotton." Advances in Agronomy 78 (2003): 139-86.

Wendel, Jonathan F., Curt L. Brubaker, and A. Edward Percival. "Genetic Diversity in

       Gossypium Hirsutum and the Origin of Upland Cotton." American Journal of Botany 79,

       no. 11 (1992): 1291-310.

Whartenby, Franklee Gilbert. Land and Labor Productivity in United States Cotton Production,

       1800-1840. New York: Arno Press, 1977.

Williams, Robert W. "Thomas Affleck: Missionary to the Planter, the Farmer, and the

       Gardener." Agricultural History 31, no. 3 (1957): 40-8.

Wright, Gavin. "The Efficiency of Slavery: Another Interpretation." American Economic Review

       69, no. 1 (1979): 219-26.




                                               45
Wright, Gavin. Slavery and American Economic Development. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana

       State University Press, 2006.

Wright, Gavin. The Political Economy of the Cotton South: Households, Markets, and Wealth in

       the Nineteenth Century. New York: Norton, 1978.



Archives and collections referred to in text.

Center for American History, University of Texas (Austin, TX).

Leyendecker Family. Papers, 1817-1981.



Department of Archives and Special Collections, J.D. Williams Library, The University of

Mississippi (University, MS).

Locust Grove Slave Ledger. MUM00275.



Historic Natchez Foundation (Natchez, MS).

Jenkins, John Carmichael. Elgin Plantation Journal.



Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens (San Marino, CA).

Nutt, Rush. Papers of Rush and Haller Nutt, 1805-1933 (Bulk 1817-1862). MssNU 1-365



Louisiana and Lower Mississippi Valley Collections, Louisiana State University Libraries

(Baton Rouge, LA).

Bacon, Edmund. Letters, 1802-1820. Mss. 2178.



Ohio Historical Center Archives Library (Columbus, OH).

                                                46
Eustatia Plantation, Mississippi, Account Book 1861.



Southern Historical Collection, Wilson Library, University of North Carolina (Chapel Hill, NC).

Baker, Everard Green. Papers, 1848-1876. Coll. 41.

Croom, Hardy Bryan. Papers, 1822-1838. Coll. 3772.

Eaton, John Rust. Papers, 1794-1815. Coll. 234-z.

Gould, William Proctor. Diary, 1828-1856. M-1192.

Minor Family. Papers, 1763-1900. Coll. 1564.

Whitmore, Charles. Plantation Journal, 1834-1864. Coll. 2406.



South Carolina Historical Society (Charleston, SC).

Rivers, Elias Lynch. Family Papers, 1750-1913. Coll. 51-542.



South Caroliniana Library, University of South Carolina (Columbia, SC).

Connors, John. Papers.

Guignard Family. Papers, 1742-1952.

Reynolds Family. Papers, 1837-1958.

Richardson, William Guignard. Papers, 1800-1849.

Townes Family. Papers, 1784-1967.



Special and Archival Collections, Texas A&M University (College Station, TX).

Affleck, Thomas. Papers.




                                               47
Table 1: Primal-Side and Dual-Side Indicators of Cotton Productivity Growth

                                                           Percent Growth per Annum
                                              1800-1860     1800-1820 1820-1840 1840-1860
Primal Side
Cotton Output                                       6.61         7.61          6.96         5.24

Cotton Labor Force
   Woodbury                                                      5.99
   Whartenby                                                     5.99          5.03
   Estimates based on Craig-Weiss Ag LF
      Slave Ag LF in cotton states                  2.70         3.04          2.43         2.63
      Slave Ag LF in cotton counties                4.22         5.13          4.14         3.38
      Total Ag LF in cotton counties                3.85         4.39          3.99         3.18

Dual Side
Real prices
   Cotton                                          -0.53         0.06         -2.63         1.11
   Slaves (1804 for 1800)                           1.92         2.47         -0.07         3.46

Sources: Carter et al., Historical Statistics, table Da756 (cotton output); table Bb210 (slave prices); table Cc222
(cotton prices); and table Cc113 (deflator). Whartenby and Woodbury labor force data are from Whartenby, Land
and Labor Productivity, pp. 67-71. Our figures are based on Slave and Total Agricultural Labor Force (aged 10 and
over) from Craig and Weiss, Rural Agricultural Workforce, in cotton states (VA, NC, SC, GA, FL, TN, AL, MS,
LA, AR, and TX), and in cotton counties as identified in 1800 (53 counties), 1820 (121), and 1840 (267) in the
cotton production maps of Stine and Baker in USDA, Atlas, pt. 5, sec. A, pp. 16-17, and as identified in the Census
of Agriculture of 1840 (233 counties) and 1860 (409) as reporting 1,000 or more 400-lb. bales, using Craig, Haines,
and Weiss, Development, Health, Nutrition, and Mortality, and U.S. Censuses of Agriculture by County.




                                                        48
Table 2: Deciphering Daily Picking Rates, 1801-1862

  Log (Mean Picking)                Upland Cotton Operations                Sea Island Operations
                                     (1)           (2)               (3)            (1)           (2)

Constant        Coeff              4.387         3.787             3.317          3.560         3.504
                Rob. SE         (0.0324)      (0.0831)          (0.1089)       (0.0957)      (0.3546)

Year_30         Coeff           0.0245          0.0194            0.0197        0.00609       0.00606
                Rob. SE      (0.00157)       (0.00161)         (0.00191)      (0.00238)     (0.00343)

Year_30_Sq      Coeff        -0.000416      -0.000258          -0.000214     -0.000228      -0.000233
                Rob. SE     (0.000076)     (0.000073)         (0.000073)    (0.000178)      (0.00020)

Log (Pickers)   Coeff                           0.1956            0.1434                       0.0147
                Rob. SE                       (0.0261)          (0.0261)                     (0.1198)

Male            Coeff                                             0.5939
                Rob. SE                                         (0.1404)

Non-Peak        Coeff                                            -0.2239
                Rob. SE                                         (0.0941)

New South       Coeff                                             0.4509
                Rob. SE                                         (0.0424)

R-squared                         0.249          0.356            0.557           0.125         0.150
No. of Obs.                         474            462              396              35            31



Summary          Variable           Obs          Mean          Std. Dev.           Min           Max
Statistics:
Upland Cotton    Lmean              474          4.621            0.457           3.103         5.661
                 Log(Pickers)       462          3.041            0.699           0.639         4.504
                 Year_30            474         17.926           12.726             -29            32
                 Male               409          0.504            0.123           0.128             1
                 Non-Peak           411          0.191            0.199               0             1
                 New South          474          0.783            0.412               0             1

Sea Island       Lmean               35          3.536            0.308           2.984         4.135
                 Log(Pickers)        31          2.757            0.642           1.227         3.864
                 Year_30             35         12.200           17.148             -29            31

Notes: Year_30 = Crop Year-1830; Year_30_Sq = Year_30^2; Log(Pickers) = log (average number of pickers per
day); Male = percent of picking obs. for males; Non-Peak = percent of picking obs. in months other than September,
October, and November; New South = 1 if plantation is in Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi,
Tennessee, or Texas, = 0 otherwise. Standard Errors are robust.
Source: Compiled from Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008.




                                                         49
Table 3: Fixed Effects Model of Daily Picking Rates for Plantations with Observations in Multiple Years

 Log (Mean Picking)                Upland Cotton Operations
                                    (1)           (2)               (3)

Constant       Coeff             4.359          4.364             4.357
               Rob. SE        (0.0469)       (0.1190)          (0.1407)

Year_30        Coeff            0.0174         0.0182            0.0191
               Rob. SE       (0.00379)       (0.0041)          (0.0034)

Year_30_Sq     Coeff         -0.000074      -0.000082          -0.00012
               Rob. SE      (0.000100)      (0.00010)        (0.000077)

Log(Pickers)   Coeff                          -0.0110           -0.0389
               Rob. SE                       (0.0404)          (0.0353)

Male           Coeff                                             0.3554
               Rob. SE                                         (0.1564)

Non-Peak       Coeff                                            -0.2539
               Rob. SE                                         (0.0963)

R-squared                        0.854          0.847            0.888
No. of Obs.                        428            417              360
Categories                          87             87               75

Source: Compiled from Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008.




                                                        50
Table 4: Upland Picking Rates in Old and New South

  Log (Mean Picking)                Old South                        New South
                                    (1)              (3)               (1)            (3)

Constant        Coeff              3.961           3.373             4.478          3.877
                Rob. SE         (0.0610)         (0.209)          (0.0300)        (0.138)

Year_30         Coeff           0.0156         0.0180               0.0283       0.0252
                Rob. SE      (0.00132)      (0.00242)            (0.00263)    (0.00236)

Year_30_Sq      Coeff        -0.000025      0.000062              -0.00054     -0.00040
                Rob. SE     (0.000097)      (0.00011)            (0.00010)   (0.000088)

Log (Pickers)   Coeff                             -0.290                           0.139
                Rob. SE                         (0.0856)                          0.0282

Male            Coeff                              1.084                            0.401
                Rob. SE                          (0.224)                          (0.175)

Non-Peak        Coeff                            0.0760                            -0.267
                Rob. SE                          (0.224)                         (0.0978)

R-squared                         0.368           0.596              0.304         0.450
No. of Obs.                         103              68                371           328


Summary          Variable           Obs           Mean          Std. Dev.             Min   Max
Statistics:
Old South        Lmean              103           4.227            0.358            3.206   4.905
                 Log(Pickers)       103           2.736            0.666            1.099   4.504
                 Year_30            103          17.864           14.180              -29      32
                 Male                77           .0472            0.152            0.143       1
                 Non-Peak            79           0.116            0.149                0       1

New South        Lmean              371           4.731            0.419            3.103   5.661
                 Log(Pickers)       359           3.128            0.685            0.639   4.431
                 Year_30            371          17.951           12.312              -25      32
                 Male               332           0.512            0.114            0.128   0.838
                 Non-Peak           332           0.208            0.205                0       1

Source: Compiled from Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008.




                                                           51
Table 5: Fixed Effect Models for Old and New South Upland Operations with Observations in Multiple Years

  Log (Mean Picking)              Old South                       New South
                                  (1)             (3)               (1)            (3)

Constant        Coeff           3.879           4.057              4.478         4.411
                Rob. SE      (0.0975)         (0.449)            (0.636)       (0.153)

Year_30         Coeff          0.0197         0.0143              0.0167        0.0216
                Rob. SE     (0.00437)      (0.00642)            (0.0075)      (0.0060)

Year_30_Sq      Coeff       0.0000052      -0.000063           -0.000083    -0.00019
                Rob. SE    (0.000117)      (0.00012)           (0.00020)   (0.00014)

Log (Pickers)   Coeff                         -0.0254                          -0.0386
                Rob. SE                       (0.108)                         (0.0372)

Male            Coeff                          0.0641                            0.389
                Rob. SE                       (0.294)                          (0.185)

Non-Peak        Coeff                          -0.371                           -0.245
                Rob. SE                       (0.203)                          (0.103)

R-squared                       0.789          0.897               0.824        0.855
No. of Obs.                        88             56                 340          304
Categories                         18             11                  69           64

Source: Compiled from Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008.




                                                        52
Figure 1: Cotton Production and Slave and Cotton Prices



                      10000                                                                            10000

                                    Cotton Production in 1,000 Bales
                                    Real Price of Prime-Age Male Field Hands
                                    Real Price of 480 lb. Cotton Bale


                       1000                                                                            1000




                                                                                                               Real Price in 1859 Dollars
  Cotton Production




                       100                                                                             100




                         10                                                                            10




                             1                                                                         1
                             1790      1800          1810          1820        1830   1840   1850   1860




Sources: Carter et al., Historical Statistics, Table Da756 (cotton output); Table Bb210 (slave prices); Table Cc222
(cotton prices); and Table Cc113 (deflator).




                                                                                53
       Figure 2: David Dickson’s 1854 Seed Advertisement




Source: Hargrett Library Broadside Collection, 1850-1859, Mss. 2622, Hargrett Rare Book &
Manuscript Library, University of Georgia Libraries.




                                                   54
Figure 3: Sample from Eustatia Cotton Book




Source: Eustatia Plantation, Mississippi, Account Book 1861, Ohio Historical Center Archives.



                                                                             55
Source: Compiled from Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008.




                                                     56
Figure 5: Mean Daily Picking Rates by Plantations, 1801-1862

Panel A: Upland Cotton (N=474)
                                  300

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                         LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA TX AL
                                                                                                                                                 LA                       LA                            AR MSMS   LA
                                                                                                                                                                                               MS LA
                                  200



                                                                                                                                           LA                                                           MS LA
                                                                                                                                                    LA LA                           LA          TX TX   MS
                                                                                                                                       LA                       LAMS             MSLA LA MS                    AL
                                                                                                                                                                                      MS
                                                                                                                                                                                       LA      MS
                                                                                                                                              LA LA             TX LA               LAMSLAMS             TNMSMS   LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ARLA
                                                                                                                                                          LA AL                                 LAMS MSMS   LA AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA
                                                                                                                                                                  MSTX AL        MS MS                  MS MS
                                                                                                                                                                                   MSLA        MS
   Mean Daily Pounds Per Worker




                                                                                                                                           TX TX                                                         TXMSAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                        MS
                                                                                                                                                   MSAL ALMS TX
                                                                                                                                                            MS
                                                                                                                                                                AL AL         MS LA         MS        AL ALMS
                                                                                                                                                             LA                    MSMS MS        MSMS
                                                                                                                                                 LA TXMSMS           MSLA                   MS        AL MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MS     AL LA
                                                                                                                                                               MS MSTX             MS MS  LAMS
                                                                                                                                                                                            MSMSMS AL AL AL TX
                                                                                                                                 LA             MS                       LA      LAMS MS                      NC
                                                                                                                                              TX
                                                                                                                                             MS
                                                                                                                                                      MS              LA                  LAMS
                                                                                                                                                                                         MS           AL MSMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MS
                                                                                                                                             MSMSLA             AL MS            MS
                                                                                                                                                                                 GASC     FL LAMS          MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           NC
                                                                                                                                                                                      MS
                                                                                                                         MS MS           MS MSMSMS MS  LA AL AL         MS MS  AL MSMS             AL MS MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                         AL TXMS
                                                                                                                         MS                        MSTX TX LA                    MS MS TX NC AL ALARMSNCNC MS MS
                                                                                                                                                                     MS TX            NC  AL
                                                                                                                                                                                         SC  FLMS MS           AR
                                  100




                                                                                                                     MS          ALMS
                                                                                                                                 LA    ALMSMSMS
                                                                                                                                                         MS
                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                                                          LA                  MS ALMSMS MS MS        NCMSMS FL AL
                                                                                                                             MSMS
                                                                                                                                    LAMS
                                                                                                                                       LA    SC          MSMS                  ALMSMS
                                                                                                                                                                                   MS
                                                                                                                                                                                    FL AL         MSARMSNC  LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                 MS LA AL           AL MS         MS MSMS   LA
                                                                                                                                                                                               NCMSSCMS  LA MSMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                        AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                        NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                        SC
                                                                                                                           MS                      MSMSMSMS    MS       MSALMSAL SCNC    GAMSMS NC
                                                                                                                     LA    MS            MS                  AL MS
                                                                                                                                                             AR   SCAL                             SC FL MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                  NC
                                                                                                                                                   MS
                                                                                                                                                   SCSCFL            SC       NC AR      MS     FL   MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                   FLSC MS
                                                                                                                 MSMS                                 MS SC                        NC                SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                      AL
                                                                                                                                                                           MSMS                 FL
                                                                                                                                                                                               NC  GA      MS MS
                                                                        LA
                                                                             LA                                MSMS MS              LA                         MS
                                                                                                                                                                     NCSCSCNC                  SCARSC MS   AR
                                                                                                                       MS                           AL                                   GAARAR          TXSCNCSC
                                                                                                                                      MS MS
                                                                                                                                                       LA            MSMS
                                                                                                                                                                                 NC
                                                                                                                                                                         SCMS AL MSSC                 TXSCALSC
                                                                                                                                                             SC TX                       SC MSMS MS SC
                                                                                     MS
                                                                                                                     LA                                        SC  AL AL MSMSMS                   MS       SC LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SC
                                                              LA                                                                                SC        SC         SC          MS
                                                                   LA                                        MSMS              GA                     SC          MS                     MS
                                                                                                                                                                                            SC
                                                                                                                                                                                            MS
                                                                                                                                                                                            SC  ALSC       NC SC
                                                                                    LA   GA                      LA                MS              SC                                          SC
                                                                                                                                                                         AL AR
                                                                                    GA                                                                                    SC                  MS SC
                                                                                                                                     NC                                             GASC                    SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                     AL SC AL
                                                                                         LAMS MS                                                                                          SCSC SC
                                  50




                                                                                                               LA                                                                   NC               SC
                                                                                             MS                                            SC                                         SCSC       NCSC SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                       TX
                                                              GA                                                                                                                              SC
                                                                                  MSLA                                   LASC             NC                                                              SC
                                                                             MS        LA                                                                                               SC
                                                         MS                            MS                                                   NC        SC
                                                                                     GA                                                                                                                                TX                  TX
                                                                    MS                             SC
                                                                                   MS                                                                                MS
                                                                                                                                                                                    SC
                                               SC             LA                                                                SC
                                                      SC           LA
                                                    SC                        MS
                                          SC
                                  25




                                                                                                                                           VA
                                                               MS




                                        1800                                             1820                                                         1840                                                                  1860
                                                                                                                                 Year


Panel B: Sea Island Cotton (N=35)
                                  300
                                  200
   Mean Daily Pounds Per Worker
                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                                                             SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                             SI
                                                                                                                                            SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SI
                                  50




                                                                                                                                                                               SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SI
                                                                                                        SI                                                      SI             SI SI        SI
                                                                                                                    SI                                                                   SI SI
                                                                                              SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SI                       SI
                                                                                                                                                                                                   SI                       SI
                                          SI                            SI                                                                                                               SI                            SI
                                                                                                                                                                     SI                                 SI
                                                                                                                                                           SI                                 SI                                      SI
                                  25




                                                                                                                           SI                                                                                                              SI

                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SI
                                               SI                                                                                                                                   SI
                                                                                                                                                      SI
                                                    SI




                                        1800                                             1820                                                         1840                                                                  1860
                                                                                                                                Year

Source: Compiled from Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008.


                                                                                                                                            57
                                                                Percentage of Cotton Production




                                                    0%
                                                         20%
                                                                           40%
                                                                                                 60%
                                                                                                                       80%
                                                                                                                                  100%
                                             1800

                                             1802

                                             1804

                                             1806

                                             1808




     Source: Watkins, King Cotton, passim.
                                             1810

                                             1812

                                             1814

                                             1816

                                             1818

                                             1820

                                             1822

                                             1824

                                             1826

                                             1828

                                             1830
                                                                                                                                         Figure 6: Regional Distribution of U.S. Cotton Production, 1800-1860




58
                                             1832

                                             1834

                                             1836

                                             1838

                                             1840

                                             1842

                                             1844

                                             1846

                                             1848

                                             1850

                                             1852

                                             1854

                                             1856

                                             1858

                                             1860
                                                                                 FL
                                                                                                LA


                                                                                      AL




                                                           VA
                                                                                                       TX




                                                                     SC
                                                                                                                 TN




                                                                          GA
                                                                                                                             OK




                                                                NC
                                                                                                            AR




                                                                                           MS
                                                                                                                      MO
Figure 7: Geographic Breakdown of Upland Cotton Picking Rates
Panel A: Old South (N=103)


                                  300
                                  200
   Mean Daily Pounds Per Worker




                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                  GASC        NC
                                                                                                                                                                            NC
                                                                                                                                                                            NC
                                                                                                                                                                       NCSCNC
                                  100




                                                                                                                                                                          NC
                                                                                                                                    SC
                                                                                                                                                                      NC SCNC NC
                                                                                                                                                                  GA      NCSC
                                                                                                                                                                SCNC    SC
                                                                                                                                        SCSC      SC                    NC
                                                                                                                                              SC    SC    NC              SC
                                                                                                                                                              NC      NCGASC
                                                                                                                                                    NCSC
                                                                                                                                                      SCNC        GA
                                                                                                                                                                      SC SC SCNC
                                                                                                                                                                                SC
                                                                                                                                                            NC    SC        SC SC
                                                                                                                                                      SC          SC            SC
                                                                                                                                              SC                              SC
                                                                                                                                      SC    SC  SC  SC                        SC
                                                                                                                    GA                                              SC SC     NC SC
                                                                                   GA                                                   SCSC                        SC
                                                                                                                                                                      SC
                                                                             GA                                                                 SC                      SC
                                                                                                                 NC                                        GASC                SC SC
                                                                                                                                                                 SCSC SC
                                  50




                                                                                                                                                           NC               SC
                                                                                                                         SC                                  SCSC       NCSC SC
                                                       GA                                                                                                            SC
                                                                                                                      NC                                                         SC
                                                                                                       SC                                                      SC
                                                                                                                        NC         SC
                                                                                  GA
                                                                                        SC
                                                                                                                                                           SC
                                           SC                                                             SC
                                                 SC
                                               SC
                                          SC
                                  25




                                                                                                                         VA




                                        1800                                      1820                                             1840                                                1860
                                                                                                            Year


Panel B: New South (N=371)
                                  300




                                                                                                                                                                                            MS
                                                                                                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                                                                                                                       LA
                                                                                                                                                                                 LA TX AL
                                                                                                                              LA                LA                                     AR MSMS  LA
                                                                                                                                                                              MS LA
                                  200




                                                                                                                           LA                                                         MS LA
                                                                                                                                    LA LA                           LA
                                                                                                                       LA                       LAMS             MSLA LA MSTX TX MS AL
                                                                                                                                                                      MS
                                                                                                                                                                       LA     MS
                                                                                                                              LA LA             TX LA               LAMS  LAMS         TNMS MS  LA
                                                                                                                                                                                             ARLA
                                                                                                                                          LA AL                               LAMS MSMS   LA AL
                                                                                                                                                                                          LA
                                                                                                                                                  MSTX AL        MS MS                MS MS
                                                                                                                                                                   MSLA       MS
   Mean Daily Pounds Per Worker




                                                                                                                           TX TX            MS  AL AL            LA                    TXMSAL
                                                                                                                                                                                      MS
                                                                                                                                   MSAL ALMS TX               MS            MS      AL ALMS
                                                                                                                                             LA                    MSMS MS      MSMS
                                                                                                                                 LA TXMSMS           MSLA                   MS      AL MS
                                                                                                                                                                                   TX
                                                                                                                                                                                   MS     AL LA
                                                                                                                                               MS MSTX             MS MS  LAMS
                                                                                                                                                                            MSMSMS AL AL AL TX
                                                                                                                 LA             MS                       LA      LAMS MS
                                                                                                                              TX
                                                                                                                             MS
                                                                                                                                      MS              LA                  LAMS      AL MSMS
                                                                                                                                                                                   MS
                                                                                                                             MSMSLA             AL MS            MS MSMS  FL LAMS
                                                                                                                         MS MSMS       LA TX AL AL             AL MSMS           AL MSMSMS
                                                                                                         MS MS                  MS MS                   MS MS          TX AL ALARMS    AL   MS
                                                                                                                                                                                             TXMS
                                                                                                         MS                        MSTX         LA MS            MS MS                      MS
                                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                                                                         MSFLMS MS MSMSFL AR
                                  100




                                                                                                     MS          ALMS                    MS
                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                                          LA                TXMS
                                                                                                             MSMS
                                                                                                                 LA    ALMSMSMS
                                                                                                                    LAMS
                                                                                                                       LA                MSMS                       AL
                                                                                                                                                                    FLMS
                                                                                                                                                               ALMSMS
                                                                                                                                                                   MS         MSMSARMSMS  LA AL
                                                                                                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                         MS                MS          AL       MS    MS
                                                                                                                                                                                       AR   MS
                                                                                                                 MS LA AL           AL            MS                                   LA
                                                                                                           MS                      MSMSMSMS    MSMS MS  MS
                                                                                                                                                            LA
                                                                                                                                                            ALMS            MSMS
                                                                                                                                                                                               MS
                                                                                                                                             AL
                                                                                                     LA    MS            MS        MSFL AR            AL         AL
                                                                                                                                                                 AR                 FL MS
                                                                                                                                                                         MS FL FLMS MS
                                                                                                 MSMS                                 MS                                            AL
                                                                                                                                                           MSMS               FL         MS MS
                                                                 LA
                                                                      LA                       MSMS MS              LA
                                                                                                                                    AL
                                                                                                                                               MS
                                                                                                                                                                              AR AR       AR
                                                                                                                                                                                         MS
                                                                                                       MS                                                                              TX AL
                                                                                                                      MS MS
                                                                                                                                       LA            MSMSMS AL MS ARMSMSTX
                                                                              MS
                                                                                                     LA                                            AL AL MSMSMS
                                                                                                                                                   TX                           MS MS           LA
                                                       LA                                                                                                        MS
                                                            LA                               MSMS                                                 MS                     MSMSAL
                                                                             LA                  LA                MS                                    AL AR
                                                                                                                                                                       MS
                                                                                   LAMS MS                                                                                        AL
                                  50




                                                                                               LA                                                                                           AL
                                                                                       MS                                                                                              TX
                                                                           MSLA                      LA
                                                                  MS               LA
                                                  MS                               MS
                                                                                                                                                                                  TX        TX
                                                             MS
                                                                            MS                                                                MS
                                                       LA

                                                            LA         MS
                                  25




                                                        MS




                                        1800                                      1820                                             1840                                                1860
                                                                                                            Year

Source: Compiled from Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008.



                                                                                                                  59
Appendix: References – Used in Construction of Slave Cotton Plantation Dataset, 2008

Archives & Collections

Alabama Department of Archives and History (Montgomery, AL).
Hall Family. Papers, 1785-1923. LPR39.
Waldwick Plantation Records, 1834-1971. LPR174.

Arizona Historical Society Library and Archives (Tuscon, AZ).
Dinsmore Family. Papers, 1731-1978. MS1016.

Birmingham Public Library, Archives Department (Birmingham, AL).
Faunsdale Plantation Papers.

Center for American History, University of Texas (Austin, TX).
Leyendecker Family. Papers, 1817-1981.
Rogillio Family. Papers, 1821-1933.

Darlington Historical Society (Darlington, SC).
Wilds, Peter. Collection.

Department of Archives and Special Collections, J.D. Williams Library, University of Mississippi
        (University, MS).
Locust Grove Slave Ledger. MUM00275.

Florida Historical Society Library (Cocoa, FL).
El Destino Plantation Papers, 1786-1938. Mss. 2001-02.

Georgia Department of Archives and History (Morrow, GA).
Butts, Elijah. Plantation Account Book, 1843-1865 (bulk 1843-1846, 1855-1864).
Conley, Benjamin. Papers, 1839-1875, 1880, and n.d.
Curry, Duncan. Major Duncan Curry Business Papers.
Everett, Josiah. Daybook.
Fincher, William J. Diary.
Lester, John Vickers. School Roll Book, 1856.
Smith, Archibald. Family Papers, 1670, 1696, 1737-1985, and n.d.

Houghton Library, Harvard University (Cambridge, MA).
Palfrey Family. Papers. MS 1704-1704.9, 1704.11-1704.21.

Huie Library, Henderson State University (Arkadelphia, AR).
Bozeman Plantation Journal. ARK F 417.C53 B69.

Huntington Library, Art Collections, and Botanical Gardens (San Marino, CA).
Postlethwaite Family Papers. Mss. HU 28847.

Jarrett Learning Center, East Texas Baptist University (Marshall, TX).
Webster, John B. Plantation Journal.

Louisiana and Lower Mississippi Valley Collections, Louisiana State University Libraries (Baton Rouge,
         LA).
Capell Family. Papers. Mss. 56, 257, 1751, 2501, 2597.
Jenkins, John C. Family Papers. Mss. 141,142,184,187.
Liddell, Moses and St. John Richardson. Family Papers. Mss. 531.
Monette, James. Day Book and Diary. Mss. 0590.


                                                    60
Snyder, Alonzo. Papers. Mss. 655.
Steward, Robert. Family Account Books. Mss. 404, 4732.

Manuscript, Archives and Rare Book Library, Emory University (Atlanta, GA).
Graves Family. Papers, 1818-1939 (bulk 1836-1910). Coll. 327.

Manuscripts Department, Library of the University of North Carolina (Chapel Hill, NC).
Newstead Plantation Records. MS 2339.

Microform Collection, Davis Library, University of North Carolina (Chapel Hill, NC).
Dent, John Horry. Farm Journals and Account Books, 1840-1892.

Mississippi Department of Archives and History (Jackson, MS).
Allen, James. Plantation Book. Z/0014.000, reel 35978.
Anonymous Plantation Diary. Z/0024.000, reel 37134.
Ayres Family. Papers. Z/1873.000, Reel 36543.
Denton, William A. Diary. Z/2028.000, Archival Reading Room.
Griffith, B. W. and Rondo A. Westbrook. Papers. Z/1287.000; Box 1; Folder 10.
Helm, Thomas E. Plantation Record Book. Z/0859.000, reel 35998.
Magruder, James Trueman, Jr. Mercantile Ledgers [manuscript]. Z/1995.000.
McGehee Family. Papers, 1854-1874. Z/0899.000.
Metcalfe Family. Papers. Z/1874.000, reels 36547-48.
Metcalfe, Frederick Augustus. Papers. Z/1843.000.
Parker, Houston Huling. Papers. Z/1710.000, reel 36319.
Rabb Family. Plantation Journal. Z/1985.000.
Rainwater. Z/0052.000.
Shields, William F. Papers. Z/0040.000.
Spencer, Horatio Nelson. Papers. Z/0196.000, cotton book.
Surget-McKittrick-Macneil Family. Papers. Z/1795.000, reel 36215.
Sykes, Columbus. Papers. Z/0012.000.
Taylor Family. Plantation Ledger. Z/2260.000.
Wheless, Frederick W. Plantation Journal. Z/1986.000.

Missouri Historical Society (St. Louis, MO).
Jones Family. Plantation Records.

North Carolina Department of Archives and History (Raleigh, NC).
Clark, James F. Plantation Book. MARS ID 539.
Mial, Alonzo T. and Millard. MARS ID 2968.

Ohio Historical Center Archives Library (Columbus, OH).
Eustatia Plantation, Mississippi, Account Book. Vol. 649.

Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections Library, Duke University (Durham, NC).
Dromgoole, George Coke, and Richard B. Robinson. Papers, 1767-1974.
Law, Willam. Papers, 1761-1890.
Nutt, Haller. Papers.
Sims, Joseph Starke. Papers, 1819-1903.
Sydnor, Charles S. Papers, 1729-1978 and n.d. (bulk 1923-1954).

South Carolina Historical Society (Charleston, SC).
Coffin, Ebenezer, 1765-1817. Coffin Point Plantation Journal, 1800-1816. 34/199.
Smith, William Wragg, 1808-1875. William Wragg Smith Papers, 1803-1859. 1118.03.01.
Webb, Daniel Cannon, 1782-1850. Daniel Cannon Webb Plantation Journals, 1817-1850. 1154.

South Caroliniana Library, University of South Carolina (Columbia, SC).

                                                   61
Aiken, David. Farmers' Diary, 1855-58. Coll. 14.
Anonymous Plantation Records. Acc. 1001.
Blewett, Thomas G. Papers. Acc. 1001.
Charles and Company (Darlington County, S.C.). Records. Acc. 1813.
Coleman, Feaster, and Faucette Families. Papers. Acc. 12663.
Crosswell, J.R. Account Book. Acc. 1001.
Guignard Family. Papers. Acc. 1001, 1425, 1938, 2527, 2630, 14120.
Guild Family. Account Book.
Huey Family. Papers. Acc. 5137.
Osteen, Thomas H. Papers. Acc. 9450.
Taylor, Washington. Journal, 1835-1855.
Watts, James Washington. Papers. Acc. 6010.

Southern Historical Collection, Manuscripts Department, Library of the University of North Carolina
          (Chapel Hill, NC).
Arrington, Archibald Hunter. Papers. 3240.
Ballard, Rice C. Papers, 1822-1888. 4580.
Bills, John Houston. Papers. 2245.
De Saussure, Louis M. Journal. 2251-z.
Ervin, William Ethelbert. Diaries. 247.
Gould. William Proctor. Diary. 1192.
Grimes Family. Papers. 3357.
Hamilton, W. S. Papers. 1471.
Lewis Plantation Records. 2528.
Massenburg, Nicholas Bryor. Papers, 1834-1851. 908.
Postell, James P. Kelvin Grove Plantation Book. 2771.
Whitmore, Charles. Plantation Journal. M-2046.
Yancey, Benjamin Cudworth. Papers. 2594.

Special Collections, Clemson Unviersity Libraries (Clemson, SC).
Overseer's Daybook (Westwood Plantation). Mss. 230.

Special Collections, Library of the University of Arkansas (Fayetteville, AR).
Currie Family. Papers. MC713.
Currie. James B. Ledger, 1851-1869.
Shugart Plantation Records. MC1075.

Special Collections, University Libraries, Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University, (Blacksburg,
         VA).
Overseer's Journal, 1853-1861. Ms1994-010.

Special Collections Department, Florida State University Libraries (Tallahassee, FL).
Plantation Record Book, 1836-1841. Mss. 1-10.

Sturdivant Hall Museum (Selma, AL).
Sturdivant Hall Plantation Records.

University of California, Berkeley, Library (Berkeley, CA).
Plantation Journal for "The Mountain", Mississippi [1852-64]. MICROFILM.5640.HT.

University of Virginia Library (Charlottesville, VA).
Hillyer Family. Papers, 1797-1860. Acc. 2130.

Virginia Historical Society (Richmond, VA).
Mason Family. Papers. MSS1M3816c.


                                                    62
W.S. Hoole Special Collections Library, University of Alabama (Tuscaloosa, AL).
Davis, Hugh. Papers. MS1611.
Sturdivant Hall Papers.


Archives & Collections Consulted Via:
Stampp, Kenneth M., ed. Records of Ante-bellum Southern Plantations from the Revolution through the
        Civil War [Microfilm]. Frederick, MD: University Publications of America, 1985-2000.

Series A, Selections from the South Caroliniana Library, University of South Carolina.
Caleb Coker (1802-1869) Plantation Book, 1856-1861. RASP, Ser. A, pt. 2, reel 3.
James D. Trezevant Plantation Diary and Records, 1845-1858. RASP, Ser. A, pt. 2, reel 3.
Mary Hart Means (1835-1916) Papers, 1846-1865. RASP, Ser. A, pt. 2, reel 4.
Papers of James Henry Hammond, 1795-1865. RASP, Ser. A, pt. 1, reels 1-15.
Samuel Porcher Gaillard (1811-1880) Plantation Journals, 1835-1871. RASP, Ser. A, pt. 2, reels 1-2.
Thomas Cassels Law (1811-1888) Papers, 1810-1865. RASP, Ser. A, pt. 2, reels 7-8.

Series B, Selections from the South Carolina Historical Society.
Thomas Walter Peyre Plantation Journal, 1812-1851. RASP, Ser. B, Reel 5.

Series F, Selections from the Manuscript Department, Duke University Library.
Duncan and Dugal McCall Plantation Journals, 1832-1854. RASP, Ser. F, pt. 1, reels 4-5.
Haller Nutt Papers, 1846-1860, and Journal of Araby Plantation, 1843-1850. RASP, Ser. F, pt. 1, reel 1-2.
Joseph M. Jaynes Plantation Journals, 1854-1860. RASP, Ser. F, pt. 1, reel 1.
Rockingham Plantation Journal, 1828-1829. RASP, Ser. F, pt. 2, reel 8.

Series G, Selections from the Barker Texas History Center, University of Texas at Austin.
Barnes-Willis Family Papers, 1783–1840. RASP, Ser. G, pt. 5, reels 15-17.
Canebrake Plantation Record Books, 1856-1868. RASP, Ser. G, pt. 1, reel 11.
Green C. Duncan Papers, 1850-1865. RASP, Ser. G, pt. 1, reel 33.
James Franklin Perry and Stephen Samuel Perry Papers, 1786-1895. RASP, Ser. G, pt. 1, reels 12-31.
John P. Bolton Account Book and Plantation Records, 1853-1863. RASP, Ser. G, pt. 1, reel 33.
Kiger Family Papers, 1820–1885. RASP, Ser. G, pt. 5, reels 25-28.

Series H, Selections from the Howard-Tilton Library, Tulane University, and the Louisiana State
        Museum Archives.
Bonaventure Plantation Book, 1850-1851. RASP, Ser. H, reel 1.
David Rees Papers, 1803-1835. RASP, Ser. H, reels 29-30.

Series I, Selections from Louisiana State University.
Alexander Blanche Plantation Journal, 1851-1856. RASP, Ser. I, pt. 3, reel 14.
John H. Randolph Papers, 1822-1865. RASP, Ser. I, pt. 1, reels 14-15.
Joseph Toole Robinson Papers, 1830s and 1853-1861. RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reel 20.
LeBlanc Family Papers, 1812-1866. RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reel 17.
Lewis Stirling and Family Papers, 1784-1865. RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reels 21-25.
Nathaniel Evans and Family Papers, 1791-1865. RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reels 1-10.
Pre Aux Cleres Plantation Record Books, 1852-1854. RASP, Ser. I, pt. 2, reel 19.

Series J, Selections from the Southern Historical Collection, Manuscripts Department, Library of the
         University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Benjamin Franklin Little Papers, 1806-1935. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 13, reels 38-39.
Branch Family Papers, 1788-1866. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 4, reels 45-47.
Francis Terry Leak Papers, 1839–1865. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 6, reels 24-27.
George J. Kollock Plantation Books, 1837-1861 RASP, Ser. J, pt. 4, reels 2-3.
Jackson and Prince Family Papers, 1784-1880. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 4, reels 25-36.
John Durant Ashmore Plantation Journal, 1853-1859. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 3, reel 27.

                                                    63
John Edwin Fripp Papers, 1817-1905. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 3, reel 25.
Nicholas, Bryor Massenburg Papers, 1834-1851. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 13, reels 1-2.
Phanor Prudhomme Papers, 1804-1940. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 5, reels 15-17.
Ruffin, Roulhac, and Hamilton Family Papers (James H. Ruffin Plantation Records), 1841–1848. RASP,
         Ser. J, pt. 7, reel 7.
Wyche and Otey Family Papers, 1824–1900 and 1935–1936. RASP, Ser. J, pt. 7, reels 9-12.

Series M, Selections from the Virginia Historical Society.
Baskervill Family Papers, 1747–1928. RASP, Ser. M, pt. 5, reels 2-8.
Bassett Family Papers, 1728–1923. RASP, Ser. M, pt. 3, reels 1-4.
Mason Family Papers, 1789–1965. RASP, Ser. M, pt. 5, reels 36-46.

Series N, Selections from the Mississippi Department of Archives and History.
Aventine Plantation Diary, 1857–1860. RASP, Ser. N, reel 1.
Charles Clark and Family Collection, 1810–1892. RASP, Ser. N, reels 4-5.
Elley Plantation Book, 1855–1856. Series N, Reel 10
James T. Magruder Account Book and Plantation Journal, 1796-1818. RASP, Ser. N, reel 12.
James T. Magruder Cotton Book, 1818–1830. RASP, Ser. N, reel 12.
Killona Plantation Journals, 1836–[1840]. RASP, Ser. N, reel 12.
Levin Covington Diary, 1825–1845. RASP, Ser. N, reel 5.
Panther Burn Journals, 1859-1883. RASP, Ser. N, reel 12.
Walter Wade Plantation Diaries, 1834–1854. RASP, Ser. N, reel 18.


Archives & Collections Consulted Via:
Berlin, Ira, ed. Records of Southern Plantations from Emancipation to the Great Migration. [Microfilm].
          Bethesda, MD: University Publications of America, 2001.

Series A. Selections from the Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special Collections Library, Duke
        University.
David Miller Carter Papers, 1858–1903. Ser. A, pt. 2, reel 4.


Single Publications
Davis, Edwin A., ed. Plantation Life in the Florida Parishes of Louisiana, 1836-1846, As Reflected in the
         Diary of Bennet H. Barrow. New York: AMS Press, 1967.
Kilpatrick, Dr. "Historical and Statistical Collections of Louisiana: The Parish of Catahoula, Part 2." De
         Bow's Review 12, no. 6 (1852): 631-46.
“The Plantation Journal of John B. Webster, February 17, 1858-November 5, 1859,” Southwestern
         Historical Quarterly 84, no. 1 (July 1980).
Whartenby, Franklee Gilbert. Land and Labor Productivity in United States Cotton Production, 1800-1840.
         New York: Arno Press, 1977.




                                                   64
