                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE OPPORTUNITY COST OF CAPITAL OF US BUYOUTS

                                       Alexander Peter Groh
                                        Oliver Gottschalg

                                       Working Paper 14148
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14148


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2008




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Alexander Peter Groh and Oliver Gottschalg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Opportunity Cost of Capital of US Buyouts
Alexander Peter Groh and Oliver Gottschalg
NBER Working Paper No. 14148
June 2008, Revised March 2009
JEL No. G24,G32

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper measures the risk-adjusted performance of US buyouts. It draws on a unique and proprietary
set of data on 133 US buyouts between 1984 and 2004. For each of them we determine a public market
equivalent that matches it with respect to its timing and its systematic risk. After a correction for selection
bias in our data, the regression of the buyout internal rates of return on the internal rates of return of
the mimicking portfolio yields a positive and statistically significant alpha. Our sensitivity analyses
highlight the necessity of a comprehensive risk-adjustment that considers both operating risk and leverage
risk for an accurate assessment of buyout performance. This finding is particularly important as existing
literature on that topic tends to rely on performance measures without a proper risk-adjustment.


Alexander Peter Groh
GSCM - Montpellier Business School
Finance Department
agroh@iese.edu

Oliver Gottschalg
HEC School of Management
gottschalg@hec.fr
       Since the late 1970s buyouts1 have become an important asset class with significant

economic impact.2 Yet relatively little is known about the risk and return characteristics of

this type of investment. This is largely due to two factors. First, buyout investments differ

substantially from public market investments in several important characteristics, especially

regarding liquidity and information symmetry. This implies theoretical challenges with

respect to the assessment of their risk and return. Second, buyout investments are a sub-

category of the private equity asset class for which general disclosure requirements do not

exist. In the absence of detailed information on the underlying transactions and their

investment characteristics, risk-adjusted returns are impossible to calculate. To prove that is

the major contribution of our paper, we assess the opportunity cost of capital of buyout

transactions by public market investments with an equal risk profile. For this assessment, we

draw on a unique and proprietary set of data on target-company and industry characteristics,

as well as the applied financial structures of 133 US buyouts. Based on this information, we

construct a mimicking portfolio of investments in the S&P 500 Index, with additionally

borrowed or lent funds to adjust for the applied degrees of leverage. These mimicking

investments match the buyouts in terms of the timing of their cash flows and their systematic

risk pattern. The systematic risk of buyout transactions usually changes during the holding

period. Being initially high due to the amount of debt used for financing the transaction, the

risk decreases in the following periods as debt is repaid. Our mimicking investments exactly

replicate this evolution of the buyout risk patterns over time.




1
    In the literature, buyout transactions are variously labelled (e.g., leveraged buyout, management buyout,
    institutional buyout, management buy-in, etc.) and these terms are often used synonymously. In this paper
    the term "buyout" is preferred as being the broadest covering the different facets of this transaction type.
2
    The historical evolvement of the asset class, different cycles and its economic impact are well reported in
    Lowenstein (1985), Sahlman and Stevenson (1985), Sahlman (1990), Smith (1990), and Kaplan and Stein
    (1993) for the late 1970s and 1980s. See Jeng and Wells (1998) for the 1980s and 1990s. See Gompers and
    Lerner (1999a) and (2000) for an overall summary, and see the current yearbooks of the National Venture
    Capital Association and the European Private Equity and Venture Capital Association for actual market data.


                                                          1
      The chosen public market equivalent is not intended to present a “buyout pricing

model” nor does it imply that buyouts can be replicated adequately with traded securities. We

simply propose an approach to benchmarking them in what we regard as the best possible

way. For this method, we adopt the perspective of a well-diversified investor, such as a fund

of fund investor, pension fund or a university endowment. This is a reasonable assumption as

such investors are the primary providers of capital for buyout transactions. Consequently, we

do not consider idiosyncratic risks in our analyses because these investors are not affected by

idiosyncratic shocks. Our stylized model follows the alternative decision to either invest in

buyouts or in quoted assets. Thereby we control for the systematic risk involved, but not for

liquidity risk, size, or other factors.

      The contributions of this paper are several. First, our method of benchmarking the

buyout asset class with the public market could evolve into a standard for buyout

performance measurement. Second, we apply this method in an empirical analysis on a

comprehensive and unique data set and reveal the importance of a correct specification of

risks taken by lenders, cost of borrowing and lending, and potential changes of the operating

risk profile of the buyout targets. We illustrate that it is insufficient to assess the performance

of buyout transactions without thoroughly determining leverage ratios, risks borne by lenders,

and controlling for the systematic risks carried by the sponsors. This finding is important for

the interpretation of results from some of the most recent literature, such as Phalippou and

Gottschalg (2008), Kaplan and Schoar (2005) and Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003), as data

limitations depending on their data sources make our proposed way of risk separation

impossible in these studies. We show that, under what we regard as the most realistic

mimicking approach, the average buyout opportunity cost of capital is 9.07%, while the

median is 12.16%. This is significantly (two tailed p-value = 0.013) 3.29% (2.79%) below

what would have been earned on average (medial) if the investors had invested in the time



                                                   2
matching S&P 500 portfolio (with an average return of 12.36%, and a median of 14.95%). It

seems surprising that the average return of the levered index portfolio is less than the average

return of the index. However, the explanation is rather simple: Many public market

mimicking transactions would have defaulted due to the leverage ratios applied in the

buyouts. Default is triggered if the equity value invested in the mimicking portfolio melts

down to zero.

      The detected deviation from the S&P 500 returns results from controlling for the risks

taken by lenders in the buyout transactions and the corresponding cost of debt. Relaxing our

approach, and assuming perfect market conditions with riskless borrowing and lending, leads

to average (median) opportunity cost of capital of 12.89% (12.59%). The average return is

slightly higher than the average return earned if the correct mimicking portfolio is indeed the

S&P 500. However, the median return is slightly smaller. As a conclusion, we claim that

neglecting different degrees of leverage, and using the returns of the S&P 500 for simplicity

as opportunity cost of capital to benchmark buyout transactions leads to preliminary results,

unless the detected difference is an appropriate premium for illiquidity and/or other risk

factors. However, the exposure of buyout transactions to other risk factors is not yet

sufficiently researched, and this is also not the subject of this paper.

      The third contribution of our paper are the sensitivity analyses and robustness checks,

where we provide further insights into the nature of buyout transactions and the financial

drivers of their performance. The analyses confirm that buyout transactions tend to be more

successful relative to their public market benchmark if the buyout fund managers are able to

transfer substantial parts of the risk to the lenders.

      Finally, it is important to note that our approach relies on completed and audited

transactions only. This removes the necessity of dealing with interim valuations and missing

values, as reported by Rotch (1968), Poindexter (1975), Peng (2001a and 2001b), Quigley



                                                     3
and Woodward (2002 and 2003), Cochrane (2005), and Phalippou and Gottschalg (2008). It

is due to issues such as these that performance analyses become both difficult and

questionable because the methods of correction transfer the historical development and return

patterns on the non-exited and current transactions. This might cause a substantial bias due to

market conditions that have changed meanwhile.


I. Background

      Buyouts, as Sahlman (1990), and Lerner (2000) point out, represent one strand of the

private equity (PE) asset class. This asset category is based on the relationship between an

institutional investor and an intermediary (the PE fund or investee). PE funds are usually

structured as a limited partnership, with a management team (termed the “general partner”)

that manages the investments of the limited partners. Investors in the fund then hold shares as

limited partners. Buyout funds concentrate their investments on mature companies. In most

cases, the companies’ shares are not traded on a public stock market, though a particular type

of transaction described by Lowenstein (1985), called “going privates”, target quoted

companies. A defining feature of the asset class is that, for the “going privates” as well as for

the privately held target corporations, once a general partner has invested in a company, its

shares are not (no longer) publicly traded over her holding period. The exposure is typically

structured as, or highly like, equity claims (common and preferred). For each transaction an

investment vehicle is created, funded by one or several buyout funds as well as other parties,

such as senior and subordinated debt providers and mezzanine investors. The nature of these

is investigated by Kaplan and Stein (1990) and Cotter and Peck (2001). The target company’s

management team, its employees or new external managers may also subscribe for equity

stakes, but their stakes are usually small compared to the institutional investors’ participation.

The transaction vehicle acquires assets or shares of the target company and/or will merge

with it, thus creating a unique opportunity highlighted by Jensen (1986) to specify a capital


                                                   4
structure and design particular claims and incentives. The principle to found a special purpose

vehicle for every single transaction is a particularly important feature with respect to the

subsequently proposed mimicking approach. The legal construction secures that the liability

of the buyout fund is limited to its equity exposure. The sponsor’s individual assets do not

serve as collateral for other ones. As a consequence, debt financing for an individual portfolio

company is granted against the particular portfolio company’s assets only, and hence, more

costly than the risk free rate.

      The transaction date is called the closing date. At the end of the holding period (called

exit), all claims are usually sold either via privately negotiated sales or through Initial Public

Offerings. If not all shares are sold at IPO, the general partners liquidate their holdings

subsequently or directly transfer the shares to the limited partners. In any case it is not the

investors’ goal to maintain exposure in the public stock market. Unsuccessful engagements

are written off, eventually to a zero value. Some transactions might be only partly sold and/or

re-levered to benefit once more from debt finance.

      Buyout funds tend to act as active investors, as comprehensively discussed by Jensen

(1989a and 1989b). Their role involves monitoring, managing and restructuring the target

companies to create value. Kaplan (1989a and 1989b), Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990), Smith

(1990), Kaplan (1991) and Berg and Gottschalg (2005) argue that this is a key determinant

for the success of buyout transactions. To secure their influence on the target companies,

buyout funds seek to obtain the majority of voting rights either alone or together with other

financial investors via equity syndications. This is not a necessary condition however, and,

depending on the buyout size and structure, the majorities can vary.

      A second strand of the PE asset class is constituted by VC investments, as discussed by

Bygrave and Timmons (1992), Gompers (1998) and Gompers and Lerner (1999a and 2000).

Buyouts and venture capital differ substantially in terms of the investment risk profile. While



                                                   5
buyout funds invest in mature companies in traditionally stable industries using financial

leverage, VC funds typically acquire minority stakes of early stage businesses in volatile

growth industries with minimal or no debt financing. These fundamental differences make it

necessary to treat the two sub-categories of the private equity asset class separately in the

assessment of risk and return; it is also why this paper focuses exclusively on buyout

transactions.


II. Related Literature

      Strikingly, recent research on the risk and return of private equity has lead to

contradictory findings. As we will show in this section, different approaches to correct for

sample selection biases and to adjust for risk may be responsible for a large part of these

inconsistencies. Furthermore, it is important to note that many studies do not sufficiently

differentiate between the different risk-characteristics of the venture capital and the buyout

asset class. The key papers are discussed below before we highlight how our paper differs

from the related literature.

      Gompers and Lerner (1997) address the “stale price” problem and propose market

tracking as a tool for measuring risk-adjusted returns of buyouts. The term “stale price” is

used to describe the fact that market valuations of PE transactions are only available at two

dates (if at all): the entry and the exit date. Hence, the common risk measure standard

deviation of periodic returns is meaningless for the asset class. The authors benchmark the

individual transactions by building equally weighted indexes of publicly quoted companies

sharing the same three-digit SIC codes. They then analyze one single buyout fund using these

indexes as a performance indicator (if neither cash payments nor write-offs exist), modeling

the quarterly exposure of its investments. If a payment or write-off occurs, then a new

company value can be calculated and attributed to the transaction. Gompers and Lerner

(1997) concede that their approach assumes perfect correlation between the target company


                                                 6
valuations and the chosen index. Moreover, the authors argue that this could overstate the risk

involved. Using their approach, the authors find superior performance for this single buyout

fund.

        Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) use extensive data obtained from a fund of fund

investor regarding cash outflows, inflows and management fees for investments in 73

different PE funds. To determine risk-adjusted returns they calculate industry beta factors

using the methodology of Fama and French (1997). Without data on the leverage of the target

companies, they are unable to correct for different degrees of leverage, and therefore

implicitly assume average industry debt/equity ratios within their analysis. From this, they

obtain an average beta factor of all the different PE fund portfolios of 1.08 and an average

annual internal rate of return of 21.83%. This greatly exceeds the S&P 500 Index

performance during the same period of 14.1% per annum. The authors argue that, provided

the degrees of leverage were no higher than about twice the industry average, a risk-adjusted

premium exists for the PE transactions. However, they acknowledge that their PE-fund

sample may not be a random draw from the general population.

        Jones and Rhodes-Kropf (2003) investigate the idiosyncratic risks of PE transactions,

arguing that they play an important role that must be priced. They find that investors in PE

funds do not earn positive alphas. Surprisingly, they also find that funds exposed to more

idiosyncratic risk earn higher returns than more diversified portfolios. Groh, Baule and

Gottschalg (2009) determine idiosyncratic buyout risks with a contingent claim approach

based on the Ho and Singer (1984) model to price risky debt with an amortization payment.

They find high Sharpe-ratios of the buyouts but face a severe selection bias in their sample of

transactions.

        Quigley and Woodward (2002) and Woodward and Hall (2003) develop a VC price

index based on the Repeat Sales Regression Method introduced by Bailey, Muth and Nourse



                                                 7
(1963) to benchmark real estate investments. Quigley and Woodward (2002) further correct

for sample selection bias with Heckit Two Step Regression. The authors use proprietary data

on 5,607 companies that received venture capital in 12,553 financing rounds between 1987

and 2000. Quigley and Woodward (2002) calculate Sharpe-ratios of their VC index and of

the S&P 500, and the NASDAQ Index. Both stock market indexes have to be considered

superior to VC in terms of the ratio between risk and return. However, the authors conclude

that for diversification purposes, securities portfolios should include 10% to 15% of VC

exposure.

     Similar to Peng (2001a and 2001b) and Quigley and Woodward (2002), Cochrane

(2005) points out that empirical VC research usually only observes valuations if target

companies go public, receive new financing or are acquired by third parties. These events are

more likely to occur when good returns have already been experienced and this results in a

sample selection bias that the author overcomes via a maximum likelihood estimate. He

measures the probability of observing a return as the company values increase. His approach

implies the assumption that historical development patterns of the portfolio companies

remain stable and are applicable to estimate the value of current and non-exited projects.

Cochrane (2005) uses data on 16,613 financing rounds between 1987 and June 2000 for

7,765 target companies from the VentureOne database. This database includes buyout and

venture capital transactions but the VC segment notably dominates the data. With his

reweighing procedure Cochrane (2005) calculates an arithmetic mean return of 59% and

underlines the high idiosyncratic risks of the particular transactions. He directly models the

returns to equity and does not control for leverage risks. He compares the returns with the

corresponding returns of the S&P 500 Index and with several portfolios taken from the

NASDAQ Index. Considering these different benchmark portfolios he finds alphas ranging

from 22% to 45%. Regarding the slopes of the regressions he argues that VC is riskier than



                                                 8
the S&P 500 Index. For the different NASDAQ portfolios Cochrane (2005) determines

regression slopes between 0.5 and 1.4 and argues that VC can have either greater or lower

risk than the benchmark depending on the choice of the NASDAQ portfolio.

      Kaplan and Schoar (2005) employ a public market equivalent approach to benchmark

PE funds. They construct a mimicking portfolio for a large sample of PE funds contained in

the Thomson Venture Economics database, investing the same amount over an equally long

period in the S&P 500 Index and comparing the PE fund performance to the index returns.

Within their approach, Kaplan and Schoar (2005) presume that PE investments are as risky as

the S&P 500 portfolio and hence, have a beta equal to one. The authors conclude that average

buyout fund returns are, after fees, slightly smaller than those of the S&P 500. Gross of fees

the asset class earns returns exceeding the chosen benchmark. They also report a strong

persistence of the performance (negative as well as positive) of the particular funds and a

higher performance for larger funds and more experienced management teams. Kaplan and

Schoar (2005) acknowledge that their results may be misleading however, as by not

controlling for different risk patterns in the individual transactions they assume that the

appropriate buyout cost of capital is the return of the S&P 500 Index. They also do not

correct for a potential selection bias that might exist in their sample.

      Phalippou and Gottschalg (2008) extend the Kaplan and Schoar (2005) article. They

calculate public market equivalents for cash flows to and from buyout funds, and also use the

time matching returns of the S&P 500 as opportunity cost of capital. They focus on the

correction of unrealized, but reported net asset values and run several analyses applying

various approaches to partially or fully write them off. They find that gross of fees their

sample funds outperform the S&P 500 by 3% p.a. Net of fees the performance is 3% below

the benchmark. In a robustness check, they calculate unlevered and levered beta factors with

a method similar to the one we will apply to perform a risk-adjustment. However, without



                                                    9
data on the target companies’ leverage, the authors are unable to correct for different degrees

of leverage in their sample transactions. They calculate equity beta factors similar to

Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) with initial debt/equity ratios of 3 and final debt/equity

ratios at average industry levels. In their unlevering and re-levering approach they assume a

corporate tax rate of 35%, a debt beta of 0.25 for the buyouts and 0 for the public market and

do not differentiate the risks of debt tax shields in the quoted and unquoted market segment.

They also do not control for different cost of borrowing and lending. Using the average

buyout case, Phalippou and Gottschalg (2008) find underperformance of the buyouts with

respect to the S&P 500.

      Our study differs from and aims to extend prior work in several ways. First and most

importantly, it constitutes the first large-scale analysis on the cost of capital for buyouts that

fully corrects for operating risk, leverage risk, and leverage cost. Using precise information

on the valuations of individual target companies, their competitors in their industry sector and

on the capital structures of the investment vehicles at the closing date and at exit, it becomes

possible for us to attribute a systematic risk measure to every transaction. This risk measure is

neither an average over several transactions nor constant over time. There is, rather, an

individual risk pattern for every single transaction. This pattern typically starts at higher risks

due to initially higher degrees of leverage, and consecutively decreases, due to the

redemption of debt. The redemption capabilities of the target corporations vary to a great

extent and, hence, this underlines the variety of the risk patterns in buyout financing. We are

able to control for these patterns by constructing well-defined, equally risky mimicking

investments that can be used to determine the opportunity cost of capital of buyout

transactions. We show that the consideration of leverage risk and cost is of great importance.

Also, as Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003), and Kaplan and Schoar (2005) note, any findings

regarding the performance of buyouts that do not appropriately adjust for the effect of



                                                   10
leverage have to be interpreted with great caution. We are able to illustrate the effect of

different choices regarding the treatment of the risk patterns and the cost of debt for the

relative performance of this asset class.

      Further, this paper focuses exclusively on investments of buyout funds, as the category

of PE in which leverage plays a crucial role. It thereby avoids mixing two asset classes

(venture capital and buyouts) that have substantially different risk and return characteristics.

Additionally, we only rely on fully completed (exited and audited) transactions. Hence, we

avoid the problem of missing values and do not need to vaguely estimate interim valuations

for our transactions from historical return patterns nor to handle reported net asset values.

Next, we provide detailed insights into risk characteristics and drivers of performance of this

asset class. Our findings contrast the performance impact of: (a) systematic operating risk;

and, (b) leverage risk; with (c) the joint impact of both factors. Moreover, we explicitly

analyze the sensitivity of our results with respect to different assumptions regarding the risk

patterns of the individual transactions. Therefore we vary the assumptions about debt risk, the

risk of debt tax shields, credit spreads, and operating risks in the industry sectors.


III. Data Collection and Sample Description

      The availability of data of sufficient breadth and depth has been one of the key

constraints in addressing the question of the opportunity cost of capital for buyouts. As we

show in this paper, mimicking buyout investments with public market instruments on a risk-

adjusted basis requires information on the industry segment of the target companies, the

timing and size of underlying cash flows, as well as the capital structure of the acquiring

investment vehicles at least at entry and exit. This data is neither publicly available, nor is it

listed in any of the commonly used databases, such as Thomson Venture Economics or

VentureOne. Rather, it can only be gathered directly from institutions investing in buyouts as

either general or limited partners. While this approach has advantages regarding the depth of


                                                   11
available data, it leads to potential selection and survivorship biases. In the following, we

describe the data sources and sample characteristics of the data used in this study and discuss

a potential bias.

      Our dataset is compiled from information on buyout funds made available to us

anonymously either directly from general partners or through limited partners. Limited

partners collect detailed information on general partners as part of the due diligence processes

for their fund allocations. Each year, limited partners often screen hundreds of new buyout

funds. In a special document (the so-called Private Placement Memorandum - PPM), general

partners describe their previous transactions in order to raise a new fund. The PPM are

submitted to potential limited partners and used by them to assess the general partner’s

quality and strategy. These documents contain information about all past transactions carried

out by the general partner. The data on individual transactions used in this study has been

extracted from PPM. Our data providers are among the world’s largest limited partners and

collectively manage more than US$40 billion in the PE asset class. Needless to say, PPM

documents are highly confidential and, to the best of our knowledge, have never been used in

academic research.

      As no standard format exists for reporting transactions in PPM, the documents are very

heterogeneous in terms of the level of detail provided for each transaction – both within one

fund and across general partners. As a result, the data necessary to perform our proposed

method of risk-adjustment was extracted only for a small subset of transactions. Moreover, as

only fully exited transactions are considered here, the size of the available sample shrinks

further. Because this study’s objective is to assess the opportunity cost of capital for

“buyouts”, we only consider investments performed by funds that refer to themselves

explicitly as a “buyout fund”. For instance, the 122 PPM supplied to us by our research

partners described 2,264 realized buyout transactions (1,001 of which were in the US) made



                                                 12
through 170 buyout funds (some PPM report on several funds) raised between 1981 and

2004. From this large number of transactions, we only collect 152 transactions for which the

following data is available. First, for closing: the date, company valuation, acquired equity

stake, amount paid for the equity, target-company industry and a short product and market

description, or description of competitors (in order to determine its SIC code). Second, for the

exit: the date, company valuation, equity stake and amount returned to the buyout fund.

Finally, in order to verify that the underlying cash flows are correctly matched, the

investment’s gross internal rate of return reported in the PPM is needed. Some problems and

shortcomings of the internal rate of return as a performance measure for buyout transactions

are discussed in Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Phalippou (2008), and Phalippou and Gottschalg

(2008). However, we only use the internal rates of return of the transactions to verify that we

correctly match all their underlying cash flows.

      The vast majority of the collected 152 target companies are based in the United States,

with the remainder based in the United Kingdom, continental Europe and Japan. As the non-

US results would lack statistical weight for any individual country while also distorting the

US results and raising questions about cross-currency returns, the availability of public peers

and adequate benchmark portfolios, we decided to exclude all non-US transactions. This

finally leaves us with 133 transactions executed by 41 different funds. For each of these

transactions we are able to create the exact individual financial risk profile considering

operating risk, initial financial leverage, and subsequent redemption of debt. In several

transactions, meaningful additional “add-on payments” occurred in subsequent financing

rounds as well as premature disbursements. These payments influence the investor’s exposure

and the internal rates of return on the particular transactions. Staged investments usually have

a lower risk than the initial payment given the debt redemption that takes place until the

moment of the add-on payment. Similarly, premature disbursements or large dividends



                                                   13
financed by recapitalizations usually have a higher risk than at the end of the holding period.

To accurately track the risks of these buyouts with the mimicking investments, all underlying

cash flows have to be matched. Our sample transactions show the following characteristics,

exhibited in Table I: The first transaction was closed in November 1984 and the last was

exited by June 2004: 16 transactions were closed in the 1980s, 31 in the early 1990s and 74 in

the late 1990s, while the remaining were closed in the new millennium. The holding periods

range from three months to 15 years plus one month. The average and the median holding

period are below four years, respectively. The equity stakes range from 8% to 100%

ownership, where the average (median) is 76% (86%). This figure in general reflects the

strategy of securing majority-voting rights in target companies in order to be able to control

them effectively. The minor equity stakes in a few transactions represent syndicated equity

layers.

          -----------------------
          Table I about here
          -----------------------


      Regarding the degrees of financial leverage, the average (median) debt to equity ratio is

2.94 (2.49) at closing, and 1.28 (0.64) at exit. Some of the transactions do not include any

debt. However, some of the buyouts are highly levered with degrees up to 17.05. The high

average and median degree of financial leverage found in our sample emphasizes the need to

consider the effect of leverage risk in the performance assessment.

      While at closing, the enterprise values of the target companies range from $3.5 million

to almost $9,000 million, the average (median) is $313.5 million ($88.0 million). At exit, the

enterprise values range from $0.001 million (a write off) to almost $13,500 million with an

average (median) of $547.9 million ($135.0 million). Similarly, the amount of equity invested

ranges from $0.2 million in a small and syndicated transaction to almost $1,150 million

signaling the large exposure in certain transactions. On average (median) the amount of


                                                 14
equity invested is $53.4 million ($18.7 million). The final payoffs range between

$0.001 million (a write off) and almost $1,800 million with an average of $160.4 million and

a median of $63.1 million.

     The descriptive statistics further reveal the diversity of the transactions made by the

buyout funds, e.g., with holding periods ranging from three months to 15 years or equity

exposure between $0.2 million and $1,150 million. With respect to transaction size and the

observed financial structures, our sample can be regarded as “typical” compared to other

samples, such as DeAngelo and DeAngelo (1987), Kaplan and Stein (1990), Kaplan and

Stein (1993), Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990), and Axelson, Jenkinson, Strömberg and

Weisbach (2007).

     The internal rates of return gross of fees range from –100% (total write off within a

year) to as high as 472% p.a. However, the mean average IRR of all the transactions and the

median are 50.08% p.a. and 35.70% p.a., respectively. Since these figures do not consider

differences in either the amounts invested or their duration, we also calculate the aggregate

IRR over all the underlying cash flows, which is 33.19% p.a. This corresponds to the gross

return an investor would have gained by participating in all of our sample transactions in an

equal proportion of the equity values. We also calculate the invested-capital-weighted IRR of

all the cash flows, which is 30.95% p.a. These figures seem high, but are reported gross of all

fees. The final returns to investors are much lower after deducting the fees typically paid in

this asset class. Usually fees are structured as an annual percentage of the capital under

management (‘management fee’ of 1-4%) plus a performance related share (‘carried interest’

of 15%-35% of the returns), which is often subject to a hurdle rate. Alternatively, the

management fee might be payable on invested funds. Anyway, fee structures are opaque and

incomparable, as catch-up clauses might protect LPs from deteriorating returns over the life




                                                 15
time of the fund, or as the timing of the carry payment also affects the final returns to

investors.3

       As detailed information about the entire population of buyout investments is

unavailable, we can only speculate whether our sample represents typical transaction sizes,

transaction structures, leverage ratios, sourcing or exit channels, or preferred industry

segments at the time. At least, the ratios and dimensions of our sample transactions are very

similar to those from other researchers, as discussed above. However, given the long sample

horizon – from 1984 to 2004 – it should be stressed that trends, market conditions, debt

interest rates and disclosed returns on buyout transactions changed significantly within that

period. The entire capital market segment passed two cycles, as reported by Gompers and

Lerner (1999a and 2000). However, the temporal composition of our sample with 16

transactions from the 1980s, 31 from the early 1990s, 74 from the late 1990s and the

remainder after 2000 represents the historical evolvement of the asset class.

       Available datasets on PE transactions (such as Thomson Venture Economics or

VentureOne) usually do not contain any economic information other than the timing and the

amount of cash flows. Additionally, it is impossible for us to trace our sample transactions in

any one of these (and similar) databases, since they are kept anonymous. In general, our data

gathering process is not determined by any economic variable but only by the facts that we

first need to have a relationship with a research partner, and second the available PPM must

provide sufficient information on the track records. Due to these facts and the impossibility of

tracing our sample transactions in any other database, we unfortunately cannot quantify the

extent to which our sample is biased through sample attrition. We rely on the data provided




3
    A comprehensive description and discussion of compensation models can be found in Bygrave, Fast,
    Khoylian, Vincent, and Yue (1985), p. 96, Jensen (1989a), p. 68, Jensen (1989b), p. 37, Sahlman (1990), p.
    491, Murray and Marriott (1998), p. 966 Gompers and Lerner (1999a), p. 57, Gompers and Lerner (1999b),
    p. 7, Metrick (2006), Metrick and Yasuda (2008), and Phalippou (2009).


                                                         16
by the PPM as a single but primary and reliable source. It should be noted that the

information provided is based on audited numbers and audited transactions.

      Given the source of our data, there are good reasons for suspecting an upward return

bias in our sample. First, we have to consider a possible selection bias arising from the GPs’

reporting policy. GPs have an incentive to provide detailed information only for their

successful transactions in the PPM, which is primarily a marketing instrument for

fundraising. Second, we have to expect a survivorship bias based on the mechanism that

unsuccessful GPs will find it difficult or even impossible to raise another fund. Hence, they

will never write a PPM that reports their past unsuccessful investments. A sample like ours,

which is derived from PPM information, will therefore be systematically biased towards the

more successful fund managers that ‘survive’. We address this issue in the next section after

the introduction of our mimicking approach, and after the presentation of the results.


IV. The Mimicking Portfolio of the Buyouts

      To assess the opportunity cost of capital for buyouts, we create a mimicking portfolio

of public market investments. These investments are designed to replicate the risk profile of

the buyouts in terms of their timing and their systematic risk.

      The determination of the mimicking portfolio requires for each buyout: (a) the

identification of a peer group of publicly traded companies with the same operating risk; (b)

the calculation of the equity betas for each of these ‘public peers’; (c) the unlevering of these

beta factors to derive their operating or unlevered betas; (d) the determination of a market

weighted average of these operating betas for every peer group; and, (e) the re-levering of

these peer group operating betas on the level of the buyout transactions at closing, and exit.

The unlevering and re-levering procedures also require the specification of the risk, which is

borne by the lenders, the risk of tax shields, as well as an applicable corporate tax rate.




                                                   17
      With the individual buyout betas the mimicking portfolio can be established as follows:

for every buyout transaction, an equal amount of equity is invested in a market proxy-

portfolio which is levered up with borrowed funds until it matches the equity beta factor of

the buyout at closing. If the buyout’s beta is lower than 1, funds can be lent. The timing of the

mimicking investments corresponds to the closing dates. The risk of the public market

transaction is then adjusted every year, tracking the risk of the buyouts. Therefore, every

position is liquidated annually, interest is paid, debt is redeemed and the residual equity is

levered up again with borrowed funds (respectively funds are lent) to the prevailing

systematic risk of the buyout. At this point, the value of the equity might have approached

zero. This triggers default of the mimicking transaction and its return is calculated up to this

point. The procedure is repeated until the exit date (for the “no default cases”). Then, the

position is closed and, after serving debt, we receive a residual cash flow to the investor,

which represents the final payoff. We can easily calculate the returns of these cash flows

which represent the opportunity cost of capital of the buyouts.

      The individual steps and the necessary assumptions used to construct the mimicking

portfolio are discussed in detail in the Appendix. The approach enables the analyses

described in the following section.


V. Analyses and Results

      First, we can compare the leverage pattern of buyouts with that of their publicly quoted

peers (see Table I). With respect to leverage risk, we find that at closing the average

debt/equity ratio of the buyout investments is 2.94 and their median is 2.49. At exit those

ratios are 1.28 (mean average), and 0.64 (median) respectively. In comparison, the mean

average leverage ratio of all quoted peers over the five years is 1.38, while the median is

0.83. That means that on average our sample transactions are initially levered more than

twice as much as their public peers. When exited, the target companies have even lower


                                                  18
leverage ratios than their public peers. This finding should be contrasted with the literature.

Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003) argue that buyout transactions create excess value as long

as they don’t use less than 0.476 the amount of equity used by their quoted peers under the

conservative assumption of risk-free debt. We show that, while this ratio is initially 0.47, it

rises to 1.08, and hence is 0.77 on average between closing and exit of a transaction. This,

and the introduction of risky debt, would have increased the level of outperformance found in

Ljungqvist and Richardson (2003).

       Second, we take a look at the operating risk and find that the resulting unlevered beta

factors range between 0.32 (0.05 percentile) and 1.40 (0.95 percentile). The mean average of

the unlevered beta factors is 0.67 and their median is 0.56. This is not surprising, as buyout

fund managers typically choose low volatile businesses for their investments and, hence, the

unlevered beta factors of target companies should be low in general.4

       Third, the resulting systematic risk of the transactions ranges between 0.32 (0.05

percentile) and 3.88 (0.95 percentile) at closing, with a mean of 1.40 and a median of 0.94. At

exit the equity betas are between 0.32 (0.05 percentile) and 2.80 (0.95 percentile), with a

mean of 1.01 and a median of 0.71. From that, we can calculate an average beta factor for all

the transactions and over the holding periods of 1.21. This signals the need for adjustment of

an index portfolio when benchmarking buyout performance.

       Fourth, we build the portfolio of mimicking investments. As we explain in detail in the

Appendix, the construction of the adequate set of mimicking investments depends on several

assumptions. These assumptions are stressed in the subsequent sensitivity analyses and

robustness checks. We start with our “base case” approach, and one of its important features

is the replication of the limited liability for each buyout. Hence, the only available collateral


4
    See e.g. Jensen (1989a), p. 64, Smith (1990), p. 154, DeAngelo and DeAngelo (1987), Table 1, or Lehn and
    Poulsen (1989), p. 774. The lower end of the range of unlevered beta factors could also result from the
    selection of infrequently traded peers. We attempted to exclude this kind of peer from our selection. Our
    sensitivity analysis considers this case for its effect on our results.


                                                        19
for every individual mimicking investment is the portfolio of the S&P 500 shares which are

bought on the margin. As a result, levering up the portfolio is possible only at the cost of a

credit spread. As a source for the relevant spreads we refer to Altman and Pasternack (2006).

However, lending is possible at the risk free rate.

      In our first sensitivity analysis, we relax this assumption and observe the consequences

if lending is possible at the same credit spread, suggesting that investors can buy risky bonds

and the S&P 500 portfolio. Subsequently, we abandon the establishment of limited liability

for setting up the mimicking investments and allow both risk free borrowing and lending,

hence, assume perfect market conditions. The next sensitivity analysis replicates Kaplan and

Schoar (2005), i.e., the mimicking investments time-match the S&P 500 portfolio. The last

sensitivity analysis replicates Phalippou and Gottschalg (2008), assuming for the

unlevering/levering process initial debt/equity ratios of 3 and final debt/equity ratios at

average industry levels, a corporate tax rate of 35%, a debt beta of 0.25 for the buyouts and 0

for the public market, and no differentiation between the risks of debt tax shields in the

quoted and unquoted market segment. Further, risk-free borrowing and lending is possible in

this case.

      The beta factors that result from our base case and the proposed sensitivity analyses are

presented in Table II and the descriptive statistics as well as the check for appropriateness of

the different mimicking approaches is presented in Table III.

        -----------------------
        Table II and Table III about here
        -----------------------


      To confirm the applicability of the mimicking approaches we test them like simple

benchmark models, using the returns achieved in the buyout transactions as dependent

variables and the returns of the mimicking investments as independent variables:
                                    ~              rMimicking + ε~
                                    rBO = α 0 + α 1~                                         (1)


                                                    20
        where:
~r            Returns of the buyout cash flows
  BO


~r            Returns of the mimicking investments
  Mimicking



α0            Intercept of the regression

α1            Slope of the regression

~ε            White noise error term

        If our benchmark models are appropriate to explain the buyout returns, the slope α1

should be equal to one, while the intercept α0 is rather meaningless due to the assumed bias

towards high buyout returns gross of fees and a high influence of white noise in this

regression. Hence, we test the hypotheses: H0 → α1 = 1, H1 → α1 ≠ 1.

        Our base case approach yields a mean average return of the mimicking investments of

9.07%, and the median is 12.16%. The 0.05 and the 0.95 percentile are -30.06%, and 38.25%

respectively, while the standard deviation is 0.2525. In our base case approach, we assume

that lending is possible at the risk free rate and borrowing at the cost of high yield debt. This

adequately replicates the limited liability in buyouts. For a fair comparison, the investor

mimicking the buyouts should not borrow on his other assets. As a consequence, the cost of

borrowing to establish the mimicking portfolio increases to the level paid in the buyout

transactions. Actually, the cost of the debt required to set up the mimicking transactions

might even be larger than for the buyouts because buying stocks on the margin is very

expensive. The test-result for applicability of our model is positive. The explained variance of

3.4% of the dependent variable is very little, but this is not surprising at the given high

volatility of the buyout and the mimicking returns. The R2 will remain small unfortunately,

for all of the subsequent regressions. However, the regression slope 0.67 is different from

zero with a p-value of 0.009, and not significantly different from 1 with a p-value of 0.195.

As a consequence, the proposed model is adequate for benchmarking buyouts.


                                                     21
      In the first sensitivity analysis (# 1), we also apply the same credit spreads for lending.

This leads to an increase of the mean (median) return of the mimicking investments to

10.30% (13.91% respectively). The whole distribution of mimicking returns is shifted

towards positive results as would be expected. Ninety percent of the returns are between -

29.50% and 38.92%, and the standard deviation of the returns remains almost unchanged at

0.2523. The regression confirms that this mimicking approach is also appropriate.

      In the next sensitivity analysis (# 2), we allow for risk-free borrowing and lending, and

hence, assume perfect market conditions. The mean (median) mimicking return increases to

12.89% (12.59%) and the return distribution shifts further towards positive returns with the

0.05 percentile at -22.93% and the 0.95 percentile at 45.75%. The standard deviation of

returns slightly reduces to 0.2323 and the regression results signal applicability of that

approach.

      For the first three scenarios, the beta factors to match in the public market do not

change because we do not change any assumption regarding the unlevering/re-levering

process for the buyouts; we only change assumptions that affect the mimicking portfolio.

Next, we replicate Kaplan and Schoars’ (2005) findings (scenario #3), and set all beta factors

equal to 1, hence, there is no borrowing and lending involved. This is in strong contrast to the

betas in our baseline cases that vary substantially over time and across transactions. On

average, the systematic risk of the Kaplan and Schoar (2005) mimicking portfolio is lower

than the systematic risk in our case. We achieve a mean (median) 12.36% (14.95%) return of

the mimicking transactions. The standard deviation of returns decreases to 0.1475 and this

correspondingly narrows 90% of the return observations between -13.88% and 31.99%. The

regression confirms that matching the buyouts with the S&P 500 directly is appropriate.

      In the final scenario (#4), we replicate Phalippou and Gottschalg (2008) and use their

approach for the unlevering/levering process. Here, betas range between 0.32



                                                  22
(0.05 percentile) and 4.36 (0.95 percentile) at closing with a mean average of 1.50 and a

median of 1.03. The betas decrease until exit to a range between 0.32 (0.05 percentile) and

1.70 (0.95 percentile) with a mean of 0.82 and a median of 0.73. We find that equity betas are

slightly larger at closing and slightly smaller at exit compared to our base case approach.

Assuming risk-free borrowing and lending to adjust the mimicking investments leads to a

mean return of 12.55% and a median of 12.60%. These results, and also the standard

deviation of the returns of 0.2208, are close to scenario #2. The 0.05 to 0.95 percentile is -

26.31% to 43.46%, and the regression analysis signals appropriateness of this approach.

      The scenarios confirm that buyout opportunity cost of capital is largely determined by

the assumptions on the appropriate cost of and the returns on debt to establish the mimicking

investments. Kaplan and Schoar (2005) suggest time-matching the buyout investments with

S&P 500 exposure. This approach needs no assumptions about the capital structure of the

individual buyouts, nor about any unlevering and re-levering procedure, hence it does also

not need any determination of the cost/return on debt to establish the mimicking investment.

However, the approach implies that, on average, buyout companies correspond to the average

of the companies that comprise the S&P 500 index with respect to their business risk, their

leverage, and their cost of debt. Further, the approach implies that, on average, the buyout

leverage ratios do not change over time, or more precisely, follow the pattern of the S&P 500

companies. If these preconditions are accepted, time-matching S&P 500 investments

represent the correct opportunity cost of capital for buyout transactions.

      However, we claim that buyout transactions do not usually happen in risky industries,

and differ with regard to leverage ratios, leverage cost, and deleverage patterns from the

“average” S&P 500 company. Hence, we claim that corrections are necessary to control for

these differences and propose these corrections in the Appendix. The described procedure

leads to a set of levered and unlevered purchases of the S&P 500 index portfolio. For the



                                                  23
establishment of the mimicking portfolio, we have to specify the cost and the risk of debt.

The simplest case is to assume that debt is risk free and borrowing and lending is possible at

the risk-free rate, which is scenario #2. As a result, we achieve an average opportunity cost of

capital of 12.89% (median 12.59%) which is, in fact, only slightly different from the mean

average 12.36% (median 14.95%) return in the Kaplan and Schoar (2005) case. The approach

by Phalippou and Gottschalg (2008) leads to 12.55% (median 12.60%) which is very close to

our result. One could conclude that the mentioned differences with respect to operating risks,

leverage ratios and cost, net out on average. Hence, proper adjustments are not required, and

the S&P 500 may serve as a benchmark for buyouts, even if the large dispersion of returns

suggests that every single buyout should be benchmarked with “its specific” opportunity cost

of capital.

      However, results change if we include a credit spread for the establishment of the

mimicking transactions as we do in our base line case and scenario #1. If we assume that the

limited liability in buyouts is a valuable feature that also needs to be replicated, the risk and

the cost of debt will rise. The S&P 500 portfolio must be purchased on the margin. In

practice, it is in fact doubtful that banks allow borrowed share purchases up to the risk-levels

that we detect at closing of some buyout transactions. This underlines the necessity to choose

a fair mimicking approach that controls for this issue. As a consequence, we introduce risky

debt to lever up the investments into the S&P 500 index, and observe a strong and significant

(two tailed p-value = 0.013) decrease of the average return of the mimicking portfolio to

9.07% (median 12.16%). This decrease is not surprising at first sight, as positive returns of

the index portfolio are eaten up by the cost of debt. However, there is another factor that

explains the deterioration of the average return. This is the simple fact that some of the

mimicking transactions default. Thereby, it is not the transactions with the largest initial

leverages. It is those with “bad” market timing that would have defaulted in the public



                                                  24
market. If we also allow for lending at the same rates, the average return of the mimicking

transactions becomes 10.30% (median 13.91%).

      As a result, we claim that it is, first, not appropriate to use the unadjusted index

portfolio as a benchmark. Second, adjusting for different operating and leverage risks

requires certain specifications, as described in the Appendix. Third, a fair replication of

buyouts with public market securities should consider the limited liability of the transactions

that come at some cost: Buyout sponsors do not borrow on the buyout fund’s other assets; the

target corporations borrow on their own assets. Hence, the equivalent approach is to purchase

stocks on the margin.

      In a next step, we control for our assumptions regarding the risk-adjustment process

and analyze the influence of outliers on the calculations in robustness checks.

      A. Robustness Checks

      For all of our robustness checks, we assume riskless borrowing and lending when

setting up the mimicking portfolio, for better comparison. However, we alter the assumptions

for the unlevering/re-levering approach that determine the beta factors which have to be

tracked in the public market. The resulting beta factors in the robustness checks, the returns,

and the regression analyses are presented in Tables IV and V.

       ------------------------------------
       Table IV and Table V about here
       ------------------------------------


      The first robustness check (#1) controls for the industry mix. We apply the average

equity beta factors of our peer groups directly to the mimicking investments without

considering different degrees of leverage. This leads to partial risk adjustment as such a

mimicking portfolio replicates the industry mix of our buyouts but fails to capture the effect

of (additional or less) leverage. In other words, the buyouts are benchmarked with their




                                                 25
public peers directly. The approach leads to equity betas between 0.35 (0.05 percentile) and

1.46 (0.95 percentile) that remain constant over the holding period. Their mean average is

0.78, and the median is 0.70. Thus, the betas are lower than both the market beta and that of

our baseline case. This results in a mean (median) return of the mimicking portfolio of

10.12% (11.97%). The standard deviation of 0.1253 is the lowest of all of our different

analyses, and this is mirrored in a narrowed 0.05 to 0.95 percentile, which is -11.95% to

27.86%. The regression proves the applicability of that approach.

       This robustness check underlines two important implications: the average peer group

betas are smaller than one, signaling that buyout funds search for targets in less risky

industries. Further, we see again that without taking into account leverage risks, the

opportunity cost of buyouts become low, at least lower than in Kaplan and Schoar (2005).

       In the second robustness check (#2), we examine the impact of leverage alone on

returns. We set all the investments of the mimicking portfolio to have an unlevered beta of

0.84 (which is the unlevered beta factor of the S&P 500 Index). Here we draw on data

provided by Bernado, Chowdhry and Goyal (2004), which determines unlevered beta factors

for the Fama and French (1997) industry classification.5 We then lever up each mimicking

investment with the actual leverage of the corresponding buyout. This leads to a comparison

of the buyouts with a levered- and time-matched investment in a hypothetically leverage-free

public market index. This scenario adjusts for differences in leverage risk, but not for the

impact of different operating risks in the chosen industries.

       The resulting betas range at closing from 0.93 (0.05 percentile) to 4.16 (0.95 percentile)

with a mean average of 2.11 and a median of 1.92. At exit they are between 0.87

(0.05 percentile) and 2.65 (0.95 percentile) with a mean of 1.40 and a median of 1.13. Thus

the betas are larger, on average, than in our baseline case. This highlights once more the


5
    See Bernado, Chowdhry and Goyal (2004), Table 1, panel C, means of 1978-2002 data column.


                                                      26
proposition that buyout fund managers search within low-risk industries. Corresponding with

the higher beta factors, the mimicking portfolio yields a mean (median) return of 17.72%

(19.60%). The standard deviation of returns becomes as high as 0.2653 and the 0.05 to 0.95

percentile is -24.83% to 56.21%. The regression signals appropriateness of the approach.

        The third robustness check (#3) controls for the sensitivity of our results with respect to

the calculation of the operating betas for the peer group companies. Buyout transactions often

take place in niche markets in which shares might be traded infrequently. As several studies

have found, infrequently traded assets do not closely follow market movements (Fisher

(1966), Pogue and Solnik (1974), Scholes and Williams (1977), Schwert (1977), and Dimson

(1979)). As a result, the business risks of the target companies could be downward biased.

Along the same lines, one could argue that our approach inherently leads to a lower risk

boundary for the buyout transactions, as we use comparables transferred from the public

market to the unquoted segment. Another reason to perform this check is that we might have

miss-specified the risk of debt, of debt tax shields, or the applicable tax rate in our

unlevering/re-levering approach (as described in the Appendix).

        Hence, we increase the operating risk of each of the investments in the mimicking

portfolio arbitrarily by an arbitrary factor that corrects for a suspected 25% understatement of

the operating betas in our calculations. Consequently, the resulting equity betas increase (in

reference to our baseline case) within the range of 0.45 (0.05 percentile) to 5.87

(0.95 percentile) at closing, with a mean of 2.22 and a median of 1.70. At exit, they range

from 0.43 (0.05 percentile) to 3.90 (0.95 percentile) with a mean of 1.50 and a median of

1.09.

        As expected, the mean (median) return of the mimicking investments increases to

15.70% (16.27%). The standard deviation of returns becomes as high as 0.3501, which

expands the 0.05 to 0.95 percentile to -40.41% to 67.25%. However, the regression slope of



                                                    27
0.46 is significantly different from 1 at a p-value of 0.004. Hence, this seems not to be an

appropriate benchmarking approach.

      In the following robustness check (#4), we control for the impact of the risk of debt. As

explained in detail in the Appendix, we use a debt beta of 0.41 in our base case analysis to

lever-up the buyout betas. In this check, we instead replicate our calculations using risk-free

debt. When no risk can be transferred to the lenders, all the leverage risk is borne by the

equity sponsors, and therefore, the equity betas for our mimicking transactions increase

substantially. They range at closing from 0.69 (0.05 percentile) to 6.39 (0.95 percentile), with

a mean of 2.57 and a median of 1.99. At exit they range from 0.47 (0.05 percentile) to 3.88

(0.95 percentile), with a mean of 1.53 and a median of 1.07 respectively.

      Accordingly, the mean (median) return of the mimicking investments rises to peaking

17.57% (18.13%). These peaks are mirrored by the dispersion of returns. The standard

deviation becomes 0.3534, and 90% of the returns are between -42.13% and 72.35%. One

can conclude that if buyout sponsors are not able to transfer risks to the lenders, the

appropriate opportunity cost of capital becomes very large and dispersed. However, the

assumption that lenders in buyout transactions to not take risks is rather hypothetical.

Additionally, the regression results suggest that assuming risk-free buyout debt is not

appropriate when benchmarking buyouts: The slope of 0.53 is significantly different from

one at the 0.009 level.

      The next robustness check (#5) follows Kaplan and Stein (1990), and we assume that

operating improvements have lowered operating risk. A reduction of operating risks might,

for example, be caused by improved governance by the active investors. Thus, we

(arbitrarily) reduce all the operating beta factors by 25%. This reduction of operating beta

factors could also be justified by an overestimation of the risk of investment-grade debt, and

an underestimation of the corporate tax rate while initially calculating the operating beta



                                                 28
factors. However, this also leads to a lower truncation level for the risk of debt and hence

lower levered mimicking investments (see the Appendix). Accordingly, the beta factors for

this scenario shrink to between 0.24 (0.05 percentile) and 2.35 (0.95 percentile), with a mean

(median) of only 0.83 (0.45) at closing. They decrease to a range between 0.24 (0.05

percentile) to 1.95 (0.95 percentile), with a mean (median) at 0.66 (0.44).

      Due to the resulting low beta factors the mean (median) return of the mimicking

investments is only 10.11% (10.07%). The standard deviation is also low at 0.1468, while

90% of the return distribution is between -16.07% and 31.51%. The regression slope is 0.93

and hence close to one. This confirms the applicability of this approach, and turns to its

discussion: If buyout sponsors are indeed able to lower the operating risks of their portfolio

companies by enhanced governance or restructuring activities, they likewise decrease their

opportunity cost of capital. Improved governance by the active investor is named in Jensen

(1989a and 1989b), Kaplan (1989a and 1989b), Lichtenberg and Siegel (1990), Smith (1990),

and Kaplan (1991) as a particular determinant in buyout transactions. Hence, these

improvements should be accounted for in buyout performance analyses.

      In our sixth robustness check we analyze what happens if lenders take on an even

higher proportion of risk than that assumed in our baseline case. This assumption is also

reasonable as high yield bonds or mezzanine funding is often extensively used to structure

buyout transactions. It is also consistent with prior research that found even higher debt betas

for buyouts (such as Kaplan and Stein (1990)). Hence, we arbitrarily increase our debt beta to

0.50 to lever up the mimicking investments.

      The resulting equity betas range from 0.32 (0.05 percentile) to 3.36 (0.95 percentile) at

closing, with a mean of 1.19 and a median of 0.72. At exit, the betas range from 0.32

(0.05 percentile) to 2.68 (0.95 percentile), with a mean of 0.92 and a median of 0.65. As more

risk is transferred to the lenders, the mean (median) return of the mimicking investments



                                                 29
decreases (compared to our base case analysis) to 11.86% (11.65%). The standard deviation

of returns is 0.2106 and the 0.05 – 0.95 interval ranges from -22.47% to 41.21%. The

regression slope of 0.67 is not significantly different from one. This leads us to conclude that

the opportunity cost of capital of buyout transactions becomes smaller if we assume that GPs

are able to structure buyout transactions transferring a substantial part of the transaction risk

to the lenders. This is a common feature in buyout transactions where debt layers are often

provided against insufficient or no collateral.

      In the final robustness check we exclude those transactions from our sample that could

be considered “atypical” or outliers of other buyout transaction. Even with full data regarding

the transactions, some would be characterized by relatively low or zero leverage ratios,

minority ownership of the active investor, or either very short, or long holding periods.

Hence, we exclude transactions from our sample with a debt/equity ratio below 0.25 and

where the institutional investors’ equity ownership is below 50%. We further exclude

transactions with holding periods below a year and above nine years. Finally, we exclude the

most successful transactions with achieved internal rates of return above 200% p.a. This

results in a reduced sample of 108 transactions. The equity betas then range between 0.31

(0.05 percentile) and 3.89 (0.95 percentile) at closing, with a mean of 1.32 and a median of

0.91. At exit, the betas range from 0.31 (0.05 percentile) to 3.12 (0.95 percentile) with a mean

(median) of 1.01 (0.70). The mimicking portfolio yields a mean (median) return of 12.27%

(12.01%) which is slightly lower than in our baseline case, assuming borrowing and lending

at the risk-free rate. The standard deviation of returns is 0.2290, while the 0.05 to 0.95

interval is from -21.96% to 45.37%. The regression slope of 0.70 is not significantly different

from one. Hence, dropping “outliers” from our sample of transactions does not meaningfully

change the results.




                                                  30
         B. Sample Selection Bias

         To analyze the extent of a sample selection bias with respect to the success of the

transactions, we first study the impact of fees on the returns of our sample buyouts, and

recalculate the internal rates of return achieved in the buyout transactions after deducting

carried interest. Therefore, we assume expensive GPs, charging 30% carried interest at a

hurdle rate of 0%. The average (median) internal rate of return of our sample transactions

reduces from 50.08% to 35.50% (median from 35.70% to 27.85%). These were the average

(median) IRRs achieved by investors if management fees were already paid. However, the

management fees lower the amount of money available for investments, no matter if paid on

committed or invested capital. Phalippou (2009) argues that a typical buyout fund charges the

equivalent of 7 percent fees per year. This calculation includes management fees, and carried

interest, among other fee components. His analyses are based on committed capital and not

invested. For our transactions, we only know how much money was invested but not how

much was committed. Metrick and Yasuda (2008) provide an illustrative example where total

management fees add up to 14.81% of nominal invested funds.6 Hence, we can correct for

this discount and appreciate the cash outflows from the investors by 100/86.23. This

simplifying calculation leads to a mean (median) IRR of 25.92% (23.59%). Hence, the

average internal rates of return after fees achieved in our buyout sample transactions are

somehow higher than, for example, those reported by Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Phalippou

and Gottschalg (2008), or Phalippou (2009).

         A bias towards higher returns earned in our sample transactions does not harm our

results as long as the achieved returns are independent of the parameters that determine the

mimicking investment. Therefore, we search for correlations between the IRRs achieved in

the buyout transactions; and all determinants necessary to set up the mimicking portfolio. We

6
    This is total management fees of $12.77 divided by invested capital $86.23 per $100 committed, according to
     the numbers Metrick and Yasuda (2008) provide.


                                                          31
find four significant correlations at the two-tailed 0.05 significance level: Achieved IRRs

correlate positively with the degree of leverage at closing (ρ = 0.204), with debt redemption

abilities (ρ = 0.556), with the peer group’s average beta factor (ρ = 0.211), and negatively

with the holding period (ρ = -0.335). Hence, as our sample is biased towards higher IRRs it

might likewise be biased towards highly levered transactions, target corporations with strong

free cash flows, risky peers, and short holding periods. However, we also verify if these

parameters drive the returns of the mimicking portfolio in parallel. We find that only the

initial degree of leverage (ρ = 0.240) likewise positively affects buyout opportunity cost of

capital.

      We conclude that our sample might be biased towards highly levered transactions, and

this increases the average opportunity cost of capital. Unfortunately, we cannot correct for

this bias because initial leverage ratios are unknown for the population of buyouts. However,

our observations are in line with the samples used by other researchers, such as DeAngelo

and DeAngelo (1987), Kaplan and Stein (1990), Kaplan and Stein (1993), Muscarella and

Vetsuypens (1990), and Axelson, Jenkinson, Strömberg and Weisbach (2007). Anyway, if we

include too many highly levered transactions in our sample, the returns of the mimicking

investments increase. Therefore, our calculations of opportunity costs of capital for buyout

transactions represent upper estimates - and this does not harm the following overall

conclusions.


VI. Conclusion

      In this paper, we contribute to the discussion of how to determine opportunity cost of

capital for buyout transactions. For a set of 133 US buyouts between 1984 and 2004, we

propose a portfolio of levered mimicking investments in the S&P 500 Index that match the

buyouts with respect to the timing of their cash flows and their systematic risks. An approach

like ours had not previously been used due to the non-availability of required data for the


                                                32
determination of the buyouts’ systematic risks. With our rich data set, we show that using the

returns of the S&P 500 (or any other benchmark index) as opportunity cost of capital for

buyout performance analyses only yields preliminary results. The risk pattern in buyout

transactions is different from the public benchmark index. Usually, buyout transactions

happen in less than average risky industries. Contrarily, they are levered up at closing to an

extent that exceeds the risk of the market proxy. However, over the holding period this risk is

reduced by amortization payments. Further, limited partners themselves do not borrow

money to lever up their transactions. The required debt is borrowed by the target

corporations, and the fund’s liability is limited to its equity exposure. As a result, borrowing

at the risk-free rate is a highly unrealistic assumption, when setting up a public market

mimicking investment. We show that taking into account these issues leads to average

(median) opportunity cost of capital which are 3.29% (2.79%) below the mean average

(median) of the S&P 500 returns. The average/median opportunity cost of capital of buyouts

is ex post lower than the benchmark index due to the simple fact that if our sample of buyouts

was appropriately mimicked in the public market, many of the transactions would have

defaulted. However, it is not the most levered transactions that default - it is simply those

transactions that are “badly timed” in the public market. A potential bias in our sample

towards highly levered transactions does not affect this result because high leverage ratios

affect the mimicking returns positively, hence, in the opposite direction. If we assume that

borrowing and lending is possible at the risk-free rate to set up the mimicking investments,

the mean buyout opportunity cost of capital becomes close to the result by Kaplan and Schoar

(2005). However, there still remains a difference of 2.36% regarding the median returns of

both distributions. The standard deviation of returns remains much higher, again comparing

our approach and Kaplan and Schoar (2005). As a result, we claim that buyouts should not be

“averaged” for performance analyses. On the contrary, a comprehensive discussion of the



                                                 33
inherent risks caused by the business and applied leverage ratios is necessary when judging

buyout success. The discussion includes the question of how much risk is taken by lenders in

these transactions, whether risks might be decreased due to improved governance, and what

credit-spreads have to be paid when levering up the public market equivalent.

      Our study builds on and extends existing work on the comparison of public and private

equity performance in several respects:

      First, we propose a method for benchmarking the asset class that might become an

industry standard.

      Second, our study exploits the detailed information available on a large sample of

individual buyouts to illustrate the importance of a detailed risk-adjustment for assessment of

their performance. Using precise information on the valuations of individual target

companies, their competitors, as well as their industry sector and on the capital structures of

the investment vehicles at the closing date and at exit, it becomes possible to attribute

operating and leverage risk measures to each individual transaction. Thus, we can

comprehensively control for the transaction risks in constructing a well-defined mimicking

portfolio with an equal risk profile. The sensitivity analyses highlight the importance of a

comprehensive risk-adjustment that considers both operating and leverage risks for an

accurate assessment of buyout performance. This is directly relevant for interpreting findings

from prior research where this kind of risk separation has not been possible.

      Third, our study provides detailed insights into the importance of different assumptions

regarding the risk-profile of debt, debt tax shields, credit spreads and transaction operational

risks. The analyses confirm the conjecture that buyout investors choose industries with low

operating risk, use financial leverage where favorable, and transfer an important portion of

the risk to the lenders.




                                                 34
     Absent detailed data on the risk characteristics of the entire universe of buyout

transactions, any assessment of the relative performance of buyouts has to remain

inconclusive. The detected differences regarding the distributions of returns in our base case

analysis, and the scenarios and robustness checks are large. Researchers should thoroughly

specify their presumptions with respect to the above discussed determinants when assessing

buyout performance.




                                                35
                           Table I: Descriptive Statistics of Sample Data

                   The Table presents the characteristics of our sample transactions.

                                            Min      Max Average Median                 Std. Dev.

Closing Date                              Nov 84 Mar 03       Nov 95        Jul 96

Exit Date                                 Feb 88    Jun 04     Jul 99    Dec 99

Holding Period [years]                      0.25     15.08       3.75        3.08              2.61

Equity Stake at Closing                      8%     100%         76%         86%               0.25

Equity Stake at Exit                         8%     100%         74%         86%               0.27

Initial Debt/Equity                            0     17.05       2.94        2.49              2.75

Exit Debt/Equity                               0     14.09       1.28        0.64              1.99
                                                   almost
Enterprise Value at Closing [$m]            3.50              313.52        88.00            870.17
                                                    9,000
                                                   almost
Enterprise Value at Exit [$m]              0.001              547.90     135.00         1,366.82
                                                   13,500
                                                   almost
Equity Investment [$m]                      0.20               53.39        18.70            115.79
                                                    1,150
                                                   almost
Final Payoff [$m]                          0.001              160.38        63.10            299.05
                                                    1,800
IRR (p.a.)                            -100.00% 472.00%       50.08%     35.70%                 0.92




                  Table II: Equity Betas for the Baseline Case and Four Scenarios

      This table presents the most important descriptive statistics of the S&P 500 equity beta

factors at closing and at exit in our base scenario and in different sensitivity analyses.

                                 Closing                 Exit
                                  0.05 0.95               0.05                0.95
#      Scenario                              Mean Median                            Mean Median
                                   pct. pct.               pct.                pct.
0 - 2 Base Cases                  0.32 3.88 1.40    0.94 0.32                 2.80 1.01    0.71
3     Kaplan/Schoar (2005)           1    1     1      1      1                  1     1      1
      Phalippou/Gottschalg
4                                  0.32    4.36    1.50      1.03    0.32     1.70   0.82      0.73
      (2008)




                                                   36
                                                       Table III:

     Descriptives of the Mimicking Portfolio Returns and Regression Results of the

                                                       Scenarios

      This table presents the descriptive statistics of the annualized rates of return of the

mimicking investments, regression results and the test whether the mimicking model is

applicable for our base case analysis and for different scenarios.




                                                                                                                     Two tailed p-value of test
                                   Mean (Median) return of



                                                             [0.05 – 0.95 percentile],




                                                                                                                     if regression slope is
                                                                                         (two tailed p-value)
                                                             standard deviation




                                                                                         Regression slope
                                   the mimicking
                                   investments




                                                                                                                     equal to 1
                                                                                                                R2
# Scenario
                                      9.07% [-30.60% - 38.25%]                              0.67
0 Base Case                                                                                      0.034                        0.195
                                   (12.16)%             0.2525                           (0.009)
  Base Case, but Borrowing
                             10.30% [-29.50% - 38.92%]                                      0.65
1 and Lending at Altman                                                                          0.032                        0.173
                           (13.91%)             0.2523                                   (0.011)
  Spreads
  Base Case, but Borrowing
                             12.89% [-22.93% - 45.75%]                                      0.63
2 and Lending at Risk Free                                                                       0.025                        0.182
                           (12.59%)             0.2323                                   (0.025)
  Rate
                             12.36% [-13.88% – 31.99%]                                      1.46
3 Kaplan/Schoar (2005)                                                                           0.055                        0.287
                           (14.95%)             0.1475                                   (0.001)
  Phalippou/Gottschalg       12.55% [-26.31% - 43.46%]                                      0.71
4                                                                                                0.029                        0.322
  (2008)                   (12.60%)             0.2208                                   (0.015)




                                                                            37
                                                Table IV

                          Equity Betas for the Robustness Checks

      This table presents the most important descriptive statistics of the equity beta factors at

closing and at exit of our robustness checks.

                              Closing                            Exit
                               0.05      0.95                     0.05     0.95
#   Robustness Check                           Mean Median                       Mean Median
                                pct.      pct.                     pct.     pct.
1   Industry Mix               0.35      1.46 0.78    0.70        0.35     1.46 0.78    0.70
2   Leverage Only              0.93      4.16 2.11    1.92        0.87     2.65 1.40    1.13
3   Increased Operating Betas 0.45       5.87 2.22    1.70        0.43     3.90 1.50    1.09
4   Risk Free Debt             0.69      6.39 2.57    1.99        0.47     3.88 1.53    1.07
5   Reduced Operating Risk     0.24      2.35 0.83    0.45        0.24     1.95 0.66    0.44
6   Increased Risk of Debt     0.32      3.36 1.19    0.72        0.32     2.68 0.92    0.65
7   Outliers Dropped           0.31      3.89 1.32    0.91        0.31     3.12 1.01    0.70




                                                  38
                                                                  Table V

 Mean IRRs of the Mimicking Portfolios and Regression Results of Robustness Checks

     This table comprises the descriptive statistics of the annualized rates of return of the

mimicking investments, regression results and the test whether the mimicking model is

applicable for the robustness checks.




                                                                                                                            Two tailed p-value of test
                                Mean (Median) return of



                                                          [0.05 – 0.95 percentile],




                                                                                                                            if regression slope is
                                                                                             (two tailed p-value)
                                                          standard deviation




                                                                                             Regression Slope
                                the mimicking
                                investments




                                                                                                                            equal to 1
                                                                                                                    R2
# Robustness Check
                                  10.12%                                [-11.95% –27.86%]       1.57
1 Industry Mix                                                                                                      0.046            0.262
                                (11.97%)                                            0.1253   (0.002)
                                  17.72%                                [-24.83% - 56.21%]      0.77
2 Leverage Only                                                                                                     0.049            0.327
                                (19.60%)                                            0.2653   (0.002)
                                  15.70%                               [-40.41% – 67.25%]       0.46
3 Increased Operating Risk                                                                                          0.031            0.004
                                (16.27%)                                            0.3501   (0.012)
                                  17.57%                                [-42.13% - 72.35%]      0.53
4 Risk Free Debt                                                                                                    0.041            0.009
                                (18.13%)                                            0.3534   (0.004)
                                  10.11%                               [-16.07% – 31.51%]       0.93
5 Reduced Operating Risk                                                                                            0.022            0.876
                                (10.07%)                                            0.1468   (0.036)
                                  11.86%                                [-22.47% - 41.21%]      0.67
6 Increased Risk of Debt                                                                                            0.024            0.285
                                (11.65%)                                            0.2106   (0.029)
                                  12.27%                                [-21.96% - 45.37%]      0.70
7 Outliers Dropped                                                                                                  0.056            0.186
                                (12.01%)                                            0.2290   (0.002)




                                                                                39
                                         Appendix

                    Constructing the Mimicking Portfolio


       We take the perspective of a well diversified investor not exposed to idiosyncratic

risks of the particular buyout transactions. Accordingly, timing and equity betas of the

mimicking strategy have to correspond to those of the buyout transactions. To track the

transactions, we construct an index portfolio and allow funds to be borrowed or lent. We

assume that borrowing and lending is possible in unlimited amounts. However, the

assumptions regarding the risks taken by lenders and different rates for borrowing and

lending largely determine the returns of the mimicking investments. In our base case, we

assume that lenders take risk and receive appropriate compensation. Contrarily, if the

mimicking investment includes unlevering the index portfolio, funds are lent at the risk-free

rate. In the course of robustness checks, we stress these assumptions to investigate the effect

of credit spreads, and change the risk borne by lenders. We use the total return calculations

for the S&P 500 Index, provided by DataStream as the performance benchmark. This index

assumes that dividends are reinvested, which accurately reflects the fact that, during buyout

transactions, dividends are not usually paid but free cash flows are used for debt redemption.

However, if there is a notable premature disbursement, it is considered. The exact approach

to tracking the individual buyout transactions is described in the following.


I. Framework

       For the theoretical background for our mimicking strategies we refer to Modigliani

and Miller (1958), assuming that every company is exposed to some unavoidable and

constant economic risk by its business. This risk has to be borne by the investors of a

company. If a company is fully equity financed, the investors are directly exposed to that risk.


                                                 40
If debt financing is used, risk is allocated to the equity investors and the debt providers

according to ratios discussed below. For the purpose of our analysis, the constant risk class

assumption means that a risk class shall be attributed to every target company defined by the

operating risk of its public peers. This assumption merits discussion in general,7 but

especially regarding buyouts. There, efforts are often made by management teams to reduce

operating risks, e.g., by focusing on safer (i.e., less volatile) business strategies.8 However,

we cannot correct for this kind of risk class transition because, first, we do not have sufficient

information about the strategic activities of the target companies after closing; and second,

we would be unable to assess how the activities had influenced the companies’ business risk.

For these reasons, we base our approach on the assumption of unchanging risk classes.

         There are also practical reasons to assume constant risk classes since it is practically

impossible to identify adequate peer group companies and obtain the necessary data for the

time our sample transactions actually took place. Hence, we perform all the calculations for

the business-class risks with present data. Therefore the peers’ weekly stock prices and

annual balance sheet data between 1999 and 2003 are used. The results are then transferred to

the time of the actual transaction. In this way, we assume that typical business-class risks

remain constant even over a very long time horizon.




7
    For early discussions of the constant risk class hypothesis refer to Ball and Brown (1967), who argue that,
    according to some typical ratios, different risk classes can be attributed to enterprises. Gonedes (1969) tests
    the constant risk class assumption. He finds some support to refute the hypothesis. Sharpe and Cooper
    (1972) investigate risk classes at the New York Stock Exchange and find evidence for the existence of
    constant risk classes.
8
    Some evidence that target companies focus on less risky businesses after buyouts close is provided by Hite
    and Vetsuypens (1989), p. 959, Kaplan (1989a), p. 224, Lehn and Poulsen (1989), p. 776, Marais, Schipper,
    and Smith (1989), p. 167, Asquith and Wizman (1990), p. 197, Muscarella and Vetsuypens (1990), p. 1398,
    Palepu (1990), p. 248, Smith (1990), p. 145, Opler (1992), p. 28, Holthausen and Larcker (1996), p. 328. Bae
    and Simet (1998), p. 159, Elitzur, Halpern, Kierschnick, and Rotenberg (1998), p. 352, Nohel and Tarhan
    (1998), p. 197, Cotter and Peck (2001), p. 105, Holmstrom and Kaplan (2001), p. 127, and Bruton, Keels,
    and Scifres (2002), p. 713. The operating risk is thereby generally expressed by the steadiness of operating
    earnings or by the ratio between fixed costs and variable costs.


                                                           41
       A. Unlevering the Peer Groups’ Business Class Risks

       Since buyout transactions often occur in very particular niche markets, we do not

want to rely on broad industry definitions to classify our sample transactions. Rather, we aim

to be as precise as possible assigning peer groups to our 133 sample companies and

identifying their 116 different industry sectors. Some of the transactions were made simply in

the same business. For these industry sectors we determine peer groups of quoted comparable

companies. A peer group is defined by an equal four-digit SIC code and by company

headquarters in the United States. For some transactions, the principal competitors are named

in the documents, thus facilitating the peer group analysis. The majority of the peers

however, are defined by the description of the relevant market and the target companies’

products/services. This approach leads to suitable peer group samples. An advantage of

focusing on buyout transactions is that reasonably comparable quoted companies usually

exist. The accuracy of the peer group selection is qualitatively verified by comparing the

major business units and products of the peers and the targets. As an additional filter we

require the peer companies to be traded regularly.

       We decided that, in order to be meaningful, a peer group has to consist of at least

three companies. For a few buyouts, we find more than 20 peer group members. In these

cases, we narrow the search by including an appropriate company size in terms of market

capitalization. We eliminate those companies from the peer group that are out of the range of

50% to 200% of the equity value of the target. We are aware that this approach excludes non-

successful competitors with low market capitalization that might face operating difficulties or

even bankruptcy. However, this is in line with our basic assumption of not incorporating non-

systematic risk such as bankruptcy. Finally, we identify 1,207 peers to be incorporated into

our analysis.




                                                 42
          We measure the business class risks for our transactions by a market-weighted

average of the unlevered beta factors of the relevant peer group companies. To gain these

beta factors, we calculate the actual levered beta factors of every single peer-group company

using the S&P 500 Index as a benchmark and weekly returns from January 1999 to December

2003. To unlever these beta factors, we determine leverage ratios of the companies during the

same time from balance sheet and market data obtained from DataStream. Therefore we net

total debt of each period (which includes short- and long-term interest bearing debt) by cash

positions and divide it by the year-end market capitalizations (of straight and preferred

equity). Finally, we determine the arithmetic average over the periods. Thus, we assume that

the nominal value of balance sheet debt equals its market value. This implies that the beta

factors reflect current leverage ratios, but do not anticipate them. Once we determined the

arithmetic average of the leverage ratios we use a beta transformation formula to derive the

hypothetical beta factor for the company without any debt. Such a formula has to consider the

role of the tax benefit of debt financing (the tax savings that result from deducting interest

from taxable earnings). In the simplest case where debt is perpetual and risk free, the interest

expense can always be fully deducted from the taxable earnings, and the tax rate and the

interest rate do not change, the capitalized value of the tax shield simplifies to τD.9

          While, in general, the assumption of unchanging risk classes has to be accepted, the

postulate of debt being risk free should be stressed for our analysis to allow for real market

conditions, such as credit risk on corporate bonds. Mandelker and Rhee (1984) present how

operating company risk is borne by equity investors and risky debt providers according to the

applied leverage ratio:10




9
     This was originally derived by Modigliani and Miller (1958 and 1963), first empirically tested by Hamada
     (1972) and transferred into the CAPM by Rubinstein (1973). Refer to Drees and Eckwert (2000) for a
     critique of this approach.
10
     See Mandelker and Rhee (1984), Equation (3) and Footnote 2.


                                                         43
                                                 βe + βd (1 − τ)
                                                                D
                                            βu =                E                                         (2)
                                                  1 + (1 − τ)
                                                              D
                                                              E

          where:

βd        systematic risk borne by debt providers (debt beta)

βe        systematic risk borne by equity investors (levered equity beta)

βu        systematic operating risk (unlevered beta)

τ         marginal tax rate

D         market value of debt (all tax-deductible sources of capital such as senior, subordinated

          and mezzanine debt)

E         market value of equity (common and preferred)



          Having calculated a debt beta factor βd (which is discussed later), and fixed the

marginal tax rate at 35%,11 we can calculate the unlevered beta factor for every single peer-

group company applying its average debt-to-equity ratio. Finally, we determine the market

capitalization weighted average of the unlevered beta factors of all the companies of a peer

group. We refer to this as our measure for the systematic operating risk of the target

companies.12

          B. Levering Up the Individual Transactions

          Formula (2) reflects the assumption that uncertainty regarding the company’s ability

to gain the tax benefits from debt financing is best measured by the rate at which its creditors

lend the money. This is the cost of debt rd. As long as the leverage ratios are moderate, this

11
     See Graham (2000).
12
     A comprehensive discussion regarding degrees of operating and financial leverages and the implications on
     operating and equity beta factors is lead by Hamada (1972), Gonedes (1973), Lev (1974), Beaver and
     Manegold (1975), Hill and Stone (1980), Gahlon and Gentry (1982), Frecka and Lee (1983), Huffman
     (1983), Mandelker and Rhee (1984), Lee and Wu (1988), Healy and Palepu (1990) and Darrat and
     Mukherjee (1995).


                                                         44
seems to be the correct relationship between the systematic operating risk and the risk borne

by the shareholders and lenders. If leverage ratios increase, the company may be unable to

realize the tax benefits either fully or partially, simply because it does not generate sufficient

income and will be unable to carry losses forward.13 The risk of not being able to fully profit

from debt finance is then as high as the risk of obtaining the income itself (the operating

systematic risk). Then, the more appropriate rate for discounting the tax benefits equals the

unlevered cost of capital.14 The operating company risk is then borne by the equity and debt

investors according to the following relationship:15

                                                                  D
                                                        βe + βd
                                                 βu =             E                                         (3)
                                                            D
                                                         1+
                                                            E

          We assume that, for the publicly quoted companies of our peer groups, the degrees of

leverage are moderate and, therefore, the tax benefits are discounted by the cost of debt. We

follow Kaplan and Ruback’s (1995) argument regarding buyout transactions and capitalize

the tax benefits by the operating cost of capital. Hence, we make use of Formula (3). This

approach is based principally on two typical features of buyout transactions. First, on

average, the amount of debt used in initiating a buyout leads to leverage ratios far higher than

the average debt-to-equity ratios of quoted companies.16 This results in a higher risk

association with tax shields because the companies might not achieve enough income to fully

benefit from the tax-deductible interest payments. Second, attempts are usually made to

redeem debt levels as quickly as possible. Therefore, it is common to liquidate assets and to




13
     See Modigliani and Miller (1963), Footnote 5.
14
     See the discussions about this topic in Myers (1974), p. 22, Riener (1985), p. 231, Myers and Ruback (1987),
     p. 9, Kaplan and Ruback (1995), p. 1062, Arzac (1996), p. 42 and Graham (2000), p. 1917.
15
     See Ruback (2002), Equation 34.
16
     See De Angelo, De Angelo, and Rice (1984), p. 373, Marais, Schipper, and Smith (1989), p. 159, Kaplan
     and Stein (1993), Table 3, Cotter and Peck (2001), p. 105, Axelson, Jenkinson, Strömberg and Weisbach
     (2007), Table 6, and our Table 1.


                                                           45
use free cash flows for debt service.17 This leads to uncertain future debt levels that depend

on the future free cash flows and, hence, the uncertainty about future interest payments (as

well as the tax benefits) is as high as the uncertainty about the operating business.

           As discussed, the resulting equity beta factors are influenced by the assumption

regarding the risk of achieving the future tax shields. Since some transactions in our sample

have lower debt levels and therefore higher probabilities of benefiting from tax shields, it

could be argued that Formula (2) is more appropriate at least for some of the transactions.

Further, it could be argued that, in accordance with Kaplan (1989b), the tax benefits of

buyout transactions are most meaningful to investors. Thus the investors ensure that the risk

of receiving the tax benefits is rather low and, therefore, Formula (2) would again be the

more appropriate to lever up the beta factors for the buyout transaction. Since both arguments

seem rich, we consider both approaches in the sensitivity analysis, varying the resulting beta

factors.

           Again, after having specified the systematic risk of debt βd (as described in the

following section), we can calculate the equity betas for every single buyout and adjust them

annually for the redemption abilities of the target companies. This provides ex post equity

beta transition patterns between closing and exit for the individual transactions.

          C. Deriving Debt Betas

           We next need to specify the systematic risk of debt in order to be able to lever and

unlever the systematic equity risk according to Formulas (2) and (3). We distinguish between

the moderately levered publicly traded companies and the (in general) more highly levered

buyout transactions. An adequate measure of the systematic risk of the debt layers of the

quoted companies would be provided by the beta factor of investment grade debt. Due to

different maturities and decreasing durations and, therefore, decreasing volatility over time, it

17
     See Shleifer and Vishny (1992), p. 1362 and Kaplan and Stein (1993), p. 333.


                                                          46
is not clear which bonds would be best suited to measuring systematic debt risk.18 This

problem is exacerbated when calculating a risk proxy for the buyout debt. Therefore low

grade/high yield bonds would be the benchmark. These bonds usually have larger coupon

payments, and are called, converted or defaulted more frequently than investment grade

bonds.19 This leads to the problem that, on average, the duration and, hence, the volatility,

might be even lower than for investment grade bonds.20

          We follow Cornell and Green (1991) and calculate average debt beta factors from the

price data of open-end bond funds. This resolves the issue of lacking price data on low-grade

bonds, defaults, calls, and conversions. We retrieve weekly gross-returns and 2004 year-end

market capitalizations for 314 open-end funds investing in investment-grade corporate debt

and we retrieve the same data for 101 open-end bond funds investing in low-grade debt

securities.21 Using the S&P 500 Index as a market proxy over a two-year horizon, we

calculate the beta factors for each fund. We then determine the market capitalization

weighted average for the investment grade and for the high yield samples. For the investment

grade sample, we determined a debt beta factor of 0.296 and of 0.410 for the high yield

sample. Since the risk profile of our sample transactions is highly dependent on the

assessment of the debt betas, we will perform a sensitivity analysis and include other research

results on debt beta calculations.

          Blume, Keim, and Patel (1991) directly calculate betas with the S&P 500 for different

periods using Scholes and Williams’ (1977) and OLS-regressions of returns on government

bonds and on low-grade bonds with at least ten years to maturity. They find beta factors for

the government bonds ranging between 0.16 and 0.83 and betas for the low-grade bonds of


18
     See Fisher and Weil (1971), Boquist, Racette, and Schlarbaum (1975), Lanstein and Sharpe (1978), p. 657,
     Livingston (1978) and Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross (1979).
19
     See Altman (1989), p. 913, Asquith, Mullins, and Wolff (1989), p. 928, and Blume, Keim, and Patel (1989),
     published (1991).
20
     See Cornell and Green (1991), p. 47.
21
     Data was retrieved from Bloomberg.


                                                         47
between 0.32 and 0.71 (less than the maximum of the government bonds!). Cornell and

Green (1991) report debt betas for different bond risk classes and periods using bond fund

returns. Their investment-grade debt betas range from 0.19 to 0.25 and their high-yield betas

range from 0.29 to 0.54.

          Kaplan and Stein (1990) determine implied debt betas for a sample of 12 leveraged

recapitalizations of publicly quoted companies. They calculate equity beta factors before and

after the transactions and provide the implied debt betas under two different assumptions. In

this way, they use three different estimation models. With their first assumption, that

operating risks do not change, they find that the equity betas rise surprisingly little, between

37% and 57% on average (depending on which method is used to estimate them). This leads

to average (median) implied debt beta factors of 0.65 (0.62) for all debt layers of the

individual transactions, such as senior and junior debt. Their second assumption is that the

operating beta factor is reduced by approximately 25%. This reduction is linked to the

market-adjusted premium paid at the recapitalization, which could represent an anticipation

of decreased fixed costs. In this case, the corresponding average (median) implied systematic

debt risk is 0.40 (0.35). The method developed by Kaplan and Stein (1990) also offers an

alternative way of calculating reduced operating beta factors. If a fixed beta factor for the

debt is inserted into their model, a hypothetical reduced operating beta factor can be

calculated. They refer to Blume, Keim, and Patel (1989) who provide beta factors for low-

grade bonds during different time periods, and use 0.25 as the debt providers’ systematic risk

for the relevant period.22 This results in an average reduction of operating betas by 41%.

Kaplan and Stein (1990) argue that their research should be best considered as yielding

ranges of risk, rather than a single estimate. Following their reasoning, the above-cited

information on debt betas will be addressed in our sensitivity analysis, where we vary the risk


22
     See Blume, Keim, and Patel (1989), published (1991), Table V.


                                                         48
of debt. Also, in a few cases then, the debt betas are larger than the calculated unlevered betas

of the target companies. Since equity claims (as residual claims) must be at least as risky as

debt claims, we always truncate the risks of debt at the levels of the operating risks. This

assumes that, in the less risky transactions, debt and equity investors bear the same (low) risk.


II. Treatment of the Individual Transactions

       Each transaction is analyzed thoroughly in terms of the timing and the character of the

underlying cash flows. Our data provides us with the dates and payments at closing and at

exit and for add-on investments and premature distributions. Likewise, principle claims

linked to the equity and debt cash flows are recorded. For our analysis, common and

preferred equity are treated as equivalent. Similarly, all debt is treated as straight debt.

Unfortunately, lacking information about the structure of claims, we cannot differentiate

rankings or collateral for particular debt layers. We assume that all buyout fund investments

are equity investments unless they are explicitly declared as higher ranking properly

collateralized debt instruments. This approach considers the fact that investments by a buyout

fund can usually be regarded as equity investments in terms of their inherent risk. Even if

investments are structured as debt (e.g., shareholder loans), their economic character and risk

differs from that of loans. They are usually of a junior rank and are unaccompanied by

substantial collateral, thus making all investments resemble equity. All remaining layers other

than common or preferred equity provided by third parties are treated as debt.

       To build the mimicking portfolio we attribute the same systematic risk as that of the

buyout transactions to the mimicking cash flows. The systematic risk for buyout investors

consists of the two elements of operating risk and leverage risk. For the operating risks, we

use the peer group operating betas as proxies. The leverage risk is determined by the

individual transaction structure adopted (and subsequently changed) in the buyout

transaction. We know all cash flows from and to investors within the buyout and we know


                                                  49
the capital structures for the entry and the exit dates. With this data, we can calculate the

initial leverage ratios and the ratios at exit. Between closing and exit we assume that the

leverages change linearly. Kaplan (1989a) finds evidence for asset sales and immediate

reduction of the degree of leverage following the closing of buyout transactions. Muscarella

and Vetsuypens (1990) and Opler (1992) report decreasing investments after closing, while

Zahra (1995) cites lower R&D expenditure. Their results are compatible with the buyout

strategy of focusing on core businesses and improving operations and organization during the

holding period. From their findings we conclude that the typical buyout deleveraging pattern

should be hyperbolic rather than linear but, given the absence of parameters for estimating a

hyperbolic function, we retain the linearity assumption.

       In order to determine a transaction’s risk structure we must differentiate between two

general outcomes. First, the investment was successfully exited, providing us with the

company valuation, the equity payoff, and hence the degree of leverage at exit. These

transactions will be referred to as “non write-offs”. Second, the investment was written off

(“write-offs”). We assign different assumptions regarding the leverage linearity to both

outcomes. The “non write-offs” are entered and exited at certain leverage ratios. During the

holding period the leverage ratio either decreases (as in most cases), it grows linearly or stays

constant. The “write-offs” are entered into at a given degree of leverage and, by definition,

are written off at an infinitely large leverage ratio. This is because the equity value

approaches zero while the debt is usually somehow collateralized and therefore retains some

value. This leads to problems in terms of the mimicking strategies, because it implies the

unrealistic need to leverage investments in public market securities to an infinite exposure.

Therefore, we refer to the cause of bankruptcy and assume that the investment was written off

because covenants were breached and debt providers claimed their rights. In most cases, this

should explain the loss of invested capital. With this reasoning, one can argue that the



                                                  50
targeted leverage ratios, defined by loan contracts and covenants, could not be maintained.

The debt providers in buyouts usually do not allow their risk to be increased. On the contrary,

they insist on debt redemption. For us, this leads us to keep leverage risk constant in the

mimicking position over the total holding period of the “write off” buyout transactions. As

the leverage ratios could not be successfully lowered, and banks would not allow them to be

increased, this appears to be the most rational treatment of them. The approach is further

supported by accounting guidelines and best practice rules for buyout funds to immediately

write off investments once substantial changes in value such as a breach of covenant takes

place.23

         In the simplest case without add-on investments and premature disbursements, the

cash flows can then be duplicated by a single payment at closing and a single payoff at exit.

The initial payment takes place at a certain systematic risk level characterized by the

operating risk and the additional leverage risk. The systematic risk level at closing is

determined by the initial equity beta of the corresponding buyout. The mimicking strategy is

structured by investing the same amount of equity in the S&P 500 Index portfolio and

levering it up according to Formula 3 with borrowed funds to achieve an equal systematic

risk. If the equity beta of the buyout is lower than one, funds are lent. We assume that the

buyouts are settled on the last trading day of the proposed month. The systematic risk of the

mimicking strategy is adjusted each year until exit, to secure parity with the buyout.

Therefore, the mimicking portfolio is liquidated every year, interest on debt is paid, debt is

redeemed and the residual equity is invested in the S&P 500 Index portfolio being levered to

the prevailing systematic risk. Again, if the prevailing beta factor is lower than one, funds are

lent. In our base case, we assume that (infinite) lending is possible at the one-year US

treasury-bill rate and that the debt beta is 0 in Formula 3 while the unlevered beta is set equal


23
     See e.g. EVCA (2003).


                                                  51
to 1, the beta factor of the market proxy. However, (infinite) borrowing is associated with

higher borrowing cost. The debt beta becomes 0.41, the beta of high yield debt, and the

required debt needed to adjust for the buyout beta increases compared to risk free debt. As a

reference for the appropriate credit spreads we use Figure 23 in Altman and Pasternack

(2006), who provide credit spreads for high yield securities for the relevant period. The

rationale for keeping lending risk free but borrowing risky is to replicate the limited liability

of the buyout sponsor. The mimicking investor also must not allow his other assets to serve

as collateral for the mimicking transaction. Hence, the remaining collateral is the equity

investment in the index portfolio itself, which is bought on the margin. In the sensitivity

analyses and robustness checks, we address the debt betas and the corresponding cost to

determine our model’s sensitivity. The performance of the benchmark portfolio is measured

by a total return index calculation on the S&P 500 corporations provided by DataStream. The

risk adjustment procedure is repeated until the exit date. The final payoff of the mimicking

strategy and the initial equity investment determine the return of the mimicking investment. If

the residual equity of a mimicking investment approaches zero at any time within the holding

period, the position is closed and the internal rate of return is calculated up to that point.


III. Add-on Investments and Premature Payoffs

        To consider add-on investments by the funds and premature payoffs to the funds, we

need to know the amounts and the investment dates. For the “non write-offs” we simply

extrapolate the equity beta at the time of either the add-on investments or the early

disbursements. Provided that the payments are not accompanied by changes in debt, they

immediately affect the leverage ratios and then follow the same risk pattern as the initial

investments. Since we have details of neither the company valuations, nor the prevailing

leverage ratios at the time of the add-on investments or disbursements, we cannot correct for

the “leverage-jumps”. We implement add-on investments and disbursements in our linearity


                                                    52
approach. The add-on investments are reflected by the degrees of leverage at exit and, hence,

are incorporated into the transactions’ final risk levels. This approach might smooth the

overall risk patterns. However, if the equity add-on is accompanied by debt in the same

proportion as the prevailing capital structure at that time, this approach should hold true. In

the mimicking strategy, add-on payments are treated like the initial investments, but take

place at a later stage. From the time they are made, they follow the same risk pattern as the

initial transaction. Early disbursements lower the capital at risk and therefore we deduct them

at the relevant month from the prevailing equity. We determine the internal rate of return of

the mimicking strategy until that date and calculate the present value of the disbursement at

the transaction closing. That present value is then subtracted from the initial payment giving

us two separate cash flows. The remaining equity following disbursement is retained in the

mimicking portfolio until the exit, except where it becomes zero. In this case, the position is

closed on the disbursement.

          For the “write offs” the approach is straightforward.24 Add-on investments in the

“write off” cases are usually made to prevent the debt providers from claiming bankruptcy.

The add-on payments would lower the leverage ratio immediately. However, the debt

providers would not necessarily have asked for additional equity if the company’s prospects

were still good. Debt providers thus demand the payment in order to maintain an acceptable

leverage ratio. This leads us to consider that the leverage ratios are unaffected by the add-on

investments in “write off” companies. This is supported by the fact that these engagements

finally had to be written off, meaning that the debt claims could obviously not be serviced

sufficiently and, hence, the leverage ratios could not be lowered.




24
     Premature disbursements in “write-off” transactions were not observed in our sample.


                                                          53
IV. Changes in Ownership

       In some transactions the ownership structure changes within the holding period, either

due to non-proportional add-on investments or distributions or by any execution of contingent

claims such as conversion rights, or call or put options. If the ownership structure changes, it

is noted in the transaction description but not in sufficient detail to permit further

investigation. We account for these types of changes in the proportion of the equity stake at

exit, thus again assuming that all changes in ownership structure develop linearly over the

holding period.




                                                 54
References


Altman, Edward I. (1989): Measuring Corporate Bond Mortality and Performance, in:
   Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, pp. 909 – 922
Altman, Edward I. and Pasternack, Brent (2006): Defaults and Returns in the High Yield
   Bond Market, Journal of Applied Research in Accounting and Finance, Vol. 1, pp. 3 - 29
Arzac, Enrique R. (1996): Valuation of Highly Leveraged Firms, in: Financial Analysts
  Journal, Vol. 52, July/August, pp. 42 – 50
Asquith, Paul, Mullins, David W. Jr., and Wolff, Eric D. (1989): Original Issue High Yield
  Bonds: Aging Analyses of Defaults, Exchanges, and Calls, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 44,
  pp. 923 – 952
Asquith, Paul and Wizman, Thierry A. (1990): Event Risk, Covenants, and Bondholder
  Returns in Leveraged Buyouts, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 195 – 213
Axelson, Ulf, Jenkinson, Tim, Strömberg, Per, and Weisbach, Michael S. (2007): Leverage
  and Pricing in Buyouts: An Empirical Analysis, SSRN working paper
Bae, Sung C. and Simet, Daniel P. (1998): A Comparative Analysis of Leveraged
  Recapitalization Versus Leveraged Buyout as a Takeover Defense, in: Review of
  Financial Economics, Vol. 7, pp. 157 – 172
Bailey, Martin H., Muth, Richard F., and Nourse, Hugh O. (1963): A Regression Method for
  Real Estate Price Index Construction, in: Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  Vol. 58, pp. 933 – 942
Ball, Ray and Brown, Philip (1967): Some Preliminary Findings on the Association between
  the Earnings of a Firm, its Industry and the Economy, in: Empirical Research in
  Accounting, Selected Studies, Supplement to Vol. 5, Journal of Accounting Research, pp.
  55 – 77
Beaver, William and Manegold, James (1975): The Association between Market Determined
  and Accounting Determined Risk Measures, in: Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis, Vol. 10, pp. 231 – 284
Berg, Achim and Gottschalg, Oliver (2005): Understanding Value Creation in Buyouts, in:
  Journal of Restructuring Finance, Vol. 2, pp. 9 - 37
Bernado, Antonio E., Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Goyal, Amit (2004): Beta and Growth,
  UCLA Working Paper
Black, Bernard S. and Gilson, Ronald J. (1998): Venture Capital and the Structure of Capital
   Markets: Banks Versus Stock Markets, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 47, pp.
   243 – 277
Blume, Marshall E., Keim, Donald B., and Patel, Sandeep A. (1989): The Components of
  Lower-Grade Bond Price Variability, Working Paper (The Wharton School, Philadelphia,
  PA), published (1991) as: Returns and Volatility of Low-Grade Bonds 1977 - 1989, in:
  Journal of Finance, Vol. 46, pp. 49 – 74
Boquist, John A., Racette, George A., and Schlarbaum, Gary G. (1975): Duration and Risk
  Assessment for Bonds and Common Stocks, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 30, pp. 1360 –
  1365


                                               55
Bruton, Garry D., Keels, J. Kay, and Scifres, Elton L. (2002): Corporate Restructuring and
  Performance: An Agency Perspective on the Complete Buyout Cycle, in: Journal of
  Business Research, Vol. 55, pp. 709 – 724
Bygrave, William, Fast, Norman, Khoylian, Roubina, Vincent, Linda, and Yue, William
  (1985): Early Rates of Return of 131 Venture Capital Funds Started 1978 – 1984, in:
  Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 4, pp. 93 – 105
Bygrave, William and Timmons, Jeffry A. (1992): Venture Capital at the Crossroads, Boston
Cochrane, John H. (2005): The Risk and Return of Venture Capital, in: Journal of Financial
  Economics, Vol. 75, pp. 3 – 52
Cornell, Bradford and Green, Kevin (1991): The Investment Performance of Low-grade
  Bond Funds, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 46, pp. 29 – 48
Cotter, James and Peck, Sarah W. (2001): The Structure of Debt and Active Equity Investors:
  The Case of the Buyout Specialist, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 59, pp. 101 –
  147
Cox, John C., Ingersoll, Jonathan E. Jr., and Ross, Stephen A. (1979): Duration and the
  Measurement of Basis Risk, in: Journal of Business, Vol. 52, pp. 51 – 61
Darrat, Ali F. and Mukherjee, Tarun K. (1995): Inter-Industry Differences and the Impact of
  Operating and Financial Leverages on Equity Risk, in: Review of Financial Economics,
  Vol. 4, pp. 141 – 155
De Angelo, Harry, De Angelo, Linda Elizabeth, and Rice, Edward M. (1984): Going Private:
  Minority Freezeouts and Stockholder Wealth, in: Journal of Law & Economics, Vol. 27,
  pp. 367 – 401
De Angelo, Harry and De Angelo, Linda Elizabeth (1987): Management Buyouty of Publicly
  Trade Corporations, in: Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 43, May/June, pp. 38 – 49
Dimson, Elroy (1979): Risk Measurement when Shares are Subject to Infrequent Trading, in:
  Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 7, pp. 197 – 226
Drees, Burkhard and Eckwert, Bernhard (2000): Leverage and the Price Volatility of Equity
  Shares in Equilibrium, in: Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance, Vol. 40, pp. 155 –
  167
Elitzur, Ramy, Halpern, Paul, Kieschnick, Robert, and Rotenberg, Wendy (1998): Managerial
   Incentives and the Structure of Management Buyouts, in: Journal of Economic Behavior &
   Organization, Vol. 36, pp. 347 – 367
EVCA (2003): EVCA Guidelines, Zaventem
Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. (1997): Industry Costs of Equity, in: Journal of
  Financial Economics, Vol. 43, pp. 153 – 193
Fisher, Lawrence (1966): Some New Stock-Market Indexes, in: Journal of Business, Vol. 39,
   Supplement, pp. 191 – 225
Fisher, Lawrence and Weil, Roman L. (1971): Coping with the Risk of Interest-Rate
   Fluctuations: Returns to Bondholders from Naive and Optimal Strategies, in: Journal of
   Business, Vol. 44, pp. 408 – 431
Frecka, Thomas J. and Lee, Cheng F. (1983): Generalized Financial Ratio Adjustment
   Processes and their Implications, in: Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 21, pp. 308 –
   316


                                               56
Gahlon, James M. and Gentry, James A. (1982): On the Relationship between Systematic
  Risk and the Degrees of Operating and Financial Leverage, in: Financial Management,
  Vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 15 – 21
Gompers, Paul A. (1998): Venture Capital Growing Pains: Should the Market Diet?, in:
  Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 22, pp. 1089 – 1104
Gompers, Paul A. and Lerner, Josh (1997): Risk and Reward in Private Equity Investments:
  The Challenge of Performance Assessment, in: Journal of Private Equity, Vol. 1, pp. 5 –
  12
Gompers, Paul A. and Lerner, Josh (1999a): The Venture Capital Cycle, Cambridge
Gompers, Paul A. and Lerner, Josh (1999b): An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S.
  Venture Capital Partnership, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 51, pp. 3 – 44
Gompers, Paul A. and Lerner, Josh (2000): Money Chasing Deals? The impact of Fund
  Inflows on Private Equity Valuations, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 55, pp. 281
  – 325
Gonedes, Nicholas J. (1969): A Test of the Equivalent-Risk Class Hypothesis, in: Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 4, pp. 159 – 177
Gonedes, Nicholas J. (1973): Evidence on the Information Content of Accounting Numbers:
  Accounting-Based and Market-Based Estimates of Systematic Risk, in: Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 8, pp. 407 – 443
Graham, John R. (2000): How Big are the Tax Benefits of Debt?, in: Journal of Finance, Vol.
  55, pp. 1901 - 1941
Groh, Alexander P., Baule, Rainer and Gottschalg, Oliver (2009): Measuring Idiosyncratic
  Risks in Leveraged Buyout Transaction, in: Quarterly Journal of Finance and Accounting,
  Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 5 - 23
Hamada, Robert (1972): The Effect of the Firm’s Capital Structure on the Systematic Risk of
  Common Stocks, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 27, pp. 435 – 452
Healy, Paul M. and Palepu, Krishna G. (1990): Earnings and Risk Changes Surrounding
  Primary Stock Offers, in: Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 28, pp. 25 – 48
Hill, Ned C. and Stone, Bernell K. (1980): Accounting Betas, Systematic Operating Risk, and
   Financial Leverage: A Risk-Composition Approach to the Determinants of Systematic
   Risk, in: Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 15, pp. 595 – 637
Hite, Gailen L. and Vetsuypens, Michael R. (1989): Management Buyouts of Divisions and
   Shareholder Wealth, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, pp. 953 – 970
Ho, Thomas S.Y. and Singer, Ronald F. (1984): The Value of Corporate Debt with a Sinking
  Fund Provision, in: Journal of Business, Vol. 57, pp. 315 - 336
Holmstrom, Bengt and Kaplan, Steven N. (2001): Corporate Governance and Merger
  Activity in the United States: Making Sense of the 1980s and 1990s, in: Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, pp. 121 – 144
Holthausen, Robert W. and Larcker, David F. (1996): The Financial Performance of Reverse
  Leverage Buyouts, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 293 – 332
Huffman, Lucy (1983): Operating Leverage, Financial Leverage, and Equity Risk, in: Journal
  of Banking and Finance, Vol. 7, pp. 197 – 212



                                               57
Huntsman, Blaine and Hoban, James P. Jr. (1980): Investment in New Enterprise: Some
  Empirical Observations on Risk, Return and Market Structure, Financial Management,
  Vol. 9, pp. 44 – 51
Jeng, Leslie A. and Philippe C. Wells (1998): The Determinants of Venture Capital Funding:
   Evidence across Countries, SSRN working paper
Jensen, Michael C. (1986): Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
   Takeovers, in: American Economic Review, Vol. 76, pp. 323 – 329
Jensen, Michael C. (1989a): Eclipse of the Public Corporation, in: Harvard Business Review,
   September – October, pp. 61 – 74
Jensen, Michael C. (1989b): Active Investors, LBOs, and the Privatization of Bankruptcy, in:
   Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 35 – 44
Jensen, Michael C. (1991): Corporate Control and the Politics of Finance, in: Journal of
   Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 4, No. 2, pp. 13 – 33
Jones, Charles M. and Rhodes-Kropf, Matthew (2003): The Price of Diversifiable Risk in
   Venture Capital and Private Equity, Columbia University Working Paper
Kaplan, Steven N. (1989a): The Effects of Management Buyouts on Operating Performance
  and Value, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 24, pp. 217 – 254
Kaplan, Steven N. (1989b): Management Buyouts: Evidence on Taxes as Source of Value, in:
  Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, pp. 611 – 632
Kaplan, Steven N. (1991): The Staying Power of Leveraged Buyouts, in: Journal of Financial
  Economics, Vol. 29, pp. 287 – 313
Kaplan, Steven N. and Ruback, Richard S. (1995): The Valuation of Cash Flow Forecasts:
  An Empirical Analysis, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 50, pp. 1059 – 1093
Kaplan, Steven N. and Schoar, Antoinette (2005): Private Equity Performance: Returns,
  Persistance and Capital Flows, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 60, pp. 1791 – 1823
Kaplan, Steven N., Sensoy, Berk A. and Stromberg, Per (2002): How well do Venture Capital
  Databases Reflect actual Investments?, Working Paper, University of Chicago
Kaplan, Steven N. and Stein, Jeremy C. (1990): How Risky is the Debt in Highly Leveraged
  Transactions?, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 215 – 245
Kaplan, Steven N. and Stein, Jeremy C. (1993): The Evolution of Buyout Pricing and
  Financial Structure in the 1980s, in: Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, pp. 313 –
  357
Lanstein, Ronald and Sharpe, William F. (1978): Duration and Security Risk, in: Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 13, pp. 653 – 668
Lee, Cheng F. and Wu, Chunchi (1988): Expectation Formation and Financial Ratio
  Adjustment Processes, in: Accounting Review, Vol. 63, pp. 292 – 306
Lehn, Kenneth, Netter, Jeffry, and Poulsen, Annette (1990): Consolidating Corporate
  Control: Dual-Class Recapitalizations Versus Leveraged Buyouts, in: Journal of Financial
  Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 557 – 580
Lehn, Kenneth and Poulsen, Annette (1989): Free Cash Flow and Stockholder Gains in
  Going Private Transactions, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 44, p. 771 – 787
Lerner, Josh (2000): Venture Capital and Private Equity: A Casebook, New York


                                               58
Lev, Baruch (1974): On the Association between Operating Leverage and Risk, in: Journal of
  Financial and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 9, pp. 627 – 641
Lichtenberg, Frank and Siegel, Donald (1990): The Effects of Leveraged Buyouts on
   Productivity and Related Aspects of Firm Behavior, in: Journal of Financial Economics,
   Vol. 27, pp. 165 - 194
Livingston, Miles (1978): Duration and Risk Assessment for Bonds and Common Stocks: A
   Note, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 33, pp. 293 – 295
Ljungqvist, Alexander and Richardson, Matthew (2003): The Cash Flow, Return and Risk
   Characteristics of Private Equity, NBER Working Paper 9454
Lockett, Andy, Murray, Gordon, and Wright, Mike (2002): Do UK Venture Capitalists still
  have a Bias against Investment in New Technology Firms, in: Research Policy, Vol. 31,
  pp. 1009 – 1030
Lowenstein, Louis (1985): Management Buyouts, in: Columbia Law Review, Vol. 85, pp.
  730 – 784
Mandelker, Gershon N., and Rhee, S. Ghon (1984): The Impact of the Degrees of Operating
  and Financial Leverage on Systematic Risk of Common Stock, in: Journal of Financial
  and Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 19, pp. 45 – 57
Marais, Laurentius, Schipper, Katherine, and Smith, Abbie (1989): Wealth Effects of Going
  Private for Senior Securities, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 23, pp. 155 – 191
Metrick, Andrew (2006): Venture Capital and the Finance of Innovation, John Wiley & Sons,
  Hoboken, NJ
Metrick, Andrew and Yasuda, Ayako (2008): The Economics of Private Equity Funds, SSRN
  Working Paper 996334
Modigliani, Franco and Miller, Merton (1958): The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and
  the Theory of Investment, in: American Economic Review, Vol. 48, pp. 261 - 297
Modigliani, Franco and Miller, Merton (1963): Taxes and the Cost of Capital: A Correction,
  in: American Economic Review, Vol.53, pp. 433 - 333
Murray, Gordon C. and Marriott, Richard (1998): Why has the Investment Performance of
  Technology-Specialist, European Venture Capital Funds been so poor?, in: Research
  Policy, Vol. 27, pp. 947 – 976
Muscarella, Chris and Vetsuypens, Michael R. (1990): Efficiency and Organizational
  Structure: A Study of Reverse LBOs, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 45, pp. 1389 – 1413
Myers, Stewart (1974): Interactions of Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions –
  Implications for Capital Budgeting, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 39, pp. 1 – 25
Myers, Stewart and Ruback, Richard S. (1987): Discounting Rules for Risky Assets, NBER
  Working Paper No. 2219
Nohel, Tom and Tarhan, Vefa (1998): Share Repurchases and Firm Performance: New
  Evidence on the Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, in: Journal of Financial Economics,
  Vol. 49, pp. 187 – 222
Opler, Tim C. (1992): Operating Performance in Leveraged Buyouts: Evidence from 1985 –
  1989, in: Financial Management, Vol. 21, No. 1, pp. 27 – 34




                                               59
Palepu, Krishna G. (1990): Consequences of Leveraged Buyouts, in: Journal of Financial
   Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 247 – 262
Peng, Liang (2001a): A New Approach of Valuing Illiquid Asset Portfolios, SSRN Working
  Paper 258599
Peng, Liang (2001b): Building a Venture Capital Index, SSRN Working Paper 281804
Phalippou, Ludovic (2008): The Hazards of Using IRR to Measure Performance: The Case of
  Private Equity, SSRN Working Paper 1111796
Phalippou, Ludovic and Gottschalg, Oliver (2008): The Performance of Private Equity Funds,
  in: Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming
Phalippou, Ludovic (2009): Beware when Venturing into Private Equity, Journal of
  Economic Perspectives (forthcoming)
Pogue, Gerald A. and Solnik, Bruno H. (1974): The Market Model Applied to European
  Common Stocks: Some Empirical Results, in: Journal of Financial and Quantitative
  Analysis, Vol. 9, pp. 917 – 944
Poindexter, John B. (1975): The Efficiency of Financial Markets: The Venture Capital Case,
  Dissertation, New York University
Quigley, John M. and Woodward, Susan E. (2002): Private Equity before the Crash:
  Estimation of an Index, University of California Berkeley Working Paper
Riener, Kenneth D. (1985): A Pedagogic Note on the Cost of Capital with Personal Taxes
   and Risky Debt, in: Financial Review, Vol. 20, pp. 229 - 235
Rotch, William (1968): The Pattern of Success in Venture Capital Financing, in: Financial
  Analysts Journal, Vol. 24, September and October, pp. 141 - 147
Ruback, Richard S. (2002): Capital Cash Flows: A Simple Approach to Valuing Risky Cash
  Flows, in: Financial Management, Vol. 31, No. 2, pp. 85 – 103
Rubinstein, Mark E. (1973): A Mean-Variance Synthesis of Corporate Financial Theory, in:
  Journal of Finance, Vol. 28, pp. 167 – 181
Sahlman, William A. (1990): The Structure and Governance of Venture-Capital
  Organizations, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 473 – 521
Sahlman, William A. and Stevenson, Howard H. (1985): Capital Market Myopia, in: Journal
  of Business Venturing, Vol. 1, pp. 7 – 30
Scholes, Myron and Williams, Joseph (1977): Estimating Betas from Nonsynchronous Data,
  in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 5, pp. 309 – 327
Schwert, G. Williams (1977): Stock Exchange Seats as Capital Assets, in: Journal of
  Financial Economics, Vol. 4, pp. 51 – 78
Sharpe, William F. and Cooper, Guy M. (1972): Risk-Return Classes of New York Stock
  Exchange Common Stocks, 1931 – 1967, in: Financial Analysts Journal, Vol. 28,
  March/April, pp. 47 – 54
Shleifer, Andrei and Vishny, Robert W. (1992): Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A
  Market Equilibrium Approach, in: Journal of Finance, Vol. 47, pp. 1343 – 1366
Smith, Abbie J. (1990): Corporate Ownership Structure and Performance: The Case of
  Management Buyouts, in: Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 143 – 164



                                              60
Woodward, Susan E. and Hall, Robert E. (2003): Benchmarking the Returns to Venture,
 NBER Working Paper 10202
Zahra, Shaker A. (1995): Corporate Entrepreneurship and Financial Performance: The Case
  of Management Leveraged Buyouts, in: Journal of Business Venturing, Vol. 10, pp. 225 –
  247




                                             61
