                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     TAX INCENTIVES FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING:
                       THE LOW INCOME HOUSING TAX CREDIT

                                         Mihir A. Desai
                                      Dhammika Dharmapala
                                         Monica Singhal

                                       Working Paper 14149
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14149


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2008




We thank Bill Apgar, Lily Batchelder, Jeff Brown, Rob Dietz, Tom Holtmann, Christopher Marquis,
Tom Neubig, Michael Novogradac, Richard Peiser, Michael Schler, Abby Sigal, Alvin Warren, David
Weisbach and participants in the NBER Economics of Tax Expenditure Conference and the 2009 Tax
Policy and the Economy conference for helpful discussions and comments. We are grateful to Ben
Feigenberg, Jill Gentry, Adam Hallowell and Ealy Ko for providing excellent research assistance and
to the Harvard University Taubman Center for State and Local Government, the Harvard Real Estate
Academic Initiative, and the Fitzgerald Gubernatorial Fund for Maine for generous research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Mihir A. Desai, Dhammika Dharmapala, and Monica Singhal. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Tax Incentives for Affordable Housing: The Low Income Housing Tax Credit
Mihir A. Desai, Dhammika Dharmapala, and Monica Singhal
NBER Working Paper No. 14149
June 2008, Revised November 2009
JEL No. H2,H76,R31,R51

                                              ABSTRACT

The Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) represents a novel tax expenditure program that employs
“investable” tax credits to spur production of low-income rental housing. While it has grown into the
largest source of new affordable housing in the U.S. and its structure is now being replicated in other
programs, the LIHTC has also drawn skepticism and calls for its repeal. We provide estimates of tax
expenditures under this program and discuss pricing, efficiency, and distributional effects of the program.
We also consider the impacts of the recent financial crisis on the LIHTC program and explore implications
of resulting policy changes and proposals.


Mihir A. Desai                                       Monica Singhal
Graduate School of Business Administration           Harvard University
Harvard University                                   JFK School of Government
Soldiers Field                                       79 JFK Street
Boston, MA 02163                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                             and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu                                       monica_singhal@harvard.edu

Dhammika Dharmapala
University of Illinois College of Law
504 E. Pennsylvania Avenue
Champaign, IL 61820
dharmap@illinois.edu
I.      Introduction

        The Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) program provides for the majority of new
affordable housing units built in the U.S. and has resulted in the production of 1.5 million low-
income housing units since its inception in 1986. The LIHTC represents a radical departure from
the structure of previous supply-side housing programs, which have generally relied on direct
provision or subsidization of low-income housing. In addition to being a critical federal housing
program, the LIHTC is of interest as an example of a novel type of tax expenditure program that
is spreading to other policy domains. Under the LIHTC program, the government allocates tax
credits to developers of low-income housing who then sell the credits, often via intermediaries,
to investors in exchange for equity financing. Credits are subsequently claimed by investors on
their tax returns. As a consequence, the tax beneficiary is an investor, rather than the provider or
the targeted beneficiary of the subsidized service. We refer to this class of credits as “investable
tax credits.”

        Figure 1 illustrates the rapid growth in tax expenditures for this program. Annual tax
expenditures on the LIHTC program were estimated at $4.3 billion in 2004 and are projected to
increase by almost 20% in real terms by 2011 (JCT, various years).1 Expenditures on the LIHTC
program relative to other federal housing programs are shown in Figure 2. While tax
expenditures on the LIHTC are only about a third of outlays on Section 8 vouchers, the program
is large relative to other federal supply-side programs. In addition, several of these other
programs (such as the Section 8 project based program) are no longer active (Rice and Sard,
2007). The LIHTC is currently the largest and fastest growing federal program for the
production of affordable rental housing.

        Although the LIHTC has generally been regarded with skepticism in the academic
literature (e.g. Weisbach, 2006), the program has remained politically popular. Reforms to the
program since its inception have all been in the direction of program expansion and have
generally passed with overwhelming bipartisan support. In addition, other programs with a
similar structure have been introduced by the federal government. Under the New Market Tax
Credits (NMTC) program, for example, the federal government allocates tax credits to

1
 Expenditure growth in the early years of the program primarily reflects lags between credit allocation and
claiming; later expenditure growth reflects expansions in annual credit allocations.



                                                         1
designated Community Development Entities (CDEs). The CDE then sells these credits to
investors in exchange for equity finance which is used by the CDE to provide investments in
low-income communities. The program was initiated in 2000 and has allocated $12.1 billion in
tax credits as of 2007 (GAO, 2007). Recent legislation has also proposed the creation of a
Homeowner’s Tax Credit, modeled after the LIHTC, for the construction or rehabilitation of
non-rental affordable housing.2

        The LIHTC program has also received a great deal of recent attention, as the market for
credits has been severely impacted by the financial crisis that began in 2007. Prices for LIH
credits have fallen dramatically through 2008 and 2009. This strain in the credit market has
come precisely at a time when the need for affordable housing has arguably increased greatly.
These recent events have prompted the passage of new legislative initiatives and proposals for
further policy reform. In particular, both the Housing and Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA) and
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) resulted in important changes to
the LIHTC program. Many of these changes are temporary, but some permanently affect the
structure of the program. We discuss these policies in detail below.

        In this paper, we provide estimates of the magnitude of LIHTC tax expenditures and
discuss efficiency costs of the program. We also present empirical evidence on the
characteristics of program participants: developers, credit claimants, and beneficiaries. Finally,
we discuss recent events in the LIHTC market as well as the potential implications of recent tax
legislation and reform proposals.



II.     An Overview of the Low Income Housing Tax Credit

        The Tax Reform Act of 1986 (TRA86) included several provisions that reduced the
profitability of investment in rental housing. The LIHTC program was devised as part of TRA86
to preserve incentives for the provision of affordable rental housing. Under this program, the
Internal Revenue Service allocates non-refundable tax credits to housing agencies run by the
state governments, which then award the credits to selected housing projects proposed by
developers. Federal law sets basic requirements for projects applying for LIHTC funds to ensure

2
  In addition, 15 states have enacted state LIHTC programs to supplement the federal LIHTC program. Most of
these programs have a similar structure to the federal program.



                                                       2
that they make a strong commitment to provide low-income housing. However, state housing
agencies hold most of the power in selecting program recipients, both through their individual
plans for ranking programs and through a significant amount of additional discretion.
Developers, in turn, sell the credits to investors in exchange for equity financing used to support
the housing project. Investors may be individuals, corporations or financial institutions, and their
return is limited to their tax benefits. Intermediaries, also known as syndicators, create the
market in these tax credits. The flow of credits is depicted in simplified form in Figure 3, based
on GAO (1997).3

         There are two types of credits allocated under the program. The first type of credit (“9%
credit”) is allocated to projects that are newly constructed and receive no other federal subsidies.
The federal government allocates these credits to states in proportion to population. Initial
allocations were $1.25 per capita. This amount was increased (in nominal terms) to $1.50 in
2002, $1.75 in 2003, and indexed for inflation thereafter. These allocations are subject to a small
state minimum, which was $2 million in 2003 and also indexed for inflation. If a project is
financed with private-activity tax-exempt bonds, it is eligible for the second type of credit (“4%
credit”); these credits are only capped indirectly through state private activity bond caps.

         One dollar of allocated credit entitles the claimant to a dollar tax credit each year for a
ten year period. The federal government also sets several guidelines with which projects must
comply in order to be eligible for LIHTC funding. Most importantly, a certain share of units
must be rent restricted and be occupied by low income households. These conditions must, in
most cases, be met for a minimum of 30 years.4 Conditional on meeting these guidelines, state
housing agencies have broad discretionary powers in setting criteria for the credit allocation
process. These criteria are generally set out in state Qualified Action Plans (QAPs). The normal
allocation process can be overridden or bypassed; indeed, a GAO study found that 17 out of 20
studied QAPs contained such override provisions (GAO, 1997). Olsen (2003) estimates that on
average $3 is requested for every available $1, indicating periods of substantial excess demand



3
  For other overviews of the program, see Burman (2005) and US Treasury (2008).
4
  In particular, projects must meet either a 20-50 rule (at least 20% of the units in the development must be rent-
restricted and occupied by households with income at or below 50% of the area median income) or a 40-60 rule (at
least 40% of the units in the development must be rent-restricted and occupied by households with income at or
below 60% of the area median income).



                                                         3
for LIH credits. As a result, many states have forced developers to meet requirements that are
stricter than the federal guidelines in order to be eligible for LIH credits.5

         Tax credits are then awarded to chosen projects. The amount of tax credits a given
project receives is determined by the qualified basis of the project. This is the product of two
factors: the first reflects the development costs of the project, and the second reflects the share of
the project that is reserved as low-income.6 This method approximates a per-low-income unit
subsidy, adjusted for development costs. Projects which are newly constructed and receive no
federal subsidies other than the LIHTC receive an amount of credits such that the present value
of credits over a 10 year period will be equal to 70% of the qualified basis. All other projects
receive credits such that the present value will be equal to 30% of the qualified basis.7 On
average, one third of the total financing of a typical project is provided through the proceeds of
the sale of tax credits.

         Once state housing agencies award credits to projects, the tax credits become available to
the developer. The developer may either use the tax credits to reduce its own tax bills, if it is a
for-profit developer, or sell the credits to investors. Investors who buy the credits provide the
developers with equity which is used to support the construction and creation of the low-income
housing. The deal is often structured as a limited partnership between investors and developers.
Investors, the limited partners in the partnership, generally do not expect income from the equity
but instead view the tax credits as their return.

         Note that the structure of the program creates tax benefits for investors and intermediaries
in the syndication process who have no intrinsic interest in low-income housing or related issues.


5
  States may, for example, require developers to meet stricter rent requirements or remain in compliance for a longer
period than mandated by the federal guidelines.
6
  More specifically, the qualified basis is the product of the eligible basis, the amount of all applicable depreciable
development costs, and the applicable fraction. The eligible basis includes most depreciable costs but excludes such
costs as the acquisition costs of land and permanent financing costs. The project may be eligible for a “basis boost”
of 30% if it is located in a HUD designated high cost area. The applicable fraction is either the fraction of units or
the fraction of floor space (whichever is lower) reserved as low-income units. A potential concern with this method
is that the subsidy amount is set ex ante without a mechanism to adjust the subsidy ex post for changes in operating
costs or area median income; please see Usowski and Hollar (2008) for further discussion.
7
  Technically, the eligible basis is multiplied by an “applicable percentage” that is meant to produce a credit
allocation equivalent to the present values given above. This leads to applicable percentages of approximately 9%
and 4% respectively. In practice, the percentages are set by the Treasury monthly and fluctuate with interest rates.
If the amount of credits required to attract enough equity finance to fill the financial deficit is less than this
calculated amount, the project receives the lower amount. The Housing and Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA) set a
floor for the credit rate for new construction completed before 2014 at 9%.



                                                          4
This creates a much wider constituency for the program than would be the case for an
economically equivalent program of direct subsidies for low-income housing.8 This may explain
why developers, intermediaries and housing advocates – not by any means a natural political
coalition - are fans of the program.9



III.    LIHTC Tax Expenditure Estimates

        In this section, we consider two methods to calculate tax expenditures under the LIHTC
program and compare the resulting estimates to the JCT estimates. First, we calculate implied
tax expenditures from credits claimed. As discussed above, the LIHTC differs from most other
tax expenditures in that a large share of total expenditure is capped and determined by annual per
capita credit allocations. If the majority of credits are claimed, it should be possible to estimate
and project tax expenditures under this program with a reasonably high degree of accuracy using
only information on credits allocated. Second, we calculate tax expenditures using data from
individual and corporate tax returns. As we discuss below, the information on the public use
files is not always sufficient to calculate actual credits claimed. We therefore compare the
resulting tax expenditure estimates to the estimates from JCT and credits allocated to assess the
validity of using these data to examine the characteristics of credit claimants.

III. A. Estimates from Credits Allocated

        Figure 4 provides expenditure estimates based on credits allocated. All credits allocated
by the federal government are assumed to be claimed by investors over the ten year period
immediately following project completion, with a two year lag between credit allocation and
project completion. Annual credits claimed are then adjusted to 2004 dollars. This method will
result in underestimates of total tax expenditures since it only accounts for credits subject to the
per-capita cap.




8
  There is perhaps an analogy here with Ferejohn’s (1986) account of the Food Stamp program, which argues that
the program was enacted as the result of a (seemingly unnatural) coalition between rural legislators with farming
constituencies and urban legislators representing the urban poor.
9
  The LIHTC also can create odd political coalitions in other policy dimensions. For example, LIHTC advocates
suggested that the initial proposal for dividend exemption in 2003 would depress the market for tax credits and
opposed the proposal on that basis.



                                                         5
         Implied expenditures increase rapidly over the first decade as the program reaches steady
state. Expenditures then decline slightly as the real value of credits allocated falls over time and
increase as annual per capita allocations are increased. Expenditure estimates are substantially
higher than JCT estimates in the early years of the program but conform closely to JCT estimates
over the recent period. This likely reflects the fact that many of the initially allocated tax credits
were left unused (GAO, 1997). Lags between federal allocation and credit claiming may also
have been longer than average in the early years of the program.

III. B. Estimates from Tax Return Data

         A second measure of LIHTC tax expenditure comes from credits claimed by individuals
and corporations on their tax returns. There are at least three reasons why information on credits
claimed from tax return data may not accurately reflect actual annual tax expenditure on the LIH
program.10 First, the line item for the current year LIHTC is included as part of the tentative
credit calculation form for the general business tax credit (Form 3800). Taxpayers may not be
eligible to claim the full amount of the tentative credit; for example, credits are nonrefundable
and cannot be used to offset AMT liability.11 Although the total amount of general business tax
credit claimed is available on the tax return, it is difficult to determine the exact amount of LIH
credit claimed for these taxpayers. Second, LIH credits can in some cases be carried forward or
carried back. In these cases, they are included as single line items that include the sum of all
general business credit carryforwards or carrybacks. Finally, an individual does not need to file
Form 3800 if she is not claiming any other general business credits and has no carryforwards or
carrybacks. The allowable LIH credits are then entered in the “other credits” line item on the
1040 form. While the first factor may cause these estimates to represent an overestimate, the
second two factors may result in underestimates of total LIH credits claimed from the Form 3800
line item.

         Given these caveats, estimates of LIHTC tax expenditure based on publicly available
individual and corporate tax return data are presented in Figure 5. The individual data come
from public use samples of individual federal tax returns.12 Information on LIH credit claiming


10
   We are grateful to Tom Holtmann at JCT for several helpful discussions on these issues.
11
   The credits included in the general business tax credit are then subject to a stacking order that determines which
credits are claimed first.
12
   Please see http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi/weber.pdf for sampling details.



                                                           6
is available from 1987-2002. The corporate data come from Table 21 of the SOI Corporation
Complete Report which itemizes components of the general business tax credit.

         The estimates in Figure 5 are lower than estimates from credits allocated in the early
years of the program. Again, this is likely a result of initial credits remaining either unused or
claimed with a substantial lag. In 2002, the last year for which we have individual data, implied
tax expenditure on the program was almost $4 billion. Less than 10% of this expenditure was
from claims by individual investors.

         The gap between tentative and allowable LIH credits seems likely to be small for two
reasons. First, investors must actively purchase credits and would not do so unless they expected
to claim the full value. Second, while it is possible that investors could unexpectedly become
ineligible to claim the full value, there is a secondary market for credits which allows investors
to sell credits they cannot claim.13 A similar argument applies to carryforwards and carrybacks:
such claims would arise if investors are not able to claim the full annual allocation in a given
year. One imperfect estimate of the magnitude of these biases is to examine what share of
tentative credit dollars are “claimed” by investors with AMT liability.14 Using the individual
public use files for 1987-2002, we find that less than 10% of all individual credit dollars are from
AMT payers. The possibility remains that individuals are ineligible to claim the full value of
credits for other reasons, and the corporate AMT “claim” share may be quite different than the
share for individuals. In addition, some credits claimed by individual investors may not appear
on Form 3800. We unfortunately do not have the necessary data to quantify the magnitude of
these biases.

         Overall, the estimates from these tax data imply slightly higher tax expenditure than the
JCT estimates and estimates from credits allocated, consistent with tentative credits being an
overestimate of final credits claimed. However, the aggregate trends over time as well as the
shift from individual claims to corporate claims do track the estimates from the other data
sources fairly well. We are therefore reasonably confident in using these figures as an
approximation of credits claimed when we examine the characteristics of credit claimants below.

13
   There are some conditions placed on investors who wish to sell their interests in LIHTC properties. In particular,
until recently, the investor must purchase a “recapture bond” which guarantees payment to the Treasury in the event
of tax credit recapture due to noncompliance. This was repealed under HERA.
14
   Until 2008, LIH credits could not be used to offset AMT liability. Therefore, these tentative credits are
presumably not actually claimed by investors.



                                                          7
IV.        Credit Pricing and Economic Efficiency

IV. A. Determinants of Credit Prices and Trends over Time

           An interesting feature of the LIHTC program is that purchasers of credits do not
generally receive income from the property; the difference between the purchase price and the
value of the credit represents the return on the investment. However, credit prices sometimes
deviate from the actuarially fair value. In the case of the LIHTC, the price at which credits are
sold has increased substantially over the life of the program. Ernst and Young (2005) calculate
the equity price simply as housing credit equity divided by housing credits. By this measure,
median credit prices have increased from approximately 45 cents in the early years of the
program to over 85 cents for projects placed into service in 2005 (Ernst and Young, 2005).15
Anecdotal evidence suggests that the very low initial pricing was primarily the result of
uncertainty about the rules of the system and about how long it would last.

           Calculating the price in this way implicitly assumes that investors are realizing the full
nominal value of credits received. In practice, however, investors realize the credits over a 10
year period. To obtain a “true” price, which reflects the equity per effective credit dollar, the
stream of tax credits should be discounted. Discounting credits appropriately substantially
increases the implied equity price: Cummings and DiPasquale (1999) estimate that the average
credit price over their sample period (1987-1996) increases from 52 cents to more than 70 cents
if the present value of the stream of credits (using a discount rate of 6.7%) is used in the price
calculations.

           Historical prices below actuarially fair values may have reflected additional
compensation for the risk of default: projects may fail to remain in compliance over the full
lifetime of the credits. If a property is found to be in noncompliance, the investor forfeits future
tax credit claims and must repay 1/3 of previously claimed credits with interest. The monitoring
costs associated with ensuring that the developers are in compliance, and the discounting of the
risk of developer noncompliance could result in a risk premium. Empirically, this risk premium
appears negligible: until the recent financial crisis, credits were trading at or above their


15
     Cummings and DiPasquale (1999) find similar patterns in their surveyed properties.



                                                           8
actuarially fair value, consistent with evidence indicating that the ex post probability of
punishment appears low. Ernst and Young (2005) find that only 0.4% of surveyed properties
had been audited and faced a loss of tax benefits in the form of recapture or disallowance of
future claims.16 While the average risk of noncompliance may be small, risk may help to explain
cross-sectional variation in credit prices. Using data from LIHTC transactions in California,
Eriksen (2009) finds that projects with characteristics correlated with an increased risk of
noncompliance are associated with lower tax credit prices. This suggests that states may be able
to use credit prices as an effective ex ante screening device when choosing how to allocate
credits across proposed projects.

        In many respects, the puzzling feature of credit prices (until the very recent period) was
not why they are too low, but rather why they appear too high. For many years, credit prices
approached or exceeded one when the stream of tax credits is discounted appropriately.17 A
possible explanation for this anomaly is that for certain financial institutions, investment in low-
income housing can serve to satisfy some of their obligations under the Community
Reinvestment Act (CRA). The CRA requires banks and other depository institutions to provide
credit throughout their local communities, including in low income areas. CRA evaluations are
subjective and based on a diffuse set of metrics that are deliberately not quantified. The record
of the financial institution is reviewed and taken into account when regulators evaluate
applications for deposit facilities or during mergers. As such, there are no specific, quantifiable
linkages between LIHTC purchases and CRA ratings though it is widely acknowledged that
LIHTC can count toward the hardest standard for banks, the investment of resources into their
low-income communities. A 2003 report estimated that 43% of LIH investors were financial
institutions subject to CRA requirements (Ernst and Young, 2003). The interaction with the
CRA opens up the possibility that entities may be willing to bid the price of tax credits above
their actuarially fair value as they can jointly realize tax advantages and fulfill CRA



16
   The low probability of punishment may arise from low noncompliance or ineffective monitoring. The IRS is
largely dependent on monitoring by state housing agencies, and a GAO review found a number of potential
problems in state oversight procedures (GAO, 1997).
17
   Many participants employ an after-tax yield to measure pricing more accurately to catch the temporal aspects of
the credits. Participants then use comparisons between these yields and municipal bonds to benchmark appropriate
pricing. When yields are lower than municipal bonds, most participants believe that CRA incentives, discussed
below, are operative.



                                                         9
obligations.18 Such mechanisms for increasing the funding for the supply of low-income
housing should however be balanced against possible inefficiencies stemming from any
expansion of CRA obligations.

         Credit prices may also experience short term fluctuations as a result of supply and
demand shocks. Most notably, the puncturing of the bubble in the US housing market in 2007
and the subsequent financial crisis of 2008 have had profound consequences for the LIHTC
program. Prior to the crisis, $1 of tax credits traded at an undiscounted price of nearly 90 cents;19
by early 2009, the corresponding price had fallen below 70 cents (see e.g. Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas (2009)). This price decline reflects decreased investor demand for LIH credits, due
principally to two factors. First, the large losses incurred by banks and other financial
institutions rendered tax credits significantly less valuable. A second major development was the
exit from this market of two major buyers of LIH credits, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which
entered government conservatorship in September 2008.
         IV. B. Efficiency of the Program
         A notable feature of the LIHTC is that a large share of credits (specifically, the 9%
credits) are capped. This means that there is no budgetary uncertainty about the amount of
resources committed by the government to low-income housing, which may be politically
advantageous. However, there is uncertainty over the actual provision of housing; in particular,
lower prices of credits may dictate that fewer housing units are constructed. For example, the
decreased market value of LIH credits during the recent crisis has had a severe negative impact
on the ability of developers to obtain equity financing through the sale of credits.20 At the same
time, a number of developments have potentially increased the demand for low-income rental
housing. For instance, would-be homeowners now face greater difficulty in obtaining credit to
purchase houses. There has also been an increase in unemployment associated with the
recession. Demand has also increased from former homeowners whose houses have been


18
   Marquis and Guthrie (2007) discuss the interactions between the CRA and the LIHTC at length. They cite
Federal Reserve analyses of bank mergers that highlight LIHTC investments as ways of satisfying CRA
requirements. Marquis and Guthrie go on to argue that states design their LIHTC programs, in part, to help banks
address CRA guidelines in order to foster merger activity.
19
   As discussed earlier, this price corresponds to one that may have exceeded $1 when tax credits are appropriately
discounted; this point does not, however, affect the magnitude of the post-crisis decline in prices.
20
   For examples of projects that have lost financing as a result, see “Shovel Ready, but Investor-Deprived” by Terry
Pristin, New York Times, May 6, 2009, p. B6.



                                                         10
foreclosed on, or who have decided to abandon houses in which they had negative equity.21 This
extreme case illustrates a more general issue with the structure of the LIHTC program: credit
prices and the supply of affordable housing through this program may fluctuate with aggregate
economic conditions.

        In addition to variability in the prices of credits, it is important to note that not all of the
equity finance received through the sale of credits goes into housing projects; there are a number
of transactions costs associated with most LIHTC projects. Indeed, the GAO estimates, for
example, that syndication costs may consume 10-27% of equity invested in low-income housing
credit projects (GAO, 1997). Consistent with this finding, Cummings and DiPasquale (1997)
find that the average ratio of net equity to gross equity in their data is 0.71. Syndication costs
appear to be declining over time as the market has become more competitive. It is also important
to note that many projects constructed with LIH credits also benefit from additional supply side
subsidies, such as tax exempt bond financing and Section 515 rural housing loans. In addition, a
substantial share of residents in these housing projects are recipients of Section 8 vouchers or
other forms of rental assistance.22 Therefore, while the LIHTC program is credited with great
success in the production of affordable housing, it is not clear that the program would be
successful in meeting project goals were it to exist in isolation.

        This evidence leaves open the question of whether new construction is the most efficient
means of getting housing assistance to low-income households or whether subsidies should
instead be provided in the form of demand-side programs, such as vouchers. The relative merits
of supply-side programs and vouchers are a subject of ongoing debate, and some (e.g., Weisbach
2006) have advocated replacing the LIHTC with a voucher program. A potential disadvantage
of vouchers is their effect on market rents: Susin (2002) and Gibbons and Manning (2006), for
example, find large effects on rent subsidies on rents. Since rent voucher programs only cover a
relatively small fraction of people with low incomes, recipients of vouchers may be better off on
balance despite the rent increases but there is a larger population of low-income non-recipients
who face higher rents without receiving any government assistance. In contrast, supply-side
housing policies not only benefit those low-income families that obtain the new housing, but also

21
   On the other hand, the end of the housing bubble has increased housing affordability, as house prices have
declined from their previously excessive levels towards their fundamental values.
22
   See Cummings and DiPasquale (1999) for estimates of the total development costs of housing produced under the
LIHTC program and Deng (2006) for comparisons with the voucher program.



                                                      11
may potentially benefit the wider low-income population through lower market rents (Coate,
Johnson and Zeckhauser, 1994).

       However, these benefits depend on whether housing provided under this program
increases the net supply of low-income housing or simply crowds out other low income housing.
Estimates suggest that crowd-out is likely to be substantial: Sinai and Waldfogel (2005) estimate
crowd out of up to two-thirds from government subsidized housing generally, Malpezzi and
Vandell (2002) estimate full crowd out from the LIHTC program, and Eriksen and Rosenthal
(2008) estimate crowd out of between one-half and one. There is, however, some evidence that
the LIHTC program increases supply at very local levels. Baum-Snow and Marion (2009)
exploit a discontinuity in the LIHTC program. Specifically, a census tract qualifies for
discontinuously higher funding (a 30% increase in the tax credit) if more than 50% of its
households have incomes below a certain threshold (60% of Area Median Gross Income). They
find a large impact of this discontinuity on the supply of LIHTC housing. They also find that
LIHTC-funded housing increases owner turnover, reduces neighborhood income in gentrifying
areas, and increases property values in declining areas.

       On balance, the available empirical evidence suggests that rent vouchers are likely to be
more cost effective than the LIHTC program. Deng (2006) computes the costs associated with
LIHTC-funded developments and vouchers in six US metropolitan areas, and finds that vouchers
are generally less costly. However, it is important to note that there is considerable heterogeneity
in the relative costs, depending on housing market conditions in the metropolitan area, the type
of housing, and various other factors. Supply side remedies may thus be preferred for particular
targeted groups or in certain geographic areas. Certain groups, such as large households, single
non-elderly persons, and the elderly, statistically have a lower chance of success in using their
vouchers (Finkel and Buron, 2001). There may also be markets in which the LIHTC is less
costly than vouchers (DiPasquale, et al. 2003). Finally, LIHTC-funded developments may
achieve better outcomes along other dimensions, such as neighborhood integration and school
quality (Deng, 2007).

       There are three other considerations that are relevant when thinking about the efficiency
consequences of the structure of the LIHTC program specifically. First, the fact that producers
need not be the claimers of credits may be beneficial for productive efficiency. If credits are not



                                                 12
refundable and not transferable, then participation in the program will be tied to a provider’s tax
liability. Investable tax credits neutralize the bias toward for-profit providers inherent in a non-
refundable tax credit; this feature is particularly critical if the dominant organizational form for
delivering the production is nonprofit. Such a market can also improve productive efficiency if
there is heterogeneity among for-profit providers and more efficient providers do not have
sufficient tax liability to utilize the full value of the credits.

        In this sense, the provision of investable tax credits under the LIHTC is closely analogous
to the widespread use of leasing as a means of transferring tax benefits (such as depreciation
allowances) among firms. The leasing market allows firms facing relatively low marginal tax
rates to benefit from investment incentives by allow a firm facing a high marginal tax rate to be
the legal owner of a piece of equipment. Specifically, Congress’ experiment with “safe harbor”
leasing removed most obstacles for the transfer of tax benefits through leasing arrangements as
part of the Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA) of 1981 (see Warren and Auerbach (1982)).
This provision proved to be short-lived because of perceived abuses, and these concerns have
limited more expansive efforts in the leasing domain. However, the leasing market continues to
serve this basic function today. Investable tax credits accomplish the same separation of the
legal tax beneficiary from the agent undertaking the targeted activity. This analogy also makes
clear that transferability of tax benefits is not a unique feature of the LIHTC, and has important
precedents elsewhere in the tax system.

        Second, investors claim credits over a 10 year horizon. This provides a mechanism for
the developer to receive up front financing for the project while maintaining the ability of the
government to enforce program guidelines after the project is built through the threat of
recapture of credits from investors. This structure may therefore be preferable to direct subsidies
or refundable credits which allocate the entire subsidy to the developer prior to project
completion.

        Finally, the investable nature of the program allows for the creation of delegated monitors
to ensure compliance with housing agency and IRS requirements. Without the investable feature
of the program, housing agencies and the IRS would be exclusively monitoring compliance of
the many projects. With investable tax credits, monitoring is largely undertaken by the investors
and their agents (often accounting firms) as their entire economic return for their investment is



                                                     13
contingent on compliance. If there are differential monitoring capabilities, this delegation of
monitoring can be an important dimension to the desirability of the LIHTC.23

           Note that in practice, the incentives for investors to monitor depend on the government
oversight of the program. The IRS requires state housing agencies to develop compliance
monitoring programs that meet certain federal guidelines and report cases of non-compliance.
However, the IRS has no specific authorization to evaluate or audit state housing agencies to
ensure that they are actually meeting these federal guidelines, and some evidence suggests that
the agencies may not in fact always be fully compliant with their oversight responsibilities
(GAO, 1997). As discussed, the IRS rarely recaptures credits in practice, and it is not clear
whether this is a result of effective monitoring and high project compliance or simply poor
government oversight.



V.         Distribution of LIHTC Tax Expenditure

           Determining the true economic incidence of the LIHTC program is quite challenging for
several reasons. Credit allocation formulas reflect a range of factors, including development
costs and other received subsidies. In addition, states often allocate credits to developers willing
to serve particular target populations or meet affordability guidelines that are stricter than federal
requirements. Finally, most LIH projects receive additional federal supply and demand side
subsidies, making it difficult to isolate the effects of the LIHTC. We focus instead on
examining the distribution of three groups affected by the program: providers of low income
housing, investors in LIH credits, and low income households who benefit from the program.

VI. A. Distribution of Providers

           As discussed above, an advantage of the “investable” feature of the LIHTC program is
that it levels the playing field between for-profit and nonprofit developers. Federal law requires
states to reserve 10% of LIHTC funds for projects with nonprofit developers, but this
requirement does not appear to be binding in practice. Figure 6 illustrates the share of LIHTC
funded projects developed by nonprofit developers by year placed into service. This share
increased rapidly in the early years of the program, peaked at over 35% in 1998 and has since

23
     Thanks to Michael Novogradac for highlighting this point to us.



                                                          14
declined slightly to 25% in 2003. Some states do have additional nonprofit set-asides or favor
nonprofits in their QAPs (Gustafson and Walker, 2002), but it is unlikely that these provisions
alone can explain the observed levels of participation of nonprofits in this market.

V. B.    Distribution of Credit Claimants

V. B. 1.Individuals

         A surprising feature of individual LIHTC investors is that they are small: Between 1987
and 2002, the average credit among claimers was slightly more than $3,000. The number of
claimants has remained fairly constant over time, but the credit claimed per return has declined
substantially, as shown in Figure 7. Among claimers, the average credit per return almost halved
between 1995 and 2002, declining from $4,100 to $2,100 in real terms. This implies both an
overall shift toward corporate investors and a shift towards smaller investments among
remaining individual investors.

         To examine the distribution of individual claimants, an approximation of cash income
can be constructed from the public use data files.24 Figure 8 plots the share of the annual value
of credits claimed by individuals by income category between 1999 and 2002. There are two
features to note. First, the distribution is hump-shaped in each year. This is not surprising: low
income individuals may not have tax liability to offset, and higher income individuals (except
those at the very top of the distribution) are more likely to be subject to the AMT. Second, the
distribution of credits claimed shifts noticeably down the income distribution between 2000 and
2001. In particular, the share of credit value claimed by those in the 100-250 K income category
declines and appears to shift to the two income categories that are immediately below. 25 These
findings suggest that the AMT may have significant effects on the distribution of credit claimants


24
   In particular, we use the following definition for income: Cash Income = AGI - S&L tax refunds + IRA deduction
+ student loan interest deduction + alimony paid deduction + tuition & fees deduction + HSA deduction + 1/2 of
self-employment tax + penalty on early withdrawal of saving + self-employed health insurance deduction + MSA
deduction + Keogh deduction + tax-exempt interest + non-taxable SS benefits - min(Other Income, 0). Not all
components are available in all years, so we construct a measure as close as possible to the above definition in each
year.
25
   Those with very high incomes are likely to have regular tax liability that exceeds the AMT. This may be one
explanation for why the claim share for those in the highest income category ($1 million and above) remains fairly
stable over this period. The change in distribution of individual investors could be more precisely attributed to the
AMT by comparing changes in the distribution across states with high versus low shares of AMT taxpayers. This is
unfortunately not possible in the public use files since the state of residence is not available for those with AGI
greater than $200,000.



                                                         15
and may help to explain both the overall shift toward corporate investors as well as the move
toward lower-income, smaller individual investors.26

VI. B. 2.Corporations

        Tabulations by income category are not available in the published corporate reports. The
reports do tabulate claims by sector, which is perhaps a more interesting categorization for
corporate claimants. Table 1 illustrates the share of annual credit value claimed by various
sectors in 2000 and 2006. We include data from the five sectors in the SOI classification that
account for the largest shares of credit value claimed as well as data for the real estate and rental
and leasing sector.

        The majority of corporate credits are claimed by corporations in two sectors: “finance
and insurance” and “management of companies (holding companies).” These two sectors have
also accounted for a larger share of LIH credit dollars claimed over time. Together, corporations
in these sectors claimed 65% of corporate credit dollars in 2000 and 89% in 2006. There is
nothing in the structure of the LIHTC program alone that suggests that claiming of credits should
be so concentrated across sectors. These findings strongly suggest that corporations in these
sectors derive additional benefits from investments in low income housing.

        Finally, it is interesting to note that the real estate sector accounts for a negligible share of
credits claimed. In part, this suggests that the separation of the provision of the service from the
tax beneficiary allowed by investable tax credits has been important.

V. C. Distribution of Beneficiaries

        Overall, it appears that the program is successful in providing affordable housing to
households with below average incomes, but it may not benefit those with the very lowest
incomes. This is not surprising, since the income limits for rent-restricted units are 50-60% of
area median income, although the additional use of vouchers or other rent subsidies may help to
make the units affordable for lower income households. A survey of properties placed into
service between 1992 and1994 indicates that three quarters of households in LIHTC properties
had income below 50% of the area median and forty percent had income below 30% of the area
median income (GAO, 1999). Thirty nine percent of resident households received direct rental
26
  Individual investments in LIH credits are also limited by passive loss limitations. We thank Rob Dietz for
highlighting this point to us.



                                                        16
assistance, and their average income was 25% of the area median (GAO, 1999). Similar patterns
have been observed in other surveys of LIHTC properties (Ernst and Young, 1997). We do not
attempt to examine the effects of the program on other (non-resident) low income households.



VI.      Recent Tax Reforms

         Congress has responded to the recent problems in the LIHTC market by adopting various
measures to encourage the supply of low-income housing, within the context of its overall
strategy of “economic stimulus.” The Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (HERA),
enacted in July 2008, included provisions designed both to make LIH credits more attractive to
investors and to expand the scale of the LIHTC program (see Congressional Research Service
(2009)). In particular, HERA established a floor for the annual credit rate (as a percentage of a
project’s eligible basis) obtained by investors in LIH credits. The act also increased LIHTC
allocations to the states by 10% for 2008 and 2009.
         In addition, HERA allowed LIH credits to be used to offset AMT liability. A number of
housing advocates had argued strongly for enabling credits to be used against AMT liability in
order to make credits attractive to investors who are subject to the AMT or who are concerned
about facing the AMT over the lifetime of the credits. Since credit allocations are fixed, this
provision should not substantially affect tax expenditure on the program.27 In theory, this change
may shift credit claiming back to individual investors (especially those with higher incomes),
since this group is more likely to be constrained by the AMT. This could shift the distribution of
investors, which could affect the effectiveness of the program in producing low-income housing
as well as the types of projects built under the program. Projects with corporate investors tend to
have lower syndication costs (Ernst and Young, 1997) and are likely to be more effective at ex
post monitoring than a diffuse group of small individual investors, resulting in a reduction of risk
and higher credit prices. A shift back to individual investors could therefore decrease the amount
of equity financing available for low-income housing. The changing distribution of investors


27
   In theory, allowing credits to be used to offset the AMT could increase tax expenditures under the program if
some investors were previously unable to claim purchased credits after being hit by the AMT. This effect seems
likely to be small, since investors were well aware of the AMT provisions, and made purchasing decisions taking
into account the likelihood that they would be subject to the AMT over the life of the credits. In addition, investors
could make use of carry forward allowances and the secondary market for credits, making it likely that most credits
allocated were eventually claimed.



                                                          17
may also influence the types of projects that are financed under the program. A report by the
National Association of Home Builders, for example, argued that individual investors tend to
prefer smaller projects and may be more likely to prefer rural projects as well as projects catering
toward special needs populations (NAHB, 2005). However, the application of credits against the
AMT may have a small effect relative to the growing use of LIH credits by corporations against
CRA requirements. To the extent that this effect dominates, credit claiming may continue to
shift increasingly toward corporations.
        More recently, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA), signed
into law by President Obama on February 17, 2009, marked a significant departure for the
LIHTC through the introduction of a credit exchange program. Specifically, ARRA authorized
the Treasury to make cash grants to the states in lieu of part of their LIHTC allocations
(Congressional Research Service, 2009). For example, a state was permitted to elect to receive as
cash grants up to 40% of its 2009 LIH credit allocations (as well as to receive grants in exchange
for unused credits for 2008). The Federal government will pay 85 cents for each $1 of LIH
credits given up by the state. The idea underlying this provision is that states would award these
funds to developers to pursue projects that conform to LIHTC requirements. These projects need
not have any other LIHTC funding, although developers are required to demonstrate that they
have made a good faith effort to obtain equity investment. The funds awarded in this way are not
taxable income to the recipients, and do not reduce the project’s eligible basis for LIHTC
purposes. This LIHTC exchange program will essentially bypass the current depressed market
for LIH credits. The provision is anticipated to have a substantial budgetary impact, relative to
the overall size of the LIHTC program.28



VII.    Conclusion

        The LIHTC program has become the primary federal program subsidizing the
development of low income housing and appears to have broad support among policymakers,
low income housing advocates, developers and institutional investors. Recent and proposed




28
  The JCT estimates a cost of $419 million over the 10-year budget horizon (Congressional Research Service,
2009).



                                                       18
reforms to the program have been in the direction of further expansion, and the structure of the
LIHTC has been replicated in other related federal and state programs.

       Several features of the LIHTC program distinguish it from traditional supply side
provision or subsidization. The unbundling of the service provider and the tax beneficiary has
potential advantages for competition and productive efficiency. This unbundling also creates
better incentives for ex post monitoring and compliance in theory, although it is not clear
whether these benefits are being realized in practice. However, the LIHTC structure also means
that the success of the program in delivering affordable housing thus depends on the incentives
of a variety of market participants.
       Tax expenditures under the program are quite predictable, but the supply of housing
provided for a given level of tax expenditure (even abstracting from general equilibrium effects)
can vary. Corporations are now the primary investors in LIH credits, and their incentives may
reflect not only features of the LIHTC program specifically, but also of related programs, such as
CRA requirements.
       The recent crisis has illustrated the potential vulnerability of the program to aggregate
market conditions. Several provisions of recent policy reforms have loosened the supply of
credits or made the terms of their use more favorable but have not altered the program’s
fundamental structure. However, the replacement of some LIHTC allocations by cash grants
represents a significant (albeit partial and perhaps temporary) shift in program design from the
“investable tax credit” model discussed earlier towards the direct subsidy approach. In view of
this, analysis of the relative merits of the LIHTC structure and a traditional subsidy appears more
pertinent than ever.




                                                19
References


Baum-Snow, N. and J. Marion (2007) “Effects of Low-Income Housing Developments on
Neighborhoods.” Journal of Public Economics, 93: 654-666..
Burman, L. (2005) “Low-Income Housing Credit” in J. J. Cordes, R. D. Ebel and J. G. Gravelle
(eds.) NTA Encyclopedia of Taxation and Tax Policy, Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press.
Coate, S., S. Johnson and R. Zeckhauser (1994) “Pecuniary Redistribution through In-Kind
Programs,” Journal of Public Economics, 55:1-40.
Congressional Research Service (2009) An Introduction to the Design of the Low-Income
Housing Tax Credit by Mark P. Keightley, CRS Report RS22389, Washington DC.
Cummings, J.L. and D. DiPasquale. (1998) “Building Affordable Rental Housing: An Analysis
of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit.” Mimeo, City Research.
Cummings, J.L. and D. DiPasquale. (1999) “The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit: An
Analysis of the First Ten Years.” Housing Policy Debate, 10(2):251-307.
Deng, L. (2006) “The Cost-Effectiveness of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Relative to
Vouchers: Evidence from Six Metropolitan Areas” Housing Policy Debat,e 16: 469-511.
Deng, L. (2007) “Comparing the Effects of Housing Vouchers and Low-Income Housing Tax
Credits on Neighborhood Integration and School Quality” Journal of Planning Education and
Research, 27:20-35.
DiPasquale, D., D. Fricke, and D. Garcia-Diaz. (2003) “Comparing the Costs of Federal Housing
Assistance Programs.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review.
Eriksen, M. (2009) “The Market Price of Low-Income Housing Tax Credits.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 66(2): 141-149.
Eriksen, M. and S. Rosenthal. (2008) “Crowd Out Effects of Place-Based Subsidized Rental
Housing: New Evidence from the LIHTC Program.” Mimeo, University of Georgia.
Ernst and Young. (1997) “The Low Income Housing Tax Credit: The First Decade.” Mimeo.
Ernst and Young. (2003) “The Impact of the Dividend Exclusion Proposal on the Production of
Affordable Housing.” Mimeo.
Ernst and Young. (2005) “Understanding the Dynamics III: Housing Tax Credit Investment
Performance.” Mimeo.
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2009) “Low-Income Housing Tax Credits in Texas:
Achievements and Challenges” Banking and Community Perspectives, Issue 2, May 2009.
Ferejohn, J. A. (1986) “Logrolling in an Institutional Context: A Case Study of Food Stamps
Legislation” in G. Wright, L. Rieselbach and L. Dodd (eds.) Congress and Policy Change New
York City: Agathon Press.
Finkel, M. and L. Buron. (2001) “Study on Section 8 Voucher Success Rates — Volume I:
Quantitative Study of Success Rates in Metropolitan Areas.” Cambridge, MA: Abt Associates
Inc.



                                             20
Gibbons, S. and A. Manning (2006) “The Incidence of UK Housing Benefit: Evidence from the
1990’s Reforms” Journal of Public Economics, 90: 799-822.
General Accounting Office. (1997) “Tax Credits: Opportunities to Improve Oversight of the
Low Income Housing Program.” GAO/GGD/RCED-97-55.
General Accounting Office. (2007) “Tax Policy: New Markets Tax Credit Appears to Increase
Investment by Investors in Low-Income Communities, but Opportunities Exist to Better Monitor
Compliance.” GAO-07-296.
Gustafson, J. and J. C. Walker. (May 2002) “Analysis of State Qualified Allocation Plans for
the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program.” Mimeo, The Urban Institute.
Joint Committee on Taxation. (various years) “Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures.”
Malpezzi, S. and K. Vandell. (2002) “Does the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Increase the
Supply of Housing?” Journal of Housing Economics, 11:360-380.
Marquis, C. and D. Guthrie. (2007) “State Activism and the Hidden Incentives behind Bank
Acquisitions.” HBS mimeo.
National Association of Home Builders. (2005) “Increasing Individual Investor Demand for the
LIHTC.” NAHB White Paper.
Olsen, E.O. (2003) “Housing Programs for Low-Income Households.” in Means-Tested Transfer
Programs in the U.S., ed., Robert Moffitt, National Bureau of Economic Research Conference
Report.
Rice, D. and B. Sard. (2007) “The Effects of the Federal Budget Squeeze on Low-Income
Housing Assistance.” Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, mimeo.
Sinai, T. and J. Waldfogel. (2005) “Do Low-income Housing Subsidies Increase the Occupied
Housing Stock?” Journal of Public Economics, 89:2137-2164.
Susin, S. (2002) “Rent Vouchers and the Price of Low-Income Housing” Journal of Public
Economics, 83: 109-152.
US Treasury (2008) “Low-Income Housing Tax Credits: Affordable Housing Investment
Opportunities for Banks” Community Development Insights, February.
Usowski, K. and M. Hollar. (2008) “Social Policy and the U.S. Tax Code: The Curious Case of
the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit.” US Department of Housing and Urban Development,
mimeo.
Warren, A. C., Jr. and A. J. Auerbach (1982) “Transferability of Tax Incentives and the Fiction
of Safe Harbor Leasing” Harvard Law Review, 95: 1752-1786.
Weisbach, D. A. (2006) “Tax Expenditures, Principal Agent Problems, and Redundancy.”
Washington University Law Review, 84:1823-1860.




                                               21
                                                              Figure 1
                                              JCT Estimates of LIHTC Tax Expenditure
                     6


                     5
 Billions (2004 $)




                     4


                     3


                     2


                     1


                     0
                         1987   1989   1991   1993   1995   1997    1999   2001   2003   2005   2007   2009   2011
                                                                  Year
                                                            Corporate Individual

Notes: Data Source: JCT, “Estimates of Tax Expenditures,” various years. Figures for a given year are taken from
the report immediately preceding that year. All figures are in 2004 dollars. Starting from 2008, estimates are based
on a -0.3 annual CPI changes which reflects the average for 2005-2007. The apparent one-year shift from individual
to corporate claimants from 2000 to 2001 reflects a change in the method of estimation rather than a true change in
the distribution of claimants.




                                                                   22
                                                                        Figure 2
                                                          Comparison of Housing Programs (2005)
                             16
                                                   14.8

                             14
   Billions of Dollars ($)




                             12


                             10


                              8


                              6                                   5.3
                                      4.7

                              4

                                                                                                             1.8
                              2                                                                                             1.2
                                                                                             0.979
                                                                                0.1
                              0
                                  LIHTC* (tax      Sec. 8    Sec. 8 Project Section 515 & Section 202 &    Home          Homeless
                                  expenditure)    Housing       Based       Section 521** Section 811** Investment      Assistance**
                                                  Choice      Program**                                 Partnership**
                                                 Voucher**

                                                                        Housing Programs


Notes: * Data for LIHTC tax expenditure are from JCT. ** Data on remaining programs come from Rice and Sard
(2007). Budget Authority rather than outlays. Funding estimates for these programs are based on budget authority
rather than expenditure. The Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program provides vouchers to low-income tenants.
The Section 8 Project Based program subsidizes affordable rental housing. Section 515 and Section 521 provides
low-interest loans to encourage the production of affordable rental housing in rural areas. Section 202 and Section
811 provide subsidies to developers of affordable rental housing for the elderly and those with disabilities; Section
811 also includes tenant-based rental assistance for the disabled. The HOME Investment partnership provides a
variety of subsidies (both project and tenant based) for rental and non-rental affordable housing. Homeless
assistance refers to a number of programs that provide housing assistance to the homeless. See Rice and Sard
(2007) for further details.




                                                                              23
                                              Figure 3
                                   Mechanics of LIHTC Allocation




Notes: Source: Adapted from U.S. General Accounting Office, Tax Credits.




                                                      24
                                                                Figure 4
                                            Tax Expenditure Estimates from Credits Allocated

                        5

                       4.5

                        4

                       3.5
   Billions (2004 $)




                        3

                       2.5

                        2

                       1.5

                        1

                       0.5

                        0
                             1987    1989     1991      1993     1995     1997      1999     2001   2003   2005   2007
                                                                          Year

Notes: Figures are calculated from annual per capita credits allocated and population figures, and assume all credits are claimed
over the 10 year period following project completion. The figures are based on federal allocation guidelines and do not
incorporate state-specific minimum allocations or changes arising from 2008 and 2009 legislation. We allow a two year lag
between allocation and project completion.


                                                                Figure 5
                                            Tax Expenditure Estimates from Tax Return Data
                                                     (Note: Individual data is from 1987-2002)
               6.0


               5.0

             )4.0
             $
             4
             0
             0
             (23.0
              s
              n
              o
              il
               li
                2.0
                B

               1.0


               0.0
                         1987       1989     1991      1993     1995      1997     1999      2001   2003   2005   2007
                                                                        Year
                                                                  Corporate Individual
Notes: Figures are taken from the tentative credit calculation of the general business tax credit (Form 3800). Individual data are
from the public use individual federal tax return sample and corporate data are from the SOI Corporation Complete Report.




                                                                             25
                                                            Figure 6
                                    Share of Projects Completed by a Not-for-Profit Developer

                       0.4

                      0.35

                       0.3
  Share of Projects




                      0.25

                       0.2

                      0.15

                       0.1

                      0.05

                        0
                             1987   1989      1991      1993        1995    1997      1999      2001   2003
                                                                    Year


Notes: Source: HUD LIHTC database. Year refers to year placed in service.




                                                               26
                                              Figure 7
                                 LIHTC Claimed by Individual Investors

  800

  700

  600

  500

  400

  300

  200

  100

    0
        1987         1989         1991         1993         1995         1997         1999         2001
                                                        Year

                         LIHTC (Millions)             Returns Claiming LIHTC (Thousands)

Notes: Source: Public use sample of individual tax returns (1987-2002). LIHTC claimed is calculated from the
LIHTC line item in the tentative general business tax credit calculation.




                                                       27
                                                       Figure 8
                                         Distribution of Claimants by Income

                           0.45

                            0.4

                           0.35
                                                                                                        <0
   Share of Annual Total




                            0.3                                                                         0-25
                                                                                                        25-50
                           0.25                                                                         50-75
                                                                                                        75-100
                            0.2                                                                         100-250
                                                                                                        250-500
                           0.15
                                                                                                        500-1000
                            0.1                                                                         1000+

                           0.05

                             0
                                  1999        2000               2001                  2002
                                                       Year


Notes: Source: Public use sample of individual tax returns (1987-2002). LIHTC claimed is calculated from the
LIHTC line item in the tentative general business tax credit calculation. Income refers to an approximation of cash
income (please see text for details).




                                                         28
                                              Table 1
                      Distribution of Corporate Claimants by Selected Sectors

                                                                      Share of Annual Value of Corporate
                                                                                Credits Claimed
                                                                          2000                  2006
Finance and Insurance                                                     33.4                  42.9
Management of Companies (Holding Companies)                               31.5                  45.6
Utilities                                                                  9.61               N/A
Manufacturing                                                             14.7                   4.11
Information                                                                5.43                  3.56
Real estate and rental and leasing                                         1.02                  0.06

Notes: Source: Public Table 21 of the Corporation Complete Report. LIHTC claimed is calculated from the
LIHTC line item in the tentative general business tax credit calculation. Table includes the five sectors that account
for the largest shares of credits claimed as well as the real estate sector.




                                                         29
