                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     FAMILY LEAVE AFTER CHILDBIRTH AND THE HEALTH OF NEW MOTHERS

                                           Pinka Chatterji
                                           Sara Markowitz

                                        Working Paper 14156
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14156


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from NICHD Grant Number 1R03HD052583-01A2.
 We would also like to thank Janet Currie, Karen Norberg, and participants at the 2008 SOLE and
ASHE meetings for very helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Pinka Chatterji and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Family Leave after Childbirth and the Health of New Mothers
Pinka Chatterji and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 14156
July 2008
JEL No. I0,J08

                                              ABSTRACT

In the United States, almost a third of new mothers who worked during pregnancy return to work within
three months of childbirth. Current public policies in the U.S. do not support long periods of family
leave after childbirth, although some states are starting to change this. As such, it is vital to understand
how length of family leave during the first year after childbirth affects families' health and wellbeing.
The purpose of this paper is to examine the association between family leave length, which includes
leave taking by mothers and fathers, and behavioral and physical health outcomes among new mothers.
Using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study - Birth Cohort, we examine measures of
depression, overall health status, and substance use. We use a standard OLS as well as an instrumental
variables approach with county-level employment conditions and state-level maternity leave policies
as identifying instruments. The results suggest that longer maternity leave from work, both paid and
un-paid, is associated with declines in depressive symptoms, a reduction in the likelihood of severe
depression, and an improvement in overall maternal health. We also find that having a spouse that
did not take any paternal leave after childbirth is associated with higher levels of maternal depressive
symptoms. We do not find, however, that length of paternal leave is associated with overall maternal
health, and we find only mixed evidence that leave length after childbirth affects maternal alcohol
use and smoking.


Pinka Chatterji
University at Albany
Economics Department
Business Administration 111A
1400 Washington Avenue
Albany, NY 12222
and NBER
pchatterji@albany.edu

Sara Markowitz
Rutgers University
Department of Economics
360 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd.
Newark, NJ 07102
and NBER
smarkow@rutgers.edu
I.     Introduction

       In contrast to most industrialized countries, where paid maternity leave can extend to more

than a year (European Industrial Relations Observatory, 2004), in the United States, almost a third of

new mothers who worked during pregnancy return to work within three months of childbirth

(Klerman & Leibowitz, 1994). Although the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993

guarantees 12 weeks of leave for eligible parents (both mothers and fathers), only about 46% of the

private sector workforce is entitled to FMLA benefits, and the mandated leave is unpaid

(Kammerman, 2000; Cantor, Waldfogel, Kerwin, Wright, Levin, Rauch et al., 2001). As a result,

many families, particularly low-income families, cannot take advantage of this policy. Moreover,

changes in the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and other tax policies, and the passage of welfare

reform legislation in 1996, explicitly encourage low-income mothers of infants to enter the workforce

(Ruhm, 2004).

       Given that public policies in the U.S. do not support long periods of family leave after

childbirth, particularly for low-income families, it is critical to understand how length of family leave

during the first year after childbirth affects families’ health and wellbeing. If employment detracts

from the quality and quantity of time parents spend caring for their families and for themselves,

returning to work during the first year, particularly after a short leave, may have detrimental effects

on the health and wellbeing of both mothers and children. Alternatively, if employment brings

psychic benefits to the parent and additional income to the family, mothers and children may benefit

through increases in material resources and higher quality of time spent together.

       Recent studies indicate that short maternity leave, and, more generally, full-time maternal

employment during the first year of life, detract from children’s health, cognitive development, and

behavioral outcomes (Baum, 2003; Blau & Grossberg, 1992; Brooks-Gunn, Han & Waldfogel, 2002;



                                                                                                          2
Waldfogel, Han & Brooks-Gunn, 2002; Baydar & Brooks-Gunn, 1991; Desai, Chase-Lansdale &

Michael, 1989; Ruhm, 2004; Berger, Hill & Waldfogel, 2005; James-Burdumy, 2005; Ruhm, 2000;

Ruhm, 2004; Winegarden & Bracy, 1995; Belsky & Eggebeen, 1991; Han, Waldfogel & Brooks-

Gunn, 2001). Much less is known, however, about how early parental employment affects the health

and health behaviors of the mothers themselves. Particularly for infants, maternal wellbeing and

child wellbeing are inextricably linked (Belsky, 1988). The mother’s health and health behaviors can

be important routes, perhaps the most important routes aside from child care arrangements, through

which infants are affected by parents’ employment decisions.

        The purpose of this paper is to examine the association between family leave length (leave

taking by mothers and fathers after childbirth) and behavioral and physical health outcomes among

new mothers. Data come from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study – Birth Cohort (ECLS-B), a

nationally representative sample of 14,000 children born in 2001 and followed until kindergarten

entry. We focus on a sample of ECLS-B mothers from the first wave of the survey who had worked

during pregnancy and who had returned to work by the time of first follow-up interview, which was

conducted about 9 months after childbirth. When examining the effects of paternal leave, we further

restrict this sample to mothers who were married at the time of the first follow-up interview. The

maternal health outcomes of interest are measures of depression, overall health status, and substance

use. We use a standard OLS as well as an instrumental variables approach with county-level

employment conditions and state-level maternity leave policies as identifying instruments. The IV

approach accounts for the possibility of reverse causality (e.g., post-partum health affecting parental

leave decisions) and also for the possibility that employment decisions after childbirth are correlated

with unobserved factors that influence maternal health outcomes.




                                                                                                          3
       Our OLS findings indicate that for mothers who worked prior to childbirth and who return to

work in the first year, longer maternity leave length is associated with reductions in depressive

symptoms as well as improvements in overall health status. The magnitudes of these effects are

small, most likely because health outcomes are measured about 9 months after childbirth when many

mothers may have started to recover from early health problems. Our findings suggest that doubling

total maternal leave length from 9 weeks (the sample average) to 18 weeks (a length more typical of

European nations) would reduce maternal depressive symptoms by about 5 percent, would reduce the

likelihood of mothers’ experiencing severe depression by 1 percent, and would reduce the likelihood

of mothers’ reporting overall poor/fair health status by 1 percent. We report similar results for the

length of paid maternal leave. Among married mothers, we find that having a spouse that did not

take any paternal leave after childbirth is associated with higher levels of maternal depressive

symptoms. We do not find, however, that length of paternal leave is associated with maternal health,

and we find only mixed evidence that family leave length after childbirth affects maternal alcohol use

and smoking behaviors.

II.    Maternity leave length and maternal and child outcomes

A.     Early maternal employment, maternity leave length, and children’s outcomes

       There are several distinct literatures on the effects of maternal employment during the first

year on child outcomes. One literature, which assesses the effects of working in the first year versus

working later or not working, includes two sub-sets – studies based on econometric models that

address selection issues, and studies based on psychological models that focus more on process and

measurement. Studies from both these literatures generally indicate that working full-time in the first

9 to 12 months of a child’s life increases the frequency of child behavior problems as well as detracts

from the child’s long-term cognitive outcomes, such as school readiness, verbal ability, and test



                                                                                                         4
scores Baum, 2003; Blau & Grossberg, 1992; Brooks-Gunn, Han & Waldfogel, 2002; Waldfogel,

Han & Brooks-Gunn, 2002; Baydar & Brooks-Gunn, 1991; Desai, Chase-Lansdale & Michael, 1989;

Ruhm, 2004; Berger, Hill & Waldfogel, 2005; James-Burdumy, 2005; Ruhm, 2000; Ruhm, 2004;

Winegarden & Bracy, 1995; Belsky & Eggebeen, 1991; Han, Waldfogel & Brooks-Gunn, 2001). A

much smaller set of studies poses the question of whether or not mandatory maternal employment

during the first year -- such as that imposed by welfare policy – has similar effects on children’s

outcomes (The Future of Children, 1997). While a few studies indicate that maternal employment

appears to benefit children in low-income families that are likely to be welfare eligible (Vandell &

Ramanan, 1992), effects may differ if employment is mandatory rather than voluntary.

       Finally, there is a small, growing body of work that focuses specifically on the effects of

differences in the length of maternity leave among mothers who return to work during the first year

of life. In cross-country comparisons, longer paid maternity leave in Europe has been associated with

reductions in infant and child mortality (Ruhm, 2000; Winegarden & Bracy, 1995). Maternity leave

of 12 or fewer weeks, particularly if it involves full-time return to work, is associated with lower

cognitive test scores, lower rates of well-child care, immunizations, and breastfeeding, and higher

rates of externalizing behavior problems (Baum, 2003; Berger, Hill & Waldfogel, 2005). Several

other studies suggest that shorter maternity leave length detracts from breastfeeding initiation and

duration (Visness & Kennedey, 1997; Roe, Whittington, Fein & Teisl, 1999; Chatterji & Frick,

2005). In a recent study based on Canadian data, however, increases in job-protected leave were not

associated with infant mortality or low birth weight (Baker & Milligan, 2005).

       In sum, prior research generally presents a negative picture of the effects of early maternal

employment on children. Studies based on the NICHD Study of Early Child Care and other data,

however, suggest that the overall effect of maternal employment and child care on children’s




                                                                                                       5
outcomes depends critically on the quality of the care in both those environments – high quality child

care and sensitive parenting attenuate the adverse effects of early maternal employment (NICHD

Early Child Care Research Network, 1997, 1998). There also is evidence of important variation in

effects by demographic sub-groups, with boys and children of white, more educated, and married

mothers showing the most negative impact (Brooks-Gunn, Han & Waldfogel, 2002; Waldfogel, Han

& Brooks-Gunn, 2002; Ruhm, 2004; James-Burdumy, 2005; Ruhm, 2004). Finally, the intensity and

type of maternal work appears to make a difference -- longer maternal working hours are associated

with worse outcomes in some cases (Brooks-Gunn, Han, & Waldfogel, 2002; Waldfogel, Han &

Brooks-Gunn, 2002; Ruhm, 2004), and there is new evidence that non-standard work schedules are

associated with adverse effects for children (Han, 2005).

B.     Maternal employment after childbirth and maternal health outcomes

       Almost all prior research has focused on the effects of early maternal employment on

children’s health and wellbeing, and there is much less research on how mothers’ own health and

health behaviors may be affected as well. In the present study, two of our maternal outcome

measures are depression. We focus on depression as a maternal health outcome because of the high

prevalence of this condition among new mothers, and because of its important effects on children’s

health and wellbeing.

       About 10-20 percent of mothers of infants develop depression within six months of delivery

(Miller, 2002). Depression rates among poor mothers are estimated to be more than twice as high as

those among non-poor mothers (Shokoff & Phillips, 2000). Numerous studies show that clinical

depression in mothers as well as self-reported depressive symptoms, anxiety, and psychological

distress, are important risk factors for adverse emotional and cognitive outcomes in their children,

particularly during the first few years of life (Gray, Indurkhya & McCormick, 2004; NICHD Early




                                                                                                       6
Child Care Network, 1999; Petterson & Albers, 2001). Depressed mothers of infants are less

interactive with and less responsive to their children (Campbell, Cohn & Meyers, 1995), and are less

likely to seek appropriate health care for their children (Minkowitz, Strobino, Scharfstein, Hou,

Miller, Mistry et al., 2005). Compared to infants of healthy mothers, infants of depressed mothers are

more negative and less playful (Cohn, Matias, Tronick, Connell, & Lyons-Ruth, 1986; Field, 1984)

have more behavior problems during childhood (Barry, Dunlap, Cotton, Lochman & Wells, 2005;

Essex, Klein, Miech & Smidar, 2001; Lyons-Ruth, Easterbrooks & Cibelli, 1997; Hay, Pawlby,

Angold, Harold & Sharp, 2003), and they are more likely to eventually develop psychopathology

during childhood and adulthood (Downey & Coyne, 1990; Kim-Cohen, Moffitt, Taylor, Pawlby &

Caspi, 2005).

        To the best of our knowledge, in the economics literature the only paper that focuses on

maternal employment and maternal health is our own prior work on the effect length of maternity

leave on maternal wellbeing, which is based on a sample of mothers who were employed prior to

childbirth and who returned to work during the first year (Chatterji & Markowitz, 2005). Data for

this study come from the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey (NMIHS). Two measures

of depression and a measure of outpatient health visits are used to represent maternal health.

Ordinary least squares models provide baseline estimates, and instrumental variables models, with

state-level maternity leave policies as identifying variables, account for the potential endogeneity of

maternity leave length. The findings suggest that longer maternity leave is associated with a

reduction in the number or frequency of maternal depressive symptoms. There is suggestive but

inconclusive evidence that longer maternity leave also is associated with mother’s lower probability

of being a likely case of clinical depression, and a lower likelihood of having frequent outpatient

visits during the first six months after childbirth.




                                                                                                          7
       In the public health literature, a few studies have explored the impact of returning to work on

the mother’s health. In regards to physical health, employed postpartum women have higher rates of

respiratory infections, breast symptoms, and gynecologic problems compared to postpartum women

who are not employed (Gjerdingen et al. 1995, Gjerdingen et al. 1993). This research on physical

health is based on a sample of 436 first-time mothers in Minnesota. In regards to mental health, there

is some mixed evidence that among employed mothers, returning to work earlier increases depressive

symptoms. Hyde et al. (1995b), for example, uses a sample of 570, mostly white mothers in

Wisconsin to explore the postpartum employment experience. They find that among mothers who

are back at work four months postpartum, short length of maternal leave increases the probability of

depression, but only among mothers who also have marital concerns and mothers who feel their jobs

are unrewarding. Gjerdingen et al. (1994), based on a sample of 436 married, employed, first-time

mothers in Minnesota, find that returning to work within 24 weeks after childbirth, as well as longer

work hours, are associated with poor mental health. These studies are based on small, non-

representative samples. Moreover, it is not clear whether or not the association between shorter

maternity leave and increased depressive symptoms is causal.

       McGovern et al. (1997) address some of these problems by using a larger sample of 654

employed mothers in Minnesota, and by accounting for the possibility that the timing of the return-to-

work decision is endogenous. They find that maternity leave length has a positive effect on mothers’

wellbeing, measured at about seven months postpartum using a generic measure of mental health,

vitality and role function. As identifying instruments, these researchers use a set of variables that

measure the infant’s health endowment (birth-weight and gestation, congenital anomalies), the

infant’s race, health insurance, maternal leave policies, child care arrangements and job

characteristics. These variables are shown in the analysis to be reasonably adequate predictors of




                                                                                                         8
maternal leave length. However, it seems unlikely that they can be validly left out of the maternal

health equation. For example, there is evidence from other studies that infant health and child care

arrangements affect maternal stress and depression (McLennan et al. 2001, Mandl et al. 1999,

Gjerdingen et al. 1995). No results from over-identification tests are shown to justify these

exclusions.

          The present study builds on prior work, including our own, in two ways. First, this study is

more informative for current policy decisions regarding family leave since it is based on recent data

collected post-FMLA (in 2001) while all prior work is based on data collected in the 1980’s and early

1990’s. Second, unlike prior studies, including our own, we are able to examine several aspects of

family leave in this study – the total length of length of maternal leave, the total length of paid

maternal leave, and the total length of the father’s leave.

   III.       Modeling the Return- to-Work and Maternal Health Relationship

          Models of household production and the production of health (Becker 1965, Grossman 1972)

can be used to conceptually motivate why family leave length may affect maternal health outcomes.

Although we consider the effects of both maternal and paternal leave in the empirical work, in this

section, for clarity, we focus on the effects of maternal leave. Consider an employed mother with a

newborn infant who derives utility from her own health and the health of her child, subject to her

preferences. The mother produces maternal health and child health using market goods, time, and a

production technology. The inputs in the maternal and child health production functions may overlap;

for example, spending time playing with a child may benefit both maternal health and child health.

To choose the optimal amounts of maternal and child health, the mother maximizes utility subject to

budget and time constraints, where time is divided between time spent in the labor market, time spent

investing in the health and well-being of her child, and time spent investing in her own physical and



                                                                                                         9
mental health. The optimal quantities of child health and maternal health chosen by the mother

depend on the marginal utilities and the shadow prices of maternal and child health.

       While this framework suggests that the mother’s return to work is likely to affect the inputs to

health, as well as maternal health itself, the direction of these effects is indeterminate. When the

mother returns to work, the opportunity cost of her time increases, which in turn increases the shadow

prices of both maternal health and child health since time is likely to be an important component of

both these prices. The effects of returning to work on maternal health, however, depend on: (1) what

the mother chooses to do with increased income from returning to work (in the case of unpaid leave,

which is the norm in the US); and (2) how she reallocates the time and market good components in

the production of the health commodities when she returns to work.

       Theory suggests that the increase in income that occurs when the mother returns to work

would increase the demand for both maternal and child health, thus potentially also increasing

positive health behaviors, quality parenting practices, and other inputs. However, holding other

factors constant, if child health is more time-intensive to produce relative to maternal health, the

mother might substitute market good inputs for time inputs (to the extent possible) to produce a given

level of child health when she returns to work. For example, she may substitute child care for her

own time with her child. On the other hand, if maternal health is more time-intensive to produce than

child health, the mother might substitute away from time-intensive activities and towards market

goods that improve her own health.

       Therefore, the net effect of the mother’s return to work on maternal health will depend on

many factors including: (1) the relative time intensity of child health and maternal health production;

(2) how readily market goods and time can be substituted for each other in producing maternal and

child health; (3) the conditions of leave (e.g., weeks of leave, paid versus unpaid). As a result, the




                                                                                                         10
directions of the effects of maternity leave length on maternal health are theoretically ambiguous and

must be studied empirically.

       The study focuses on estimating the maternal health production function, represented by the

equation below (Eq.1):

                          MHi = a0 + a1Wi + a2Xi + ui + e                Eq. 1

       This equation is specific to the mother/child pair (i). The dependent variable MH is a measure

of maternal health – depression, self-reported overall health or substance use. The main independent

variable of interest is W, a measure of family leave length after childbirth (e.g., total weeks of

maternity leave). The vector X includes observed maternal factors that may affect maternal health,

such as the mother’s age, marital status, number of children, and education, and observed child-

specific factors that may influence maternal health, such as the child’s health endowment. Specific

details about the variables included are discussed below. In addition to these measured variables,

unobserved, individual-level factors may exist that are associated with both maternal health status

and length of leave after childbirth. These unobserved factors are represented by u in Equation 1, and

e is a random disturbance term.

       Initially, we use a standard ordinary least squares (OLS) model to estimate equation 1.

Estimating equation 1 by OLS, however, can lead to biased and inconsistent estimates if a problem of

reverse causality exists (for example, postpartum health affects length of leave) or if unobserved,

mother-specific factors exist that influence both maternal health and leave decisions (e.g. u is

correlated with W and MH). It is difficult to predict the direction of the bias. If reverse causality is

an issue (postpartum health drives leave decisions), some mothers experiencing depressive symptoms

and other health problems may return to work later, in an effort to overcome postpartum health




                                                                                                       11
problems or in order to retain health insurance and other benefits.1 Similarly, if unobserved

heterogeneity exists, there are plausible reasons to think mothers who return later may have

unmeasured traits that are correlated with higher levels of health, such as strong family support, but

one can also make an argument that mothers who return later may have unmeasured factors that may

be associated with lower levels of health, such as family stress.

        Given these potential issues, in this paper we estimate OLS models, and then apply IV

methods to address the possible bias from unobserved heterogeneity and reverse causation. Angrist

(2001) and Wooldridge (2002, pg. 622) argue that researchers can, and in many cases should, use

two-stage least squares (2SLS) even when the endogenous and outcome variables are binary. Thus,

we present 2SLS estimates in the paper with Huber/White corrected standard errors to adjust for

heteroskedasticity. We also tested IV models using a two-step GMM estimator, which is analogous

to 2SLS but uses a weighting matrix that makes it efficient in the presence of heteroskedasticity (e.g.

Greene, 2003, 201–207; 400–401). Our 2SLS results are nearly identical to those of GMM (results

not shown). For all models, we use the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test to test the endogeneity of maternal

leave length with respect to maternal health. Our IV approach depends critically on the validity and

relevance of the identifying instruments. Consequently, we test the validity of the over-identifying

restrictions using Hansen’s J statistic, the minimized value of the GMM criterion. As suggested by

Staiger & Stock (1997), we use the F-statistic of the joint significance of the identifying instruments

to gauge their relevance.

IV.     The Early Childhood Longitudinal Study – Birth Cohort (ECLS-B)

        The ECLS-B is a nationally representative sample of 14,000 children born in 2001 and

followed until kindergarten entry. The sample includes over-samples of racial/ethnic minority

1
  Although the FMLA mandates that firms continue to provide health insurance during unpaid leave, only about 46% of
the private sector workforce is entitled to FMLA benefits


                                                                                                                  12
children, twins, and low and very low birth weight infants. The data are collected from children,

families (both mothers and fathers), teachers and schools, providing unusually rich information on

children’s development as well as maternal employment, work characteristics, and maternal health

outcomes. The parent interviews are conducted with the child’s primary caregiver, usually the

mother. The interviews are computer-administrated at the child’s home by a trained assessor, and are

available in both English and Spanish.

       Our main analytic sample is limited to 3,366 adult ECLS-B respondents who: (1) were the

biological or adoptive mother of the child; (2) had worked either part-time or full-time during

pregnancy; and (3) had returned to work either part-time or full-time by the 9-month interview. The

sample includes mothers who had returned to work at some point before the 9-month interview, but

were not currently working when the 9-month interview was conducted. In cases of twins, we

randomly selected one twin for inclusion in the sample. Observations were dropped if an observation

had missing information on any dependent or independent variables used in the study. When

examining effects of paternal leave, we limit the main analysis sample to 2,181 mothers who were

married at the time of the 9-month ECLS-B interview.

       The FMLA only applies to parents who return to the same employer after childbirth. From a

policy perspective, therefore, it is interesting to test whether our results persist in sample of mothers

who return to the same employer after childbirth. Previous research by Klerman and Leibowitz

suggests that most mothers who worked full-time during pregnancy continued to work for the same

employer after childbirth (Klerman and Leibowitz 1999). Nevertheless, in sensitivity analyses, we

re-estimated all models based on a sample that is restricted to 2,496 mothers who appear to have

returned to the same job after childbirth. Although we do not have information regarding whether or

not the mother returned to the same employer, this sample excludes two groups of mothers who




                                                                                                        13
potentially may be returning to different jobs: (1) mothers who report not taking maternity leave

because they quit their jobs during pregnancy (although they retuned to work after childbirth); and (2)

mothers who report a maternity leave length that is more than 6 weeks shorter than the child’s age in

weeks when the mother returned to work. Results based on this sample were qualitatively very

similar to those shown in the paper and are not discussed here.

B.     Dependent Variables

1.     Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale

       The ECLS-B survey includes a 12-item version of the Center for Epidemiologic Studies

Depression Scale (CES-D) to measure depressive symptoms in the past week. The CES-D is one of

the most widely used psychiatric scales and captures mood, somatic problems, problems in

interactions with others, and issues with motor functioning, such as “I felt lonely,” “my sleep was

restless,” and “I could not get going.” The respondent is asked to respond to each item according to a

4-point Likert scale, with higher values corresponding to higher frequency of the item in the past

week. For example, for the item “I felt lonely,” mothers responded either “less than 1 day” (zero

points), “1-2 days” (1 point), 3-4 days (2 points), or 5-7 days (3 points).

       For the 12-item scale, the final CES-D score is computed by: (1) subtracting 1 from each item

so that the range for each item is 0 to 3; (2) assigning missing CES-D scores to any respondent with

more than 3 missing responses; and (3) summing the responses for non-missing individuals. The

maximum possible score is 36 (12 items x maximum of 3 points per item). The U.S. Department of

Education recommends using a cut-point of 15 or higher to define severe depression for this modified




                                                                                                      14
CES-D scale. The CES-D scale does not correspond to a DSM-IV diagnosis of major depression. It

is used primarily as a screening tool for depression, not as a diagnostic tool (Eaton et al. 2003).2

           We create two measures of depression from the CES-D scale, a continuous measure of

symptoms and a dichotomous indicator of severe depression. Because the CES-D is skewed to the

right in these data, we use the natural log of the total CES-D score as the continuous measure.3 The

dichotomous measure is a dummy variable indicating whether or not the respondent’s CES-D score is

equal to or exceeds 15. This dummy variable is not equivalent to a psychiatric diagnosis of

depression, but it does capture respondents who are experiencing many symptoms of depression, or

several symptoms with high frequency, in the past week (Eaton et al. 2003).

           Ideally, we would have liked to measure depression at the same point in time for all mothers

in relation to when they returned to work. For example, if depression was measured for all the

mothers when they been back at work for one month, we could isolate the effect of maternity leave

length on maternal health, controlling for the child’s age at the time of the interview and how long the

mother has been back at work. Unfortunately, this approach is not possible since ECLS-B

respondents completed the 9-month survey when their children were between 6 and 22 months old,

regardless of when and whether they returned to work.

           Although we control for the age of child at the interview date in all models, the length of

maternity leave cannot be disentangled from how long the mother has been back at work. By

2
 About 50% of mothers experience increases in emotional reactivity for up to several weeks
following the birth of a child (Miller 2002). This period of “postpartum blues” is transient and
should be distinguished from postpartum depression, a mental disorder that affects nearly 10 to 20%
of mothers in the US within six months of delivery (Miller 2002). Postpartum depression is defined
as major depression that has its onset during the postpartum period, which lasts for up to six months
after delivery (American Psychiatric Association 1994). The CES-D cannot be used to diagnose
depression but it captures some symptoms associated with this condition. Since all ECLS-B
respondents were interviewed after 6 months (most after 9 months) this postpartum time period is
well outside the period during which postpartum blues is prevalent, but some mothers may be
experiencing postpartum depression.
3
    In this variable and in others where log values are used, the zeros are replaced with a value of 0.5.


                                                                                                            15
construction, mothers who take longer leaves will have been back at work for shorter periods of time

when the interview is conducted compared to mothers who took shorter leaves. For example,

consider two employed mothers both interviewed when their children are 7 months old – one mother

has taken a 3 month maternity leave, while the other has taken a 6 month maternity leave. If longer

leave is associated with better health, the mother with the longer leave may be expected to be in

better health, but this mother also has returned to work more recently than the mother who took the 3-

month leave, and therefore may be adjusting to employment, which could negatively affect health.

We selected a stringent threshold for our depression indicator and for our poor health indicator so that

for these two outcomes, this issue is unlikely to affect our findings. Short-term adjustments to

employment are unlikely to induce severe depression and large reductions in overall health. This

issue remains a limitation of the analysis, however, when we examine the continuous measure of

depressive symptoms.

2.     Self-reported health

       All ECLS-B respondents are asked to report whether their health in general is excellent (1),

very good (2), good (3), fair (4), or poor (5). We use this scale as a dependent variable, combining

the fair and poor categories since only 7 mothers in the main sample reported being in poor health.

We use an ordered probit to analyze this outcome. We also consider a dichotomous indicator that

equals one if the mother reports her health in general is fair or poor. Since the question does not

specify physical or emotional health, these variables may capture both physical and mental illness.

The ECLS-B does not include any measures of post-partum physical health conditions.

3.     Substance use

       We consider two measures of substance use: (1) whether or not the mother reports at least one

binge drinking episode in the past month; and (2) whether or not the mother reports current smoking.




                                                                                                       16
The binge drinking measure is based on two questions related to alcohol. ECLS-B respondents are

asked “do you currently drink any alcoholic beverages?” and if the respondent reports yes, she is

asked “in the last month, how many times did you drink four or more alcoholic beverages in the same

sitting?.” The indicator of current smoking is based on the question: “do you smoke cigarettes now?”

Substance use is analyzed because these behaviors may be correlated with, and may be

manifestations of stress and depression experienced by new mothers (US DHHS, 2001; Brady &

Stone, 1999).

C.     Independent Variables

1.     Family leave after childbirth

       The main independent variables of interest in this study are measures of maternal and paternal

leave after childbirth. For maternal leave, we consider two measures in alternative specifications: (1)

total length of maternity leave in weeks; and (2) weeks of paid leave in weeks. Length of maternity

leave in weeks is created based on the question: “did you take any maternity leave, either paid or

unpaid, from your job while you were pregnant or right after your child was born?” This question

includes a probe that specifies that maternity leave is taken from a job to which one expects to return,

at least at the time of the leave. Respondents who report taking any maternity leave are then asked

“in total, how many weeks of maternity leave, paid or unpaid, did you take?” Respondents who took

maternity leave were then asked the total number of weeks of paid maternity leave they took. This

question specifies that paid leave includes pay received through maternity benefits, sick time,

vacation time and other kinds of paid leave.

       Respondents who report that they did not take any maternity leave are asked why and

provided with the following possible reasons: (1) not employed during pregnancy; (2) employed but

quit before delivery; (3) leave not provided/self-employed; (4) could not afford to take it; and (5)




                                                                                                       17
other reason. In addition, all ECLS-B respondents, regardless of whether they took maternity leave,

were asked if they had worked since the child was born and the age of the child when they returned to

work. Our main analytic sample excludes mothers who were not employed during pregnancy. In

sensitivity analyses, we estimate all models on a sample that excludes mothers who quit before

delivery as well as mothers who report maternity leaves more than 6 weeks longer than the reported

age of the child when they returned to work. Results are very similar to those presented below.

2.     Individual and family factors affecting maternal health

       In addition to maternal employment, maternal depressive symptoms and self-reported health

are likely to be influenced by numerous other personal and family-level factors. Previous research

suggests that important predictors of postpartum depression include poor prenatal mental and

physical health, low social support, concerns about child care arrangements, young maternal age,

socioeconomic stresses, insurance status, poor infant health and low income. (Gjerdingen and

Froberg 1991; Gjerdingen et al. 1993; Gjerdingen and Chaloner, 1994; Gjerdingen et al. 1995;

McGovern et al. 1997; Deal and Holt, 1998; Chaudron et al. 2001 Mandl et al. 1999; McLennan et al.

2001). Some of these factors, however, are possibly endogenous to the return-to-work decision. We

estimate all models with a set of presumably exogenous characteristics that are likely to be associated

with maternal health outcomes. This set includes: (1) mother’s age in years; (2) mother’s education

(dummy indicators with less than high school graduate as the baseline, high school graduate, some

college completed, four-year college degree or more); (3) race/ethnicity (dummy indicators with

white as the baseline, African-American, Hispanic, other); (4) age of child at time of interview; (5)

the number of siblings; (6) a dummy variable indicating whether or not the mother is married; (7)

indicator of whether the child has a twin; (8) a dummy indicator for urban residence; (9) whether or

not the mother has ever received welfare since the child’s birth; (13) indicators for low and very low




                                                                                                        18
birth-weight; and (14) an indicator of whether the child was born prematurely. In addition to these

variables, to further reduce unobserved heterogeneity, we include several variables related to the

mother’s childhood and family background: (15) whether the mother ever repeated a grade in school;

(16) whether the mother lived with her biological mother from birth until age 16; (17) whether the

mother lived with her biological father from birth until age 16; and (18) the number of years of

education that the mother’s mother completed.

D.      Identifying Instrumental Variables

        In this study, following Baum (2003) and our prior work, we use cross-sectional variation in

local labor market conditions, local cost of living, and state policies related to maternity leave as

identifying instrumental variables. These variables are expected to be correlated with maternal

employment decisions after childbirth, but not directly related to maternal health after accounting for

individual-level characteristics. To proxy local labor market conditions and local cost of living, we

use the following variables: (1) median gross rent in the county; and (2) percent of county residents

who are employed outside the county. These variables come from the Area Resource File. In

addition, we include an indicator of whether the mother lives in a state that had any kind of family

leave policy that pre-dated the FMLA.4

        In most cases, we merged county-level characteristics to child records by the county of

residence listed on the child’s birth certificate, and state-level characteristics are merged according to

the mother’s state of residence at the 9-month interview. However, in cases where the county of

residence was missing on the birth certificate, or if the state on the birth certificate was not consistent


4
  The FMLA does not include provisions for paid leave, and only applies to employees are those who have worked for
their current employer for at least 1,250 hours in the past year at a firm with 50 or more employees (Department of
Labor, 2007). The ECLS-B does not include information on firm size, but we experimented with county-level indicators
of firm size as instruments. These instruments performed poorly empirically, however, so we did not include them in the
final models presented in the paper.



                                                                                                                     19
with the state of residence at the 9-month interview, we used state-level averages of county-level

variables according to the state reported at the 9-month interview.

IV.    Results

       Table 1 displays means and standard deviations for the main sample used in the paper. In

terms of mental health, the average CES-D score is 4.86, and 6 percent of the respondents had a CES-

D score of at least 15, which is considered to be a severe rate of depressive symptoms that may be

indicative of clinical depression. This rate of depression is somewhat lower than the estimated 12-

month prevalence rate for major depression for women in the US, which is estimated to be about 11

percent (Marcotte et al. 1999). The sample appears to be in fairly good physical health overall, with

only six percent of the sample report that their overall self-reported health is poor or fair. Smoking

and drinking are not very prevalent. Ten percent of the sample report binge drinking at least once in

the past month, and 18 percent are current smokers.

       On average, these employed mothers take 9.43 weeks of maternity leave, and just under 5

weeks of this leave was paid. Mothers are an average of about 29 years old, with a 10 month old

child at the time of the interview. The sample is 17 percent African-American, 12 percent Hispanic,

and 20 percent are in the other race category. The full sample includes fairly large proportions of low

birth-weight infants (12 percent) and very low birth-weight infants (9 percent) because the ECLS-B

over-sampled these groups. Eighty four percent of respondents live in an urban area and 5 percent

received welfare.

       Table 2 shows regression results for the full sample, which includes all mothers who worked

in the year prior to childbirth. These models focus on the effect of total weeks of maternity leave

(both prior to and after childbirth) and paid weeks of leave on maternal mental health. This table

shows findings for the two different outcome – depressive symptoms as measured by the log of the



                                                                                                         20
CES-D score and an indicator for severe depression. For each outcome, we show OLS followed by

IV results.

       The OLS results indicate that longer maternity leave lengths are associated with lower levels

of depressive symptoms and a lower probability of depression. Both the total length of maternity

leave and the weeks of paid leave appear to be beneficial. A ten percent increase in weeks of

maternity leave (which translates to just under one additional week) is associated with a 0.4 or 0.5

percent reduction in the CES-D score. For severe depression, the OLS models show that a ten

percent increase in weeks of leave reduces the probability of being classified as severely depressed by

0.1 percentage points. The magnitudes of these effects are small, but this is perhaps not surprising,

given that we are measuring maternal health outcomes about 9 months after childbirth. Many

mothers who had been experiencing health problems early on may have started to recover by this

point, and re-adjust to employment.

       These OLS associations may not reflect a causal relationship if the length of maternity leave

is endogenous. For this reason, we also show the corresponding IV results for each OLS

specification. In these models, we use three instruments to predict length of leave: a dummy

indicator of whether or not the mother’s state of residence had any family leave policy that pre-dated

FMLA; median gross rent in county of residence; and percentage of county residents who work

outside the county of residence (the first stage regressions are shown in Appendix Table 1). The

coefficients on the maternity leave variables are negative in all models, but are only statistically

significant at conventional levels in the log CES-D score models. Note that in all models the joint F

statistic on the instruments is reasonably high, ranging from 7 to 10. The over-identification statistics

are not statistically significant indicating the instruments are uncorrelated with the error term and are

properly excluded from the second stage equation. But according to the Hausman test, we fail to




                                                                                                        21
reject the consistency of OLS in all of the models. Given that the instruments appear trustworthy,

endogeneity does not seem to be a critical problem and we will rely on the OLS results to draw

conclusions.

       Table 3 considers the effects of leave length on two measures of overall maternal health. The

first panel shows the effects of maternity leave length on the probability of being in fair or poor

health. Only the coefficients on total weeks and paid weeks are shown for brevity. The results are

strikingly similar to that of Table 2. The OLS results show that longer weeks are statistically

associated with improvements in overall health. For example, columns 1 and 3 show that a ten

percent increase in leave length is associated with a 0.1 percentage point reduction in the probability

of being in fair or poor health. The corresponding IV models confirm the OLS results in sign and

significance. The magnitude, however, is much larger (although still small relative to the mean).

The test statistics on the instruments point to their validity, and based on the Hausman test we cannot

reject the consistency of the OLS coefficients.

       The bottom panel in Table 3 considers the categorical version of the question as to the state of

the woman’s overall health. Ordered probit models are used to analyze the effects of maternity leave

length on the probability of being in different categories of health. We are not concerned with the

endogeneity of maternity leave length in this model, given the results found for the dichotomized

version of the overall health question. The results here confirm the previous results where longer

leaves (both total weeks and paid weeks) are associated with higher probabilities of being in excellent

health and lower probabilities of being in very good, good, or poor health.

       Table 4 considers two health-related behaviors, binge drinking and smoking. Here, we

consider the effects of leave length on the probability of any binge drinking in the past month and of

being a current smoker. These health behaviors are examined because excessive alcohol use and




                                                                                                      22
smoking are highly correlated with and may be manifestations of stress and depression. The results

consistently show a negative relationship between weeks of leave and drinking or smoking. The

effects are small in size, however, and not statistically significant in some cases. As before, the

instruments appear to be valid and relevant, and, based on the Hausman test, we would conclude that

the OLS estimates are the preferred estimates.

       The length of paternal leave may be a contributing factor in determining maternal health

outcomes. In Table 5, we restrict the sample to married women in order to evaluate the marginal

effects of paternity leave, holding maternity leave constant. Paternity leave is typically short-- less

than 2 weeks, although 87 percent of fathers take some level of leave. We measure paternity leave

first as a dichotomous indicator for whether or not the father took any leave, and second, the log

number of weeks taken by the father. Given the previous results showing that OLS models are

preferred, only OLS results are shown for these models. These models include all the maternal and

family characteristics previous discussed. We also add father’s education, age, and occupational

prestige score to these models.

       Including paternity leave does not change the conclusions regarding the mother’s own

maternity leave, where longer lengths of maternity leave are associated with improved health

outcomes. The presence of a paternity leave of any length appears to have a positive influence above

and beyond the mother’s own leave when the CES-D score is considered. The length of this leave,

however, is not statistically related to higher CES-D scores. The coefficients on paternity leave are

also positive in the model for severely depressed, but do not achieve statistical significance at

conventional levels. Similarly, paternity leave is not associated with the probability of being in fair

or poor health, nor with the probability of being a current smoker. Strangely, the coefficients on no




                                                                                                          23
leave by the father are negatively related to binge drinking in the past month, but this association

does not persist once the length of paternal leave is considered.

V.      Conclusions

        In 2008, New Jersey became the third state (following California and Washington) to

approve paid family leave for up to six weeks to care for a newborn or a seriously ill family member.

In the past decade, paid leave bills have been introduced in at least 28 states. States are considering a

variety of different options to finance paid family leave, including using general funds from state

budgets, giving tax credits to employers who provide paid leave, extending existing temporary

disability systems and expanding unemployment insurance programs to families with newborn

children (National Partnership for Women and Families 2004). All of these policy initiatives are

intended to help families actually take advantage of the FMLA, which currently guarantees 12 weeks

of unpaid leave.

        To understand the net impact of these policies, states need information on the benefits of

parental leave for families. Previous economic research on maternal employment has focused on

understanding how maternal employment after childbirth impacts children’s health and development.

This study extends this literature by examining the effects of both maternal and paternal leave after

childbirth on the health of mothers. The results suggest that longer maternity leave from work, both

paid and un-paid, is associated with declines in depressive symptoms, a reduction in the likelihood of

severe depression, and an improvement in overall maternal health. The magnitudes of these effects

are small since health outcomes are measured about 9 months after childbirth. It is notable, however,

that the benefits of longer leave appear to persist well into the first year after childbirth.

        Currently, much remains unknown about the effects of early maternal employment on

families, despite the large number of women in the U.S. who balance employment with the care of an



                                                                                                        24
infant. Until now, we have almost no information on whether paternal leave benefits families. The

findings from this paper suggest both maternal and paternal leave after childbirth do matter for

maternal health, as has been found for infant health and wellbeing in the case of maternal leave. This

research provides some new insights into this under-studied area.




                                                                                                    25
References
   1. American Psychiatric Association. 1994. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
       Disorders, 4th Edition. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
   2. Angrist, J. (2001). Estimation of limited-dependent variable models with binary endogenous
       regressors: Simple strategies for empirical practice. Journal of Business and Economic
       Statistics, 19, 2-16.
   3. Baum, C.L. (2003). Does early maternal employment harm child development? An analysis
       of the potential benefits of leave taking. Journal of Labor Economics 21: 409-48.
   4. Baker, M., Milligan, K. (2005). How does job-protected maternity leave affect mothers’
       employment and infant health? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
       11135.
   5. Barry, T.M., Dunlap, S.T., Cotton, S.J., Lochman, J.E. & Wells, K.C. (2005). The influence
       of maternal stress and distress on disruptive behaviors problems in boys. Journal of the
       Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 44: 265-273.
   6. Baydar, N. & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1991). Effects of maternal employment and child-care
       arrangements in infancy on preschoolers’ cognitive and behavioral outcomes: Evidence from
       the Children of the NLSY. Developmental Psychology, 27, 932-945.
   7. Becker, G. (1965). A Theory of the Allocation of Time. Economic Journal, 75, 493-517.
   8. Belsky, J. (1988). The ‘effects’ of infant day care reconsidered. Early Childhood Research
       Quarterly, 3: 235-272.
   9. Belsky, J. & Eggebeen, D. (1991). Early and extensive maternal employment and young
       children’s socioemotional development. Journal of Marriage and the Family 53: 1107-1110.
   10. Berger, L.M., Hill, J. & Waldfogel, J.. (2005). Maternity leave, early maternal employment,
       and child health and development in the US. The Economic Journal 115, F29-F47.
   11. Blau, F.D. and A.J. Grossberg. (1992). Maternal labor supply and children’s cognitive
       development. Review of Economics and Statistics 74: 474-81.
   12. Brady, Kathleen T. and Susan C. Sonne. The Role of Stress in Alcohol Use, Alcoholism
       Treatment, and Relapse, Alcohol Research and Health, Vol. 23, No. 4, 1999 p263-271.
   13. Brooks-Gunn, J., W.J. Han, and J. Waldfogel. (2002). Maternal employment and child
       cognitive outcomes in the first three years of life: the NICHD Study of Early Child Care.
       Child Development 73: 1052-72.
   14. Campbell, S. B., Cohn, J. F. & Meyers, T. (1995). Depression in first-time mothers: Mother–
       infant interaction and depression chronicity. Developmental Psychology, 60, 349-357.
   15. Cantor, David, Jane Waldfogel, Jeffrey Kerwin, Mareena McKinley Wright, Kerry Levin,
       John Rauch, Tracey Hagerty, Martha Stapleton Kudela. 2001. Balancing the needs of
       families and employers: The family and medical leave surveys 2000 update. Rockville, MD:
       Westat p. 2-7.
   16. Chatterji P, Markowitz S. Does the length of maternity leave affect maternal health?
       Southern Economic Journal. 2005; 72: 16-41.
   17. Cohn, J., Matias, R., Tronick, E.Z., Connell, D., & Lyons_Ruth, K. (1986). Face-to-face


                                                                                                26
    interactions of depressed mothers and their infants. New Directions for Child Development,
    34: 31-45.
18. Danziger, Sandra, Mary Corcoran, & Danziger, Sheldon. 2000. “Barriers to the Employment
    of Welfare Recipients.” In R. Cherry & W. Rodgers (Eds.), Prosperity for All? The
    Economic Boom and African Americans. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 245-278.
19. Desai, S., Chase-Lansdale, P.L., & Michael, R.T.. (1989). Mother or market? Effects of
    maternal employment on the intellectual ability of four-year-old children. Demography, 26,
    545-561.
20. Downey, G., Coyne, J. (1990). Children of depressed parents: An integrative review.
    Psychological Bulletin, 108: 50-76.
21. Eaton, WW, Muntaner C, Smith C, Tien A, Ybarra M. (2003). Center for epidemiologic
    studies depression scale: Review and revision (CESD and CESDR). In The use of
    psychological testing for treatment planning and outcomes assessment, 3rd edition, chapter 40,
    volume III, edited by M.E. Maruish. Mahwah, NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp.8-9.
22. Essex, M., Klein, M., Miech, R., & Smider, N. (2001). Timing of initial exposure to maternal
    major depression and children’s mental health symptoms in kindergarten. British Journal of
    Psychiatry, 179: 151-156.
23. European Industrial Relations Observatory On-Line, Family-related leave and industrial
    relations, accessed at http:///www.eiro.eurofound.ie/2004/03/study/tn0403101s.html [May
    2005]
24. Edwards, L.N. & Field-Hendrey, E. (2002). Home-based work and women’s labor force
    decisions. Journal of Labor Economics 20: 170-200.
25. Field, T. (1984). Early interactions between infants and their postpartum depressed mothers.
    Infant behavior and Development, 7: 517-522.
26. The Future of Children, Welfare to Work, Volume 7 Number 1, Spring 1997.
27. Gjerdingen, D.K. and K.M. Chaloner. (1994). The relationship of women’s postpartum
    mental health to employment, childbirth, and social support. Journal of Family Practice 38:
    465-72.
28. Gray, R.F., Indurkhya, A., McCormick, M.C. (2004). Prevalence, stability, and predictors of
    clinically significant behaviors problems in low birth weight children at 3, 5, and 8 years of
    age. Pediatrics 114:736-743.
29. Greene, W.H. (2003). Econometric Analysis, 5e. Prentice Hall: Upper Saddle River, NJ.
30. Grossman, M (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
    Political Economy 80, 223-255.
31. Han, W.J., Waldfogel, J. & Brooks-Gunn, J. (2001). The effects of maternal employment on
    later cognitive and behavioral outcomes. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 63: 336-54.
32. Hay, D.F., Pawlby, S., Angold, A., Harold, G.T., & Sharp, D. (2003). Pathways to violence
    in the children of mothers who were depressed postpartum. Developmental Psychology 39:
    1083-1094.
33. James-Burdumy, S. (2005). The effect of maternal labor force participation on child
    development. Journal of Labor Economics 23, 177-211.




                                                                                               27
34. Kammerman, S. (2000). Parental leave policies: an essential ingredient in early childhood
    education and care policies. Social Policy Report, 14, 3-15.
35. Kim-Cohen, J., Moffitt, T.E., Taylor, A., Pawlby, S.J., Caspi, A. (2005). Maternal depression
    and children’s antisocial behavior. Archives of General Psychiatry 62: 173-181.
36. Klerman, J.A. and A. Leibowitz. 1994. The work-employment distinction among new
    mothers. Journal of Human Resources 29: 277-303.
37. Lyons-Ruth, K., Easterbrooks, M.A., & Cibelli, C. (1997). Infant attachment strategies, infant
    mental lag, and maternal depressive symptoms: Predictors of internalizing and externalizing
    behavior problems at age 7. Developmental Psychology, 33: 681-692.
38. Marcotte, D.E., Wilcox-Gok, V., Redmon, D.P. (1999). Prevalence and patterns of major
    depressive disorder in the United States labor force. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and
    Economics, 2, 123-131.
39. McGovern, P., B. Dowd, D. Gjerdingen, I. Moscovice, L. Kochevar, and W. Lohman. (1997).
    Time off work and the postpartum health of employed women. Medical Care 35: 507-21.
40. Meara, Ellen and Richard G. Frank. 2006. “Welfare Reform, Work Requirements, and
    Employment Barriers.” NBER Working Paper Series. Cambridge, MA.
41. Miller, L.J. (2002). Postpartum depression. Journal of the American Medical Association 287:
    762-65.
42. Minkovitz, C.S., Strobino, D., Scharfstein, D., Hou, W., Miller, T., Mistry, K.B., and Swartz,
    K. (2005). Maternal depressive symptoms and children's receipt of health care in the first 3
    years of life. Pediatrics 115: 306-14.
43. Montoya, Isaac. D. et al. 2002. “Mental Health, Drug Use, and the Transition from Welfare to
    Work.” Journal of Behavioral health Services and Research, 29(2), 144-156.
44. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early Child Care Research
    Network. (1997). The effects of infant child care on infant-mother attachment security:
    Results of the NICHD Study of Early Child Care. Child Development, 68: 860-879.
45. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Early Child Care Research
    Network. (1998). Early child care and self-control, compliance, and problem behavior at 24
    and 36 months. Child Development, 69: 1145-1170.
46. NICHD Early Child Care Research Network (1999). Chronicity of maternal depressive
    symptoms, maternal sensitivity, and child functioning at 36 months. Developmental
    Psychology 35: 1297-1310.
47. Han, W.J. (2005). Maternal nonstandard work schedules and child cognitive outcomes.
    Child Development, 76: 137-154.
48. Petterson, S.M. & Albers, A.B. (2001) Effects of poverty and maternal depression on early
    child development. Child Development, 72: 1794-1813.
49. Presser, H.B. (1999). Toward a 24-hour economy. Science, 284: 1778-1779.
50. Presser, H.B. (1988). Shift work and child care among young dual-earner American parents.
    Journal of Marriage & the Family 50: 133-148.
51. Presser, H.B. (1989). Can we make time for children? The economy, work schedules, and
    child care. Demography, 26: 523-543.
52. Preser, H.B. (1995). Job, family, and gender: Determinants of nonstandard work schedules
    among employed Americans in 1991. Demography, 32: 577-598.
53. Ruhm, C.J. (2000). Parental leave and child health. Journal of Health Economics 19: 931-60.



                                                                                               28
54. Ruhm, C.J. (2004). Maternal employment and adolescent development. NBER working paper
    10691.
55. Ruhm, C.J. (2004). Parental Employment and Child Cognitive Development. Journal of
    Human Resources, 39, 155-92
56. Ruhm, C.J. (2004) How well do parents with young children combine work and family life.
    NBER working paper 10247.
57. Shonkoff, J.P. & Phillips, D.A. (Eds.) (2000). From neurons to neighborhoods: The science
    of early childhood development. Washington DC: National Academy Press.
58. Staiger, D. & Stock, J.H. (1997). Instrumental variables regression with weak instruments.
    Econometrica, 65, 557-86.
59. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Women and Smoking . A Report of the
    Surgeon General.
    Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
    Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
    Smoking and Health, 2001.
60. Vandell, D.L. & Ramanan, J. (1992). Effects of early and recent maternal employment on
    children from low-income families. Child Development, 63: 938-949.
61. Visness CM, Kennedy KI. (1997). Maternal employment and breast-feeding: findings from
    the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey. American Journal of Public Health,
    87: 945-50.
62. Waldfogel, J, W.J. Han, and J. Brooks-Gunn. (2002). The effects of early maternal
    employment on child cognitive development. Demography 39: 369-92.
63. Winegarden, C.R. and P.M. Bracy. (1995). Demographic consequences of maternal-leave
    programs in industrial countries: Evidence from fixed-effects models. Southern Economic
    Journal 61: 1020-35.
64. Wooldridge, J.M. (2002). Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data. MIT Press:
    Cambridge.




                                                                                           29
                     Table 1: Means and Standard Deviations
                                                              Full Sample
                                                               N = 3,366
                                                           Mean          SD
CES-D score                                                4.86         5.04
Mother is severely depressed (1=yes, 0=no)                 0.06         0.23
Mother’s overall health rating                             1.99         0.91
(1=excellent; 2=very good; 3=good; 4=fair or poor)
Mother is in fair or poor health(1=yes, 0=no)                0.06       0.23
Mother binge drank in past month                            0.10        0.30
Mother currently smokes                                     0.18        0.39
Total number of weeks of maternal leave                      9.43        8.74
Number of weeks of paid maternal leave                       4.90        5.66
Child’s age in months                                      10.47        1.80
Mother’s age                                               29.36        6.01
Mother is married                                            0.71        0.46
Number of siblings the child has                            0.94        1.04
Child is a twin                                             0.09        0.28
Mother is African-American                                   0.17        0.37
Mother is Latino                                            0.12        0.33
Mother is other race                                         0.20        0.40
Mother is a high school graduate                             0.26        0.44
Mother has vocational training                               0.02        0.16
Mother has some college                                      0.29        0.46
Mother is college graduate or higher educated                0.15        0.36
Child was premature                                          0.23       0.42
Child was low birth-weight                                  0.12        0.33
Child was very low birth-weight                             0.09        0.29
Urban location                                               0.84        0.37
Mother received welfare at any time since child was born     0.05        0.22
Mother lived with biological mother until age 16             0.87       0.33
Mother lived with biological father until age 16            0.64        0.48
Mother repeated a grade                                      0.11        0.31
Number of years of education of grandmother                 13.30        4.15
State had a family leave policy that pre-dates FMLA          0.29        0.45
Percent of county that is employed outside the county       22.93       17.31
Median gross rent in the county in dollars                 610.53      167.35




                                                                                30
                     Table 2: Effects of maternal leave length on maternal depression
                                           Log CES-D Score                        Severely depressed
                                   OLS         IV     OLS      IV        OLS          IV      OLS       IV
                                   (1)        (2)     (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)      (7)       (8)
Log total number weeks            -0.049     -0.455                     -0.010      -0.062
                                 (-3.04)    (-2.10)                     (-2.86)    (-1.54)
Log total number paid weeks                          -0.039    -0.352                        -0.007     -0.050
                                                    (-2.62)   (-2.18)                       (-2.41)    (-1.62)
Child’s age                       -0.012     -0.017 -0.012     -0.015     0.003      0.002    0.003      0.002
                                 (-1.05)    (-1.34) (-1.03)   (-1.20)    (1.06)     (0.78)   (1.08)     (0.88)
Mother’s age                      -0.008      0.009 -0.008      0.009     0.001      0.003    0.001      0.003
                                 (-2.00)     (0.91) (-1.95)    (0.96)    (1.12)     (1.65)   (1.03)     (1.72)
Married                           -0.279     -0.169 -0.279     -0.171    -0.042     -0.028 -0.043       -0.028
                                 (-5.46)    (-2.07) (-5.47)   (-2.20)   (-3.64)    (-1.71) (-3.73)     (-1.74)
Number of siblings                 0.028     -0.009   0.028    -0.012     0.013      0.008    0.013      0.008
                                  (1.33)    (-0.30)  (1.31)   (-0.40)    (2.60)     (1.39)   (2.61)     (1.26)
Child is a twin                    0.063      0.230   0.058     0.189     0.010      0.031    0.009      0.026
                                  (0.82)     (1.87)  (0.77)    (1.79)    (0.57)     (1.33)   (0.49)     (1.24)
Black                              0.092      0.156   0.093     0.163     0.008      0.016    0.008      0.017
                                  (1.58)     (2.18)  (1.59)    (2.27)    (0.55)     (1.03)   (0.55)     (1.12)
Latino                            -0.145     -0.136 -0.142     -0.109     0.007      0.008    0.008      0.012
                                 (-2.20)    (-1.86) (-2.16)   (-1.52)    (0.53)     (0.59)   (0.56)     (0.86)
Other race                         0.059      0.076   0.063     0.110    -0.004     -0.002 -0.003        0.003
                                  (1.12)     (1.31)  (1.19)    (1.82)   (-0.36)    (-0.15) (-0.31)      (0.28)
High school                        0.123      0.144   0.119     0.111     0.009      0.011    0.008      0.007
                                  (2.22)     (2.35)  (2.16)    (1.90)    (0.73)     (0.92)   (0.67)     (0.56)
Vocational Tech.                   0.109      0.132   0.092    -0.016     0.022      0.025    0.019      0.004
                                  (0.88)     (0.99)  (0.74)   (-0.11)    (0.72)     (0.80)   (0.61)     (0.12)
Some college                       0.161      0.226   0.158     0.194     0.011      0.019    0.010      0.015
                                  (3.19)     (3.49)  (3.12)    (3.42)    (1.06)     (1.58)   (0.98)     (1.36)
College graduate or more          -0.056     -0.029 -0.052      0.003    -0.001      0.003    0.000      0.008
                                 (-0.88)    (-0.41) (-0.82)    (0.04)   (-0.05)     (0.26)   (0.00)     (0.64)
Premature                          0.085      0.145   0.083     0.121    -0.007      0.000 -0.008       -0.003
                                  (1.34)     (1.88)  (1.31)    (1.76)   (-0.59)     (0.02) (-0.64)     (-0.20)
Low birth-weight                  -0.037     -0.066 -0.032     -0.014    -0.001     -0.004    0.001      0.003
                                 (-0.54)    (-0.84) (-0.46)   (-0.19)   (-0.04)    (-0.28)   (0.04)     (0.21)
Very low birth-weight             -0.019     -0.058 -0.017     -0.039     0.011      0.006    0.011      0.008
                                 (-0.21)    (-0.56) (-0.19)   (-0.41)    (0.54)     (0.28)   (0.57)     (0.40)
Urban                             -0.036     -0.045 -0.037     -0.050    -0.011     -0.012 -0.011       -0.013
                                 (-0.69)    (-0.78) (-0.70)   (-0.87)   (-0.97)    (-1.03) (-0.98)     (-1.09)
Welfare                            0.249      0.013   0.257     0.089     0.092      0.062    0.095      0.072
                                  (2.63)     (0.08)  (2.71)    (0.68)    (3.07)     (1.62)   (3.16)     (2.12)
Lived with mother until 16        -0.050     -0.046 -0.051     -0.058     0.003      0.003    0.003      0.002
                                 (-0.83)    (-0.71) (-0.85)   (-0.91)    (0.21)     (0.24)   (0.19)     (0.12)
Lived with father until 16        -0.115     -0.115 -0.114     -0.103    -0.008     -0.008 -0.007       -0.006


                                                                                                       31
                                     (-2.62)   (-2.39)   (-2.59)   (-2.19)   (-0.80)   (-0.77)   (-0.77)   (-0.60)
Repeated grade                         0.135     0.108     0.133     0.088     0.003     0.000     0.003    -0.003
                                      (2.21)    (1.52)    (2.17)    (1.25)    (0.22)   (-0.02)    (0.21)   (-0.20)
# yrs education of grandmother         0.002     0.006     0.002     0.004     0.002     0.002     0.002     0.002
                                      (0.37)    (0.97)    (0.34)    (0.77)    (1.54)    (1.85)    (1.49)    (1.74)
r2                                     0.06                0.06                0.03                0.03
First stage R2                                   .11                 .15                 .11                 .15
F test on identifying
instruments                                     7.22               10.61                7.22               10.61
(p-value)                                      (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)
Over identification test statistic              1.99                2.09                 .98                 .77
(p-value)                                      (0.37)              (0.35)               (.61)               (.68)
Wu-Hausman test statistic                       3.53                3.79                1.67                1.96
(p-value)                                      (0.94)              (0.95)              (0.80)               (.84)
Notes: The sample size is 3,366. The dependent variables are the log of the CES-D score and a
dichotomous indicator of whether the CES-D score was 15 or higher (severely depressed). The table
shows OLS coefficients and IV coefficients (estimated using TSLS) with T-statistics below. T-
statistics are based on robust standard errors. The identifying instruments are: a dummy indicator of
whether or not the mother’s state of residence had a maternity leave policy that pre-dated FMLA;
median gross rent in county of residence; and percentage of county residents who work outside the
county of residence.




                                                                                                           32
                    Table 3: Effects of maternal leave length on maternal general health
                                                              Dichotomous Indicator:
                PANEL A                                    Mother is in poor or fair health
                                                       OLS         IV        OLS          IV
                                                         (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)
                 Log total weeks                        -0.01     -0.07
                                                      (-2.62) (-1.75)
                 Log paid weeks                                              -0.01       -0.06
                                                                            (-2.80) (-1.85)
                 R2                                     0.04                 0.04
                 First stage R2                                 0.11                   .15
                 F test on identifying instruments              7.37                   10.65
                 (p-value)                                      (0.00)                 (0.00)
                 Over identification test statistic             5.24                   5.39
                 (p-value)                                      (.072)                 (0.07)
                 Wu-Hausman test statistic                      2.31                   2.58
                 (p-value)                                      (0.87)                 (.89)

                                                                           Ordered Probit
                PANEL B                                                    Marginal Effects
                Log total weeks
                   Health is excellent                                             0.014
                                                                                  (2.33)
                    Health is very good                                          -0.001
                                                                                 (-2.15)
                    Health is good                                               -0.009
                                                                                 (-2.32)
                    Health is fair or poor                                       -0.004
                                                                                 (-2.30)

                Log paid weeks
                   Health is excellent                                             0.013
                                                                                  (2.31)
                    Health is very good                                          -0.001
                                                                                 (-2.14)
                    Health is good                                               -0.008
                                                                                 (-2.31)
                    Health is fair or poor                                       -0.003
                                                                                 (-2.28)
Notes: Panel A shows OLS coefficients and IV coefficients (estimated using TSLS). T-statistics are based on robust
standard errors. The identifying instruments are: a dummy indicator of whether or not the mother’s state of residence
had a maternity leave policy that pre-dated FMLA; median gross rent in county of residence; and percentage of county
residents who work outside the county of residence. All models include the full set of variables shown in Table 2. Panel
B shows marginal effects indicating the change in the probability of being in the health category from a one percent
change in weeks. Robust T-statistics in parentheses. Models include the full set of variables shown in Table 2.




                                                                                                                     33
                              Table 4: Effects of maternal leave length on maternal substance use

                                           Any binge drinking in past month                          Mother currently smokes
                                         OLS         IV       OLS         IV                   OLS        IV        OLS       IV
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)                    (5)      (6)        (7)      (8)
 Log total weeks                        -0.001      -0.12                                     -0.003     -0.15
                                        (-0.23) (-2.02)                                       (-0.60) (-2.23)
 Log paid weeks                                               -0.003     -0.09                                      -0.01    -0.12
                                                             (-0.85) (-2.02)                                       (-2.49) (-2.39)
 R2                                       0.03                0.03                              0.14                0.15
 First stage R2                                   0.11                 .15                             0.11                .15
 F test on identifying                            7.37                 10.65                           7.37                10.65
 instruments                                      (0.00)               (0.00)                          (0.00)              (0.00)
 (p-value)
 Over identification test                           2.01                     2.39                        1.85                     1.58
 statistic                                          (.37)                    (.30)                       (.40)                    (.45)
 (p-value)
 Wu-Hausman test statistic                          4.02                     3.82                        4.81                     4.67
 (p-value)                                          (.96)                    (.95)                       (.97)                    (.97)
Notes: The table shows OLS coefficients and IV coefficients (estimated using TSLS). T-statistics are based on robust standard errors. The identifying
instruments are: a dummy indicator of whether or not the mother’s state of residence had a maternity leave policy that pre-dated FMLA; median gross
rent in county of residence; and percentage of county residents who work outside the county of residence. All models include the full set of variables
shown in Table 2.
                        Table 5: Effects of maternal and paternal leave on mother’s health – Married Sample

                                                        Severely                                Binged in past         Currently
                                       Log CES-D        Depressed        Fair or poor health       month                smokes
                                                                                   Panel A
   Log total weeks maternal leave           -0.04            -0.01              -0.01               -0.002                -0.002
                                           (-1.81)          (-2.79)            (-1.52)              (-0.36)               (-0.27)
   Father took no leave                      0.12            0.01                0.01                 -0.03                0.03
                                            (1.70)          (1.05)             (0.52)               (-2.03)               (1.18)
                                                                                   Panel B
   Log paid weeks maternal leave            -0.03           -0.004              -0.01                 -0.01                -0.01
                                           (-1.56)          (-1.18)            (-1.94)              (-1.33)               (-1.36)
   Father took no leave                      0.12            0.02                0.01                 -0.03                0.02
                                            (1.76)          (1.19)             (0.57)               (-2.07)               (1.15)
                                                                                   Panel C
   Log total weeks maternal leave           -0.03            -0.01             -0.003                -0.004               -0.008
                                           (-1.42)          (-2.47)            (-0.67)              (-0.68)               (-1.17)
   Log total weeks paternal leave           0.004            0.002             -0.004                  0.01                 0.01
                                            (0.09)          (0.28)             (-0.67)               (1.05)               (1.13)
                                                                                   Panel D
   Log paid weeks maternal leave            -0.03           -0.003             -0.004               -0.004                 -0.01
                                           (-1.43)          (-0.88)            (-1.20)              (-0.76)               (-1.57)
   Log total weeks paternal leave           0.003            0.001             -0.004                  0.01                 0.01
                                            (0.08)          (0.16)             (-0.64)               (1.14)               (1.14)
Notes: The sample size is 2,181. The table shows OLS coefficients with T-statistics below. T-statistics are based on robust standard
errors. All models include the full set of variables shown in Table 2. Models also include categories for father’s education, age, and
occupational prestige score.




                                                                                                                                    35
                             Appendix Table 1: First Stage Results
                                          Log total number of   Log number of weeks
                                                weeks of                of paid
                                            maternal leave          maternal leave
Child’s age                              -0.01                   -0.01
                                        (-0.97)                 (-0.70)
Mother’s age                              0.04                    0.05
                                         (9.22)                 (11.29)
Married                                   0.26                    0.33
                                         (4.86)                  (5.73)
Number of siblings                       -0.09                   -0.12
                                        (-3.81)                 (-4.95)
Child is a twin                           0.41                    0.41
                                         (4.99)                  (4.64)
Black                                     0.16                    0.22
                                         (2.49)                  (3.29)
Latino                                   -0.005                   0.66
                                        (-0.080)                 (0.870)
Other race                                0.005                   0.10
                                         (0.080)                 (1.60)
High school                               0.06                   -0.01
                                         (1.07)                 (-0.15)
Vocational Tech.                          0.06                   -0.34
                                         (0.44)                 (-2.33)
Some college                              0.17                    0.14
                                         (3.18)                  (2.31)
College graduate or more                  0.05                    0.16
                                         (0.070)                 (2.08)
Premature                                 0.14                    0.12
                                         (2.07)                  (1.59)
Low birth-weight                         -0.07                    0.06
                                        (-0.87)                  (0.77)
Very low birth-weight                    -0.09                   -0.06
                                        (-0.95)                 (-0.62)
Urban                                    -0.06                   -0.10
                                        (-0.97)                 (-1.42)
Welfare                                  -0.58                   -0.53
                                        (-5.83)                 (-4.98)
Lived with mother until 16                0.01                   -0.02
                                         (0.07)                 (-0.23)
Lived with father until 16               -0.01                    0.03
                                        (-0.10)                  (0.55)
Repeated grade                           -0.06                   -0.14
                                              (-0.91)    (-1.86)
# yrs education of grandmother                  0.01       0.008
                                               (1.7)      (1.38)
State had family leave policy prior to FMLA     0.10       0.15
                                               (2.13)     (2.81)
                                                0.003      0.004
% county residents who work outside county     (2.47)     (2.70)
Median gross rent in county                     0.0003     0.0004
                                               (2.06)     (2.54)
F-statistic on identifying instruments          7.22     10.61
(p-value)                                      (0.000)    (0.000)
R-squared                                        .11        .15




                                                                    37
