                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GENERAL EDUCATION VS. VOCATIONAL TRAINING:
                    EVIDENCE FROM AN ECONOMY IN TRANSITION

                                            Ofer Malamud
                                         Cristian Pop-Eleches

                                         Working Paper 14155
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14155


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




We wish to thank Daron Acemoglu, Kerwin Charles, Claudia Goldin, Caroline Hoxby, Larry Katz,
Marcos Rangel, three anonymous referees, and seminar participants at Columbia, Chicago, Essex,
Tel-Aviv, IUPUI, LSE, Michigan, NBER Education Program Meetings, NEUDC, and Yale. Ofer Malamud
gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Spencer Foundation. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ofer Malamud and Cristian Pop-Eleches. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
General Education vs. Vocational Training: Evidence from an Economy in Transition
Ofer Malamud and Cristian Pop-Eleches
NBER Working Paper No. 14155
July 2008
JEL No. I21,J24,P20

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the relative benefits of general education and vocational training in Romania,
a country which experienced major technological and institutional change during its transition from
Communism to a market economy. To avoid the bias caused by non-random selection, we exploit
a 1973 educational reform that shifted a large proportion of students from vocational training to general
education while keeping average years of schooling unchanged. Using data from the 1992 and 2002
Romanian Censuses and household surveys from 1995-2000, we analyze the effect of this policy with
a regression discontinuity design. We find that men in cohorts affected by the policy were significantly
less likely to work in manual or craft-related occupations than their counterparts who were unaffected
by the policy. However, in contrast to cross-sectional findings, we find no difference in labor market
participation or earnings between cohorts affected and unaffected by the policy. We therefore conclude
that differences in labor market returns between graduates of vocational and general schools are largely
driven by selection.


Ofer Malamud
Harris School of Public Policy Studies
University of Chicago
1155 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
malamud@uchicago.edu

Cristian Pop-Eleches
Columbia University
1022 International Affairs Building, MC 3308
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
cp2124@columbia.edu
1         Introduction

Vocational training was an integral part of the educational system in the planned economies

of Central and Eastern Europe.1 However, with the fall of Communism and subsequent

transition to market economies, many of the centralized sectors which relied heavily on

vocational and technical training su¤ered a major decline. Like other countries undergoing

this transition, Romania experienced substantial technological and institutional change as

economic activities gradually reoriented towards new sectors. The success of such a profound

economic transformation depended on having people adjust to new circumstances.2 Were

individuals with vocational training less able to adapt to these changes? An OECD (2000a)

report on Romania argues that some of the blame for its disappointing economic performance

during the transition period rests with the in‡exibility of vocational training: “Under an

emerging democratic and competitive market system, the state enterprises have had to adapt

to changing demand and new competition. This adaptation has been hindered by a workforce

trained in narrow specializations with little ability to adjust to changing skill demand.”

(p. 109) Using a regression discontinuity design, this paper examines whether individuals

with general education had more success in Romania’s transitory labor market than their

counterparts who received vocational training.

        Most of the empirical evidence on the bene…ts of vocational and general education during

transition is based on cross-sectional studies. In Romania, Earle (1997) …nds that individuals

with a general education were more likely to …nd jobs in the service sector and less likely to

end up in agriculture or out of the labor force than those with vocational training. Similar

    1
     UNESCO statistical yearbooks (1969, 1975, 1981) indicate that a majority of full-time students in
Eastern Europe were enrolled in vocational and technical programs under Communism from 1950 to 1980.
This represented a substantially higher fraction of vocational training than in any other region of the world.
   2
     Barberis, Boycko, Shleifer and Tsukanova (1996) provide evidence on the important role of new human
capital for restructuring during the transition and Brainerd (1998) shows that young educated men were
able to take advantage of the new pro…t making opportunities in Russia’s early transition.



                                                      1
…ndings emerge from other countries during their transition from Communism to a market-

based economy.3 (Nesporova, 2001) However, interpreting these results is di¢ cult because

selection into di¤erent types of educational tracks is not random. Admission into general and

vocational schools is usually determined by a competitive examination so less able students

are more likely to enroll in vocational programs. This is certainly the case for Romania. Even

in countries such as England and the United States which do not administer competitive

examinations, there is a large degree of self-selection out of vocational courses. Reviewing

the literature on general education and vocational training, Bennel (1996) …nds selection bias

to be “a pervasive weakness of almost all the. . . studies.”4 (p. 238) We address the problem

of selection bias by analyzing a unique educational reform in Romania which shifted a large

proportion of students from vocational training to general education.

       We also contribute to a broader debate on the trade-o¤s between general and vocational

education, often framed by the contrast between the American and European systems of

education.5 Whereas the United States emphasizes formal general education in secondary

schools, much of Europe relies on vocational training and apprenticeships to prepare its

workforce for the labor market. Goldin (2001, p. 277) notes the essential trade-o¤ be-

tween these di¤erent approaches: “Formal, school based education enabled American youths

to change occupations over their lifetimes and to respond rapidly to technological change.

Apprenticeships and highly speci…c training were more cost e¤ective for individuals who

   3
      A notable exception is Munich, Svejnar, and Terrell (2005) who do not …nd signi…cantly di¤erent returns
to vocational and general secondary education using rich data from the Czech republic. Indeed, they …nd that
privatized and de novo private …rms actually pay a signi…cant premium for vocational secondary education.
    4
      Lechner (2000) attempts to address this issue using propensity score methods and …nds no evidence
of any positive e¤ects on employment probabilities and earnings from a public sector vocational training
programs in East Germany.
    5
      The di¤erence between (…rm) speci…c and general skills also plays an important role in the standard
theory of human capital. Becker (1964) shows that, in a competitive labor market, employers pay for training
that is …rm speci…c while workers pay for investments in general skills. However, Acemoglu and Pischke
(1998) demonstrate that, in models with non-competitive labor markets, …rms will invest even in the general
skills of their workers.



                                                     2
expected to spend their lives in the same place and in the same industry and occupation.”6

Krueger and Kumar (2004a, 2004b) have recently applied this logic to explain the trends in

relative growth between the US and Europe over the previous half-century. Nevertheless,

as Acemoglu and Pischke (1999) explain, more empirical research is needed to understand

the optimal mix between general schooling and vocational training. We explore these issues

in the context of a transition economy, where workers who were provided with vocational

training under central planning may have found it more di¢ cult to adapt to the ‡exible

environment generated by rapid technological change.

       In this paper, we exploit a 1973 educational reform in Romania which prevented students

from entering vocational schools after only 8 years of schooling and, instead, required them

to receive an additional two years of general education. As a result of this policy change,

secondary school cohorts born after January 1, 1959 were treated with more general educa-

tion and less vocational training than cohorts born immediately before this date. We take

advantage of detailed information on date of birth to estimate a reduced-form e¤ect of the

policy using a regression discontinuity design. Empirical evidence indicates that average

years of schooling across these cohorts did not change as a result of the educational reform.7

Hence, we can identify an unbiased estimate for the e¤ect of the policy on labor market

outcomes and, with some additional assumptions, derive the e¤ect of a year of vocational

versus general education.

       Data from the Romanian Censuses of 1992 and 2002 and household surveys from 1995-

2000 enables us to examine labor market returns throughout the transition period. Although

most of our results also hold for women, we focus our analysis on men since they were the

   6
     That technological change may a¤ect the return to general education is closely related to early work
by Nelson and Phelps (1966) who argue for higher returns to education in the presence of more rapid
technological change.
   7
     This contrasts with other educational reforms in Europe which served to increase average years of
schooling. For example, Meghir and Palme (2005) show that a Swedish reform which abolished selection
into academic and non-academic streams also led to large increases in years of schooling.

                                                   3
ones most a¤ected by the policy change. We …nd that men in cohorts born immediately

before and after January 1, 1959 received very di¤erent types of secondary education and

consequently experienced quite di¤erent occupational outcomes, but had very similar levels

of labor market participation and earnings between 1992 and 2002. Among men employed

in 1992, those in cohorts a¤ected by the policy were signi…cantly less likely to be employed

as manual workers and craftsmen, con…rming that the policy did not simply relabel schools

but actually led to changes in occupational composition. However, the incidence of un-

employment and nonemployment is not signi…cantly di¤erent between cohorts a¤ected and

una¤ected by the educational reform, even in the later stages of the transition period when

general education may have been more valuable. Di¤erences in family income and wages

from the period 1995-2000 are also insigni…cant between these cohorts. These …ndings are

in sharp contrast to cross-sectional results where general education is associated with signif-

icantly better labor market outcomes than vocational training. While the drastic short-term

expansion in general education may have introduced some crowding resource constraints, we

show that this factor is unlikely to explain why men who received more general education

due to the 1973 educational reforms do not perform better. Hence, we interpret these re-

sults as evidence that the large cross sectional di¤erences in labor market outcomes between

graduates of vocational and general secondary schools are driven mainly by selection.

   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a background of the Romanian

educational system and the 1973 educational reform as well as the Romanian labor market

during the transition period. Section 3 describes the data and the relevant samples. Section

4 explains the empirical strategy used to identify the reduced-form e¤ect of the policy and

derive the e¤ect associated with a year of general education versus vocational training.

Section 5 presents the results, and Section 6 concludes.




                                              4
2         Background

2.1        The Structure of Education in Romania

Apart from the changes induced by the 1973 reform, the structure of education in Romania

throughout the 1970s was relatively stable. Students generally began compulsory schooling

by entering schools of general education (scoal¼a de cultur¼a general¼a ) after the age of 6. More

speci…cally, students entered grade 1 in September of the year following the calendar year in

which they reached 6 years of age. Since the mid-1950’s, these schools o¤ered a continuous

sequence of 8 years of general education, nominally composed of primary education from

grades 1 to 4 and gymnasium education from grades 5 to 8. After graduating from schools of

general education, students could continue into secondary school lyceums or enter vocational

schools and apprenticeship programs.

        Lyceums operated at two distinct levels. The …rst level corresponded to grades 9 and 10

of compulsory general education, while the second level encompassed general education in

grades 11 and 12.8 Admission to the …rst and second level was determined by a competitive

entrance exam. Graduates from the …rst level of lyceum who did not take further courses

in the second level received a certi…cate of graduation from 10-year compulsory education

(ceri…cat de absolvire a înv¼at¼amîntului obligatoriu de 10 ani). They could also apply to

enter an upper-level track in vocational schools. Graduates from the second level received

a certi…cate of graduation (certi…cat de absolvire) or a baccalaureate diploma (diploma de

bacalaureat). Curriculum in lyceums was relatively homogenous despite some di¤erences in

emphasis and specialty:
          “During the …rst 2-years of lyceum education, students are o¤ered a basically uniform
          curriculum both in academic and practical subjects whatever the character or orien-
          tation of a lyceum, its stated aims are to o¤er a well-balanced integrated curriculum

    8
    At the second level, there was some specialization across lyceums. Among the di¤erent types of lycuems
were industrial, math and science, economic, and agricultural lyceums.

                                                    5
        composed of a number of subjects in the humanities, social studies, and the sciences,
        as well as subjects related to practical training in a particular …eld.” (Braham, 1978,
        p. 10)


According to a curriculum handbook from the early 1970s, “technical practical” training

accounted for 20.2 percent of the total hours of the curriculum in general secondary lyceums.

(Blideanu, 1972, p. 122). In other words, approximately 80 percent of the curriculum in

lyceums was devoted to general education.9

      Vocational schools (şcoli profesionale) provided training in numerous trades ranging from

aircraft maintenance to winemaking. They also operated at two levels: a lower vocational

track for students who had completed 8 years of general education and an upper vocational

track for students who had received an additional two years of general education in the …rst

level of lyceum. O¢ cial guidelines regarding the organization and functioning of vocational

education stated that “the proportion of practical training will be 70-80% of the total number

of hours”in vocational schools. (O¢ cial Bulletin Nr. 67, 1977) The length of training varied

by trade and depended on whether students completed an additional two years of general

education: “In 1967-68 vocational schools o¤ered training in 232 trades, 175 of which required

3 years and 57, 2 years. With the decision to extend the compulsory educational system

to 10 years the duration of day sessions in vocational schools was reduced in most …elds.”

(Braham, 1972, p. 73) Indeed, for graduates from the …rst stage of lyceum schools, training

usually lasted only 1 year. (Dimitriu et. al, 1981, p. 41) On-the-job apprenticeships (ucenicia

la locul de munc¼a ) trained workers in largely the same …elds as those o¤ered by vocational

schools. The practical training period for apprenticeships was also normally 3 years. Thus,

although on-the-job apprenticeships were generally provided on-site rather than in vocational

schools, they were su¢ ciently similar to be considered jointly in most government statistics.

  9
    These approximate proportions have been con…rmed in numerous conversations with school administra-
tors in Romania who had …rst-hand experience of the 1973 educational reform.


                                                  6
We shall do the same in our analysis.

   Several di¤erent institutions provided further education beyond vocational and general

schools. Technical schools for master craftsmen admitted graduates of vocational schools and

lyceums who had spent between 3 and 5 years in production. Postsecondary specialization

schools admitted graduates of lyceums and trained them in specialized …elds ranging from

aircraft construction to radiology. Finally, entrance to higher education in universities was

open only to graduates of the second level of lyceum schools and required a baccalaureate

diploma.



2.2    The Educational Reform of 1973

The educational reform of 1973 prevented students from pursuing vocational training after

only 8 years of general education and, instead, required them to complete two additional

years of general education. The educational reforms of 1973 were actually preceded by Law

No. 11 of May 1968, which called for the extension of compulsory general schooling from

8 to 10 years. However, …ve years after establishing government commitment for extending

compulsory general schooling, “the rate of 10-year school generalization was thought to be

inadequate.”(Dimitriu et. al, 1981, p. 37) As a result, the government introduced an explicit

mandate to implement the 10 year system of general education under the provisions of Decree

No. 278 and the Resolution of the Communist Party’s Central Committee of June 18 and 19,

1973. In fact, this policy did not alter total years of schooling but, rather, substituted more

general education in lieu of vocational training. The Resolution of June 1973 stated that

“beginning with the school year 1974-75, the entire graduating class of grade 8 will start in

grade 9 of lyceums; vocational schools will no longer accept students from this class [grade




                                              7
8] directly.”10 We also provide evidence to show that the average years of schooling remained

essentially unchanged after these educational reforms. The structures of the educational

system before and after the change in 1973 are depicted in Figure 1. Following the reform,

students who would have otherwise received about three years of vocational training were

required to obtain an additional two years of general education.11

       Depending on their aptitudes, skills, and preferences, graduates of the …rst level of lyceum

schools could (i) enter the workforce, (ii) continue to vocational school for 1 year, or (iii)

continue to grades 11 and 12 in the second level of lyceum schools. Though the policy

a¤ected students in di¤erent ways, there was no change in overall educational attainment.

However, the emphasis on additional general education after 1973 caused a marked decrease

in the prevalence of vocational training. As one secondary source explains, “the number of

apprentices decreased during the 1970’s because of the extension of compulsory education to

include 2 years in the lyceum,” and similar drops were observed in the number of students

in vocational schools. (Braham, 1978, p. 11) But even students who continued to vocational

schools after completing the 1st stage of lyceum were treated with more general and less

vocational training following the policy change.

       The Resolution of June 1973 also introduced measures to assure that su¢ cient quali…ed

teachers and school resources (such as science laboratories, classrooms, and dormitories) were

allocated to local authorities. In most cases, these measures did not require any physical

movement of resources; teachers and schools remained the same but their training and the

curriculum were changed. As stated in the 1973 Resolution:

         “In order to provide for an e¤ective educational environment and to use the existing

  10
     These excerpts from the Resolution of the Communist Party’s Central Committee of June 18 and 19,
1973 are translated by the authors from the original Romanian text.
  11
     Decision No. 577 of the Council of Ministers in 1975 rea¢ rmed the earlier resolutions concerning 10
year compulsory general education and the restrictions on entry into vocational schools. Finally, all of these
changes were brought together under Law No. 28 of May 1978, which replaced the earlier Law No. 11 of
May 1968.

                                                      8
      facilities e¢ ciently,...lyceums will, in general, function within the same premises as
      vocational schools and under the same leadership.”


We can document some of these changes using the Annual Statistics of the Socialist Republic

of Romanian. Appendix Figure 1 shows the large decline in the number of students enrolled

in vocational schools and on-the-job apprenticeships between the school years 1973-74 and

1975-76. These declines occurred across all specialities in vocational schools. During this

period, enrollment in lyceums increased sharply, as shown in Appendix Figure 2. Moreover,

the number of teachers in vocational schools fell while the number of teachers in lyceums

rose in the initial years following the educational reform.

   Further evidence for these dramatic changes is available from the Romanian Census. Since

students began compulsory schooling at age 6, they would have completed grade 8 by age 14

and grade 10 by age 16. Consequently, students born in 1958 would have been una¤ected by

the policy while those students born in 1959 would have been required to continue to grades

9 and 10 of lyceum schools. Figure 2 shows the highest educational attainment for all men

by year of birth. There is a sharp decline in the proportion of men with vocational training

between cohorts born in 1958 and 1959. At the same time, we observe a sharp increase in

the proportion of men who completed a general lyceum education. No such discontinuity

is observed for the proportion completing only lower/primary or higher education. Thus,

the 1973 educational reform altered the proportion of students across vocational and general

education as well as the nature of their exposure to vocational training.



2.3    The Labor Market in Transition

Compared to other countries in Central Europe, such as Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Re-

public, Romania’s transition to a market economy has been relatively more di¢ cult. This has

been attributed to the unfavorable initial conditions resulting from Ceausescu’s economic, so-


                                                9
cial and political policies and the overly cautious approach towards market-oriented reforms

by Romania’s political leadership. (OECD, 2000b) Romania’s macroeconomic performance

in the early 1990’s began with a large decline in GDP and increasing in‡ation. Although

it experienced some positive economic growth in the mid-1990s, Romania su¤ered another

macroeconomic crisis in late 1996 due to the slow pace of restructuring within state owned

enterprises. As a result, a newly elected center-right coalition embarked on an IMF sup-

ported macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform program in 1997. These reforms

eliminated all remaining price controls, tightened …scal policies, and accelerated the rate of

privatization. This led to mass layo¤s in state …rms as well as decreases in real wages and

a contraction in real GDP. Nevertheless, from 2000 onwards, Romania has experienced a

sustained recovery.

   The gradual development of a new private sector and the privatization and restructuring

of state-owned enterprise had a major impact on the labor market. Registered unemployment

rose from essentially no unemployment in 1990 to over 10 percent in 1993. (Earle and

Pauna, 1996, 1998) Industrial employment fell from almost 45 percent of total employment

in 1989 to about 30 percent in 1995. Appendix Figure 3 plots the unemployment rate during

the transition period and also shows the sharp increase in unemployment after the onset

of the structural reforms in early 1997. The large decrease in industrial employment was

partly o¤set by a large increase in agricultural employment during this period. Following

land reforms in 1991, many workers who lost their jobs in the cities migrated back to the

countryside and started to be active in low-productivity subsistence farming. Empirical

evidence indicates that very young and old workers were more likely to lose their jobs and

less likely to …nd new employment opportunities. (Voicu, 2002) Moreover, individuals with

vocational training had worse labor market outcomes than those with general education. As

mentioned earlier, Earle (1997) …nds that individuals with a general education were more


                                             10
likely to …nd jobs in the service sector and less likely to end up in agriculture or out of the

labor force than their counterparts with vocational training.

       Romania also made a number of legislative changes with respect to the functioning of

the labor market. Unemployment bene…ts were introduced in 1991 and covered about 50%

of previous wages in the …rst nine months followed by a reduced allowance for another 18

months. As part of its reform e¤orts in 1997, the government also introduced a system of

severance bene…ts to eligible workers who chose to leave speci…c state enterprises. (OECD,

2000b) Thus, by the end of the transition period, the basic legislation governing employment

conditions and termination of job contracts was considered relatively liberal by international

standards. (OECD, 2000b)



3        Data

We use three di¤erent data sources for our research. The …rst is a sample from the 1992

Romanian Census which provides information on occupational structure and labor market

outcomes relatively early in the transition process.12 The second is a sample from the 2002

Romanian Census which provides a snapshot of these same outcomes towards the end of

the transition period. These two census datasets also provide su¢ cient power to employ a

regression discontinuity design and estimate fairly precise labor market outcomes. Finally,

we pool six annual LSMS-type household surveys from 1995-2000 which are based on yearly

cross-sectional representative samples.13 While the LSMS houeshold data is based on smaller

samples, it has the advantage of providing additional information on wages and income.

  12
     This sample combines two independent random samples from the 1992 Romanian Census: a 15% sample
provided by the Population Activities Unit (PAU) of the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
(UNECE) and a 10% sample recently released by IPUMS International. We have veri…ed that these two
samples are two separate random draws from the universe of all responses.
  13
     These surveys were conducted by the National Statistics Commission of the Romanian Ministry of Labour
and Social Protection and followed the exact format of the World Bank’s Living Standards Measurement
Studies (LSMS) for Romania in 1994.

                                                   11
Moreover, the timing of these survey rounds allows us to take a closer look at labor market

dynamics before and after the structural reforms of 1997.

       All three data sources provide information on the month and year of birth which proves

essential in identifying the discontinuity induced by the policy within a narrow window of

time. They also distinguish between various levels of education attainment: completion of

primary education, gymnasium education, …rst stage of lyceum education (grade 9 and 10),

second stage of lyceum education (grades 11 and 12), vocational training and apprenticeships,

post-secondary technical education, and higher education. However, these categories are

mutually exclusive so we cannot determine whether students with vocational training and

apprenticeships also completed the …rst stage of lyceum education (for cohorts una¤ected

by the educational reform). Since this makes it more di¢ cult to estimate the local average

treatment e¤ect of vocational training, we use aggregate data on school enrollment from the

Annual Statistics of the Socialist Republic of Romanian to calculate the e¤ect of the policy

on the treated population and the local average treatment e¤ect of vocational training. In

addition, these three data sources include background variables such as ethnicity and region

of birth, as well as indicators for urban/rural place of birth in the census data.14

       The census data contain several outcome variables of interest pertaining to labor market

participation and earnings. We focus on two di¤erent measures of labor market participation:

unemployment and non-employment. The former is restricted to individuals that are actively

seeking work and therefore part of the labor force. The latter consists of all individuals not

currently working and includes those out of the labor force.15 We have detailed information

on current and previous occupations based on 3 digit International Standard Classi…cation

  14
     Other socio-economic indicators, such as information on the status of the dwelling and availability of
amenities, are available. However, since these are contemporaneous with other outcomes, they are probably
not valid proxy controls for income and class.
  15
     Note that the reference period for the question on employment status changed from the “moment of the
census” in the 1992 Census to “the previous week” in the 2002 Census and the 1995-2000 LSMS.



                                                    12
of Occupation (ISCO) 88 codes. We use this information to infer whether individuals are

employed in a manual (ISCO codes 5-9) or craft-related occupation (ISCO code 7). The

1995-2000 household surveys contain similar questions related to unemployment and non-

employment but somewhat less detailed information on occupations. However, they contain

information on individual wages and family income which are not available in the census

data.

       Table 1 presents summary statistics for all the datasets described above. These are

shown for the full sample of men born 3 years before and after the policy change, as well as a

restricted sample of men who completed vocational or general schools in these same cohorts.

For the most part, we will restrict our attention to this latter sample of men whose highest

level of educational attainment is secondary schooling. Figure 2 shows that the policy did

not alter the proportion of students between secondary education and the higher or lower

levels of education. Students completing their education after primary school or gymnasium

were mostly living in relatively rural areas that could not extend their network of lyceums

while students completing higher education should not have been a¤ected by the policy.16

The next section con…rms this in a regression discontinuity setting. Consequently, we focus

on men who received a secondary level education and estimate the e¤ect of the policy for

sample of the entire population only as a robustness check.

  16
    In fact, the government established explicit rules about the provision of schools. If the number of students
registered in grade 9 exceeded 25, the community had to operate a 10-year school of general education; if
the number of students registered in grade 5 is at least 25, the community had to operate a 8-year school of
general education; and if the number of children aged 6-9 was at least 7, the community had to operate a
4-year school.




                                                      13
4        Empirical Strategy

4.1       A regression discontinuity design

Most empirical studies examining the e¤ect of vocational training adopt a simple speci…cation

in which individuals who receive vocational training are distinguished from those who receive

a general education:17
                                                   0
                                   outcomei =          Xi + V OCi + "i                                   (1)


where outcomei is a labor market outcome such as unemployment or wages, V OCi is equal

to 1 if individual i received vocational training and 0 otherwise, and Xi is a set of observable

characteristics for individual i. According to this speci…cation, the coe¢ cient on V OCi

represents the di¤erence between the bene…t from vocational training and general education

(in terms of some labor market outcome).18 However, vocational training is usually correlated

with unobserved ability because selection into di¤erent tracks is based on a competitive

examination or because individuals with higher ability choose to enter general rather than

vocational schools.

       We address the possibility of omitted variable bias using the 1973 educational reform

which prevented students from entering vocational schools with only 8 years of schooling and,

instead, required them to receive an additional two years of general education. Since this

reform took e¤ect during the 1974-75 school year and students entered grade 1 in September

after the calendar year in which they reached 6 years of age, those born before January 1,

1959 were una¤ected by the policy while those born after this date were treated with more

general education and less vocational training. With detailed information on date of birth,

  17
     For example, see the early work on vocational training by Grasso and Shea (1979) and Meyer (1982).
Neuman and Ziderman (1991, 1999) introduce some extensions to this simple model.
  18
     Clearly, an accurate cost-bene…t analysis would require consideration of the relative costs in providing
vocational and general education. We abstract from this here but evidence from other studies suggests that
vocational training is often more expensive than general education (Bennel, 1996).


                                                       14
we can estimate a reduced-form e¤ect of the policy using a regression discontinuity design:


                                             0
                             outcomei =          Xi + AF T ERi + f (ci ) + "i                             (2)


where AF T ERi is equal to 1 if individual i was born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 if

born on or before December 31, 1958, and f (ci ) is a function of the date of birth, which is

the forcing variable in this context. The coe¢ cient on AF T ER represents the reduced form

e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform. As in many recent studies employing this technique,

we specify a ‡exible parametric model by including higher order polynomials of date of birth

which are allowed to vary on either side of the discontinuity.19 Our primary speci…cation

uses a cubic trend in month of birth fully interacted with AF T ER (i.e. a cubic spline) but

we also estimate regressions with alternative polynomial functions for robustness. Binary

outcome variables are estimated with a linear probability model. Estimating this equation

using non-parametric methods, along the lines of Hahn, Todd, and van der Klaauw (2001)

and Porter (2003), also leads to similar results.

       The main set of observable characteristics, Xi , includes ethnicity, region of birth, and

an indicator for urban or rural place of birth.20 In practice, these control variables have

very little e¤ect on our estimates of the discontinuity and serve mainly to increase precision.

However, we also include dummy variables for calender month of birth to control for any

seasonal di¤erences between individuals born in di¤erent months.21 Restricting attention to

a narrow window of cohorts minimizes any confounding e¤ects associated with age or time

  19
     See Dinardo and Lee (2004) for use of parametric functions in regression discontinuity design. Lee and
McCrary (2005) and Card, Dobkin, and Maestas (2004) speci…cally use parametric functions of date of birth.
  20
     As mentioned previously, indicators for urban/rural place of birth are only available in the census data.
Furthermore, all regressions using the pooled LSMS household data include …xed e¤ects for survey year.
  21
     Note that compulsory schooling in Romania is based on years attended rather than age so there is no
concern about di¤erences in years of schooling between those born on either side of the school entry cuto¤.
But any such di¤erences would be eliminated by the calendar of month dummies, in any case.




                                                      15
of entry into the labor force. But an excessively narrow window reduces the sample size and

leads to imprecise estimates. We therefore focus on a window that includes cohorts born

3 years on either side of the cuto¤ – so that month of birth ranges from -36 to 35, with

0 representing the …rst cohort a¤ected by the policy. However, we also show results using

several alternative windows for robustness. All regressions cluster on month of birth in order

to avoid the problems associated with speci…cation error in the case of discrete covariates

(Lee and Card, 2007).



4.2    E¤ect of the reform on educational outcomes

Estimating equation 2 with educational outcomes, Panel A of Table 2 demonstrates the

dramatic change in the probability of completing vocational school for cohorts a¤ected by the

policy. Column (1) indicates that the probability of completing vocational school declined

by .08 among the entire male population. In other words, the probability of completing

vocational school fell by about .13, or more than 20 percent, among men with secondary

education. Column (2) shows a corresponding increase in the probability of completing

general lyceum school while column (3) con…rms that the proportion of men who completed

any type of secondary school did not change with the introduction of the policy. The e¤ect

of the 1973 educational reform is even more striking in graphical form. Panels A and C of

Figure 3 plot the proportion of secondary educated men with vocational training by month

and week of birth. Each panel indicates an extremely sharp discontinuity after January,

1959 –normalized as month or week 0. Men born merely two weeks apart were exposed to

extremely di¤erent types of education. In contrast, panels B and D of Figure 3 reveal no

change in the proportion of secondary educated men out of the entire population before and

after the policy change.

   The evidence described above indicates the change in the proportion of students who


                                             16
completed any type of vocational school as a result of the 1973 educational reform. Since

we only observe the highest level of education attained, we cannot discern the e¤ect on

students who were a¤ected by the policy and continued onto the upper vocational track

after receiving an additional two years of general education. But these students would also

have been treated with less vocational training and more general education. Consequently,

in order to properly interpret the e¤ect of the policy, we need to account for the e¤ect on

the entire treated population. The next section describes how we translate the reduced-form

e¤ect of the policy into the e¤ect of the policy on the treated population and the local

average treatment e¤ect of a year of vocational training.



4.3     Interpreting estimates

If we could identify the group of students who entered vocational school directly after grade

8 prior to the educational reform, we could estimate the e¤ect of the policy on the treated

population directly using two-stage least squares (2SLS). Unfortunately, we only have in-

formation on the highest level of education attained so we cannot distinguish vocational

students in the lower track who were a¤ected by the policy from vocational students in the

upper track that were not a¤ected by the policy. Instead, we use supplementary enroll-

ment data from the Annual Statistics of the Socialist Republic of Romanian to calculate the

proportion of students who entered vocational school after grade 8 prior to the educational

reform and scale up the reduced-form e¤ect of the policy to calculate the e¤ect on the treated

population.22 As explained in Appendix A, we determine that approximately 50 percent of

students with vocational training were in the lower vocational track. Hence, we conclude

  22
    This resembles the standard calculation used in moving from an intention-to-treat (ITT) estimator to
a treatment-on-the-treated (TOT) estimator. However, the reason for employing this method here is that
we cannot identify the group of students who were a¤ected by the treatment, rather than the conventional
worry that individuals may be self-selecting into the treatment.



                                                  17
that about 33 percent of students with secondary education were a¤ected by the policy.

This implies that we need to scale up the reduced-form estimate by a factor of 3 to derive

an estimate for the e¤ect of the policy on the treated population.

       The e¤ect of the policy on the treated population is still somewhat di¢ cult to interpret

because the policy did not a¤ect exposure to vocational training in the same way for all

individuals. Appendix A uses both census and aggregate enrollment data to provide a rough

calculation of the average di¤erence in vocational training before and after the policy change.

These estimates suggest that, among individuals whose highest educational attainment was

secondary schooling, the average decrease in vocational training was 0.8 years. Now, rather

than scaling the reduced-form estimate of the e¤ect of the policy by the proportion of individ-

uals who were a¤ected by the policy, we can scale the reduced-form estimate by the average

change in years of vocational training induced by the policy. In other words, we calculate

the local average treatment e¤ect (LATE) of a year of vocational versus general education.23

Undertaking this calculation, we conclude that the e¤ect of an additional year of vocational

training instead of general education on labor market outcomes is approximately 1:25 .



4.4       Testing for selection

Since higher ability students tended to be selected into general secondary schools by com-

petitive examination, students a¤ected by the policy were probably lower on the ability

distribution than those who attended general lyceums before the educational reform. Hence,

we expect the average ability of students receiving general education to decline after the

policy change. But unfortunately, we do not have good measures of ability in our data.

Instead, we examine whether students were born in an urban or rural area which serves as a

  23
    Since we are estimating a local average treatment e¤ect (LATE) for individuals a¤ected by the policy,
these results may not hold for the population at large. See Imbens and Angrist (1994) for a thorough
discussion of this issue and some instructive examples.


                                                   18
proxy for socioeconomic background and is correlated with higher educational attainment.

Panel B of Table 2 shows the likelihood of being born in an urban area for samples of men

with di¤erent levels of educational attainment. Speci…cally, column (2) reveals that men

who received general education after the policy change were 6 percentage points less likely

to have been born in an urban area than general-educated men who were una¤ected by the

policy.24 This result supports our contention that more able or more advantaged students

were selected into general secondary schools. Column (3) in Panel B of Table 2 also shows

that the proportion of men with secondary education who were born in urban regions did not

change after the educational reform. We have also con…rmed that indicators for ethnicity

and region of birth did not exhibit any discontinuous change around the discontinuity. This

is reassuring evidence that the composition of men who completed secondary level education

did not change after the policy reform and serves as a check for the validity of the regression

discontinuity design.



4.5     Quantity of schooling

We have information on years of schooling for a subsample of individuals in the LSMS

household surveys of 1995 and 1996. Using this subsample, Panel C of Table 2 shows

the e¤ect of the educational reform on the quantity of schooling for samples of men with

di¤erent types of educational attainment. Column (3) con…rms that the policy did not lead

to additional schooling among cohorts of secondary school students. The point estimate is

essentially zero and quite precisely estimated with a standard error of only 0.12 years of

schooling. The remaining columns of panel C indicate no signi…cant di¤erence in years of

  24
    That the proportion of men born in urban regions among those with vocational training did not change
after the policy reform is also consistent with selection. While the most able among those who received
vocational education prior to the policy change probably ended up completing the 2nd level of lyceum, the
least able may not have succeeded in progressing to vocational training which was available only at the
higher track after the policy change.


                                                   19
schooling for other levels and types of educational attainment (similar results are found with

higher and primary education). These …ndings are consistent with the changes induced by the

policy. According to the calculations discussed above, most students a¤ected by the policy

continued to higher-level vocational programs that lasted 1 year after completing 10 years of

general education. Since these students would have completed 8 years of general education

and 3 years of vocational training prior to the reform, they would not have experienced

any change in quantity of schooling. These …ndings con…rm that the policy altered the

amount of vocational and general education while keeping the overall quantity of education

approximately unchanged.



5     Results

5.1    Cross-sectional analysis

Before turning to the …ndings associated with the 1973 educational reform, we examine

the standard cross-sectional relationship between vocational training and labor market out-

comes. Table 3 presents these results, based on equation 1, using both census and household

data. The sample is restricted to secondary-educated men born between 1956 and 1961 to

correspond with the samples presented later. All regressions control for a cubic spline in

month of birth, ethnicity, region of birth, urban/rural place of birth, and calendar month

…xed e¤ects while robust standard errors are clustered by month of birth.

    The e¤ect of vocational training on occupational outcomes is shown in columns (1) and

(2) of panels A and B. These coe¢ cients indicate that men with vocational training were

signi…cantly more likely to be employed as manual workers and craftsmen than their counter-

parts with general education. In particular, men with vocational training were approximately

23 percentage points more likely to be manual workers and 13 percentage points more likely


                                             20
to be craftsmen in 1992. Similar magnitudes are visible in the 2002 data, during the later

stages of the transition period.25 Columns (3) and (4) of Table 3 show the e¤ect of vocational

training on labor market participation. Men with vocational training were 1.5 percentage

points more likely to be unemployed in 1992 than men with general education. On a base

of 6 percent unemployment, this represents a large and signi…cant di¤erence.26 Not sur-

prisingly, since most men were employed in the labor force, the e¤ect on nonemployment

for men was similar to the e¤ect on unemployment over this time period. The e¤ect of

vocational training on unemployment becomes even larger over time. By 2002, men with

vocational training were 4.7 percentage points more likely to be unemployed. Finally, we

examine the e¤ect of vocational training on wages and income using the pooled LSMS data

from 1995-2000. Column (1) of Panel C indicates that men with vocational training lived

in households with lower family income while column (2) reveals that men with vocational

training earned approximately 7 percent less than men with general education.27

       Consistent with other studies from Romaina, we …nd that individuals with vocational

training are more likely to be unemployed, exit from the labor force and earn lower wages

than their counterparts with general education.28 We also con…rm that individuals with

vocational training are more likely to be employed in manual and craft-related occupations.

Moreover, the adverse labor market outcomes become even more pronounced during the later

  25
      The results for manual and craft occupations in the LSMS data are similar to those from the Census
data.
   26
      Though not shown, the e¤ect of the covariates on unemployment generally accord with intuition. The
coe¢ cient on the month of birth trend is positive and signi…cant re‡ecting that younger individuals are more
likely to be unemployed. Men born in urban regions are signi…cantly more likely to be unemployed. Finally,
men with a Hungarian or Gypsy ethnic background are also signi…cantly more likely to be unemployed
compared to Romanians.
   27
      Again, the e¤ect of the covariates on this measure of wages is generally signi…cant and consistent with
previous …ndings. Men who were born later are employed in jobs that earn signi…cantly less. Men born
in urban areas are earning signi…cantly more and those with non-Romanian ethnicity earn signi…cantly less
than Romanians.
   28
      In light of the …ndings by Munich, Svejnar, and Terrell (2005), we examined whether the cross-sectional
…ndings di¤ered by type of …rm ownership. We found no signi…cant di¤erences in the e¤ect of vocational
training on labor market outcomes for private and state-owned …rms.


                                                     21
stages of the transition. These results hold when examined separately in the period before

and after January 1, 1959 or when we include cohort …xed e¤ects to focus on the relationship

within each cohort (not shown).



5.2       E¤ect of the reform on labor market outcomes

We examine the e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform on labor market outcomes by estimating

equation 2 from section 4. Columns (1) and (2) in panel A of Table 4 show the reduced-form

e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform on occupational outcomes in 1992. The coe¢ cients on

AF T ER are highly signi…cant, implying that the reform altered the occupational structure.

Speci…cally, men in cohorts a¤ected by the policy were 2.3 percentage points less likely to be

employed in a manual occupation than their counterparts who were una¤ected by the policy.

Based on the calculations in section 4, the corresponding e¤ect on the treated population

is approximately 7 percentage points.29 Moreover, these estimates imply that an additional

year of vocational training instead of general education increased the probability of being

employed in a manual occupation by about 3 percentage points. The e¤ect of the policy on

the probability of becoming a craftsmen is even larger: about 3.4 percentage points which

translates into a 10 percentage point e¤ect on the treated population. In other words, the

additional year of vocational training instead of general education increased the probability

of working as a craftsman by over 4 percentage points. We also con…rm that these …ndings

hold for disaggregated occupations such as metal workers and clerks.30

       Panels A and B of Figure 4 provide a graphical representation of the 1992 results. The

  29
      This e¤ect is somewhat smaller than expected based on the cross-sectional relationships between vo-
cational training and manual occupations. However, these results need to be interpreted in the context of
Romania’s unique Communist “labor market”. Even individuals with more general education may have been
required to enter manual occupations when joining the labor force. Thus, the e¤ect on their occupation in
1992 may have been muted due to their previous labor market experience.
   30
      In the case of clerks, we …nd that men a¤ected by the policy are more likely to be employed as clerks,
consistent with the evidence that vocational training is associated with a lower probability of working as a
clerk.

                                                    22
raw fraction of secondary educated men employed as manual and craft workers in each

month of birth are indicated with open circles while solid lines plot cubic functions of these

outcomes on either side of the discontinuity. There is a clear break in the trend around

the policy change for both occupational outcomes. Together with the regression results,

these …ndings support our contention that the policy did not simply relabel schools from

vocational to general lyceum schools. Panels A and B of Figure 5 also reveal a discontinuity

in occupational outcomes using the 2002 Census. However, compared to estimates from

1992, the corresponding coe¢ cients in panel B of Table 4 are smaller and insigni…cant.31

This change probably re‡ects the continuing reallocation of labor to new occupations during

the transition period.

       The reduced-form e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform on labor market participation

is shown in columns (3) and (4) of Table 4. The e¤ect of the policy on the probability of

being unemployed or nonemployed is small and insigni…cant in 1992, at the beginning of the

transition period (panel A). Moreover, the e¤ect of the policy is still insigni…cant in 2002,

during the later stages of the transition period when general education may have become

more valuable (panel B). The bottom panels of Figures 4, 5 and 6 con…rm these …ndings in a

graphical context. None of the panels reveal any discontinuity in labor market participation.

Columns (1) and (2) of panel C show the e¤ect of the policy on family income and log wages

using household LSMS data from 1995-2000. These estimates are somewhat imprecise but

the e¤ect of the policy on earnings is insigni…cant. Panels A and B of Figure 6 also show

the absence of any clear discontinuity. Taken together, these …ndings contrast sharply with

those from the cross-sectional analysis.32 Based on results from the 1973 educational reform,

  31
     The e¤ects on occupational outcomes using the 1995-2000 household data (not shown for brevity) are
similar in magnitude but somewhat less precise.
  32
     Although manual and craft occupations are associated with higher unemployment and slightly higher
wages, the shifts in occupational structure would not be su¢ cient to result in any substantial di¤erences in
labor market outcomes. Moreover, as we discuss in the section on robustness, much of the di¤erence in the



                                                     23
the reduction in vocational training did not cause an increase in labor market participation

or earnings.



5.3     The structural reforms of 1997

The six yearly LSMS surveys from 1995-2000 allow us to focus on labor market outcomes

immediately before and after the comprehensive macroeconomic stabilization and structural

reform program of 1997. Table 5 presents the impact of these economic reforms on labor

market outcomes by including an indicator for post 1997 surveys. The cross-sectional e¤ects

of vocational training on unemployment, nonemployment, family income and log wage are

shown in Panel A.33 The coe¢ cient on P OST 1997 indicates that the 1997 economic reforms

worsened labor market outcomes for all men. Moreover, the coe¢ cient on the interaction of

vocational training and P OST 1997 is large and signi…cant for three of the four outcomes,

suggesting that the reforms hit vocationally trained individuals particularly hard. Panel B

shows the e¤ect of the educational reform of 1973 before and after the 1997 economic re-

forms.34 While the negative e¤ect of the 1997 reforms is also visible in this speci…cation, the

coe¢ cient on the interaction of AF T ER and P OST 1997 is very small and statistically in-

distinguishable from zero. Thus, in contrast to cross-sectional regressions where the bene…ts

of general education show an increase during the period of structural reforms, we do not …nd

a corresponding e¤ect in regressions that exploit the 1973 educational reform. We interpret

these results as further evidence that the cross sectional relationship between vocational

training and labor market success is driven by selection.

outcomes between vocational and general education occurs within occupations as well.
  33
     Speci…cally, we estimate: outcomei = 0 Xi + V OCi + P OST 1997i + V OCi P OST 1997i + f (ci ) + "i
where post1997i is de…ned as 1 for 1998, 1999 and 2000 surveys and 0 otherwise, with other variables as
de…ned previously.
  34
     In this instance, we estimate: outcomei = 0 Xi + AF T ERi + P OST 1997i + AF T ERi P OST 1997i +
f (ci ) + "i :




                                                  24
5.4       The quality of general education

The drastic expansion of general education in Romania so essential to credibly identifying the

e¤ect of vocational training may have caused a reduction in the quality of general education.

Moreover, with an educational reform that a¤ected such a large fraction of the school-age

population, the question of how resources were allocated to implement the reform becomes

extremely important. Appendix Figures 1 and 2 show the in‡ux of teachers from vocational

to general high school and indicate that the average student/faculty ratios across the two

types of schools were largely maintained. Although we have some anecdotal evidence that

retraining occurred, these teachers may nevertheless have been relatively inexperienced at

teaching the new curriculum.

       We perform two additional tests to examine possible changes in the quality of general

education.35 First, we consider labor market outcomes restricted to individuals who com-

pleted general education (as opposed to any secondary education). If the quality of general

education declined due to the policy, we expect that labor market outcomes would have been

worse for cohorts a¤ected by the policy. However, we …nd that labor market outcomes for

individuals who completed general education are not signi…cantly di¤erent before and after

the introduction of the policy. Second, we examine whether labor market outcomes di¤er

by region of birth. Since some regions experienced larger expansions in general education,

students from these regions should also have been a¤ected more by changes in the quality of

education. However, we …nd no signi…cant di¤erences in labor market outcomes by region of

birth for individuals who completed general school before and after the policy change. We

conclude that a change in the quality of general education is unlikely to explain why cohorts

who have received more general education after the 1973 educational reform do not have

  35
    These robustness checks for changes in the quality of education are presented in more detail in an earlier
version of this paper (Malamud and Pop-Eleches, 2005).



                                                     25
better labor market outcomes.



5.5       Robustness checks

Our main results were based on a sample of individuals with a secondary education who were

born between 1956 and 1961 and therefore within a 3 year window of the January 1, 1959

cuto¤. Panel A of Appendix Table 1 con…rms these results with all men, by including those

with primary, gymnasium and higher education. In Panel B, we consider three alternative

samples that extend or restrict the window around the cuto¤, ranging from a 1 year window

to a 4 year window. The e¤ect of the reform on the probability of being employed as a

manual or craft worker in 1992 remain unchanged. As expected, the standard errors are

generally smaller in broader windows. Moreover, the e¤ect of the policy on labor market

participation and log wages later in the transition is not signi…cant in any of the speci…cations.

Panel C presents estimates using alternative polynomial functions of the forcing variable.

Whether we use linear, quadratic or quartic splines, the coe¢ cients on AF T ER are large

and signi…cant for occupational outcomes and small and insigni…cant for the labor market

outcomes. Using simple linear, quadratic, cubic, and quartic trends in month of birth does

not a¤ect our results in any substantial way (not shown here). Finally, Panel D shows

reduced-form estimates around alternative year cuto¤s. In essence, we consider “placebo

experiments” around January 1 of the two preceding and two following years. We …nd

no signi…cant di¤erence in the likelihood of being employed in a manual or craft-related

occupation or in unemployment and wages using these alternative year cuto¤s.36

       In addition to these robustness checks, we also examined whether the di¤erences in labor

market outcomes between vocational and general secondary educated men could be driven

  36
    Although not shown here, estimating the binary outcome variables using logit or probit functions does
not alter any of our results. Moreover, we …nd similar results using non-parametric methods such as local
linear regression.


                                                   26
by occupation speci…c shocks.37 Since the old centralized sectors which employed most of

the vocationally trained workers were hit hardest during the transition period, it is possible

that occupation and industry speci…c shocks might be driving our results. We consider

this alternative explanation with regressions that include controls for detailed indicators of

previous occupation. While the size of the e¤ect is slightly reduced in the cross-section, the

e¤ect of vocational training remains large and signi…cant, implying that di¤erences in labor

market performance continue to hold within occupations. The reduced form results for the

e¤ect of the 1973 educational reform remain essentially unchanged. Hence, changes in labor

demand for occupations associated with vocational training do not appear to explain our

…ndings.



6     Conclusion

This paper examines the relative bene…ts of general education and vocational training in

the context of a transition economy which experienced major technological and institutional

change. We exploit an educational reform that occurred in Romania in 1973 to avoid the

selection bias that arises because less able students are more likely to enroll in vocational

programs. By requiring students born after January 1, 1959 to complete an additional two

years of general education instead of entering vocational schools, the policy shifted about 15%

of the students in secondary school from vocational to general lyceum schools within a single

year. The policy also shortened the length of vocational courses so even students a¤ected by

the policy who continued on to vocational school after completing an additional two years of

general education received less vocational training. Nevertheless, this policy change did not

signi…cantly alter average years of schooling across cohorts of secondary students. Using the

  37
     These additional checks are presented in an earlier version of this paper (Malamud and Pop-Eleches,
2005).


                                                  27
Romanian Censuses of 1992 and 2002 as well as LSMS household surveys from 1995-2000,

we …nd evidence that men who were a¤ected by the policy were less likely to work as manual

workers and craftsmen than their counterparts who were born too early to be a¤ected by the

policy. However, we …nd no signi…cant di¤erence in labor market participation or earnings

between cohorts that were a¤ected and una¤ected by the policy, even during the later stages

of the transition period.

   The …ndings associated with the 1973 educational reform are in sharp contrast to the

cross-sectional evidence that individuals with vocational training are signi…cantly more likely

to be unemployed, out of the labor force, and have lower wages. We have argued that possible

changes in the quality of general secondary education as a result of the policy are unlikely

to explain why we do not observe the positive bene…ts of a general education. Hence, our

…ndings suggest that the relationship between vocational training and labor market returns

highlighted by previous studies may largely be a consequence of selection. It is important

to note that these estimates are relevant for the marginal student shifted from vocational to

general education rather than for the average student. But this group of marginal students

is probably the most likely to be a¤ected by any policy which encourages general education

over vocational training.




                                              28
References
 Acemoglu, D., and J.S. Pischke, “Why do Firms Train: Theory and Evidence,”Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 113 (1998), 79-119.

 Acemoglu, D., and J.S. Pischke, “Beyond Becker: Training in Imperfect Labor Markets,”
 Economic Journal 109 (1999), 112-142.

 Barberis, N, M. Boycko, A. Shleifer and N. Tsukanova, “How Does Privatization Work?
 Evidence from the Russian Shops,”Journal of Political Economy 104:4 (1996), 764-790.

 Bennel, P., “General versus Vocational Secondary Education in Developing Countries: A
 Review of the Rates of Return Evidence,” Journal of Development Studies 33:2 (1996),
 230-47.

 Blideanu, E., Invatamintul Secundar de Cultura Generala Din Diferite Tari (Editura Di-
 dactica si Pedagogica Bucuresti, 1972).

 Brainerd, E., “Winners and Losers in Russia’s Economic Transition,”American Economic
 Review 88:5 (1998), 1094-1116.

 Braham, R.L., Education in Romania: A Decade of Change (US Government Printing
 Press, 1972).

 Braham, R.L., The Educational System of Romania (US Government Printing Press,
 1978).

 Card, D., Dobkin, C. and N. Maestas, “The Impact of Nearly Universal Insurance Coverage
 on Health Care Utilization and Health: Evidence from Medicare,”NBER Working Paper
 No. 10365 (2004).

 Dimitriu, E., Ionescu, O. Nica, I. and I. Orghidan, A Concise History of Education in
 Romania (Editura Stiinti…ca si Enciclopedica, 1981).

 Dinardo, J. and D. Lee, “Economic Impacts of New Unionization on U.S. Private Sector
 Employers: 1984-2001,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 119:4 (2004), 1383-1442.

 Earle J.S., “Industrial Decline and Labor Reallocation in Romania,” William Davidson
 Institute Working Paper 118 (1997).

 Earle J.S. and C. Pauna, “Incidence and duration of unemployment in Romania,”European
 Economic Review 40 (1996), 829-837.

 Earle J.S. and C. Pauna, “Long-term unemployment, social assistance and labor market
 policies in Romania,”Empirical Economics 23 (1998), 203-235.

 Goldin, C., “The Human-Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the Past,”
 Journal of Economic History 61:2 (2001), 263-292.



                                          29
Grasso, J.T. and J.R. Shea, Vocational Education and Training: Impact on Youth (Berke-
ley, California: Carnegie Council on Policy Studies, 1979).

Hahn, J., Todd, P., and W. van der Klaauw, “Identi…cation and Estimation of Treatment
E¤ects with a Regression Discontinuity Design,”Econometrica 69:1 (2001), 201-209.

Imbens, G.W. and J.D. Angrist, “Identi…cation and Estimation of Local Average Treat-
ment E¤ects,”Econometrica 62:2 (1994), 467-475.

Krueger, D. and K. Kumar, “Skill-Speci…c rather then General Education: A Reason for
US-Europe Growth Di¤erences?”Journal of Economic Growth 9:2 (2004a), 167-207.

Krueger, D. and K. Kumar, “US-Europe Di¤erences in Technology-Driven Growth: Quan-
tifying the Role of Education,”Journal of Monetary Economics 51:1 (2004b), 161-190.

Lechner, M., “An Evaluation of Public Sector Sponsored Continuous Vocational Training
Programs in East Germany,”Journal of Human Resources 35:2 (2000), 347-375.

Lee, D. and J. Mccrary, “Crime, Punishment, and Myopia,” NBER Working Paper No.
11491 (2005).

Lee, D. and D. Card, “Regression Discontinuity Inference with Speci…cation Error,”Jour-
nal of Econometrics 142:2 (2007), 655-674.

Malamud O. and C. Pop-Eleches, “General Education vs. Vocational Training: Evidence
from an Economy in Transition,”Harris School Working Paper 05.16 (2005).

Meghir, C. and M. Palme, “Educational Reform, Ability and Parental Background,”Amer-
ican Economic Review 95:1 (2005), 414-424.

Meyer, R.H., “Job training in the Schools,” in Job Training for Youth, eds. R.E. Taylor,
H. Rosen, and F.C. Pratzner (Columbus: The National Center for Research in Vocational
Education, Ohio State University, 1982, 307-344).

Mincer, J., Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (New York: Columbia University Press,
1974).

Munich, D., Svejnar, J., and K. Terrel, “Returns to Human Capital under the Communist
Wage Grid and during the Transition to a Market Economy,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 87:1 (2005), 100-123.

Nelson, R.R. and E.S. Phelps, “Investment in Humans, Technological Di¤usion, and Eco-
nomic Growth,”American Economic Review 56:1/2 (1966), 69-75.

Nesporova, A., “Unemployment in Transition Economies” Economic Analysis Division
Seminar Paper (United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, 2002).

Neuman, S. and A. Ziderman, “Vocational Schooling, Occupational Matching, and Labor
Market Earnings in Israel,”Journal of Human Resources 26:2 (1991), 256-281.


                                         30
Neuman, S. and A. Ziderman, “Vocational Education in Israel: Wage E¤ects fo the VocEd-
Occupation Match,”Journal of Human Resources 34:2 (1999), 407-420.

OECD, Reviews of National Policies for Education: Romania (Paris: OECD, 2000a).

OECD, Labour Market and Social Policies in Romania (Paris: OECD, 2000b).

Porter, J., “Estimation in the Regression Discontinuity Model,” mimeo, Department of
Economics, University of Wisconsin (2003).

Romania Government, The Education Law of the Socialist Republic of Romania
(Bucharest: Didactical and Pedagogical Publishing House, 1968).

Romania Government, Resolution of the Communist Party’s Central Committee of June
18 and 19, 1973 (Bucharest: Editura Politica, 1973).

Romania Government, Presidential Decree Nr 191/1977 Article 25 (Bucharest: O¢ ical
Bulletin Nr. 67, 1977).

Romania Government, Annual Statistics of the Socialist Republic of Romanian 1960-1980.

Romania Government, Statistics Yearbook 2004, http://www.insse.ro/download/anuar_2002.

UNESCO, Statistical Yearbook (Paris, France: 1969, 1975, 1981).

Voicu, A., “Employment Dynamics in the Romanian Labor Market: A Markov Chain
Monte Carlo Approach,”Journal of Comparative Economics 33:3 (2005), 604-639.




                                        31
A      Appendix
As mentioned in the main text, we do not have precise information on the number of years
of vocational training and the total years of schooling for each individual. Instead, we only
have information on whether students completed the …rst stage of lyceum school, the second
stage of lyceum school, or vocational school.38 The …rst and second stage of lyceum school
are associated with 10 and 12 years of general education respectively. Following the 1973
educational reform, all students that completed vocational school also completed the …rst
stage of lyceum school. These students therefore received 10 years of general education and
1 year of vocational training. However, prior to the 1974-75 school year, most students who
completed vocational school would have received 8 years of general education and 3 years of
vocational training. We cannot distinguish individuals who entered vocational school after
grade 8 prior to the educational reform from those individuals who entered vocational schools
after grade 10 and completed shorter vocational courses.

A.1      E¤ect of the policy on the treated population
We estimate the rough proportion of vocational students at each level using enrollment data
from the Annual Statistics of the Socialist Republic of Romania. Assuming that there were
no dropouts and that the number of students entering vocational school after grade 10 re-
mained constant over time, we estimate that approximately 45 percent of the students with
vocational training born in 1958 had entered vocational school after grade 8.39 Further-
more, we can estimate that approximately 40 percent of students that would have entered
vocational school after grade 8 but for the policy reform, entered vocational school following
grade 10 after completing an additional two years of general education.40 Including students
who were in apprenticeship programs (which are counted jointly with vocational students in
the 1992 Census), we need to adjust these calculations so that approximately 50 percent of

  38
      In addition, we know whether they completed gymnasium (8 years of schooling), primary school (4 years
of schooling) or some form of postsecondary schooling.
   39
      Based on the enrollment data, approximately 250,000 students were enrolled in vocational schools in
1973-74 and 190,000 students were enrolled vocational schools in 1974-75. Since enrollment in 1973-74
includes three cohorts of students that entered after grade 8 whereas enrollment in 1974-75 only includes
two cohorts of students that entered after grade 8 (in addition to a cohort of students that entered after
grade 10 in each case), we can solve for the size of each cohort: 60,000 in the cohort that entered vocational
after grade 8 and 70,000 in the cohort that entered vocational school after grade 10. Given these predicted
sizes, we would expect the number of students enrolled in the following school year 1975-76 to equal 130,000
(which is not too far from the actual …gure of 123,000).
   40
      Enrollment in vocational schools in 1976-77 was approximately 94,000. Although no more cohorts of
students who entered vocational school after grade 8 should remain, students who would have wished to enter
vocational school after grade 8 in 1974-75 could now enter after having completed grade 10 in general school.
Since the numbers of students entering vocational school after grade 10 is assumed to remain constant,
we can calculate that approximately 24,000 out of 60,000 students who were denied entrance in vocational
school after grade 8 decided to continue on to vocational school after completing their additional two years
of general education. Assuming that a similar proportion wished to continue into vocational school from the
second and third cohorts after the policy reform, we would expect the number of students enrolled in the
years 1977-78 and 1978-79 to be equal to 118,000 and 142,000 respectively (which is not too far from the
actual …gures of 114,000 and 138,000).


                                                     32
the students with vocational training or apprenticeships in 1958 were a¤ected by the policy
and about 45 percent of these students continued onto these programs after completing their
additional two years of general education following the reform.41 Given these numbers, we
expect that the size of the cohort of students completing vocational training or apprentice-
ship programs of 1959 was about 75 percent of the size of the cohort of 1958, which is almost
exactly what …nd in the data from the 1992 Census. Hence, we conclude that about 50
percent of the students with vocational training before 1959 –or 33 percent of the students
with secondary education – were a¤ected by the policy. Consequently, we would need to
scale up the reduced-form estimate over all secondary educated individuals by a factor of 3
to derive an estimate of the policy on the treated population.

A.2      E¤ect of vocational training (LATE)
We can provide some rough calculations on the average di¤erence in vocational training
before and after the policy change by comparing cohorts of individuals born in 1958 and 1959
using data from the 1992 Census. Based on this data, the number of students completing
the …rst and second level of lyceum schools increased by about 4 and 11 percentage points
respectively while the number of students completing vocational school fell by about 15
percentage points. Moreover, according to the calculations of the previous section, the
number of students completing vocational school after having attended the …rst level of
lyceum school increased by about 18 percentage points after the policy.42 These estimates
suggest that, among secondary educated individuals, the average decrease in vocational
training was 0.8 years. Now, rather than scaling the reduced-form estimate of the e¤ect of
the policy by the proportion of individuals who were a¤ected by the policy, we can scale the
reduced-form estimate by the average change in vocational training induced by the policy.
In other words, we can calculate the local average treatment e¤ect (LATE) of a year of
vocational versus general education. We can express an estimate of this e¤ect as follows:43

                              E [outcomei j AF T ERi = 1]          E [outcomei j AF T ERi = 0]
       E [outcomei j Vi ] =                                                                             (3)
                                     E [Vi j AF T ERi = 1]         E [Vi j AF T ERi = 0]

Conditional on observable characteristics, Xi , the numerator of this expression is simply
from equation 2. The denominator of the expression is the di¤erence in the average quantity

  41
      We employ a similar method is to derive the number of students in apprenticeship programs: Given
enrollments of about 100,000 and 70,000 students in apprenticeships in 1973-74 and 1974-75 respectively,
we calculate that approximately 30,000 students entered after grade 8 and 10,000 entered after grade 10.
However, we also need to account for the secular decline in apprenticeships over time so that predictions of
following years are adjusted accordingly.
   42
      Those calculations suggest that approximately 50 percent of the students with vocational training in
1958 were a¤ected by the policy and about 45 percent of these students entered vocational schools after
completing the …rst stage of lyceum schools. Since about 65 percent of secondary educated students received
vocational training in 1958, the number of students completing vocational school after …rst level of lyceum
education decreased by 18 percentage points.
   43
      See Imbens and Angrist (1994) for the assumptions that underly estimates of LATE. In particular, we
need to assume a version of their montonicity requirement if we wish to allow for non-constant treatment
e¤ects.


                                                    33
of vocational training between individuals in cohorts that were a¤ected by the educational
reform and their counterparts in cohorts that were una¤ected. Applying the calculations
above, we can conclude that the e¤ect of an additional year of vocational training instead of
general education on labor market outcomes approximately 1:25 . Note that the standard
method for estimating this expression is by two-stage least squares (2SLS). However, given
the data limitations, we have had to resort to this rather indirect approach.




                                             34
                                               Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                        Entire sample                        Secondary-educated sample
                                              Mean           SD               N              Mean       SD         N
  Panel A: 1992 Census
  Urban region of birth                       0.283          0.451        227,446            0.268         0.443        143,417
  Romanian                                    0.896          0.305        227,446            0.911         0.285        143,417
  Hungarian                                   0.066          0.248        227,446            0.068         0.252        143,417
  Gypsy                                       0.020          0.139        227,446            0.005         0.071        143,417
  Education level
   Lower (primary/ gymnasium)                 0.255          0.436        227,446             —             —             —
   Vocational                                 0.359          0.480        227,446            0.570         0.495        143,417
   Lyceum 9-12                                0.271          0.445        227,446            0.430         0.495        143,417
   Higher (postsec/university)                0.114          0.318        227,446             —             —             —
  Labor market outcomes
   Manual worker                              0.780          0.414        216,342            0.839         0.367        138,924
   Craft worker                               0.432          0.495        216,342            0.518         0.500        138,924
   Unemployed                                 0.066          0.249        219,652            0.057         0.232        140,305
   Nonemployed                                0.098          0.298        227,446            0.077         0.267        143,417
  Panel B: 2002 Census
  Urban region of birth                       0.314          0.464         87,249            0.298         0.458        53,602
  Romanian                                    0.900          0.300         87,249            0.912         0.283        53,602
  Hungarian                                   0.063          0.243         87,249            0.069         0.253        53,602
  Gypsy                                       0.019          0.137         87,249            0.005         0.069        53,602
  Education level
   Lower (primary/gymnasium)                  0.234          0.423         87,249             —             —             —
   Vocational                                 0.359          0.480         87,249            0.584         0.493        53,602
   Lyceum 9-12                                0.255          0.436         87,249            0.416         0.493        53,602
   Higher (postsec/university)                0.152          0.359         87,249             —             —             —
  Labor market outcomes
   Manual worker                              0.719          0.449         74,758            0.799         0.401        46,699
   Craft worker                               0.357          0.479         74,758            0.456         0.498        46,699
   Unemployed                                 0.116          0.320         75,850            0.121         0.326        47,261
   Nonemployed                                0.231          0.422         87,249            0.225         0.417        53,602
  Panel C: LSMS 1995-2000
  Education level
   Lower (primary/gymnasium)                  0.172          0.377         28,395             —             —             —
   Vocational                                 0.385          0.487         28,395            0.567         0.495        19,286
   Lyceum 9-12                                0.294          0.456         28,395            0.433         0.495        19,286
   Higher (postsec/university)                0.149          0.356         28,395             —             —             —
  Labor market outcomes
   Log family income                          15.519         0.816         28,291           15.527         0.736        19,227
   Log wages                                  15.336         0.552         18,523           15.263         0.503        13,133
   Unemployed                                 0.115          0.319         26,973           0.123          0.328        18,459
   Nonemployed                                0.159          0.365         28,389            0.160         0.367        19,282

Notes: SD is the standard deviation and N is the sample size. All summary statistics based on cohorts born between 1956 and 1961
(within 3 years of January 1, 1959). The sample of secondary-educated men includes individuals with vocational and general secondary
education only. Manual worker is defined as 1 for men employed in an occupation with ISCO category 5-9, and 0 if otherwise employed.
Craft worker is defined as 1 for men employed in an occupation with ISCO category 7, and 0 if otherwise employed. Unemployed is
defined as 1 for men actively seeking work, and 0 if employed. Nonemployment is defined as 1 for men not employed (unemployed or
out of the labor force) and 0 otherwise. Log wages and log family income are based on annual wages and family income.


                                                                35
         Table 2: Effect of the 1973 Educational Reform on Educational Outcomes, Urban Status,
                                         and Years of Schooling
    Panel A: Highest educational level achieved (out of the entire sample)

    Dependent variable                  Vocational                   General                  Secondary
                                           (1)                         (2)                       (3)

    AFTER                                 -0.080**                   0.070**                    -0.009
                                           [0.007]                   [0.006]                    [0.006]

    R2                                     0.04                       0.04                       0.03
    Sample Size                           314,695                    314,695                    314,695
    Mean of dep. variable                   0.36                       0.26                       0.62


    Panel B: Born in an Urban Area (dependent variable)
                                                           Secondary school level
    Sample restricted to:                                                                                            Entire sample
                                        Vocational               General                           All
                                           (1)                      (2)                            (3)                      (4)

    AFTER                                  -0.016                    -0.061**                   -0.017                    -0.012
                                           [0.010]                    [0.017]                   [0.011]                   [0.009]

    R2                                     0.08                        0.15                      0.12                     0.13
    Sample Size                           112,988                     84,031                    197,091                  314,695
    Mean of dep. variable                   0.20                       0.34                       0.26                     0.27

    Panel C: Years of Schooling (dependent variable)
                                                           Secondary school level
    Sample restricted to                                                                                             Entire sample
                                        Vocational               General                          All
                                            (1)                     (2)                           (3)                       (4)
    AFTER                                 -0.198                  -0.076                         0.018                    -0.159
                                         [0.130]                  [0.143]                       [0.118]                   [0.176]

    R2                                      0.02                       0.04                      0.01                      0.07
    Sample Size                             1,617                      1,313                     2,930                     4,532
    Mean of dep. variable                   11.10                      11.95                     11.48                     11.47

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by month of birth in brackets. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1 and 5 percent level
respectively. Samples include all cohorts born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals
born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. Columns in Panel A refer to different
dependent variables (secondary education, general education, or vocational education). Columns in Panels B and C refer to sample
restrictions (all men with secondary schooling, men with vocational education, men with general education, and the entire sample). All
regressions include a cubic polynomial in month of birth fully interacted with AFTER and fixed effects for calendar of month. Binary
outcome variables are estimated using a linear probability model. Data for Panels A and B uses combined data from 1992 and 2002
Census. Data for Panel C uses data from the 1995 and 1996 LSMS. Demographic controls for the 1992 and 2002 Census regressions
include ethnicity, region of birth, and an indicator for urban or rural place of birth. Controls for the LSMS regressions include ethnicity,
region of birth and dummies for year of survey.




                                                                     36
        Table 3: Effect of Vocational Training on Labor Market Outcomes: Cross-sectional results
Panel A: 1992 Census
                                  Manual worker              Craft worker                Unemployed             Nonemployed
                                      (1)                         (2)                       (3)                     (4)

VOC                                   0.235**                   0.135**                     0.015**                0.013**
                                      [0.005]                   [0.006]                     [0.001]                [0.001]

R2                                     0.11                      0.02                        0.01                   0.01
Sample Size                           138,924                   138,924                     140,305                143,417
Mean of dep. Variable                   0.84                      0.52                        0.06                   0.08


Panel B: 2002 Census
                                  Manual worker              Craft worker                Unemployed             Nonemployed
                                      (1)                         (2)                       (3)                     (4)

VOC                                   0.260**                   0.109**                     0.047**                0.050**
                                      [0.005]                   [0.006]                     [0.003]                [0.004]

R2                                      0.12                      0.02                       0.02                    0.01
Sample Size                            46,699                    46,699                     47,261                  53,602
Mean of dep. variable                   0.80                      0.46                       0.12                    0.22

Panel C: LSMS 1995-2000
                               Log family income              Log wages                  Unemployed             Nonemployed
                                      (1)                        (2)                        (3)                     (4)

VOC                                   -0.146**                 -0.073**                     0.028**                0.031**
                                       [0.016]                  [0.012]                     [0.006]                [0.007]

R2                                      0.06                       0.1                       0.02                    0.02
Sample Size                            14,519                    10,102                     14,046                  14,555
Mean of dep. variable                   15.53                     15.26                      0.12                    0.16

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by month of birth in brackets. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1 and 5 percent
level, respectively. Samples include cohorts with a secondary-level education born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961.
VOC is defined as 1 if an individual completed a course in vocational training and 0 otherwise. All regressions include a cubic
polynomial in month of birth and fixed effects for calendar of month. Panel A uses data from the 1992 Census; Panel B uses data from
the 2002 Census and Panel C uses data from the 1995-2000 Romanian LSMS. Binary outcome variables are estimated using a linear
probability model. Demographic controls for the 1992 and 2002 Census regressions include ethnicity, region of birth, and an indicator for
urban or rural place of birth. Controls for the LSMS regressions include ethnicity, region of birth and dummies for year of survey.




                                                                   37
   Table 4: Effect of the 1973 Educational Reform on Labor Market Outcomes: Reduced-form results
Panel A: 1992 Census
                                   Manual worker               Craft worker                Unemployed              Nonemployed
                                       (1)                          (2)                       (3)                      (4)

AFTER                                  -0.023**                  -0.034**                       0.005                   0.007
                                        [0.007]                   [0.010]                      [0.004]                 [0.005]

R2                                      0.02                       0.01                        0.01                     0.01
Sample Size                            138,924                    138,924                     140,305                  143,417
Mean of dep. Variable                    0.84                       0.52                        0.06                     0.08


Panel B: 2002 Census
                                   Manual worker               Craft worker                Unemployed              Nonemployed
                                       (1)                          (2)                       (3)                      (4)

AFTER                                   -0.014                     -0.001                      -0.001                   0.004
                                        [0.021]                   [0.022]                      [0.009]                 [0.011]

R2                                       0.02                       0.01                        0.01                    0.01
Sample Size                             46,699                     46,699                      47,261                  53,602
Mean of dep. variable                    0.80                       0.46                        0.12                    0.22

Panel C: LSMS 1995-2000
                                Log family income               Log wages                  Unemployed              Nonemployed
                                       (1)                         (2)                        (3)                      (4)

AFTER                                    0.041                     -0.01                        0.029                   0.016
                                        [0.078]                   [0.045]                      [0.021]                 [0.025]

R2                                       0.05                       0.09                        0.02                    0.02
Sample Size                             14,519                     10,102                      14,046                  14,555
Mean of dep. variable                    15.53                      15.26                       0.12                    0.16

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by month of birth in brackets. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1 and 5 percent
level, respectively. Samples include cohorts with a secondary-level education born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961.
AFTER is defined as 1 for individuals born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. All
regressions include a cubic polynomial in month of birth fully interacted with AFTER and fixed effects for calendar of month. Panel A
uses data from the 1992 Census; panel B uses data from the 2002 Census and Panel C uses data from the 1995-2000 Romanian LSMS.
Binary outcome variables are estimated using a linear probability model. Demographic controls for the 1992 and 2002 Census
regressions include ethnicity, region of birth, and an indicator for urban or rural place of birth. Controls for the LSMS regressions include
ethnicity, region of birth and dummies for year of survey.




                                                                     38
Table 5: Effect of the 1997 Structural Reform Program on Labor Market Outcomes (LSMS samples)
                                 Unemployed              Nonemployed               Log family income                Log wages
                                    (1)                      (2)                          (3)                          (4)
Panel A: OLS
                                     0.013                    0.016                      -0.104**                    -0.043**
VOC
                                    [0.007]                  [0.008]                      [0.021]                     [0.013]

                                    0.043**                 0.059**                      -0.287**                    -0.204**
POST1997
                                    [0.012]                 [0.014]                       [0.029]                     [0.018]

                                    0.028*                    0.028                      -0.082**                    -0.062**
VOC*POST1997
                                    [0.013]                  [0.015]                      [0.029]                     [0.020]

R2                                   0.02                     0.02                         0.06                          0.1
Sample Size                         14,046                   14,555                       14,519                       10,102
Mean of dep. variable                0.12                     0.16                         15.53                        15.26

Panel B: Reduced form
                                 Unemployed              Nonemployed               Log family income                Log wages
                                    (1)                      (2)                          (3)                          (4)
                                     0.024                    0.02                         0.046                       -0.011
AFTER
                                    [0.020]                  [0.024]                      [0.080]                      [0.047]

                                    0.054**                 0.078**                      -0.331**                    -0.240**
POST1997
                                    [0.013]                 [0.015]                       [0.024]                     [0.019]
                                     0.009                   -0.007                        -0.008                       0.001
AFTER*POST1997                      [0.013]                  [0.014]                      [0.026]                      [0.020]

R2                                   0.02                     0.02                         0.05                         0.09
Sample Size                         14,046                   14,555                       14,519                       10,102
Mean of dep. variable                0.12                     0.16                         15.53                        15.26

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by month of birth in brackets. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1 and 5 percent level
respectively. Samples include cohorts with a secondary-level education born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. AFTER
is defined as 1 for individuals born on or after January 1, 1959 and 0 for individuals born on or before December 31, 1958. VOC is
defined as 1 if an individual completed a course in vocational training and 0 otherwise. POST1997 is defined as 1 if the observation is
from LSMS surveys after 1997, the starting year of a macroeconomic stabilization and structural reform program. All regressions include
a cubic polynomial in month of birth fully interacted with AFTER and fixed effects for calendar of month. Binary outcome variables are
estimated using a linear probability model. Demographic controls include ethnicity and region of birth.




                                                                     39
           Appendix Table 1: Robustness Checks for Main Outcomes (coefficients on AFTER)
                              Manual ‘92          Craftsmen ‘92          Unemployed ‘02            Nonemployed ‘02             Log wages
                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                       (4)                       (5)

      Panel A: Alternative samples
                                -0.023**              -0.034**                 -0.001                      0.004                  -0.010
      Baseline
                                 [0.007]               [0.010]                 [0.009]                    [0.011]                 [0.045]

                                -0.024**              -0.031**                 -0.008                     -0.011                   0.042
      All men
                                 [0.007]               [0.010]                 [0.009]                    [0.010]                 [0.058]

      Panel B: Alternative windows
                                -0.041**              -0.041**                 -0.019                      0.011                   0.016
      1 year window
                                 [0.010]               [0.012]                 [0.017]                    [0.016]                 [0.042]

                                -0.033**              -0.042*                  -0.004                     0.029*                   0.063
      2 year window
                                 [0.012]              [0.017]                  [0.012]                    [0.011]                 [0.059]

                                -0.023**              -0.029**                  0.008                     -0.001                  -0.044
      4 year window
                                 [0.006]               [0.009]                 [0.009]                    [0.010]                 [0.040]

      Panel C: Alternative trends
                                -0.020**              -0.033**                  0.000                      0.001                   0.015
      Linear
                                 [0.003]               [0.005]                 [0.005]                    [0.005]                 [0.021]

                                -0.023**              -0.029**                  0.006                     -0.002                  -0.033
      Quadratic
                                 [0.004]               [0.007]                 [0.007]                    [0.008]                 [0.031]

                                -0.024**              -0.044**                  0.004                     0.024*                   0.007
      Quartic
                                 [0.008]               [0.013]                 [0.011]                    [0.011]                 [0.054]

      Panel D: Placebo year cutoffs
                                  0.005                 0.021                   0.006                     -0.018                  -0.075
      1957
                                 [0.008]               [0.012]                 [0.007]                    [0.010]                 [0.045]

                                  0.009                   0                    -0.001                      0.014                   0.009
      1958
                                 [0.010]               [0.013]                 [0.010]                    [0.011]                 [0.045]

                                -0.023**              -0.034**                 -0.001                      0.004                  -0.010
      1959
                                 [0.007]               [0.010]                 [0.009]                    [0.011]                 [0.045]

                                  0.004                 0.02                    0.005                      0.003                  -0.016
      1960
                                 [0.007]               [0.014]                 [0.010]                    [0.010]                 [0.047]

                                  0.005                -0.005                   0.010                     -0.002                  0.094*
      1961
                                 [0.007]               [0.013]                 [0.012]                    [0.014]                 [0.044]

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by month of birth in brackets. ** and * indicate statistical significance at the 1 and 5 percent
level respectively. Binary outcome variables are estimated using a linear probability model. Panels A, B, and D include a cubic
polynomial in month of birth fully interacted with AFTER. All regressions include calendar of month dummies (except regressions
using 1 year window due to colinearity). Columns (1), and (2) use data from the 1992 Census; columns (3), and (4) use data from the
2002 Census and column (5) uses data from the 1995-2000 Romanian LSMS. Demographic controls for the 1992 and 2002 Census
regressions include ethnicity, region of birth, and an indicator for urban or rural area of birth. Controls for the LSMS regressions
include ethnicity, region of birth and dummies for year of survey.



                                                                   40
                    Figure 1: Structure of Education in Romaina


                       Panel A: Before 1973 (Individuals born before January 1, 1959)




Lyceum 2nd                   Vocational schools
level (2 years)              (1 year)



                                                                        Vocational schools
                                                                        (3 years)
                  Lyceum 1st level (2 years)




                            Schools of general education (8 years)




                   Panel B: After 1973 (Individuals born after January 1, 1959)



Lyceum 2nd level (2 years)                     Vocational schools
                                               (1 year)




                                    Lyceum 1st level (2 years)




                             Schools of general education (8 years)




                                                                                 Source: Braham (1978)




                                                           41
                                                                      Proportion
                                                    19      0   .1   .2        .3   .4   .5
                                                       49
                                                    19
                                                       50
                                                    19
                                                       51




                           lower
                                                    19
                                                       52
                                                    19
                                                       53
                                                    19
                                                       54
                                                    19
                                                       55




                           gen
                                                    19
                                                       56
                                                    19
                                                       57
                                                    19
                                                       58




42
                                                    19
                                                       59




                           voc
                                                    19

                                    Year of birth
                                                       60
                                                    19
                                                       61
                                                    19
                                                       62
                                                    19
                                                       63
                                                                                              Figure 2: Educational Attainment by Birth Cohort




                                                    19
                                                       64
                           higher




                                                    19
                                                       65
                                                    19
                                                       66
                                                    19
                                                       67
                                                    19
                                                       68
     Source: 1992 Census
                         Figure 3: Proportion in Vocational Training and Secondary Level

                         Panel A: Vocational (by month)                       Panel B: Secondary (by month)
                    1




                                                                         1
       Proportion




                                                            Proportion
                    .5




                                                                         .5
                    0




                                                                         0
                         -36             0           36                       -36              0          36
                                   Month of birth                                        Month of birth



                         Panel C: Vocational (by week)                         Panel D: Secondary (by week)
                    1




                                                                         1
       Proportion




                                                            Proportion
                    .5




                                                                         .5
                    0




                                                                         0




                         -156           0            156                      -156             0          156
                                   Week of birth                                         Week of birth



Notes: All panels are restricted to men born between January 1, 1956 and December 31, 1961. Panels A and C are further restricted to
men whose highest educational attainment is at the secondary level (vocational or lyceum). The solid lines in Panels A and B are fitted
values from regressions of the dependent variable on a cubic spline in month of birth. The open circles indicate the fraction of men
employed in these occupations by month of birth (Panels A and B) or week of birth (Panels C and D). Source: 1992 Romanian Census
(PAU sample).




                                                                              43
                          Figure 4: Labor Market Outcomes in 1992 (by month of birth)

                         Panel A: Manual workers                               Panel B: Craftsmen
                    .9




                                                                          .6
       Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                    .7




                                                                          .4
                         -36             0          36                         -36             0          36
                                   Month of birth                                        Month of birth



                         Panel C: Unemployed                                   Panel D: Nonemployed
                    .2




                                                                          .2
       Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                    0




                                                                          0




                         -36             0          36                         -36             0          36
                                   Month of birth                                        Month of birth



Notes: All panels are restricted to men with secondary education (vocational or lyceum) between January 1, 1956 and December 31,
1961. The solid lines are fitted values from regressions of the dependent variable on a cubic spline in month of birth. The open circles
indicate the fraction of men employed in these occupations by month of birth. Source: 1992 Romanian Census.




                                                                               44
                          Figure 5: Labor Market Outcomes in 2002 (by month of birth)

                         Panel A: Manual workers                               Panel B: Craftsmen
                    .9




                                                                          .6
       Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                    .7




                                                                          .3
                         -36             0          36                         -36             0          36
                                   Month of birth                                        Month of birth



                         Panel C: Unemployed                                   Panel D: Nonemployed
                    .2




                                                                          .3
       Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                                                                          .1
                    0




                         -36             0          36                         -36             0          36
                                   Month of birth                                        Month of birth



Notes: All panels are restricted to men with secondary education (vocational or lyceum) between January 1, 1956 and December 31,
1961. The solid lines are fitted values from regressions of the dependent variable on a cubic spline in month of birth. The open circles
indicate the fraction of men employed in these occupations by month of birth. Source: 2002 Romanian Census.




                                                                               45
                     Figure 6: Labor Market Outcomes in 1995-2000 (by month of birth)

                         Panel A: Unemployed                                     Panel B: Nonemployed
                    .3




                                                                          .3
       Proportion




                                                             Proportion
                    0




                                                                          0
                         -36            0           36                           -36            0          36
                                  Month of birth                                          Month of birth



                         Panel C: Log income                              15.5   Panel D: Log wages
                    16
       Log income




                                                             Log wages
                    15




                                                                          15




                         -36            0           36                           -36            0          36
                                  Month of birth                                          Month of birth



Notes: All panels are restricted to men with secondary education (vocational or lyceum) between January 1, 1956 and December 31,
1961. The solid lines are fitted values from regressions of the dependent variable on a cubic spline in month of birth. The open circles
indicate the fraction of men that are unemployed and nonemployed, or the average log income and wages by month of birth. Source:
LSMS 1995-2000.




                                                                                 46
                      Appendix Figure 1: Enrollment in vocational schools and apprenticeships
                                                 by school-year

                 300000                                                                                      16000

                                                                                                             14000
                 250000
                                                                                                             12000
                 200000
                                                                                                             10000
# of students




                                                                                                                      # of teachers
                 150000                                                                                      8000

                                                                                                             6000
                 100000
                                                                                                             4000
                 50000
                                                                                                             2000

                      0                                                                                      0
                              71         72     73    74    75      76     77     78       79    80    81

                                   Vocational students            Apprenticeships students            Teachers

                                        Appendix Figure 2: Enrollment in lyceums by school-year


                 1,200,000                                                                                   60,000


                 1,000,000                                                                                   50,000


                  800,000                                                                                    40,000
                                                                                                                       # of teachers
 # of students




                  600,000                                                                                    30,000


                  400,000                                                                                    20,000


                  200,000                                                                                    10,000


                          0                                                                                  0
                                   71      72    73    74    75      76    77      78      79    80    81

                                                            students            teachers        Source: INSSE




                                                                          47
                                               Appendix Figure 3: Recipients of Unemployment Benefits and Unemployment Rate in
                                                                             Romania (1991-2003)

                                      850000                                                                                                              12



                                      750000
                                                                                                                                                          10
Recipients of Unemployment Benefits




                                      650000
                                                                                                                                                          8




                                                                                                                                                               Unemployment Rate
                                      550000

                                                                                                                                                          6

                                      450000

                                                                                                                                                          4
                                      350000


                                                                                                                                                          2
                                      250000



                                      150000                                                                                                             0
                                           1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995     1996     1997     1998   1999   2000    2001   2002    2003    2004
                                                                                                Year
                                                                                                                                       Source: INSSE website
                                                                       Recipients of Unemployment Benefits      Unemployment Rate




                                                                                              48
