NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLUENCE, INFORMATION OVERLOAD, AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
IN HEALTH CARE
James B. Rebitzer
Mari Rege
Christopher Shepard
Working Paper 14159
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14159

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by James B. Rebitzer, Mari Rege, and Christopher Shepard. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Influence, Information Overload, and Information Technology in Health Care
James B. Rebitzer, Mari Rege, and Christopher Shepard
NBER Working Paper No. 14159
July 2008
JEL No. D01,D8,I12,L86
ABSTRACT
We investigate whether information technology can help physicians more efficiently acquire new knowledge
in a clinical environment characterized by information overload. Our analysis makes use of data from
a randomized trial as well as a theoretical model of the influence that information technology has on
the acquisition of new medical knowledge. Although the theoretical framework we develop is conventionally
microeconomic, the model highlights the non-market and non-pecuniary influence activities that have
been emphasized in the sociological literature on technology diffusion. We report three findings.
First, empirical evidence and theoretical reasoning suggests that computer based decision support will
speed the diffusion of new medical knowledge when physicians are coping with information overload.
Secondly, spillover effects will likely lead to "underinvestment" in this decision support technology.
Third, alternative financing strategies common to new information technology, such as the use of
marketing dollars to pay for the decision support systems, may lead to undesirable outcomes if physician
information overload is sufficiently severe and if there is significant ambiguity in how best to respond
to the clinical issues identified by the computer.

James B. Rebitzer
John R. Mannix Medical Mutual Professor
Weatherhead School of Management, Economics Dept
11119 Bellflower Rd
Peter B. Lewis Building, Room 274
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
and NBER
james.rebitzer@case.edu
Mari Rege
Associate Professor
University of Stavanger,
4036 Stavanger, Norway
mari.rege@uis.no

Christopher Shepard
Verslefrikkveien 16
4019 Stavanger
Norway
SHEPARCR@HOTMAIL.COM

1. Introduction
Economists who study incentives in organizations have given much attention to problems
that arise when information is scarce. Indeed the premise of the vast literature on optimal
incentives is that principals have incomplete knowledge about agents and their actions. It has
long been recognized, however, that other important features of organizations are the result of
managing a superabundance of information, but economic research on these aspects of
organizations is less well developed (Brynjolfsson and Hitt, 2000). We consider economic
issues that arise when agents are presented with more information than they can handle.
The focus of our study is information overload among physicians. In medicine, the
number and variety of diseases and treatments threaten to overwhelm the information processing
capacities of individual doctors. This complexity is magnified by the rapid growth of new,
medically- relevant, knowledge. Failure to cope with this flood of information can cause
physicians to overlook important new treatments or new findings concerning the recommended
use of existing treatments. The net result is reduced care quality and slow diffusion of new
medical innovations (Institute Of Medicine Committee On Quality Of Health Care In America,
2000; 2001).
We investigate how information technology (abbreviated as IT) can help physicians cope
with information overload. Our analysis focuses on a particular type of computer system that has
drawn considerable attention in the medical community and in public policy debates: a physician
decision support tool. The system we study combines information from insurance billing records,
pharmacies and labs to construct an electronic medical record for each patient. Information from
this record is then passed through a sophisticated artificial intelligence program that compares
treatment received with protocols drawn from the medical literature. If a discrepancy between

actual and recommended care is observed, a message is sent to the physician. This message
might recommend that a certain patient is a good candidate for a specific lab or test.
Alternatively the message might suggest that specific medications should be taken or stopped.
The message includes citations to the medical literature, allowing the physician to read and
assess the relevance of the literature to the patient’s particular circumstances. By sending timely
and targeted messages to physicians about evidence-based treatment protocols, the system can
help doctors improve care quality and also increase the rate of diffusion of new medical
knowledge.
Our analysis is both empirical and theoretical. On the empirical side we review evidence
about the diffusion of medical knowledge. This review provides necessary context for
understanding findings from a randomized prospective trial suggesting that computer based
decision support tools can substantially enhance the diffusion of new medical knowledge among
physicians. On the theory side we construct a model of physician learning that is consistent with
the stylized facts about knowledge diffusion. Although the framework we develop is
conventionally microeconomic, the model highlights the non-market and non-pecuniary
influence activities that have been emphasized in the sociological literature on technology
diffusion (Skinner and Staiger, 2005). Using this model we consider both the likely effect of IT
systems on physician learning and whether private incentives are sufficient to support optimal
investments in information technology. This last issue is particularly important for public policy
because the Federal government is beginning large scale projects to promote the use of IT

1

enabled decision support tools in health care (Mullaney, 2005; President's Information
Technology Advisory Committee, 2004). 1
The remaining sections are organized as follows. In section two, we briefly review the
key empirical findings concerning the diffusion of new medical knowledge. In section three, we
present evidence from a randomized prospective trial suggesting that computer based decision
support tools can substantially enhance the diffusion of new medical knowledge among
physicians. In section four we develop a model of physician learning that is consistent with these
empirical findings. We then use this model to consider whether private incentives to invest in
computer based decision support technology are sufficient to assure adequate investment. We
conclude by assessing the policy implications of our model and suggest future directions for
research.
2. The Diffusion of Innovations in Medicine
The use of beta blocker drugs following heart attacks substantially reduces mortality
rates. This fact has been established for decades yet in 2000/2001 the level of compliance with
appropriate beta blocker use in the median state was just 69 percent. In some states the rate of
appropriate usage was as low as fifty percent and in others as high as eighty six percent (Skinner
and Staiger, 2005). This slow and variable take-up of an effective and inexpensive treatment
protocol for an important illness is a specific illustration of a more general phenomenon: some

1

Reference to the use of IT to reduce errors appeared in President Bush’s Economic Report
of the President in 2004 (President's Council of Economic Advisors, 2004) and in his
State of the Union Address. “By computerizing health records, we can avoid dangerous
medical mistakes, reduce costs, and improve care.”(President's Information Technology
Advisory Committee, 2004).

2

innovations appear to diffuse through the health care system much more slowly than one would
expect on the basis of their cost and efficacy. 2
Perhaps the broadest evidence supporting the slow and uneven diffusion of innovations
comes from the vast medical literature on the geographic variation in practice patterns. The
central finding in this literature is that the care delivered by doctors varies greatly from one
geographic region to another in ways that cannot be accounted for by underlying differences in
patient population, medical prices, technology or other exigencies. In the absence of other
explanations, it is hard to escape the implication that these variations are due to the incomplete
diffusion of the “best” medical practices to physicians. 3 These variations have substantial
economic implications as well – some states spend 40-60% more per patient on heart attack
treatment than others with no improvement in outcomes (Skinner and Staiger, 2005). A Rand
study described in the New York Times finds similarly wide geographic divergence in the
treatment of various cancers (Altman, 2005). Skinner, Fisher and Wennberg ( 2001) find that a
large component of Medicare expenditures (nearly twenty percent) is the result of geographic
variation in expenditures across 306 hospital referral regions. These expenditures, which are
associated with the treatment of the chronically ill, appear to offer no benefits in terms of
survival and the effects on quality of life are unclear. If even a portion of this variation is due to
cross region productivity differences, then slow diffusion of new best-practice methods may
have very substantial economic consequences. The source of geographic variations in practice
2

Of course not all slow diffusion of innovations is “too slow”. Some new innovations may diffuse
gradually because it takes time for providers to fully exploit the potential of the treatment for cost
reductions and quality improvement. This appears to be the case, for example, with the use of
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA), an important alternative to bypass
surgery for patients with coronary artery disease (see Cutler and Huckman, 2003).

3

For a discussions of this literature from an economist’s perspective see (Phelps, 1992 and 2000).
For a comparison of sociological and economic perspectives in the diffusion of innovations see
(Skinner and Staiger, 2005).

3

styles is poorly understood, but these variations suggest that physicians learn about treatments
and protocols from colleagues with whom they interact on a regular basis. These interactions
will play an important role in the theoretical analysis we develop in section four, below
Other evidence suggesting an imperfect diffusion of medical knowledge comes from the
resources that drug companies spend promoting their products. If the results of clinical studies
percolated swiftly and easily to providers, pharmaceutical companies would not need highpowered marketing campaigns and sales forces. Avorn ( 2004) describes how these campaigns
influence the decisions of practicing physicians. He also documents a number of instances
where pharmaceutical marketing appears to successfully promote the use of favored drugs even
when there is good clinical evidence that these drugs were ineffective or less effective than
inexpensive alternatives. In Avorn’s cases it was the clinical evidence concerning the
ineffectiveness of heavily marketed drugs that appears to spread too slowly. 4
A recent econometric study of the diffusion of anti-ulcer drugs finds that equilibrium
market shares are strongly determined by the resources drug companies devote to advertising
(Berndt et al., 2003). 5 This study also finds some evidence for consumption externalities that
enhance the diffusion of drugs towards their equilibrium market shares. Consumption
externalities occur when the use of a brand of drug is enhanced by the fact that many others are
using it. The authors argue that these consumption externalities are largely informational in
character, i.e. physicians and consumers make inferences about the qualities of a brand by the
fact that many others are using it. The existence of consumption externalities is important

4

A recent study of the use of anti-psychotics in Medicaid patients (Duggan, 2005) documents the heavy use
of expensive new generation anti-psychotics in spite of evidence that they perform no better than older and
less-expensive anti-psychotics.

5

The authors report that the elasticity of minutes of drug detailing to equilibrium market share is around 1,
suggesting that physicians are highly susceptible to this form of influence.

4

because they can inhibit the ability of superior new drugs and treatment modalities to enter the
market. 6
The rate of diffusion of new knowledge is of self-evident importance in an industry as
technologically dynamic as health care. Given this, it is surprising that the large and growing
literature on the effects of IT systems in health care pays so little attention to the issue. A recent
survey of 100 published studies of computer based decision support programs (Garg et al., 2005)
finds that the effects of these programs can be variable. No effort was made in the review,
however, to examine whether the variation in efficacy could be linked to how “new” the
recommendations were. Another survey of 257 studies of health IT systems (Chaudhry et al.,
2006) finds that these systems generally increased adherence to guideline care, but the analysis
did not consider potential differences between well-established guidelines and guidelines
embodying relatively new clinical protocols.
One reason for this gap in the literature is that it is often difficult to distinguish protocols
embodying relatively new knowledge from those that do not. Consider for example the
treatment for diabetes, an important and quite costly chronic disease. Disease management
programs for diabetes generally embody well understood treatment protocols (Gertler and
Simcoe, 2006; Beaulieu et al., 2007) but, as we document in the next section regarding the use
of ACE inhibitors, new discoveries can modify these protocols in subtle but important ways.
Tracking the differential effects of similar protocols requires sophisticated electronic medical
records systems and these record systems are still quite rare. Survey data collected in 2007-2008
reveals that only four percent of physicians have a fully functional electronic medical record

6

In the specific case of anti-ulcer drugs, the authors found that consumption externalities were not strong
enough to prevent a superior late entrant, Zantac, from overcoming the initial advantage of an entrenched
incumbent, Tagamet. Zantac overcame it’s disadvantage due to its superior medical qualities and also due
to unusually large expenditures on drug detailing (Berndt et al., 2003)

5

system in their office and only thirteen percent have a basic system (DesRoches et al., 2008).
Similarly low rates of IT adoption are reported for electronic medical records in hospital
emergency rooms and outpatient departments (Burt and Hing, 2005) and physician order entry
systems in hospitals (Cutler et al., 2005). The problem of studying the effects of the diffusion of
new knowledge is further limited by the fact that much of the research on IT comes from a small
number of organizations that are likely to be front-runners in adopting new evidence-based
protocols. Chaudry et. al.( 2006), in their comprehensive review, point out that a large portion of
the empirical work on health IT systems comes from the study of only four institutions: the
Regenstrief Institute; Brigham and Women’s Hospital/Partners Health Care ; the Department of
Veterans Affairs; and LDS Hospital/ Intermountain Health Care.
3. Empirical Evidence on the Influence of Computer Generated Messages.
Physicians are highly trained and highly motivated professionals. It is reasonable to
assume, therefore, that the slow and uneven distribution of new and effective therapies is not the
result of simple inattention. A more likely explanation is that it is difficult for physicians to keep
up with the rapidly changing state of medical knowledge and to understand what these changes
mean for the treatment of specific patients. If this is the case, then we should expect that an IT
based decision support system could help doctors learn about new treatments. In this section we
present empirical evidence from a randomized trial indicating that IT based decision support
tools might enhance the rate of diffusion of new medical treatments.

6

The data we use comes from a randomized controlled trial of a decision support
technology. 7 In this study patients under age 65 who were members of a single HMO were
randomly assigned to a study and a control group. Data from insurance billing records,
laboratory feeds and pharmacies were combined to construct a virtual electronic medical record
and the information in these records was passed through a sophisticated program that scanned for
clinical mistakes and also deviations from evidence based, best-practice protocols.
For patients in the study group, the information was scanned in real time and, if an issue
was detected, a message was sent to the physician. The message stated the name of the patient,
described the potential issue, and referenced the relevant medical literature. Roughly speaking
the messages sent could be divided into three categories: “start a drug”, “stop a drug” or “do a
test”. For patients in the control group, the clinical data was saved but not analyzed. After the
study was completed, the control group data was analyzed by the software and messages were
generated that would have been sent to physicians if the control patient had been in the study
group. The trial therefore allowed us to compare the rate of resolution of issues when physicians
enjoyed decision support (the study group) with the rate of resolution of the same issues when no
such support was available (the control group). The difference in resolution rates between the
study and control group is thus a measure of the influence of the information technology on
physicians. 8

7

For detailed descriptions of this trial see Javitt, Reisman et. al. ( 2005); and Javitt, Rebitzer and Reisman (
2008).

8

Although the system we describe used cutting edge information technology, the source of the
information (billing records, and data feeds from pharmacies and lab) ensured that physician’s
information about the patient was almost always superior to that available to the computer
system. For these reasons, the messages generated by the system were communicated as
recommendations that the physician should feel free to ignore. Thus it was not at all certain at the
start of the study that the messages would have any influence at all.

7

For our purposes, we would like to know if the messages from the decision support tool
increased the rate of adoption of new medical evidence. We therefore focused our attention on
messages concerning the class of medications known as ACE-inhibitors. ACE-inhibitors were
first approved by the FDA in 1981 for treatment of severe hypertension. Shortly before the
randomized trial began in 2001, several major clinical trials established the beneficial effect of
ACE-inhibitors for patients with mild and moderate hypertension, heart failure, past heart
attacks, chronic renal disease, certain subgroups of diabetics and patients at high risk for
cardiovascular events. Taken together, these trials greatly expanded the number of patients for
whom an ACE-inhibitor was indicated. One particularly important trial was the Heart Outcomes
Prevention Evaluation or HOPE trial. The computer system was set up to include
recommendations from the HOPE trial among the messages it sent to physicians. By comparing
the resolution rates for patients in the study group who triggering the HOPE trial based
recommendations with control group patients who would have triggered those recommendations,
we can directly assess the influence of computer generated messages on newly discovered
medical protocols.
The sample of participants in column one of Table 1 consists of those who would have
qualified for an ACE-inhibitor on the basis of the HOPE trial criteria, but who were not receiving
the drug. The dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the issue of ACE-inhibitor
use is successfully resolved, i.e. if records indicate that the patient received ACE-inhibitors
within 270 days of the message being sent to the physician. The coefficient on the variable Study
captures the differences in success rates between the study and the control group. Patients in the
study group whose physician received computer generated messages regarding ACE-inhibitors,
were thirteen percentage points more likely to take up the ACE-inhibitor than those in the control

8

group. To put this result in context, the resolution rate in the control group whose physicians
received no messages was about 0.14. Thus the decision support tool nearly doubled resolution
rates.
In column two of Table 1, we run analogous probit regressions for participants who
received “add a drug” recommendations other than those relating to HOPE trial
recommendations. We observe that the rate of resolution of these “add a drug”
recommendations was 0.258 in the control group. The effect of being in the study group was to
increase the resolution rate by 0.035. This difference is statistically insignificant and
behaviorally not very important.
Comparing columns 1 and 2 it is clear that the decision support system had a more
substantial effect on the relatively new ACE-inhibitor recommendation than on all other
recommendations that suggested adding a drug. At the time of our study, the new clinical
evidence regarding ACE-inhibitors was widely promoted in the conventional manner, i.e. via
disease management programs and journal articles. We suspect, on the basis of informal
conversations with providers, that the computer generated messages had extra influence because
they were reliable, timely, and focused physician attention on a specific issue concerning a
specific patient. Put differently what the IT support tool did that other conventional
communication channels did not, was link a useful general recommendation to a specific
patient’s situation.
The results in Table 1 are consistent with the possibility that IT based decision support
can enhance the diffusion of new medical knowledge, but it is important to observe that they do
not constitute a definitive proof of that claim. Non-ACE “add a drug” messages are a mix of
many different recommendations. If these messages have heterogeneous effects, pooling the

9

drugs together may create the impression that the entire set of non-ACE, “add a drug” messages
are ineffective when some of them were in fact quite effective. Pursing this alternative
interpretation of the data would require a larger study that would allow us to better analyze
specific sub-sets of the non-ACE “add a drug” recommendations.
4. Influence and Physician Learning: A Simple Analytical Framework
In this section we develop a model of physician learning in an environment characterized
by information overload. The evidence in the preceding discussions suggests that a reasonable
model of physician learning must account for three empirical relationships. Firstly, new clinical
knowledge does diffuse through the health care system, but the rate of diffusion is often slow.
Secondly, as the geographic variations in practice patterns suggest, physicians learn about new
medical treatments from other physicians with whom they interact on a daily basis. Thirdly, IT
based decision support technology can influence physician behavior and this influence is greatest
for newly discovered treatment protocols.
We introduce slow diffusion of new knowledge into our model by assuming that
physicians are hampered by two cognitive limitations: the flow of new medical knowledge
exceeds the fixed information processing capacities of individual physicians; and it is difficult
for physicians to link the new medical knowledge they acquire to the clinical needs of specific
patients.
To capture the role of informal interactions in the process of knowledge diffusion we
assume that physicians compensate for their cognitive limitations by relying on the
recommendations of colleagues with whom they interact on a day-to-day basis. Colleague
recommendations are helpful because they can link specific treatments to the clinical needs of
particular patients under a physician’s care, but these recommendations are not sufficient to
10

resolve the problem of information overload. After all, physicians making recommendations
have limits on their own cognitive abilities and these limits will generally make it hard for them
to keep abreast of all the newest procedures. For this reason, physicians will also have to devote
time to independent reading in medical journals. Reading journal articles may expose the
physician to the newest innovations, but journal articles do not identify for the physician the
specific patients for which the innovation applies. The influence of IT enabled decision support
follows naturally in this set-up. In comparison to traditional learning modalities (colleagues’
recommendations and independent reading of medical journals) the computer based decision
support tools are more likely to suggest treatments that are both new and relevant to the care of a
specific patient. 9 As a result, the new information technology will have greater influence on
physicians and will, under plausible conditions, enhance the rate of diffusion of new knowledge.
Model Set-up
In every period medical research generates s new treatments that are relevant to the care
of a physician’s patients. A physicians’ objective when reading about new medical treatments is
to maximize the sum of medical benefits from treatment adoption across his patients. We
introduce limitations in physician information processing capabilities in the simplest possible
way by assuming that in each period physicians can read n articles with n < s. 10 Physicians are
also limited in their ability to apply information about new treatments to specific patients. We
capture this aspect of limited cognition by stipulating that when reading about a new treatment in

9

One might argue that specialists are at least as good as computer data bases in keeping up with
new developments in their discipline. This may be so, but computer based decision support
systems have the advantage of giving primary providers access to the relevant knowledge of
specialists in many disciplines.

10

We could easily endogenize n by including doctor’s effort cost of reading about treatments. This
would complicate the analysis, but not add any additional insight.

11

a medical journal, the likelihood that a physician identifies the treatment as relevant to their
patients is r , where r < 1 . The value of r is determined by the relevance of the new treatment to
his or her patient population and by the probability that the physician will recognize the
relevance of the treatment. Because physicians cannot read about all new treatments produced in
each period and sometimes fail to see the relevance of a treatment, there will always be a stock
of potentially relevant treatments that the physician will have missed in the period in which they
were introduced.
In fields as technologically dynamic as medicine, the value of innovations tends to
depreciate over time. We capture this depreciation through the assumption that patients
experience benefits B when the physician adopts a relevant treatment in the same period it was
discovered, a benefit Bq, where q<1, when the physician adopts a relevant treatment in the
period after discovery, and benefit 0 from treatments that are more than two periods old. Because
treatments older than two periods are clinically irrelevant, we can unambiguously refer to
established treatments as treatments whose discovery occurred in the prior period.
Physicians can learn about the relevance of established treatments from interactions with
other doctors. The advantage of learning from other physicians is that colleagues identify
treatments that are relevant to specific patients. The disadvantage is that colleagues are also
overloaded by new information and therefore cannot keep abreast of the newest procedures. We
represent this feature by assuming that colleagues recommend only relevant established
treatments – never new ones. Thus, the expected marginal benefit of reading a journal article
about a treatment recommended by colleagues is qB . We model the heightened relevance of
treatments recommended by colleagues by assuming that q > r . In this way, information flows
have a local flavor because the physician always prefers reading about the highly relevant

12

treatments recommended by informal interactions with colleagues than independent reading
about new treatments in journals.
We focus on an equilibrium in which the behavior of all doctors in a region can be
captured by a single representative physician. Let xt and yt respectively denote the number of
established and new treatments the physician chooses to read about in period t. Let zt denote the
number of recommendations a doctor receives from her colleagues. We endogenize zt by
assuming that the recommendations a doctor gives come from the new treatments that he has
adopted for his own patients in the previous period. Formally we capture this by assuming that
zt = α ryt −1 , where α is a parameter and ryt −1 simply denotes the average number of new
treatments that physicians adopted in the previous period. Since the physicians always prefer
reading about treatments recommended by colleagues to reading about new treatments in
journals, this implies that physicians learn about the following number of treatments from
colleagues
(1)

xt = α ryt −1 ,

so that information on the remaining treatments comes from reading medical journals. Thus
(2)

yt = n − xt .

We focus on the steady state equilibrium in which a physician does not change her
learning choices from one period to the other, i.e. xt = x and yt = y for all t . This, together with
equations (1) and (2) implies that in equilibrium physicians read about y =

treatments and x =

n
new
1+ α r

α rn
established treatments. The flow of new knowledge in our model is
1+ α r

depicted graphically in Figure One.

13

Introducing Computer-based Decision Support
We now introduce computer based decision support systems. As described above, these
systems compare a patient’s treatment with best practice protocols drawn from the medical
literature. If the system finds a discrepancy, a message is sent to the physician. New treatments
are written into the computer’s software in each period and we assume that the technology only
sends messages concerning new treatments that are clinically relevant for a physician’s
patients. 11, 12 The physician can expect to receive θ m messages from the decision support
technology each period, where m is the number of new treatments entering the data base in each
period and θ is the fraction of treatments relevant to the physician’s patients. From the
physician’s perspective, the benefit of reading about a treatment recommended in a computer
generated message is given by B (it is always new and relevant), whereas the benefit of reading
about a treatment recommended by a colleague is qB, where q is the discount factor reflecting
the delay in learning about new treatments from colleagues. Thus a doctor will always prefer
reading about a computer generated recommendation over a colleague’s recommendation.
It is costly to incorporate new innovations into the decision support software, so it is
unlikely that the decision support software will ever be sufficiently comprehensive to serve as
the sole source of recommendations for physician learning. Rather than modeling these costs
explicitly, we assume that θ m < n , implying that a doctor who has access to the technology will
read about all the treatments recommended in the computer generated messages and still have
enough mental “shelf space” to continue learning about established treatments recommended by

11

Relaxing this assumption by allowing the technology to send messages about both new and
established treatments would complicate the analysis considerably, but not affect the results.

12

Assuming instead that the technology also sent out some erroneous messages would not change
the results of our analysis as long as the likelihood that a message is useful is larger than q.

14

other sources. Put differently, the heightened timeliness and specificity of computer generated
recommendations displaces, but doesn’t eliminate, the use of other learning modalities.
In the US health care system, clinical data about patients rarely sits in a common
electronic data base. The IT revolution has been slow coming to hospitals and only in recent
years have large expenditures in electronic medical record systems begun. Physicians’ offices
are typically paper based and, where they have moved to electronic records, these systems often
do not interface neatly with hospital systems (DesRoches et al., 2008). 13 Common standards for
electronic medical records systems are only now being put in place.
Efficient decision support software requires that patient information reside in a single
data base or a set of interconnected data bases, and this sort of integration is precluded by the
Balkanized system of medical records maintained by providers. Insurance companies, in
contrast, are well positioned to act as aggregators of medical information because most clinical
transactions involving their members appear coded into their data bases for billing purposes.
This is why the decision support technology we discussed in section three was designed to use
insurers’ data and perhaps this also explains why the informatics company that developed the
decision support technology was eventually purchased by a large health insurer.
Insurers’ data systems are also fragmented in that they are confined to individuals who
are current policy holders. For this reason, computer based decision will have both a direct and

13

“…to be effective, CDSS [clinical decision support systems] diagnostic systems require detailed, patientspecific clinical information (history, physical results, medications, laboratory test results), which in most
health care settings resides in a variety of paper and automated datasets that cannot easily be integrated.
Past efforts to develop automated medical record systems have not been very successful because of the lack
of common standards for coding data, the absence of a data network connecting the many health care
organizations and clinicians involved in patient care, and a number of other factors.” Institute Of Medicine
Committee On Quality Of Health Care In America, 2001, p. 154.

15

an indirect effect on physician learning. The direct effect is captured by the θm computer
generated messages a physician receives. The indirect effect results from the way that
knowledge acquired from the computer system spills over to other physicians who have no
access to the computer system. To capture these spillovers we stipulate that a share β of
physicians have access to a particular decision support technology and a share (1 − β ) does not
have access to the technology. Both groups of physicians interact with each other so that
information that flows directly to physicians with access to the technology can flow via
recommendations to other physicians not included in the system. 14
Let the subscript i ∈ {1, 2} reflect whether the physician has technology access ( i = 1 ), or
does not have technology access ( i = 2 ). As in the previous section let z denote the number of
recommendations a doctor of type i receives from colleagues, where z = α (the average number
of new treatments that physicians adopted in the previous period.). Because a physician will
always read about all the care messages generated by the decision support technology
and θ m < n , we have
(3)

z = α ( β (θ m + ry1 ) + (1 − β ) ry2 )

As in the previous section, the expected benefit from reading about a treatment generated
by a colleague’s recommendation is greater than the expected benefit from reading
independently selected newly published articles (q>r). Thus all physicians will read all
colleagues’ recommended treatments before reading independently selected journal articles. We
focus our analysis on the equilibrium in which all read about some new treatments, i.e.

14

Our analysis would not change if we assume that share (1-β) of physicians had access to a
different computer based system.

16

θ n + z < n . In this case x1 = x2 = z and the number of independently selected journal articles a
doctor chooses to read about is given by
(4)

y1 = n − θ m − z

(5)

y2 = n − z

Equations (3) - (5) determine steady state equilibrium y1* , y2* and x1* = x2* = z * . The steady
state disposition of new knowledge with computer support software is depicted in Figure Two.
From this set-up it is easy to prove the following lemma.
Lemma 1: The Effects of Computer Support Systems on Physician Learning: If
n > θ m (1 + α r + αβ (1 − r ) ) , then there exist a steady state equilibrium in which the doctors with
access to the technology will read about all treatments recommended by the technology and by
colleagues, and some treatments from independently selected journals. Doctors without the
technology will read about all treatments recommended by colleagues and some treatments from
independently selected journal articles. Doctors with the technology access will read fewer
independently selected journal articles than doctors without technology access.
Proof: see appendix
We are interested in understanding how the decision support technology affects
knowledge diffusion. For this purpose, we define knowledge diffusion among doctors of type i
as:
(6)

η1 ( m ) = ry1* + θ m + qx1*

(7)

η2 ( m ) = ry2* + qx2*

where ηi simply denotes the total number of relevant treatments that a doctor of type i will learn
about and adopt in each period. As before, established treatments are discounted by q. We
define the diffusion of knowledge about a treatment included in the technology and a treatment
not included in the technology respectively as:
(8)

⎛

μt ( m ) = β ⎜ θ +
⎝

⎛ ⎛
ry1* ⎞
ry2*
ry1* ⎞
ry2* ⎞
q
+
−
+
+
+
−
1
β
β
θ
1
β
(
)
(
)
⎜
⎟
⎟
⎜
⎟
s ⎠
s
s ⎠
s ⎠
⎝ ⎝

17

(9)

⎛ ⎛ ry1* ⎞
⎛ ry1* ⎞
ry2*
ry2* ⎞
q
+
−
+
+
−
1
β
β
1
β
(
)
(
)
⎜ ⎜
⎟
⎟
⎟
s
s ⎠
⎝ s ⎠
⎝ ⎝ s ⎠

μ nt ( m ) = β ⎜

In (8) and (9), the first term denotes the likelihood that doctors using the decision support
technology adopt the treatment in the first period. The second term denotes the likelihood that
doctors without the technology adopt the treatment in the first period. The last term denotes the
likelihood that any doctor adopts the treatment in the second period as a result of
recommendations from colleagues. Comparing (8) and (9) we can see that adding a new
treatment protocol to the decision support data base increases the likelihood of adoption by θ in
the first period and by qθ in the second period. Let ω denote total adoption of new knowledge
among all doctors. Note that equations (6) and (7), and equations (8) and (9) are necessarily
related as follows:
(10)

ω = ( s − m ) μ nt + mμt
= βη1 + (1 − β )η 2

By differentiating (6)-(10) with respect to m we establish the following proposition:
Proposition 1: Expanding Computer Based Decision Support Enhances The Rate of
Knowledge Diffusion: Increasing the number of treatments in the technology increases overall
knowledge diffusion among all doctors, even among those who do not have access to the
technology. This holds even though the rate of diffusion of treatments not in the computer
database will decline.
Proof: see appendix
An important implication of the analysis so far is that the spread of IT-based decision
support is likely to reduce geographic variation in practice patterns. To see this assume that:
underlying patient clinical needs are the same across regions; and that the medical informatics
company offers the same decision support technology in all the regions in which it operates.
What differs across regions then are: (i) the degree to which the technology has penetrated a
18

region (captured by β) and (ii) the degree to which physicians in a region rely upon their
idiosyncratic reading of articles in medical journals. We have shown in Lemma 1 that the
presence of information technology displaces reading that is not stimulated by recommendations
from colleagues or the IT system. Inspection of the proof of Lemma 1 shows that as m increases,
both steady state y1 and y2 decrease. Thus in a steady state as m increases, the idiosyncratic
reading of journals (the sort of reading that leads to variation across regions) becomes less
important for all physicians. The same proof also shows that as m increases, steady state
recommendations from colleagues (z) increases. By the logic of our model, the only reason that z
would increase with m is that as m increases, the IT system identifies more relevant protocols in
the first period that they are released. This source of new information is, however, common
across regions. Thus, as m increases, cross-regional variation in observed practice patterns
should decline.
Private Incentives to Invest in Decision Support System
Given the central role that health insurers currently play as information aggregators in our
health care system, we begin by analyzing their incentives to invest in physician decision support
systems.

We simplify our analysis by assuming that the insurer is a Health Maintenance

Organization (HMO) that must attract physicians to sign on to its network of providers (Cooper
and Rebitzer, 2006). Maintaining our assumption that providers derive a direct benefit from
offering their patients better care, the HMO will be able to attract physicians to the network at
lower cost by investing in a decision support technology that improves care quality. 15

15

Alternatively we could assume that the purchasers of health insurance would pay more for
insurance if the insurer supplied decision support technology to physicians that improved care
outcomes. Because physicians in our setup experience the same utility from improved outcomes
as patients do, the results under these assumptions would be unchanged.

19

The flow of new knowledge with decision support is depicted in Figure Two. It is clear
from this Figure that doctors who do not have access to the decision support technology still
benefit in period two from the learning induced by the computer technology in period one. This
learning spillover leads to Corollary 3. To establish this, let p be the cost of adopting a new
treatment. Then, the net private benefits of an insurer with technology access is given by

η1 ( B − p ) , whereas the total net benefit to providers is given by (η1 + η2 )( B − p ) . Thus, the
Corollary follows from the fact that both η1 and η2 are increasing in m, which was established in
Proposition 1.
Corollary 1: Insurers will Under-invest in Computer Based Decision Support.
The underinvestment in the new technology is the result of knowledge spillovers from
one set of providers to another. The conventional economic response to positive externalities is
to internalize them with subsidies financed by lump sum taxes. This approach is, however,
famously difficult to implement. In this case, however, an alternative approach might be feasible
because what appears as externalities to health care providers and insurers are actually sources of
revenue to other market actors. The pharmaceutical and device manufacturers profit from the
informal spread of new information about their products and may therefore have more powerful
incentives than providers and insurers to promote the spread of computer based decision support
tools.
A pharmaceutical or device manufacturer’s increased profit from including a treatment in
the decision support system is given by

Δπ = ( μt ( m + 1) − μnt ( m ) ) p

20

The next proposition shows that for a sufficiently large price of treatment, p, the seller of the
treatment is willing to pay more for the inclusion of a new treatment than would a provider or an
insurer.
Proposition 2: Pharmaceutical and Drug Makers Can Have More Powerful Incentives to
Invest in Computer Based Decision Support than Insurers: There exists a p1 < B , s.t. if
p > p1 then the seller of a new treatment is always willing to pay more than the HMO for
including this treatment into the technology.
Proof: see appendix
Proposition 2 has potentially important public policy implications. It suggests that one
might create appropriate incentives to invest in computer support technology by allowing
pharmaceutical firms and device manufacturers to invest in decision support technology. For
concreteness imagine that this investment takes the form of paying the IT company who runs the
decision support system to include their new products into the computer system’s database. This
sort of investment might avoid cumbersome government bureaucracy while ensuring that the
health care system has a sufficiently comprehensive decision support technology.
This strategy raises, however, a concern when one considers the cognitive limitations
under which physicians operate. Paying for the inclusion of one or another company’s products
in the computer support technology displaces other forms of learning that might lead physicians
to adopt different treatments. This crowding out of learning about other products creates
negative externalities and therefore creates incentives to over-invest in the decision support
technology- a point made in the following proposition:
Proposition 3: Pharmaceuticals and Device Makers May Have Incentives to Over-invest in
Computer Based Decision Support Technology. There exists a p2 < B , s.t. if p > p2 then the
seller of a new treatment is willing to pay more than the social marginal benefit for including this
treatment in the technology. Other pharmaceuticals will bear the full cost of this overinvestment.
Health care providers and insurers will benefit from the overinvestment.
Proof: see appendix
21

If one overlooks the effects of wasted resources resulting from over investment by
pharmaceutical and device makers, Proposition 3 seems to suggest that private financing of
decision support systems may be a sensible way to offset the investment shortfall resulting from
knowledge spillovers. Just as Google finances enhanced information flow on the internet
through the use of marketing dollars, so might the marketing efforts of pharmaceutical and
device makers be used to support enhanced information flows about treatment protocols in the
health care system. As we demonstrate in the next section, however, this conclusion rests on
unrealistically strong assumptions about the unambiguous nature of new knowledge.
Ambiguity, Influence and Marketing
We have so far considered messages whose information content is unambiguously
correct. In many settings, however, the right drug or treatment is less clear. Suppose, for
example, that a pharmaceutical company has a patent for an anti-ulcer medication, a class of
drugs for which there exist a number of competing brands (Berndt et al., 2003). Assume that all
of these anti-ulcer drugs are effective, but no single drug dominates the others. Rather each drug
works better for a subset of the ulcer population, but it is hard to identify ex-ante which patient
would benefit most from which drug. In this setting the pharmaceutical company might
profitably subsidize a message that suggests this drug to all physicians with ulcer patients
because the message may prove relevant to some subset of physicians. We will refer to this sort
of message as a marketing message because its expected relevance to the treatment of a specific
ulcer patient is low.
As before, assume that the technology sends each physician θ m targeted messages. In
addition the technology sends marketing messages for k treatments. For each patient, there is
some probability, δ > 0, that the marketing message will prove relevant to some of his patients,

22

but the relevance of the marketing message is less than other messages included sent by the
system so that δ < θ . Doctors know that the decision support software includes both marketing
and non-marketing messages, but cannot identify any individual message as the result of
marketing. Thus doctors respond to each message by consulting the cited literature and deciding
whether the recommended drug is appropriate for their patient. The likelihood that the message
is suggesting a new relevant treatment is given by

λ=

δ k +θm
k +θ m

Proposition 4 states that marketing messages can have a negative impact on the rate of
diffusion of new knowledge and overall welfare. The intuition is very simple: As long as λ > r ,
the expected relevance of messages sent by the decision support tool exceeds that available
through other channels. Thus a doctor will prefer reading about a treatment recommended by the
decision support tool to any other learning modality, despite his knowledge that the messages
include k marketing messages. Getting doctors to read the k marketing messages is profitable for
the drug company because some of these drugs will actually prove relevant to a patient and
therefore generate sales. Offsetting this private benefit, however, is the opportunity cost of
inducing physicians to read about relatively low value suggestions contained in marketing
messages. Such reading displaces physicians’ reading about treatments from independently
selected journal articles. This displacement has a negative impact on knowledge diffusion if δ< r,
i.e. the expected relevance of a marketing message is lower than expected relevance of
independent reading in journal articles. This reasoning leads directly to the following
proposition:
Proposition 4: Marketing Messages: If δ < r, then the inclusion of marketing messages has a
negative impact on the rate of diffusion of new knowledge and overall welfare, even though the
firm will benefit from such a message.
23

Proof: see appendix
This result suggests that although it might be privately profitable to use decision support
software as a sophisticated cybernetic drug detailer, doing so could undermine the social benefits
produced by the technology.
5. Conclusion
Physicians are overwhelmed by the task of managing vast amounts of information
relating to patient conditions and new treatment protocols. This information overload acts as a
drag on the diffusion of new knowledge. IT enabled decision support tools have attracted the
attention of health care providers and policy makers because they offer a way to alleviate this
drag and hence to improve care quality. Increasing the rate of diffusion of new knowledge might
also have the effect of increasing returns to innovative activity and therefore stimulate more
rapid innovation. Just as small increases in productivity growth rates accumulate over time to
transform living standards; so enhanced innovation rates resulting from the faster diffusion of
new knowledge could yield transformations in the quality of health care.
Because of the fragmented state of the IT infra-structure in the health care system,
insurance companies currently play a central role as information aggregators and are therefore in
a good position to finance investments in decision support. Our model suggests, however, that
insurers’ incentives to invest will generally be inadequate. The problem is the result of
knowledge spillovers: doctors who learn about a new treatment protocol from the IT system will
likely transmit that information to other physicians through informal interactions. These
spillovers improve care quality, but the benefits do not accrue to the insurers financing the
decision support software. Our analysis of limited mental “shelf space” and clinical ambiguity
suggests that alternative approaches, such as financing investment in improved information flows

24

with marketing dollars, may undermine the social value generated by decision support
technology.
Given the current surge in investments in health care IT and the positive and negative
externalities inherent in these investments, the role of public policy in guiding these investments
should be an important area of future research.

25

Appendix
Proof of Lemma 1: Solving equations (3)-(5) for y1 , y2 and z implies:
n − αβθ m (1 − r )
−θ m
1+ α r
n − αβθ m (1 − r )
y2 =
1+αr
α rn + αβθ m (1 − r )
z=
1+α r
y1 =

This denotes an equilibrium if q1 , q2 and z > 0. Thus, we must have n > θ m (1 + α r + αβ (1 − r ) ) .

Proof of Proposition 1: Differentiating equations (6)-(10) with respect to m yields:

1 + α r (1 − β ) + qαβ
∂η1
= θ (1 − r )
>0
∂m
1+ αr
∂η2
q−r
= αβθ (1 − r )
>0
∂m
1+ α r
∂μt
1 + qα
= − β rθ (1 + α )
<0
∂m
s (1 + α r )
∂μnt
1 + qα
= − β rθ (1 + α )
<0
∂m
s (1 + α r )
∂ω
qα + 1
= βθ (1 − r )
>0
∂m
1+ αr

Proof of Proposition 2: First note that

Δπ = ( μt ( m + 1) − μnt ( m ) ) p
= βθ ( qα + 1)

s + sα r − r − α r
>0
s (1 − α r )

The pharmaceuticals’ willingness to pay for including the treatment is Δπ ⋅ p , whereas an
HMO’s willingness to pay is η1 ( B − p ) . Thus, the pharmaceutical is willing to pay more than the

26

HMO if

p>

η1
B . Since Δπ > 0 this implies that there exist a p1 < B , s.t. if p > p1 then
Δπ + η1

the seller of a new treatment is always willing to pay more than the HMO for including this
treatment into the technology.

Proof of Proposition 3: The net benefits of the HMOs are given by ω ( B − p ) . The net benefits
of the pharmaceuticals are ω p . Thus, the social marginal net benefit is

∂ω
B . Using the
∂m

calculations from the proof of Propositions 1 and 2, the pharmaceutical’s marginal net benefit is
larger than the social marginal net benefit if

βθ ( qα + 1)

This implies p >

s + sα r − r − α r
1+ α q
p > βθ (1 − r )
B
s (1 − α r )
1+ α r

(1 − r ) s
s + α sr − r − α r

B , where

(1 − r ) s
s + α sr − r − α r

< 1 since s > 1. Thus, there exists

a p2 < B , s.t. if p > p2 then the seller of a new treatment is willing to pay more than the social
marginal benefit for including this treatment in the technology.

Proof of Proposition 4: Now we need to distinguish between diffusion of three different types of
treatments: treatments in the technology that are marketed, treatments in the technology that are
not marketed, and treatments that are not in the technology. Diffusion of a treatment in the
technology that is marketed is given by:
⎛

μl t ( m ) = β ⎜ δ +
⎝

⎛ ⎛
ry1* ⎞
ry2*
ry* ⎞
ry* ⎞
+ q ⎜ β ⎜ δ + 1 ⎟ + (1 − β ) 2 ⎟ )
⎟ + (1 − β )
s ⎠
s
s ⎠
s ⎠
⎝ ⎝

Thus, total adoption is given by

27

ω = ( s − m − k ) μnt + mμt + k μl t
= ( βθ m (1 − r ) + nr + β k (δ − r ) )
We can see that

1+ α q
1+ αr

∂ω
< 0 if δ < r . Thus, if δ< r, then the inclusion of marketing messages has a
∂k

negative impact on the rate of diffusion of new knowledge.
l ( m ) to μ ( m ) we can see that adding a new treatment protocol to the
By comparing μ
t
nt

decision support data base increases the likelihood of adoption by βδ in the first period and by

qβδ in the second period. Thus, the pharmaceuticals have positive willingness to pay for
inclusion of marketing messages.

28

Table 1
(1)
Probit

(2)
Probit

Successful Resolution
"Add Ace Inhibitor for Successful Resoltion
Hope Qualifier Drug" for Any Other "Add
Message
a Drug" Message
[0.141]
[0.258]
Study
Number of patients
Number of patients in study group
Log pseudo-likelihood

0.130
(2.82)*
311
155
-154.018

0.035
(0.69)
290
166
-158.877

In column 1, the sample consists of participants who would have qualified for an Ace inhibitor on the basis of the
HOPE trial criteria, but who were not receiving the drug according to computer records.
In column 2 the sample consists of participants who received an "add a drug" message other than that in column 1.
The message is successfully resolved if there is evidence in the data base that the patient started the
relevant drug within 270 days after the message was sent.
Robust z statistics in parentheses. [ ] is mean of dep. var. in the control group in 2001
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%
Coefficients are expressed as "derivatives". Thus in column 1 members in the study group were 13
percentage points more likely to have resolved the issue successfully than those in the control group.

1

2

3

References:
ALTMAN, L. K. (2005) Studies Find Disparity in U.S. Cancer Care. New York Times.
AVORN, J. (2004) Powerful Medicines: The Benefits, Risks and Costs of Prescription Drugs, NEW YORK, ALFRED A. KNOPF.
BEAULIEU, N., CUTLER, D., HO, K., ISHAM, G., LINDQUIST, T., NELSON, A. & O'CONNOR, P. (2007) The Business Case for
Diabetes Disease Management for Managed Care Organizations. Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 9, 1-36.
BERNDT, E. R., PINDYCK, R. S. & AZOULAY, P. (2003) Consumption Externalities and Diffusion in Pharmaceutical Markets:
Antiulcer Drugs. Journal of Industrial Economics, 51, 243-71.
BRYNJOLFSSON, E. & HITT, L. M. (2000) Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation and
Business Performance. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14, 23-48.
BURT, C. & HING, E. (2005) Use of Computerized Clinical Support Systems in Medical Settings: United States, 2001-03. Advance
Data From Vital and Health Statistics. Hyattsville, MD, National Center for Health Statistics.
CHAUDHRY, B., JEROME, W., SHINYI, W., MAGLIONE, M., MOJICA, W., ROTH, E., MORTON, S. C. & SHEKELLE, P. G.
(2006) Systematic Review: Impact of Health Information Technology on Quality, Efficiency, and Costs of Medical Care.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 144, E12-E22.
COOPER, D. J. & REBITZER, J. B. (2006) Managed Care and Physician Incentives: The Effects of Competition on the Cost and
Quality of Care. B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis and Policy: Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 5, 1-30.
CUTLER, D. M., FELDMAN, N. E. & HORWITZ, J. R. (2005) U.S. Adoption Of Computerized Physician Order Entry Systems.
Health Affairs, 24, 1654-1663.
CUTLER, D. M. & HUCKMAN, R. S. (2003) Technological Development and Medical Productivity: The Diffusion of Angioplasty
in New York State. Journal of Health Economics 22, 30.
DESROCHES, C. M., CAMPBELL, E. G., RAO, S. R., DONELAN, K., FERRIS, T. G., JHA, A., KAUSHAL, R., LEVY, D. E.,
ROSENBAUM, S., SHIELDS, A. E. & BLUMENTHAL, D. (2008) Electronic Health Records in Ambulatory Care- A
National Survey of Physicians. New England Journal of Medicine, 359, 10.
DUGGAN, M. (2005) Do New Prescription Drugs Pay for Themselves? The Case of Second-Generation Antipsychotics. Journal of
Health Economics, 24, 1-31.
GARG, A. X., ADHIKARI, N. K. J., MCDONALD, H., ROSAS-ARELLANO, M. P., DEVEREAUX, P. J., BEYENE, J., SAM, J. &
HAYNES, R. B. (2005) Effects of Computerized Clinical Decision Support Systems on Practitioner Performance and Patient
Outcomes: A Systematic Review. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical Association, 293, 15.
GERTLER, P. J. & SIMCOE, T. S. (2006) Disease Management. SSRN.
INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE COMMITTEE ON QUALITY OF HEALTH CARE IN AMERICA (2000) To Err is Human: Building a
Safer Health System. IN KOHN, L. T., CORRIGAN, J. M. & DONALDSON, M. S. (Eds.). Washington DC, National
Academy Press.
4

INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE COMMITTEE ON QUALITY OF HEALTH CARE IN AMERICA (2001) Crossing the Quality
Chasm: A New Health Care System for the 20th Century, Washington D.C, National Academy Press.
JAVITT, J. C., REBITZER, J. B. & REISMAN, L. (2008) Information Technology and Medical Missteps: Evidence from a
Randomized Trial. Journal of Health Economics, 27, 585-602.
JAVITT, J. C., STEINBERG, G., COUCH, J. B., LOCKE, T., JACQUES, J., JUSTER, I. & REISMAN, L. (2005) Use of a Claims
Data-Based Sentinal System to Improve Compliance with Clinical Guidelines: Results of a Randomized Prospective Study.
American Journal of Managed Care, 11, 21-31.
MULLANEY, T. J. (2005) A Booster Shot for Medical Data-Sharing. Business Week Online.
PHELPS, C. E. (1992) Diffusion of Information in Medical Care. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 6, 23-42.
PHELPS, C. E. (2000) Information Diffusion and Best Practice Adoption. Handbook of Health Economics. Volume 1A. Amsterdam;
New York and Oxford, Elsevier Science, North-Holland.
PRESIDENT'S COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISORS (2004) Economic Report of the President, Washington, D.C., United States
Government Printing Office.
PRESIDENT'S INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ADVISORY COMMITTEE (2004) Revolutionizing Health Care Through
Information Technology. Arlington, VA, Executive Office of the President of the United States.
SKINNER, J., FISHER, E. & WENNBERG, J. E. (2001) The Efficiency of Medicare. National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper Series, No. 8395.
SKINNER, J. & STAIGER, D. (2005) Technology Adoption From Hybrid Corn to Beta Blockers. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers: 11251.

5

