NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE VALUE OF LIFE IN GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM
Anupam Jena
Casey Mulligan
Tomas J. Philipson
Eric Sun
Working Paper 14157
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14157

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

We are thankful for useful comments from Ryan Edwards, David Bloom, David Canning, Dana Goldman,
Darius Lakdawalla, David Weil, and seminar participants at Harvard University, the Human Capital
Conference at SUNY Buffalo, the Kiel Institute, and RAND. Jena and Sun received support from the
Bing Center for Health Economics and RAND and the NIH through the University of Chicago Medical
Scientist Training Program. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Anupam Jena, Casey Mulligan, Tomas J. Philipson, and Eric Sun. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Value of Life in General Equilibrium
Anupam Jena, Casey Mulligan, Tomas J. Philipson, and Eric Sun
NBER Working Paper No. 14157
July 2008
JEL No. I1,I10,I31,J1,J17,O1
ABSTRACT
Perhaps the most important change of the last century was the great expansion of life itself -- in the
US alone, life expectancy increased from 48 to 78 years. Recent economic estimates confirm this claim,
finding that the economic value of the gain in longevity was on par with the value of growth in material
well-being, as measured by income per capita. However, ever since Malthus, economists have recognized
that demographic changes are linked to economic behavior and vice versa. Put simply, living with
others who live 78 years is different than living with others who live only 48 years, so that valuing
the extra 30 years of life is not simply a matter of valuing the extra years a single individual lives.
The magnitude by which such valuations differ is overstated when there are increasing returns to population
and is understated under decreasing returns. Focusing on the gains in life expectancy in the United
States from 1900 to 2000, we find that a significant part of the value of longer life may be affected
by these general equilibrium demographic effects.

Anupam Jena
University of Chicago and RAND
1755 East 55th St., Room 504
Chicago, IL 60615
ajena@uchicago.edu
Casey Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

Tomas J. Philipson
Irving B. Harris Graduate School
of Public Policy Studies
The University of Chicago
1155 E 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
t-philipson@uchicago.edu
Eric Sun
University of Chiacago and RAND
1776 Main St
Santa Monica, CA 90401
ericsun@uchicago.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
The 20th century witnessed tremendous advances in health, including the development of
the germ theory of disease, the use antibiotics to treat infectious disease, and genetic
testing for inherited conditions. Indeed, it seems hard to argue that any one change
during this last century was more important than the expansion of life itself. Despite the
large magnitude of these increases in life expectancy, relatively little effort has been
made by economists to estimate the value of these increases, especially when compared
to research efforts devoted to analyzing growth in per-capita income.
There is a growing consensus among economists that the total economic value of
gains in longevity and health swamped the single accomplishments of some of the largest
advances in the past hundred years, from such breakthroughs as railroads, aviation, and
the internet. Indeed, a substantial amount of recent work indicates that the gain in human
longevity is the most important economic advancement over the last century. For the US
alone, Cutler and Richardson (1997), Nordhaus (2003), and Murphy and Topel (2006) all
estimate that longevity gains have been on par in value to the gains in material well being
from income growth as measured by traditional income account measures. For the world
as whole, Becker, Philipson, and Soares (2005) argue that changes in inequality are
greatly affected by incorporating longevity into national income accounting. This strand
of work uses traditional microeconomic equilibrium methods to monetize the value of
gains in longevity, in the sense that what is valued is a change in longevity itself, holding
other factors constant (c.f. Usher (1973) and Rosen (1988)).
However, longevity affects the levels and growth of economic income and therefore
ignoring these effects in the value of increased longevity may be misleading. There are

3

several mechanisms by which longevity may affect income. The most direct is through
population size—indeed, as fertility has been falling and longevity growing, the growth
in longevity alone is an important source of the increased size of populations in many
countries. And ever since the pioneering work of Malthus, economists and others have
recognized the potential impact population size may have on income (Coale and Hoover,
1958; Kuznets, 1973; Boserup, 1981). Increased longevity may affect income through
non population-based channels as well. For example, longer life may stimulate savings
for old age (Lee, Mason, and Miller, 2000) or lead to increased human capital
accumulation by lengthening the period over which returns to human capital investment
accrue (Meltzer, 1992).
In this paper, we attempt to reconcile these separate strands of research efforts by
incorporating the external effects of increased aggregate longevity into estimates of the
value of gains in longevity. Our approach is in contrast with previous work assessing the
value of growth in longevity which is partial equilibrium in nature, assuming nonexistent the importance of demographic change in determining levels of income per
capita. For example, aggregate improvements in longevity raise population size, which
in turn impacts income levels, depending on whether there are decreasing or increasing
returns to scale in population. Our main argument is that the wage effects induced by
increased longevity may greatly alter estimates of the value of this increased longevity
obtained from partial equilibrium approaches that ignore them. A fuller description of
the value of mortality improvements incorporates not only the private valuation of
improvements in survival but also the change in income that occurs as a result of
population wide changes in longevity.

4

To illustrate this argument, consider the gains in survival that took place in the US in
the last century—life expectancy rose nearly 30 years, from 48.2 years in 1900 to 77.6
years in 2000. Traditional methods of valuing these additional years of life would be
based on the calibrated willingness-to-pay of an individual for the observed improvement
in survival, holding all else constant. For example, we calibrate that for a hypothetical
individual earning 1900 income per capita in every year of his life ($4,087 in 1996
dollars), he would be willing to spend nearly 43% of his annual income (or $1,752
annually) to face year 2000 cross-sectional survival compared to 1900 survival.
However, this calibrated willingness-to-pay does not take into account the several ways
in which increased aggregate longevity may affect annual income. For example, if the
larger population increases (decreases) income per capita, the calibrated social value of
the aggregate improvement in longevity would be higher (lower) than the calibrated
private value. This is because living with others who live 78 years may be quite different
than living with others who live only 48 years, so that privately valuing the extra 30 years
of life is not simply a matter of valuing the extra years one lives. To the extent that these
external effects of longevity on income are important, the true social value of
improvements in longevity may depart widely from private valuations that ignore them.
We pursue five separate approaches to quantitatively examine how the value of
improved longevity may be affected when the external effects of population-wide
changes in mortality are accounted for. The main purpose of this analysis is not to
advocate a particular size or sign of the external effect, but rather to illustrate the
implications of alternative estimates of these effects for current methods of valuing
aggregate improvements in longevity.

5

Our first two approaches focus on the effect of longer life expectancy on human
capital investment and income, holding population constant. Longer life increases the
return to investing in human capital at the individual level, which in turn leads to more
education and higher annual earnings—the utility value of these additional earnings, of
course, takes into account the utility and monetary costs required for the additional
investment (e.g. postponing marriage, increasing foregone labor income, and so on). We
discuss under what conditions this internal effect of improved longevity is captured by
standard methods of valuing improvements in survival. Moreover, since the average
level of human capital in an economy would be raised by population-wide reductions in
mortality, there may be external effects of improved longevity on income as well. For
example, individual productivity and earnings may depend on the human capital of others
in the economy. Our first approach uses the calibrated external effects of education on
income from Lucas (1988) along with the education effects of improved longevity from
Acemoglu and Johnson (2006) to illustrate, for the 20th century US, the potential
magnitudes of these internal and external effects of improved longevity on income. Our
second approach uses estimates of the effect of life expectancy on growth from the crosscountry growth literature. While some may argue that this literature often suffers from
identification issues which render such estimates difficult to interpret, it serves as a useful
initial benchmark to motivate our analysis.
Since the most direct effect of improved survival is a larger population, our last three
approaches focus on the effects of population size on income per capita. In each of these
instances, we calibrate the effect of a population increase that is consistent with how the
US population would have evolved from 1900 to 2000 in the face of survival

6

improvements alone—netting out the impact of immigration and under various
assumptions on fertility behavior throughout the century, we estimate that these gains in
longevity alone would have increased the counterfactual US population by almost 300
percent. The effect of this increase in population on per capita income naturally depends
on whether there are increasing or decreasing returns to scale in population.
In the third approach, we calibrate the effect of increased population in a Malthusian
regime, in which the presence of inelastically supplied inputs such as land imply that
increases in population have negative effects on income by lowering the marginal product
of labor. In this decreasing returns case, current methods of valuing improvements in
aggregate longevity would overstate the social value, which incorporates the reduction in
income associated with increased population. Our fourth approach calibrates a canonical
endogenous growth model similar in spirit to work by Romer (1986; 1990) and Jones
(1999). In this model, individual investments in R&D have economy-wide spillover
effects that increase the productivity of other firms and generate increasing returns to
population when firms are unable to fully capture the external effects of their R&D
investments. Our fifth approach uses estimates from the growth literature to infer the
empirical relationship between population and income. Again, while this literature may
be inadequately identified at times, it does serve as a benchmark to frame our other
estimates.
Our main finding is that, across all the approaches that we use, accounting for
population-wide increases in survival has large effects on the estimated value of gains in
US longevity. For example, we find that accounting for survival-induced increases in
human capital investment and incomes increases the estimated value of gains in health by

7

roughly 16-33%. Similarly, using the growth literature that examines the effects of
increases in life expectancy and population on economic growth raises the estimated
value of health gains by 150-250%. Importantly, not all of our approaches suggest that
increases in population have a positive effect on the valuation of health gains. The
Malthusian model, for example, predicts the value of 20th century health gains to be
negative, because while increases in health are valued in and of themselves, the
concomitant increase in population and its negative effects on income are much larger.
In this light, an interesting implication of our findings is that the value of improved
longevity in many developing countries—where Malthusian-like decreasing returns to
population are perhaps more likely—may be overstated due to income-lowering effects
of added population. A potentially relevant example of this is the increase in young-age
mortality in Africa due to AIDS, which Young (2005) argues to have had substantial
positive effects on income per capita among those surviving the epidemic.
The paper may be outlined as follows. Section II illustrates the bias in partial
equilibrium estimates of the value of life and demonstrates how calibrated or empirical
relationships between longevity and income can be incorporated to quantify its size and
direction. Section III then develops the model in section II to obtain partial equilibrium
estimates of the value of 20th century US health gains. Section IV discusses our efforts to
quantify the differences between the general and partial equilibrium values. Lastly,
Section V concludes and discusses future research.

8

II. PARTIAL vs GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM VALUATION OF LIFE

In order to illustrate how current methods of valuing population-wide changes in
longevity are affected by the internal and external effects of such changes, we consider a
hypothetical life-cycle individual (HLCI, c.f. Becker, Philipson, and Soares (2005)) born
in calendar year t who faces cross-sectional survival (St) and lifetime net income given
by:
Y ( A( S t ), I t , Et ) = A( S t ) y ( I t , Et )

(1)

∞

where A( St ) = ∑ β a St (a) is the present value of an annuity paying one dollar per year
a =0

given survival St and discount rate β, and y(It,Et) is annual net income which, for
simplicity, is assumed to be constant over time and equal to its value in calendar year t.
Lifetime net income is defined as gross income minus all investment expenditures
and is determined by three factors. The first is the period of time over which annual net
income y is earned, captured by A(St). The second is a set of “internal” behaviors
denoted by It—namely behaviors chosen by the individual to maximize his utility. These
behaviors may include decisions over one’s own human capital investment, life cycle
savings, and family formation, all of which are affected by life expectancy and likely
chosen to maximize utility. Each of these investments may raise lifetime gross income,
but presumably only at a cost, whether in foregone earnings, tuition, delayed marriage,
etc. In theory, our concept of net income is intended to adjust for these costs. For
example, consider an investment in education due to improved longevity that results in an
increase in lifetime gross income of $500,000. If the cost of tuition and foregone
earnings were $200,000, focusing on gross income alone would lead us to incorrectly
9

calculate the effect of improved longevity on income to be $500,000, rather than the
$300,000 that would obtain when investment costs are considered.
The third determinant of lifetime net income is a set of “external” behaviors denoted
by Et—namely outcomes (typically determined by others) that do not necessarily
maximize utility but nonetheless are affected by survival. The total size of the population
at various dates is the primary example we consider—it depends on the survival rates of
all persons in the economy and does not necessarily maximize anyone’s utility.1 An
individual’s income might be affected by the number of persons alive because of (a)
diminishing returns to labor arising from fixed inputs to production, e.g. land, (b)
increases in the extent of the market which raise the returns to R&D, and (c) socially
increasing returns to R&D arising from external effects of R&D on the productivity of
other firms. An additional “external” effect of improved longevity may operate through
spillovers in human capital. If aggregate improvements in longevity raise the average
level of human capital (an internal effect) and individual productivity depends on the
human capital of others (an external effect), population-wide changes in mortality would
be expected to have both internal and external effects on income through a single channel
alone, human capital. For convenience, we normalize the measurement of It and Et so
that they increase, rather than decrease, annual net income y.
The lifetime indirect utility of our HLCI born in calendar year t is:
V [Y ( A( St ), I t , Et ), A( St )] = max A( St )U (ct ) s.t. A( St )ct = Y ( A( St ), I t , Et )

1

(2)

For example, consider a birth cohort of size nt born in year t that lives to age a with probability St(a). The

population size in any year t is then determined by N t =

10

t

∑n S

k = −∞

k

k

(t − k ) .

By having the same discount factor in both the preferences and the budget set, we are
implicitly abstracting from life-cycle consumption profile decisions—cohort t’s decision,
then, is only about the average amount to consume in every year ct. Moreover, since our
HCLI is assumed to derive utility only from consumption, the benefits and costs of
human capital investment and other behaviors are fully captured in the maximized
lifetime net income Y.
To illustrate how current methods of valuing population-wide changes in longevity
are affected by the internal and external effects of such changes, we use the indirect
utility to first calculate our HLCI’s partial equilibrium (PE) willingness to pay, PPE, for
an increase in cross-sectional survival from S to S’.

This willingness-to-pay holds

constant the effects of survival on internal and external behaviors, implicitly assuming
away (or approximating as zero) the effects on income of changes in own-investment and
population size:
V[Y(A(S’), I, E) – PPE, A(S’)] = V[Y(A(S), I, E), A(S)]

(3)

That is, PPE is the amount our HLCI would be willing to pay to be just indifferent
between the two survival prospects, S and S’, holding constant the internal and external
behaviors.
The PE willingness-to-pay for an improvement in survival from S to S’ can therefore
be written as:
PPE = PPE(S, S’, Y(A(S’), I, E), Y(A(S), I, E))

(4)

The PE willingness-to-pay does not account for the changes in the population, or changes
in the individual’s own behaviors, that result from the increased aggregate life
expectancy—it does, however, account for the longer period over which the original

11

annual income is now earned. For small changes in survival, the envelope theorem tells
us that, even though the PE willingness to pay holds many things constant, it still
captures the induced changes in any internal behavior I that already maximizes V for a
given survival, because those induced changes have no utility value at the margin.
Therefore, in the absence of any external effects, PPE would be unaffected by small
changes in survival. And in fact, since most estimates of the value of improvements in
survival stem from the willingness-to-pay to avoid small changes in mortality risk, the
expected magnitude of this internal effect is small or zero in these instances. However,
while schooling, life cycle savings, and other personal decisions may well be optimally
chosen by each individual, for large changes in survival, the utility value of new choices
may not be zero. Therefore, when valuing large improvements in longevity, both the
benefits and costs of these internal effects may be quite important. Moreover, even for
small changes in survival, the envelope theorem does not apply to the effects of survival
on population size and (other external behaviors) since there is no obvious reason why
total population would maximize an individual’s utility.

For example, important

activities like innovation have socially increasing returns.2
Given the various channels through which changes in survival may affect income, our
HLCI’s general equilibrium (GE) willingness-to-pay can be written as:
PGE = PGE(S, S’, Y(A(S’), I’, E’), Y(A(S), I, E))

(5)

The GE value of improved aggregate longevity accounts for the effect of mortality
reductions on lifetime income. PGE is determined by:
V[Y(A(S’), I’, E’) – PGE, A(S’)] = V[Y(A(S), I, E), A(S)]
2

(6)

The envelope theorem does not apply when evaluating the effects of survival on outcomes other than
utility, e.g. income inequality. In this case, even marginal changes in survival may have an impact,
although behavior-induced effects on utility would be absent.

12

where E’ reflects the effects of changes in survival on population and other external
behaviors, and I’ reflects the effects of changes in survival on internal behaviors. The GE
willingness-to-pay for improved survival reflects the value of not only longer life, but of
the potentially disproportionate change in net lifetime income that results from individual
and aggregate increases in longevity. Specifically, the above expression illustrates that
the GE value of improved longevity, which incorporates the income effect of improved
health, differs from its PE counterpart by:
PGE - PPE = Y(A(S’), I’, E’) – Y(A(S’), I, E) = A(S’)[y(I’, E’) – y(I, E)]

(7)

The PE-GE difference, then, is the discounted change in net lifetime income holding
survival fixed at its new value.3

When changes in survival have no effect on the

evolution of net annual incomes, the difference is zero.4 Clearly then, the estimated
magnitude of the PE-GE difference will depend heavily on estimates of how
improvements in survival affect income per capita—either internally, through affecting
incentives for investment, or externally, through affecting population size or the average
level of human capital in the economy. The remainder of this paper illustrates the
potential magnitude of this survival-induced income effect for several different scenarios,
each of which can be usefully contrasted to the PE willingness-to-pay for improved
survival which we turn to next.

3

A similar calculation can be made when determining the willingness to accept a survival change. For
example, the PE willingness-to-accept satisfies V[Y(A(S), I’, E’) + PPE, WTA, A(S)] = V[Y(A(S’), I’, E’),
A(S’)]. The PE-GE difference is similarly Y(A(S), I’, E’) – Y(A(S), I, E) = A(S)[y(I’, E’) – y(I, E)]. The
willingness-to-accept PE-GE difference therefore differs only by the annuity.
4
In the absence of external effects, an upper bound of the PE-GE difference is the present value of the
differences in gross annual incomes. Since the potential increases in income that result from survival
improvements presumably come at a larger cost of investment, using net incomes which adjust for these
costs would lower the computed difference.

13

III. VALUING THE GAINS IN US LONGEVITY, 1900 – 2000: A PARTIAL
EQUILIBRIUM CALIBRATION

We develop the infra-marginal framework described above to calibrate the PE value of
improvements in US longevity from 1900-2000, a period over which life expectancy
increased by nearly thirty years, from to 48.2 to 77.6. This offers us a quantitative
benchmark with which to relate the income effects of increased aggregate longevity that
we compute later.

In the formulas above and below, the non-indexed variables

correspond to year 1900 and the indexed ones to year 2000. Following our discussion
and earlier work by Becker, Philipson, and Soares (2005), we value the observed
improvement in longevity by considering a single hypothetical life cycle individual who
faces 1900 cross-sectional survival and 1900 income per capita in every year of their life.
We calibrate how much that individual would be willing to pay to face year 2000 crosssectional survival and 1900 income per capita in every year of their life, instead.
We calibrate the PE value of life by parameterizing instantaneous utility according to:
U (c ) =

c1−1 / γ
+α
1 − 1/ γ

(8)

where γ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and α is a normalization factor that
determines the level of annual consumption at which the individual is indifferent between
being alive or dead.5 Under the maintained parameter assumptions on utility, expressions

5

We assume the following parameter values: intertemporal elasticity of substitution, 1.25; normalization
factor α, -16.2; interest rate, 0.03. See Becker, Philipson, and Soares (2005) for a detailed justification of
these values.

14

(2) and (3) be can be solved to calculate the annual PE willingness to pay for an inframarginal change in survival from S to S’: 6
γ

p PE

⎡
A( S )
A( S ) − A( S ' ) ⎤ γ −1
= y ( I , E ) − ⎢ y ( I , E )1−1 / γ ⋅
+ α ⋅ (1 − 1 / γ ) ⋅
⎥
A( S ' )
A( S ' )
⎣
⎦

(9)

The corresponding lifetime PE willingness to pay, PPE, is simply the discounted sum of
the annual PE willingness to pay, pPE:
PPE = A( S ' ) p PE .

(10)

To estimate S and S’, we use US cross-sectional survival data from 1900 and 2000
obtained from the Berkeley Mortality Database, which contains historical life-tables
published by the Office of the Actuary of the Social Security Administration. For
simplicity, we assume that net income per capita in 1900, y(I, E), equals actual income
per capita in that year—that is, we implicitly assume investments in education and health
to be zero in the initial period. For an individual earning 1900 income per capita for
every year of their life—namely, $4,087 per year in 1996 dollars (Historical Statistics of
the United States, 2003)—the calibrated willingness to pay for an improvement in
survival from 1900 to 2000 levels is roughly $1,752 per year or $53,010 over a lifetime.
As a share of 1900 income per capita, the PE value of these gains in longevity is nearly
43 percent. This is closely related to findings by Murphy and Topel (2006), who estimate
the economic gains in health between 1900 and 2000 to be between 10 and 50 percent of
annual GDP.

6

For more details, see Becker, Philipson, and Soares (2005) and Philipson and Jena (2005). These papers
present valuation formulas based on a willingness-to-accept, whereas we calculate the willingness to pay.

15

IV. QUANTIFYING THE DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE PE AND GE
VALUES OF HEALTH

The size and direction of the PE-GE difference in valuing population-wide
improvements in longevity are determined by the extent to which changes in survival
affect annual income. Therefore, any conclusion of whether the PE-GE difference is of
first- or second-order compared to PE valuations of improved longevity will rely heavily
on empirical or calibrated estimates of how survival affects income, either directly or
through changes in population size. We pursue five separate approaches to quantitatively
examine how the value of improved longevity may be affected when the internal and
external effects of population-wide changes in mortality are accounted for.

It is

important to note that the main purpose of this analysis is not to advocate a particular
size or sign of the external effect, but rather to illustrate the implications of alternative
estimates of these effects for current methods of valuing aggregate improvements in
longevity.

A. Internal and external effects of life expectancy on human capital and income

Our first approach calculates the PE-GE difference by estimating how increases in life
expectancy might affect human capital decisions and therefore income, holding
population constant. Theoretically, increases in life expectancy should lead to increased
investment in human capital, since the returns from investment can be enjoyed for longer
periods of time. Our approach here mainly follows Lucas (1988), who examines the

16

effect of human capital on output. Similar to the terminology in the previous section, in
Lucas’s model, human capital has both internal and external effects on output. The
former is the effect of human capital on an individual’s own productivity, which is taken
into account in investment decisions, while the latter is the effect of the average level of
human capital on output. Specifically, in Lucas’ model, output Q is given by
Q = AKβ(hL)1-βhaγ

(11)

where A represents the level of technological progress, K is capital, and L is labor. h is
the internal effect of human capital on output, and represents the direct effect of human
capital on labor’s productivity. ha represents the average level of human capital in the
society, and represents an external effect, since individuals do not take ha into account
when making investment decisions.
We use Lucas’ model to quantify the magnitude of the external effect of survival on
human capital and income as follows. From equation (11), the elasticity of output with
respect to average human capital is simply γ. Lucas (1988) calibrates γ to be 0.417, so
that a one percent increase in average human capital increases output by 0.417 percent.
Next, we must find a way to convert increases in average schooling, which are easily
observed, to increases in average human capital.

To do this, we use the method

employed by Bils and Klenow (2000), who add schooling into the Lucas model by
calibrating the association between human capital and schooling s:
ln h =

θ 1−ψ
s
1−ψ

7

(12)7

Following Mincer (1974), Bils and Klenow also include terms for experience and experience squared.
Although these terms include s (since all things equal, an additional year of schooling reduces experience
by one year), we omit these terms to aid in tractability and to isolate the effect of schooling, apart from its
effects on experience.

17

Bils and Klenow consider two sets of estimates: one where ψ = 0.58 and θ = 0.32, as
well as one where ψ = 0.28 and θ = 0.18. The rationale for these two sets of estimates is
driven primarily by the parameter ψ, which describes the degree of diminishing returns to
schooling. Bils and Klenow find ψ = 0.58 to be an upper bound on the level of
diminishing returns, while ψ = 0.28 is an extreme lower bound. Using the calibrated
values of γ, ψ, and θ, it can be shown that a one year increase in average schooling
increases output by 0.13s-0.58 to 0.42s-0.28, where s is the initial schooling level. Margo
(1986) estimates that the average level of schooling in the US in 1900 was roughly 9
years.8 Therefore, a one year increase in schooling increases output by 2.2-3.6%.
Calculating the increase in output due to the internal effects from increased human
capital investments is more straightforward, as we simply use estimates from the returns
to schooling literature. As an upper bound, Card (1995) estimates that a one year
increase in schooling increases income by 13.2%, while as a lower bound, Angrist and
Krueger (1992) estimate that a one year increase in schooling increases income by 5.9%.
It is important to note that these returns to schooling do not net out the costs of education,
so that our estimates of the internal effects are an upper bound.
Having calculated schooling’s external and internal effects on income, all that
remains is to calculate the actual increase in average schooling due to increases in
survival. Despite a literature that has examined how specific health interventions have
affected schooling9, we are only aware of one paper by Acemoglu and Johnson (2006)

8

Margo (1986) estimates that between average schooling among whites was 9.5 years and average
schooling among blacks was 6.4 years; we assume that blacks were 12% of the population to obtain a
weighted average of 9.1 years.
9
See Bleakley (2007) for a discussion of the effect of hookworm eradication on school attendance and
Jayachandran and Lleras-Muney (2007) for a dicussion on the effect of maternal mortality declines on
literacy rates.

18

that has explicitly examined the relationship between survival and average schooling.
Using ordinary least squares, the authors find that a one percent increase in life
expectancy increases schooling by 5 years. Using an instrumental variables approach to
account for omitted variables that might affect schooling and life expectancy, the authors
find that a 1 percent increase in life expectancy increases schooling by 0.014 years,
although this result is statistically insignificant.10
Given the lack of literature that has empirically examined the effect between survival
and schooling, Figure 1 examines how the GE/PE ratio may vary as a function of the
increase in years of schooling. For example, if the observed increases in US life
expectancy increased the average schooling level by 2 years, then our estimates suggest
that the GE value of life would be 12-26% larger than the PE value of life due to the
internal effects of education, 4-7% larger due to the external effects of education, and 1633% larger due to the total effects of education. Again, it is important to note that the
estimates of the internal and total effects are an upper bound, as they do not net out the
costs of education.
To obtain a better sense of the potential magnitude of the effect of education, it is
useful to consider several alternative scenarios.

First note that the average years of

schooling increased from 9 to 11 years between 1900 and 2000.11 As an upper bound,
then, assuming that all of this increase in schooling were due to increases in survival
alone, this would imply that the GE value of life were 16-33% larger than the PE value of

10

It is important to note that their instrumental variable approach primarily uses variations in infant and
early childhood mortality to identify the effects of life expectancy on schooling. Increases in US life
expectancy in the latter half of the 20th century were driven primarily by increases in adulthood survival,
which may have very different effects on human capital investment.
11
Estimates of average schooling in 1900 come from Margo (1986). Estimates of average schooling in
2000 come from the census.

19

life. In addition, it is also useful to consider the effects implied by the estimates of
Acemoglu and Johnson (2006). Their OLS estimate suggests that the 62% increase in US
life expectancy between 1900 and 2000 would have increased schooling by roughly three
years, while the IV estimate suggests that schooling would have increased by 0.9 years.
Therefore, under the OLS estimates, our analysis suggests that the GE value of life is 1840% higher than the PE value of life due to internal effects, 7-11% higher due to external
effects, and 24-50% larger due to the total effects of education. Even with the smaller IV
estimate, our results suggest that the GE value of life is 5-12% higher due to the internal
effects of education, 2-3% higher due to the external effects of education, and 7-15%
higher due to the total effects of education.

20

FIGURE 1 – GE/PE Difference due to Changes in Education: United States, 1900-2000

2.2
2.1
2
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Increase in Schooling
Internal Effect, Lower Bound
External Effect, Upper Bound

Internal Effect, Upper Bound
Total Effect, Lower Bound

External Effect, Lower bound
Total Effect, Upper Bound

Source: Authors’ calculations.

B. Cross-country estimates of the effect of life expectancy on income

This section complements the previous one by calculating the PE-GE difference from
estimates of the effect of life expectancy on income derived from the empirical growth
literature. The literature we consider includes cross-country regressions of log per-capita
income on log life expectancy and other variables and typically estimates equations of the
form:
g = γ LE *ln ( LE ) + X β + ε

21

(13)

where g is the average annual growth rate across the time period considered (e.g. 1960 to
1990) and LE is the life expectancy in the initial period (e.g. 1960). As discussed,
improvements in life expectancy may affect income per capita through both larger
population sizes and increased incentives for physical or human capital accumulation. In
empirical specifications that control for population, we interpret the estimated coefficient
on log life expectancy as reflecting the impact of increased incentives for capital
accumulation alone. In these instances, the coefficient presumably captures both the
internal effect of life expectancy on human capital and its associated earnings, as well as
the external effect of human capital on the productivity and earnings of others. While
identifying the causal effect of life expectancy on growth is a natural problem faced in
this literature, we use these estimates mainly as a benchmark to compare our earlier
calibrated estimates.
To calculate the counterfactual increase in per-capita income associated with a given
percentage change in life expectancy, we conservatively assume that changes in life
expectancy affect GDP growth for the length of the cross section used in a particular
study and have no effects after that time. Thus, γLE multiplied by the cross-section length
is the elasticity of final income with respect to life expectancy. For example, Barro
(1996) estimates that γLE equals 0.042; a 1% increase in life expectancy increases annual
GDP by 0.042%. Since Barro uses a 10 year cross section, the elasticity over that period
is 10·0.42 = 0.42; a 1% increase in life expectancy therefore increases per-capita GDP by
0.42%. Given that life expectancy increased by 61% between 1900 and 2000 (from 48 to
78 years), the counterfactual percentage increase in annual income owing to life
expectancy would be 61*0.42 = 25.6%. Since the PE willingness to pay for the observed

22

improvement in survival is 43% of initial income, the GE value would be roughly 60%
higher, i.e. (0.43 + 0.26)/0.43 = 0.60. Put differently, our interpretation of Barro’s LE
coefficient implies that the observed increase in US life expectancy from 1900 to 2000
would have raised annual income by $1,045 from $4,078 annually (1900 income in 1996
dollars) to $5,123. Since this additional income comprises the increase in the value of
life due to general equilibrium effects, this particular estimate therefore suggests that the
traditional calibrated value of improvements in 20th century US survival—$1,752
annually—would understate the true value by 60% (($1,752 + $1,045)/$1,752)).
Table 1 repeats this calculation for several values of γLE from the growth literature. In
general, there appears to be little consensus on the precise effect of life expectancy on
GDP. Moreover, while the income elasticity (as defined) varies widely, from -0.025 to
1.575, most studies find that increases in life expectancy lead to increases in income per
capita.

23

TABLE 1—Calibrated Effect of Increased US Life Expectancy on Income, 1900-2000

Log LifeExpectancy
Coefficient in
Growth
Regressions
0.042
0.073

(a)
(b)
(c)

Length of
Cross
Section
(years)

Barro (1996)
10
Barro and Lee (1994)
10
Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1995)
0.058
10
(d) Bloom, Canning, and
Malaney (2000)
0.063
25
(e) Bloom and Malaney (1998)
0.027
25
(f) Bloom et al. (1999)
0.019
25
(g) Bloom and Sachs (1998)
0.037
25
(h) Bloom and Williamson
(1998)
0.04
25
(i) Casselli et al. (1996)
-0.001
25
(j) Gallup and Sachs (2000)
0.03
25
(k) Hamoudi and Sachs (1999)
0.072
15
(l) Sachs and Warner (1997)
0.0075
25
(m) Acemoglu and Johnson
-0.03
40
(2006)
Source: Authors’ calculations based on each of the studies listed.

Control for
Elasticity of
Final Annual Population?
Income with
Respect to Life
Expectancy
0.42
No
0.73
No
0.58

No

1.575
0.675
0.475
0.925

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1.00
-0.025
0.75
1.08
0.1875

Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes

-1.2

Given the PE value of improved US survival from 1900 to 2000 and the percentage
increase in life expectancy, we can examine how the relative PE-GE difference (i.e.
PGE/PPE) depends on the elasticity of income with respect to population size. Figure 2
displays this linear relationship and illustrates where, along this curve, the above
elasticities lie. Note that when the elasticity of income with respect to population is zero,
PGE/PPE is unity.

24

FIGURE 2—PE-GE Difference in the Value of Survival Gains: United States, 1900-

2000

3.5

d

3

2.5

2

GE/PE

1.5

l
1

f

c

e

b j

a

g

h

k

i

0.5

0
-1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

-0.5

m

-1
Elasticity of income wrt to life expectancy

Source: Authors’ calculations. Estimates of the elasticity of income with respect to life-expectancy for
various studies are included.: (a) Barro (1996); (b) Barro and Lee (1994); (c) Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(1995); (d) Bloom, Canning, and Malaney (2000); (e) Bloom and Malaney (1998); (f) Bloom et al. (1999);
(g) Bloom and Sachs (1998); (h) Bloom and Williamson (1998); (i) Caselli et al. (1996); (j) Gallup and
Sachs (2000); (k) Hamoudi and Sachs (1999) (l) Sachs and Warner (1997) (m) Acemoglu and Johnson
(2006)

Several points stand out in Figure 2. First, the calibrated PE-GE difference in the value of
life from 1900 to 2000 is potentially large, with the most extreme estimate suggesting a
GE value of improved survival more than three times as large as the corresponding PE
value.

This estimate implies that the increase in annual income attributable to the

observed improvement in longevity is more than two times as large as the willingness to
pay for the improvement in survival alone. Second, the calibrated effects predicted by

25

the studies surveyed show no clear consensus.12 Estimates of the bias range from being
slightly negative to two to three times as high as the PE value of life. Indeed, at the
extreme, Acemoglu and Johnson (2006) find that the GE value of life is negative; in other
words, the decreases in income from longer life expectancy outweigh the value of gains
in health. Despite the variation in these effects, it appears that the majority of the studies
predict GE values on the order of 1.5 to 2.5 times the PE value of life.

C. Survival and population size: The United States 1900-2000

The remaining sections examine the effects of changes in population on income by
computing the elasticity of income per capita with respect to population size under
various scenarios.

In order to apply these findings to our earlier PE valuation of

improved US longevity, we first must determine the percentage change in the US
population that can be attributed solely to observed changes in mortality risk. This
percentage change can then be multiplied by the elasticity of income with respect to
population size in each of the scenarios we consider.
Estimating the change in the US population due solely to changes in longevity
requires that we net out the effects of immigration. While the Census provides data on
the number of immigrants entering the country, this data is not sufficient, since we must
net out not only the presence of immigrants themselves, but also the presence of their

12

This lack of consensus is in part due to differences in the estimated effects of life expectancy on average,
annual GDP growth, β. It is also due to variation across studies in the length of time considered. For
example, consider two studies that estimate an elasticity of average, annual growth with respect to life
expectancy of 1. If Study 1 spans a ten-year period, while Study 2 spans a twenty-year period, the
calibrated effect on final annual income will be twice as large in the second study, simply because the
growth in income is observed to occur over a longer period of time.

26

descendents. Thus, to estimate the change in US population due solely to changes in
longevity, we perform a simple simulation.

Our first step is to take the 1900 US

population and divide it into single-year age groups.13 Letting Ni,t represent the number
of persons age i at time t, and Si,t the one-year survival probability for persons of age i at
time t, we then have that
N i +1,t +1 = Si,t N i,t

(14)

while the number of births is simply
Bt +1 = ∑ N i,t fi,t * 0.5

(15)

i

where fi,t is the fertility rate among women of age i at time t. Because we do not have
data on the gender distribution of the US population at earlier years, we assume an even
male-to-female sex ratio; thus, we multiply the fertility ratio by one-half. Equations (14)
and (15) therefore allow us to simulate the evolution of the US population over time
under alternative survival probabilities. These expressions raise an important implication
of the effects of survival improvements on population size—holding improvements in life
expectancy constant, reductions in mortality that occur at child-bearing ages will
naturally increase population by more than mortality reductions at later ages. This is
because total fertility rises with the population of childbearing age women. Therefore,
the effect of changes in survival on population size may be very different depending on
the age at which those changes in mortality occur.

13

The single-year age distribution of the 1900 US population is taken from the Berkeley Mortality
Database.

27

Figure 3 depicts how the total US population would have evolved under several
counterfactual scenarios, all of which are net of the large migration into the US that
characterized much of the last century.
FIGURE 3—THE POPULATION EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN SURVIVAL
FROM 1900 TO 2000
1200

1000

Population (Millions)

800

600

400

200

0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year
Actual Population

1900 Survival, Actual Fertility

1900 Survival, 1900 Fertility

2000 Survival, 1900 Fertility

2000 Survival, Actual Fertility

Source: Authors’ calculations.

The lowermost curve of Figure 1 depicts the evolution of the US population over time if
survival and fertility rates had remained at their 1900 values. In 1900, the US population
was 76.1 million persons, and life expectancy was 48 years. With no changes in survival
and fertility, the US population would have increased to 336 million by 2000, a
percentage gain of 445%. While this number seems large and indeed is greater than the

28

actual US population in 2000, it is important to keep in mind that death and fertility rates
were higher in 1900, and have fallen over time. To calculate the increase in population
due to changes in survival alone, we calculate the change in US population that would
have occurred had the survival probabilities in 2000 been in effect in 1900 and fertility
rates remained at their 1900 values. The resulting evolution of the US population is the
topmost curve in Figure 1, and suggests that the US population would have grown to 1.03
billion by 2000. Our calculations therefore suggest that the US population would have
increased by 307% if persons living in the 20th century had enjoyed year 2000 survival.
Rather than hold fertility rates constant from 1900 onwards, an alternative approach
would be to allow them to follow their empirically observed time-series. Figure 1 shows
how the US population would have evolved if survival were held fixed at 1900 levels and
fertility was at its observed rate in each year. The assumptions imply that the US
population would have grown to 105 million in 2000. This number is markedly smaller
than the population we estimated under constant 1900 fertility, and reflects the fact that
fertility rates generally declined over the past century. If survival were held constant at
its 2000 levels, the US population would have increased to 316 million by 2000. These
calculations suggest that the US population would have increased by 301% if every
cohort from 1900 onwards experienced year 2000 survival. Thus, whether or not we
allow fertility to change, our estimates suggest that increased survival would have
increased the total US population by roughly 300%.
Since the age structure of the population may be relevant as well—for example,
through its effect on dependency ratios within a country—Figure 4 simulates the

29

evolution of the US working-age population under various survival and fertility
probabilities.

FIGURE 4— THE WORKING AGE POPULATION EFFECTS OF CHANGES IN
SURVIVAL FROM 1900 TO 2000

700

600

Population (Millions)

500

400

300

200

100

0
1900

1910

1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

Year
Working Population, 1900 Survival, Actual Fertility

Working Population, 2000 Survival, Actual Fertility

Working Population, 1900 Survival, 1900 Fertility

Working Population, 2000 Survival, 1900 Fertility

Source: Authors’ calculations.

In 1900, there were 46.8 million working age persons in the United States. If survival
and fertility rates had remained at their 1900 values, this number would have increased to
206 million by 2000.

However, if survival and fertility rates in 1900 had been

characterized by their 2000 values, there would have been 592 million working age

30

persons in 2000. Thus, the increased survival probabilities would have increased the
working age population by 287%. We also consider the case where fertility rates are
allowed to follow their observed time series. In this case, the working age population
would have increased to 73.7 million in 2000, under the 1900 survival probabilities and
to 207 million, under the 2000 survival probabilities. Therefore, whether or not we allow
fertility rates to change, our estimates suggest that the US working age population would
have been roughly 280% higher under the year 2000 survival probabilities.

D. Effect of population on income: A simple Malthusian model

Given the counterfactual increase in population attributable solely to improvements in
20th century US survival, we can compare the PE value of this improved longevity to GE
values which incorporate the potential income effects of this increase in population size.
In this and the following section, we calibrate the effect of survival-induced increases in
population size on income per capita. This section considers the implications of a simple
Malthusian model, in which labor and capital are the two inputs to production and capital
is fixed. This may be particularly relevant for agrarian economies in which income is
most heavily derived from the use of fixed capital inputs such as land.
Suppose, then, that capital is inelastically supplied, that survival does not affect the
fraction of the population that is employed, and that aggregate production is CobbDouglas with labor share 0.70.14 In this case, the elasticity of income per capita with
respect to population is -0.30 because the marginal product of labor is proportional to the
14

The second assumption may be unwarranted if changes in survival alter the demographic composition of
the population (e.g. by increasing the fraction of elderly through improvements in end-of-life care) so that
labor supply is not raised proportionately with population.

31

labor force raised to the -0.30 power. If the PE willingness-to-pay for the observed
improvement in longevity is 43% of income, the roughly 300% increase in population
would imply that PPE is overstated by a factor of 0.9/0.43 or 210%. Put differently, given
an annual income per capita in 1900 of $4,087, a 300% increase in population would
reduce income $3,678 to $409 annually in this model. Since the GE value of improved
longevity incorporates this income reduction, the GE willingness-to-pay would actually
be negative—approximately -$1,926 (= $1,752 - $3,678)—so that individuals would be
worse off with the improvement in longevity.

The large negative magnitude of the

measured PE-GE difference would be entirely due to the reduction in income that the
large population increase produces. This has the interesting implication that the value of
improved longevity in many developing countries—where Malthusian-like decreasing
returns to population are more likely to occur—may be partially offset by the incomelowering effects of added population.

E. Effect of population on income: An increasing returns model

The previous section illustrated how decreasing returns to population size could
significantly lower the value of improvements in longevity compared to traditional
measures. This section develops and calibrates a simple endogenous growth model
which has the potential to deliver the opposite effect of population size on income. This
model is closely related to earlier models of Romer (1986; 1990; 1994) and Jones (1999).
The basic framework of the model is as follows. Let R&D capital X be accumulated
at constant cost, which we normalize to one, and depreciate at rate δx. In reality, R&D

32

capital serves a variety of purposes, but we focus on just one of those – the enhancement
of productivity in the business sector. Generally, R&D may enhance productivity in the
household sector as well, e.g. through dishwashing machines, microwaves, etc. While a
fuller notion of the sectors in which R&D may enhance productivity is important, for
simplicity, we focus our attention on the business sector.
Analytically, aggregate GDP is assumed to be a function of R&D capital X, physical
capital K, and labor L. The partial derivative of the aggregate production function with
respect to X represents the social returns to R&D capital, which diminish because, among
other things, researchers undertake the most promising projects first, and less promising
research projects later.

Although total human capital and its relationship to the

production of R&D are likely to be important in any story of increasing returns, we omit
it from this analysis for sake of simplicity.
The owners of R&D capital enjoy only a fraction θ of the social returns to R&D.
Following Romer (1986; 1990; 1994), we model this situation by distinguishing between
two forms of R&D capital in the production function facing a representative producer: his
own R&D capital X and the average R&D capital of other producers X . In its CobbDouglas form, the production function facing a representative producer is:
BX (1−θ )γ X θγ K α L1−α −θγ

(16)

which has constant returns from the representative producer’s point of view, because he
takes the average amount of R&D capital of others as given. From the point of view of
society, however, there are increasing returns arising from R&D due to its non-rival and
only partially excludable nature. B is the productivity of firms for a given amount of

33

capital, labor, own R&D capital, and average R&D capital of other firms. National
income (gross of depreciation) is divided among the factors in shares θγ, α, and 1-θγ-α.
Labor is inelastically supplied. Since physical and R&D capital are supplied at
constant cost, the long run average amounts of those capital stocks are determined by the
following standard optimality conditions:

ρ = θγB X

γ −1

α

K L

1−α −θγ

γ

− δ X = αB X K

α −1

L

1−α −θγ

−δK

(17)

where ρ is the rate of time preference and δk is the rate of physical capital depreciation.
The middle term is the marginal private product of R&D capital, and the last term is the
marginal (social and private) product of physical capital (both net of depreciation). The
relevant marginal product of R&D capital is the private marginal product (i.e., holding
constant the average R&D capital of other producers), but (after differentiating) we have
evaluated the marginal products at an aggregately consistent allocation X = X . Let lower
case letters denote amounts measured per unit of labor. In terms of amounts per unit
labor, the steady state conditions are:

ρ = θγ Bx γ −1k α L(1−θ )γ − δ x = α Bx γ k α −1 L(1−θ )γ − δ k

(18)

The two factor equilibrium conditions imply long run quantities of R&D and physical
capital as a function of the amount of labor. These long run quantities can be plugged
into the production function to calculate long run output per worker as a function of the
total amount of labor and the other parameters. In particular, per capita output increases
with the aggregate amount of labor as long as the social returns to R&D exceed the
private returns (θ < 1). The elasticity is:

d ln y 1 − θ
θγ
=
θ 1 − α − (θγ / θ )
d ln L

34

(19)

As in the models of Romer (1986) and others, our model has socially increasing returns
to all factors including labor as the inelastically supplied factor, which means that large
economies can produce more per capita than small economies. In this case, the source of
socially increasing returns is the external effect of one firm’s R&D on another’s
productivity. Given the magnitude of the private returns to R&D, (1-θ) is a measure of
the amount by which social returns exceed private returns and thereby the amount by
which social returns are increasing.
When appropriation is full and θ = 1, the elasticity of income with respect to
population is zero, while it is positive when θ < 1. If output exhibited socially constant
returns to scale, we would obtain the standard result that the long-run level of output per
capita would not depend on population. However, when there are socially increasing
returns (1-θ>0), the elasticity of output with respect to population is positive. Intuitively,
increases in labor are met with long-run increases in all factors that would normally leave
per-capita output unchanged, were it not for the additional, external effect on aggregate
R&D capital that an individual firm takes as given and that ultimately raises per-capita
output.

Calibrating the elasticity of income with respect to population
In addition to the qualitative predictions above, Equation (19) demonstrates that
calibrating the elasticity of income with respect to population requires only three types of
data: information on the gap between social and private returns (θ), and the shares of
R&D and physical capital in national income (θγ and α). Historically, labor and capital

35

income shares are found to be roughly 70% and 30%, respectively. These shares do not
distinguish factors according to their use in R&D vs. non-R&D activities; we assume that
labor and capital shares are the same in the R&D and non-R&D sectors. For example, if
R&D expenditure were 5% of value-added, then θγ would be 0.05 and (assuming capital
intensity to be the same in R&D and non-R&D sectors) α would be 30% of 0.95 (=
0.285). The output elasticity would therefore be [(1-θ)/θ][0.05/(0.715-(0.05/θ))]. If θ =
0.5, then the output elasticity would be 0.08.
Figure 5 illustrates this calculation more generally for various shares of R&D in
national income. Historically, R&D expenditures have ranged between 1.36% and 2.88%
of GDP (Shackelford, 2002).15 Therefore, our calculations consider the cases where θγ
adopts these extremes, as well as the case where θγ adopts the average between 1953 and
2002 (2.45%). For each of the three shares considered, a single curve in Figure 3 depicts
the relationship between the elasticity of per-capita income with respect to population and
the gap between private and social returns to R&D.

15

R&D accounted for 1.36% of GDP in 1953 and 2.88% of GDP in 1964. Since 1995, the ratio of R&D
expenditures to GDP has experienced an upward trend, and currently R&D accounts for roughly 2.8% of
GDP.

36

FIGURE 5—Calibrated Elasticity of Income per Capita with Respect to Population
1
0.9

Elasticity of Income With Respect to Population

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
5%

15%

25%

35%

45%

55%

65%

75%

85%

95%

Ratio of Private/Social Returns to R&D
R&D=1.36%

R&D=2.45%

R&D=2.88%

Source: Authors’ calculations.

As Figure 5 illustrates, the elasticity of per-capita income with respect to population falls
sharply with θ, the ratio of the private to social returns to R&D, and indeed, comes close
to zero once the ratio of private to social returns reaches 50%. Moreover, for larger
values of θ, the elasticity of per-capita income with respect to population is fairly
insensitive to the ratio of R&D expenditures to GDP, θγ. However, for smaller values of

θ, the elasticity varies significantly with R&D expenditures. For example, suppose that
the ratio of private to social returns to R&D is 5%. In that case, if R&D expenditures are
1.36% of GDP, the elasticity of per-capita income with respect to population is 0.6.
However, the calibrated elasticity increases to 4.3 if R&D accounts for 2.88% of GDP.

37

Figure 5 therefore suggests that the most important determinant of the elasticity of
per-capita income with respect to population is θ, the ratio of the private to social returns
to R&D. Table 2 presents the results of several studies examining social and private
returns to R&D across various industries.
TABLE 2—Estimated Ratio of Private to Social Returns to R&D

Study

Ratio (θ)

Private Return

Social Return

(%)

(%)

Mansfield et al. (1977)

25.0

56.0

44.6

Bernstein and Nadiri (1988)

13.5

30.2

44.7

Bernstein and Nadiri (1989)

7

14

50

Bernstein and Nadiri (1991)

22.5

28.5

78.9

Bernstein (1994)

16.6

99.2

18.0

Source: Authors’ calculations. Pleasee also see Jones and Williams’ (1998) Table I for a comparable list of
studies). Each study examined the returns among several industries; the values shown are the median
social and private returns.

Overall, Table 2 illustrates that for the studies surveyed, the ratio of social to private
returns is around 50%. Assuming that θ adopts its lowest reported value in Table 2
(18%), an upper bound for the elasticity of per capita income with respect to population
ranges from 0.09 to 0.24, depending on the ratio of R&D expenditures to GDP—for the
average share of R&D to GDP from 1953 to 2002, this would imply an elasticity of 0.20.
If θ is equal to 50%, the elasticity ranges from 0.02 to 0.05, with an elasticity of 0.04 at
the average share of R&D to GDP. Therefore, we assume that the elasticity of income
with respect to population falls in the range of 0.04 to 0.20.

38

The income elasticities calibrated from this model imply that the roughly 300%
counterfactual increase in US working-age population from 1900 to 2000 would have
increased annual income by 12 to 60 percent, from $4,078 annually (1900 income in
1996 dollars) to between $4,567 and $6,524 annually. Recall that this additional income
comprises the increase in the value of life due to general equilibrium effects. This
particular model therefore suggests that the calibrated value of improvements in 20th
century survival—$1,752 annually—would understate the true value by as little as 28%
(($1,752 + $490)/$1,752)) and as much as 140% (($1,752 + $2,252)/$1,752)).

F. Cross-country estimates of the effect of population on income

The previous model-based approaches to determining the elasticity of income with
respect to population can be usefully contrasted to similar estimates from the growth
literature.

This literature typically estimates cross-country regressions in which the

average annual growth in per-capita income depends on, among other things, the average
annual growth in working-age and total population over a period of time, e.g. 30 years.
We interpret these empirical specifications as first-difference regressions in log levels
which allow us to infer the elasticity of income with respect to population over a 30-year
time frame. To the extent that such estimated effects of population on income are due to
changes in internal behaviors, the estimated elasticities will be too high since they do not
account for the costs of changing behaviors. Similarly, to the extent that the estimated
elasticities reflect effects of population on income that are external to any decisions made

39

by individuals regarding investments in human capital, marriage, etc., they will not
overstate the net income effects.
Table 3 presents the elasticity of income with respect to population for several
representative studies in the growth literature. As before, we use these estimates only as
benchmarks for our analysis given the natural issues of identification associated with
growth regressions.
TABLE 3—Elasticity of Income With Respect to Population

Study

Bloom, Canning, and
Malaney (2000)
Bloom and Malaney
(1998)
Bloom and Sachs(1998)
Bloom and Williamson
(1998)
Hamoudi and Sachs
(1999)
Average

-0.3

Elasticity of
income w.r.t.
working-age
population
0.75

% Change in income
given counterfactual
increase in both US
populations
120

0.44

-0.54

19.2

0.01
0.03

0.25
0.46

73
138

-0.31

0.95

173

-0.13

0.37

65

Elasticity of
income w.r.t.
total population

Source: Authors’ calculations from each of the studies listed and calculated counterfactual increases in US
populations.

Table 3 illustrates the positive correlation between the size of the working age
population and income per capita. For 4 out of the 5 studies considered, the impact of
population size on income per capita is positive. Across all studies, the average elasticity
is 0.37.

This figure is only slightly larger than the elasticities predicted by our

endogenous growth model—recall that as an upper bound, the calibrated elasticity of
income per capita with respect to population is 0.20 and as a lower bound, 0.04. Put

40

differently, for the estimated population effects to be consistent with our model, the gap
between private and social returns (θ) would have to be around 12 to 15 percent, which is
slightly below the lowest level of appropriation reported in Table 1. The effects of total
population on income are much more varied, with two studies reporting a negative effect,
and one reporting a larger effect. Overall, the mean elasticity of income with respect to
total population, holding working age population constant, is -0.13.
Given the estimated elasticities of income with respect to total and working age
population, we can calculate the PE-GE difference implied by these estimates. For
example, consider the mean elasticities of income with respect to total and working age
population, which are -0.13 and 0.37, respectively. Given that total and working age
population increased by 300% and 280%, this implies that the overall effect on income is
300·(-0.13) + 280·(0.37) = 65%. Thus, when evaluated at the mean elasticities, the
growth literature suggests that changes in longevity and their associated effects on
population would have increased income by 65%. This implies an increase in annual
income of $2,641 from $4,087 to $6,728 and therefore a PE-GE difference of roughly
150% (($1,752 + $2,641)/$1,752). Recall that our calibrated endogenous growth model
suggested that difference between 28% and 140%, so the difference suggested by the
growth literature is in the upper bound of this range. Table 3 reports similar calculations
for each of the studies listed.

Not surprisingly, given the wide range of reported

elasticities, there is similar variation in the calibrated effects on income. At the low end,
Bloom and Malaney (1998) find that increases in population would have decreased
incomes by 19%, while at the high end, Hamoudi and Sachs (1999) find that population
would have increased income by 173%.

Thus, the growth literature reviewed here

41

suggests that the PE-GE difference is anywhere between the broad range of 56% and
636%.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Perhaps the most important change of the last century was the great expansion of life
itself. In fact, recent estimates for the US have demonstrated that the value of gains in
longevity have nearly equaled gains in all other material well-being.

While these

estimates are large by any means, they have typically ignored the important demographic
and economic consequences such aggregate changes in longevity can induce.

For

example, a variety of previous literatures have shown that life expectancy affects
individual behavior and that population or scale matters for economic performance. The
purpose of our paper is to illustrate the implications of these previous results for valuing
the enormous gains in life that took place in the last century, and to make a first attempt
at quantifying some of them.
The basic intuition behind our analysis is straightforward. Living to the age of 78
rather than 48 is not just a 30 year extension in life, but also affects how well one lives
their first 48 years as well as their last 30. The reason is that living with others who live
78 years is different than living with others who live only 48. We begin to quantify the
total value of life extension by focusing on two reasons why this might be true: own
human capital accumulation and total population. The value of these responses may be
on the same order of magnitude – perhaps even larger – than the value of extra lifetime
itself.

42

One reason to calculate the benefits of life extension is for the purpose of a costbenefit analysis of medical research (Murphy and Topel, 2006). However, a cost-benefit
analysis that includes the value of the indirect effects of life extension may implicitly
propose oblique solutions to problems that could be solved more directly. Suppose, for
example, that life extension raises the corporate capital stock, and that the social value of
the corporate capital stock exceeds its private value as a consequence of corporate
taxation.

Then, life extension would have the beneficial side effect of raising the

corporate capital stock, but to use this as an argument for medical research amounts to
arguing that lives should be extended in order to alleviate damage done by the corporate
tax system. Obviously, the more direct solution to that damage is to fix the corporate tax
code itself. This is one important reason that we have focused on a particular category of
the external effects of life expectancy: those associated with population. Extending lives
may well be one of the best and most direct ways of increasing the population.
Theory and empirical studies have cited both beneficial and deleterious effects of
population. One conclusion of our paper is that it matters exactly how beneficial or
deleterious population may be, because even minor effects in either direction may have a
big impact on the estimated value of life. However, given the observation that much of
R&D has a social return that exceeds its private return, and given that so many people
have chosen big cities as their place to live and work, we suspect that the beneficial
effects of population are the dominant ones. In this case, the general equilibrium value of
life may be as much as 2.5 times the partial equilibrium value.

43

REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron; Linn, Joshua. “Market Size and Innovation: Theory and Evidence
from the Pharmaceutical industry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2004, Vol.
119, pp. 1049-1090.
Acemoglu, Daron; Johnson, Simon. “Disease and Development: The Effect of Life
Expectancy on Economics Growth.” Working paper, 2006.
Angrist, Joshua; Krueger, Alan. "Estimating the Payoff to Schooling Using the Vietnam-Era
Draft Lottery.” NBER Working Paper No. 4067, 1992.

Becker, Gary S.; Philipson, Tomas J.; Soares, Rodrigo R. “The Quantity and Quality of
Life and the Evolution of World Inequality.” American Economic Review, Vol.
95, 2005, pp. 277-291.
Bernstein, J.I. “International R&D Spillovers Between Industries in Canada and the
United States.” Industry Canada Working Paper Number 3, 1994.
Bernstein, J.I.; Nadiri M.I. “Interindustry R&D Spillovers, Rates of Return, and
Production in High Tech Industries.” American Economic Review. Vol. 78, 1988,
pp. 429-34.
Bernstein, J.I.; Nadiri M.I. “Research and Development and Intraindustry Spillovers: an
Empirical Application of Dynamic Duality.” Review of Economics and Studies.
Vol. 56, 1989, pp. 249-269.
Bernstein, J.I.; Nadiri M.I. “Product Demand, Cost of Production, Spillovers, and the
Social Rate of Return to R&D.” NBER Working Paper No. 3625, 1991.
Bils, Mark; Klenow, Peter. “Does Schooling Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review. Vol 90, 2000, pp. 1160-1183.
Bleakley, Hoyt. “Disease and Development: Evidence from Hookworm Eradication in
the American South.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 122, 2007, pp. 73-117.
Bloom, David E.; Canning, David; Sevilla, Jaypee. The Demographic Dividend: A New
Perspective on the Economic Consequences of Demographic Change. Santa
Monica: RAND, 2003.
Bloom David E.; Canning David; Malaney P.N. Demographic Change and Economic
Growth in Asia. Population and Development Review, 2000, 26(supp.). pp. 257290.
Bloom, David; Malaney, P.N. Macroeconomic consequences of the Russian Mortality
Crisis, World Development, 1998, Vol. 26, pp. 2073-2085.
44

Bloom, David E.; Sachs, Jeffrey. Geography, Demography, and Economic Growth in
Africa. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 1998, pp. 207-273.
Bloom, David E.; Williamson, Jeffrey G. Demographic Transitions and Economic
Miracles in Emerging Asia, World Bank Economic Review, 1998, 12 (3), pp. 419455.
Boserup, Ester.; Population and Technological Change: A Study of Long Term Trends.
University of Chicago Press (1981).
Card, David. "Using Geographic Variation in College Proximity to Estimate the Return
to Schooling". In L.N. Christofides, E.K. Grant, and R. Swidinsky, editors,
Aspects of Labor Market Behaviour: Essays in Honour of John Vanderkamp.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1995.
Coale, Ansley J.; Hovver, Edgar M. Population Growth and Economic Development in
Low-Income Countries. Princeton University Press (1958).
Cutler, David M.; Richardson, Elizabeth, “The Value of Health: 1970-1990,”
American Economic Review, 1998, Vol. 88, pp. 97-100.
Hamoudi, A.; Sachs, Jeffrey. Economic Consequences of Health status: A Review of the
Evidence. Harvard Center for International Development, Working Paper No. 30,
1996.
Geoffard, P-Y.; Philipson, Tomas J. “Pricing and R&D when Consumption Affects
Longevity”, RAND Journal of Economics, 2002, 33(1), pp. 85-95.
Jayachandran, Seema; Lleras-Muney, Adriana. “Life Expectancy and Investments in
Human Capital: Evidence from Maternal Mortality Declines in Sri Lanka.”
Working paper, 2007.
Jones, Charles I. “Growth: With or Without Scale Effects.” American Economic
Review. Vol. 89, 1999, pp. 139-44.
Kuznets, Simon S. Population, Capital, and Growth. London: Heinemann (1973).
Lee, Ronald D.; Mason, A.; Miller, Timothy. “Saving, Wealth, and Population.” In
Population Does Matter: Demography, Growth, and Poverty in the Developing
World, edited by Nancy Birdsall, Allen C. Kelley, and Steven Sinding. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Lucas, Robert E. “On the Mechanics of Economic Development.” Journal of Monetary
Economics. Vol. 22, 1988, pp. 3-42.

45

Margo, Robert A. “Race and Human Capital: Comment.” American Economic Review.
Vol. 76, 1986, pp. 1221-1224.
Mansfield, Edwin; Rapoport J; Romeoe A; Wagner S; Beardely G. “Social and Private
Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Vol. 91, 1977, pp. 221-40.
Meltzer, David O. “Mortality Decline, the Demographic Transition, and Economic
Growth,” University of Chicago Dissertation, 1992.
Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. New York: Columbia University
Press, 1974.
Murphy, Kevin M. and Topel, Robert H. “The Economic Value of Medical Research,” in
Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel, eds., Measuring the gains from medical
research: An economic approach. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
Nordhaus, William D. "The Health of Nations: The Contribution of Improved Health to
Living Standards." in Measuring the Gains from Medical Research: An Economic
Approach, edited by Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2003.
Philipson, Tomas J. and Jena, Anupam B. "Who Benefits from New Medical
Technologies? Estimates of Consumer and Producer Surpluses for HIV/AIDS
Drugs", Forum for Health Economics & Policy, Forum: Biomedical Research and
the Economy: Article 3, 2005.
Romer, Paul M. “Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth.” Journal of Political
Economy. Vol. 94, 1986, pp. 1002-1037.
Romer, Paul M. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political
Economy. Vol. 98, 1990, pp. S71-S102.
Romer, Paul M. “The Origins of Endogenous Growth.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives. Vol. 8, 1994, pp. 3-22.
Rosen, Sherwin. “The Value of Changes in Life Expectancy.” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty, 1988, 1(3), pp. 285–304.
Shackelford, Brandon. “Slowing R&D Growth Expected in 2002.” National Science
Foundation InfoBrief 03-307, 2002.
Usher, Dan. “An Imputation to the Measure of Economic Growth for Changes in Life
Expectancy,” in Milton Moss, ed., The measurement of economic and social
performance, Studies in Income and Wealth, Vol. 38. NBER Conference of

46

Research in Income and Wealth. New York: Columbia University Press, 1973,
pp. 193–225.
Young, Alwyn. “The Gift of the Dying: The Tragedy of AIDS and the Welfare of Future
African Generations.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 120, 2005, pp. 243266.

47

