NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MODELING THE TERM STRUCTURE OF
INTEREST RATES UNDER NONSEPARABLE
UTILITY AND DURABILITY OF GOODS

Kenneth B. Dunn
Kenneth J. Singleton

Working Paper No. 1)415

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 19814

We thank nrnbers of workshops at Carnegie—Mellon University, Ohio
State University, Tulane University, the University of
Pennsylvania, Doug Breeden, Rick Green, Tim McGuire, and Chester
Spatt for helpful comments on an earlier draft; and Chang—Mo Aim
for research assistance. Financial support for the second author
was provided by NSF Grant SES—8121253. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations
and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #14 15
August 1984

Modeling the Term Structure of Interest Rates Under
Nonseparable Utility and Durability of Goods

ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the term structure relations implied by a twogood model in which goods are durable and the preference function of consimters may

be nonseparable both over time and the decision variables. The

parameters characterizing preferences are estimated and the implied restrictions on the comovements of consuxnptions and the returns from following

different investment strategies in bonds are examined. Both the durability
of goods (modeled by a linear service technology) and the nonseparability of

preferences over services from goods are important factors in explaining

the time paths of individual returns, However, substantial evidence against
our model is obtained when the restrictions associated with two different

investment strategies are studied simultaneously. Specifically, the difference between the sample mean returns are too large relative to the difference
between the sample covariances of the returns and the marginal utility from

acquiring a unit of the numeraire good. Our findings suggest that these
disc;epancies are not a consequence of either the relatively small variability in aggregate acquisitions of goods, or our small estimates of relative
risk aversion.

Kenneth B. Dunn
Graduate School of Industrial
Administration
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412) 578-2298

Kenneth J. Singleton
Graduate School of Industrial
Administration
Carnegie-Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
(412) 578-8838

1.

Introduction

Equilibrium term structure relations have been deduced under various

assumptions about preferences, technology, and the joint distribution of
the underlying sources of uncertainty in the economy.

For instance, Cox,

Ingersoll and Ross (1978, 1981), Lucas (1978), Hansen and Singleton (1982,

1983), Ferson (1983), Marsh (1983), and Sundaresan (198L), among others,
have deduced restrictions on bond returns for parameterizations of models
with time—additive preferences defined over a single consumption good.

To

date, most versions of these models that have been implemented empirically

have not been consistent with the observed comovements of asset returns

and consumption.1

These findings, together with the complementary

evidence reported here, suggest that the representations of returns
implied by models with time—additive utility do not capture the relative

or absolute risks associated with investing in bonds with different
maturities.

In this paper we explore the relations among optimal consumption
decisions and the (real) term structure of discount bond returns in the

context of a dynamic model in which preferences of consumers' are
non—time—separable functions of purchases of nondurable and durable goods.

The choice of this framework is motivated primarily by the following two
considerations.

First, by introducing durable goods into the consumers'

choice problem and allowing for interactions among the utilities obtained

from durable and nondurable goods, we may be able to represent more
accurately the linkages between consumption choices and interest rates.
In particular, the demands for consumption goods depend not only on the

current prices of goods, but also on the rates at which current
consumption can be exchanged for consumption at future dates.

This

2

dependence has been evidenced recently in the large fluctuation in demand

for durable goods corresponding to the historically large fluctuation in
interest rates. Second, even though preferences in terms of services from

goods are time—separable, the durability of goods and the associated

technology for producing service flows from these goods induce a
nonseparable utility function with purchases of goods as the arguments.
We show that an implication of non—time—separability of utility is that

shifts in the term structure may affect demands for consumption goods
directly, and not only through the marginal utility of wealth as in the

case of time—separable preferences.

As a consequence, there is

potentially more scope for bonds with different terms to maturity to
differ in their risk characteristics.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.

In section two

we describe the equilibrium relations among marginal rates of substitution

of consumption and returns on bonds with different maturities that form
the basis of our empirical analysis.

Empirical evidence suggesting that

the "consumption risk" inherent in a single—good model with constant
relative risk averse preferences cannot explain the average, real returns

O U.S. Treasury bills with various maturities is also presented.

Our

non—time—separable specification of preferences for nondurable and durable

goods is described in section three. There we also make more precise the
manner in which the marginal utilities from acquiring goods depend on the
durable character of goods.

The time series properties of these marginal

utilities, and in particular their covariability with returns, are
potentially very different than those of the marginal utilities from
single—good models.

3

In

section four we describe the data and econometric methodology used

in estimation.

In addition, it is shown that the specification of the

technology for producing services from goods, together with the maturities

of the bonds studied, determine the autocovariance structure of the
disturbances in our estimation equations.

In section five the parameter

estimates are presented and the extent to which the restrictions, implied

by our model, on the moments of consumptions and returns on securities
with different terms to maturity is assessed.

In addition to using formal

statistical procedures, the fit of our model is evaluated by comparing the

sample means of the returns to the sample versions of the corresponding

covariance expressions which, according to the theory, equal the mean
returns,

The sensitivity of these expressions to changes in the

parameters governing relative risk aversion and the non—separability over

time of preferences is also investigated.
presented in section six.

Concluding remarks are

14

2.

Equilibrium Term Structure Relations

In this section we describe an equilibrium relation among bond
returns that is implied by a large class of dynamic models. Additionally,

we present some new evidence that a single—good version of the term
structure relation with time—separable utility is not consistent with the

risk structure of discount bonds.

These observations serve to motivate

our non—time—separable, multi—good specification of preferences which is
presented in section three.

Suppose that, among other investment opportunities, consumers are

given the choice of K investment strategies involving default—free,
pure—discount bonds. These strategies may include, for example, buying an

i—period bond and selling it after n periods (n < ),
sequence of n one—period bonds.

Let

or

rolling over a

denote the total return (one

plus the rate of return) from following the kth investment strategy from
date t to date t+n, where prices and payoffs are denominated in terms of a

numeraire good.2 Also, suppose that the uncertain economic environment is
such that the first—order conditions of a typical consumer's intertemporal
optimum problem imply the relation3

(1)

Et[mtrJ

1,

for k = 1, 2, ..., K,

where rr.tn is an individual consumer's marginal rate of substitution of
consumption of the numeraire good at date t for consumption at date t + n

and EE'] denotes the mathematical expectation conditioned on information
available at date t, I, which is common to all agents.

To deduce testable restrictions from (1) requires assumptions about

preferences, the distributions of mt and returns, or possibly both,

In

order to study the links between acquisitions of goods and returns on

5

bonds with different terms of maturity, without imposing assumptions on

the joint distribution of the endogenous variables

we

and

proceed by restricting only the functional form of utility. Consequently,

our empirical results are robust to alternative specifications of
technology and the distribution of the exogenous shocks.

As in previous

empirical studies, our specification of preferences allows for exact
demand aggregation, so mt,n can be interpreted as the marginal rate of
substitution for a representative consumer.

and rn are drawn from a

Since we are not assuming that

particular family of distributions, the conditional mean of [m r )

t,n

,n

cannot be evaluated explicitly as a function of the elements of I.
Therefore, instead of basing estimation and inference directly on (1), we
— 1) must be

exploit the implication of (1) that in equilibrium

orthogonal to all of the elements of agents' information set. That is,

(2) Et(rnt,nrn —

=O

for all

c

where EE] denotes the unconditional expectation.

Given a parametric

specification of' preferences and time series observations on consumptions,

the kt1 return and a set of instruments, z, a consistent estimator of the

population mean in (2) can be constructed without prior knowledge of the
distributions of the variables. The orthogonality conditions (2) restrict

the comovements among the returns on the K investment strategies and are
the basis of' the subsequent empirical analysis.

There is another relation that is implied by (1) and which resembles
more closely the restrictions on bond returns tested in the literature on
the traditional expectations models. Specifically, forming the difference
of' the versions of (1) for two returns

and

gives

6

(3)

Etrmtnrtn]

Et[mtnrt,n]

which implies that

('4)

EEmt,(r, —

r,)zt]

O for all zt c

Although estimation and inference can proceed using the orthogonality
conditions in (4), these latter conditions are not equivalent to (2).
More precisely, (2) requires that the mean of tmtnrnzt] equal the mean
of z for the n—period return on any investment strategy.

On the other

hand, ('4) requires only that the means of the products Emtnrnzt:I be
equal for all returns, which is clearly a weaker requirement than (2).

Nevertheless, tests based on (14) may be of interest because of tax
considerations (see section four).

The equilibrium relations (1) and (3) allow for the relative
riskiness of the K

investment

strategies to vary over the business cycle.

This can be seen more directly as follows: From (1) and the definition of

conditional covariance it follows that the risk premium for a security
with return

over the riskiess real security that pays off a unit of

the numeraire at date t+n is

(5) Ettr] — 1/EtCmt,]

_Cov[r, mt,]/Et[m].

As in Breeden (1979), risk is measured by the conditional covariabilty of

returns with the marginal rate of substitution of consumption.

Now

forming the difference between the respective versions of (5) for
strategies j and k gives

7

(6) Ettrn] —

If

EEr]

—
_Covt[mt,,

the securities are not equivalent in terms of the insurance which they

provide against consumption risk, then the conditional covariances of
with mt,n will differ and, hence, their mean returns will

rn and

also be different.

We emphasize that the tests of the term structure

relations (2) and (14) conducted in this paper allow for the conditional

covariances in (5) and (6) to vary over time and to change sign.
Moreover, it is not necessary to specify precisely how these covariances

change over time with changes in the state of the economy.

Thus, our

empirical methodology is not subject to Cornell's (1981) criticism of
tests of asset pricing models based on consumption—beta representations.

Prior to specifying mt, and deducing our estimation equations from
(2) and (14), it will be useful to review previous empirical specifications

of dynamic asset pricing models, and to explore in more detail the nature
of'

their

rejections.

distribution of
parametrically.

ne approach has been to restrict the joint

mt, and returns and to specify preferences
For instance, Hansen and Singleton (1983) rejected at

conventional significance levels a model of real returns on one—month
Treasury bills and stock returns in which preferences were of the constant

relative risk averse type and returns were assumed to be jointly
lognormally distributed with rn1. Subsequently, Fersori (1983) considered

three—month Treasury bills and reported a chi square statistic with a
marginal significance level of .026 for a quarterly version of the same

model. He also found that a model in which consumers exhibit constant
absolute risk aversion and in which consumption is assumed to be normally
distributed (returns and

are jointly lognormal) could be rejected at

8

the .001 level.

Together, these findings suggest that the joint

hypothesis that (1) obtains and returns and the marginal rates of
substitution are lognorrnally distributed is not supported by the data.

This conclusion is evidently not a consequence of mis—measurement of
consumption

or other non—financial aggregates. One of the tests conducted

by Hansen and Singleton (1983) did not require accurate measurement of
consumption and allowed for shocks to preferences. The evidence against
these asset pricing relations may, of course, be a consequence of imposing
distributional assumptions.

However, Hansen and Singleton (1982) provide

substantial evidence against a single—good model

with constant relative

risk

averse preferences, but without distributional assumptions imposed,

using

returns on a stock index and a one—period Treasury bill.

To confirm that these observations apply to bond returns with various

maturities, and to explore further the nature of the rejections, we
re—estimated the single—good model with constant relative risk averse
preferences considered in Hansen and Singleton (1982) using Treasury bill

returns and orthogonality conditions of the form (2).

This particular

model is of interest because of the attention it has received in previous

theoretical and empirical studies.

Furthermore, under the additional

assumption that the marginal rates of substitutions and returns are
jointly distributed as log—normal variates, a log—linear version of an
expectations theory of the term structure of real interest rates can be

derived from (3)5

This log—linear expectations theory embodies as a

special case a discretetime version of the local expectations theory
deduced by Ccx, Ingersoll, and Ross (1981) from their general equilibrium
model under logarithmic utility and by imposing special assumptions about
the evolution of the state variables in the economy.6

9

Estimates were obtained for the composite consumption good
"nondurables plus services" along with the one—month return on one—month
Treasury bills (TBILL1) and the three—month return on three—nonth Treasury

bills (TBILL3) constructed by Ibbotson and Siquefield (1982) and Huizinga

and Mishkin (1983), respectively.

The estimation procedure proposed by

Hansen aid Singleton (1982) assumes that growth rates of consumption and

returns are strictly stationary stochastic processes.7

It does not

restrict returns or consumption to be drawn from a specific family of
distributions.

The results for the time period January 1959 through

December 1978 are reported in Table I.

Both of the chi square

goodness—of—fit statistics for testing the three over—identifying
restrictions suggest that the model is not consistent with the data.
Furthermore, the estimated coefficients of relative risk aversion (CRRA)
are near zero, which seems implausably small.
TABLE I
ESTIMATES FOR A SINGLE—GOOD MODEL
JANUARY 1959 THROUGH DECEMBER 1978a

Returns

a.

CRRA

x2(3)

TBILL1

.2066
(.0806)

17.62
(.9994)

TBILL3

.0012
(.1066)

12.04
(.9927)

ER

RP

—9.436—O5

14.3O307

8.749—09

Standard errors of the parameter estimates and probability values of
the test statistics are given in parentheses.

10

It is instructive to interpret these findings using the relations
among "consumption risk" and mean returns implied by this model. The risk
premium for the return on an n—period investment strategy is given by (5).

This expression is not directly useful for our empirical analysis for the

same reasons that we are not studying (1).

Namely, we do not have

explicit expressions for the conditional moments in (5).

There is,

however, an unconditional counterpart to (5) that also must hold in
equilibrium and which is useful for interpreting the empirical results

reported in Table I.

Using (2) and the definition of unconditional

covariance, it follows that

(7) EErJ — EIzt)/E[mtnzt)

—

Cov[r,,

mt,zt]/E[mtzt).

The parameters governing preferences must be such that the first and
second moments of mt are consistent with (7) for all n—period returns on

default—free discount bonds and all z c

In particular, if

is

chosen to be the constant unity, then (7) simplifies to a relation among
the mean "excess return" of

about 1/EEmt,] and the covariance of the

return and

The sample versions of the left and right hand sides of (7),
calculated using the estimated values of the preference parameters and

setting z equal to unity, are also displayed in Table I under the

headings ER and RP, respectively.
m1

/E[mt,nJ

for

The magnitudes of Cov[r

TBILL1 (n1) and TBILL3 (n3) are two and five orders of

magnitude too small, respectively, to be consistent with the magnitudes of

the sample mean excess returns on the left—hand—side of (7).

the signs of RP are not consistent with the signs of ER.

Moreover,

None of these

11

calculations require returns or

to be drawn from a specific family of

distributions.

A common feature of previous preference—based studies of the term
structure, which may account for their failure to replicate the moment
restriction (7), is that they assume preferences are separable both over

time and across decision variables.

In the next section we argue that

introducing the desired level of consumption of services from durable
goods may substantially affect the time—series behavior of consumers'
marginal rates of substitution, and their covariability with returns.
Consequently, both the left and right hand sides of (7) will be affected

by introducing a richer specification of preferences. Before turning to
this discussion, we acknowledge that the exclusion of taxes from many of

previous studies may also explain their findings.8 The robustness of
our empirical results to the introduction of taxes is assessed in section
the

four, where we discuss the implications of introducing a tax on the income

of a "representative investor" for the forms of (2) and (4).

12

3.

Non—time—separable Preferences for Nondurable and Durable Goods

Consumers are assumed to have preferences over the service flows from

and durable goods, and to rank and alternative sequences of

nondurable

consurnptions

E

(8)

of services using the utility functional9

Z
0t0

!{c*d*(l6)}y
t t

y < 1; 0 <

< 1.

'r

In (8), c is the consumption of services from nondurables plus services
at date t, dt is the consumption of services from durable goods at date t,

(0,1) is a subjective discount factor, and

parameters.

and y are preference

*5 *(.)

In terms of the composite service flow {ct dt

}, utility

is both time separable and of the constant relative risk averse type, with

coefficient of relative risk aversion (1—1).

Although utility is a

time—separable function of services, it is implicitly a non—time—separable

function of the past acquisitions of goods that yield the services. For

both discussing the links between shifts in the term structure and
consumptions, and the subsequent empirical analysis, we shall work with

I
the "indirect" utility function obtained from (8) by expressing *
c and dt
in terms of past acquisitions of goods.

Following Telser and Graves (1972), all consumers are assumed to have

have access to linear technologies that transform consumption goods

purchased

today into service flows in the future.

*

The service flow c, is

assumed to be given by

(9)

C4.

c + aict

+

a2c

2 +

•• + CrnCt_m

m<

.

13

where

.

> 0, for all j.

*

10

The variable c is included in (8) instead of

the purchases of nondurable goods, c, since some of the goods classified

as nondurable may in fact provide services for more than one period (one
month).

By including m lagged values of c, we are at the same time

assuming that services are provided by nondurable goods for only rn
periods. All of the empirical relations considered subsequently allow for

c (fO j=1,...,m)

as a special ease.

The technology for producing services from durable goods is also
assumed to be linear, with d being proportional to the sum of the stock
of'

durable

goods held by the consumer at the beginning of period t,

and purchases of durable goods .during period t, d: d =
0 < e < 1.

Under these assumptions, kt is equal to [kti +

e(k1
dtJ

+

d).

less the

amount of the stock used to produce services:

(10)

kt

(1_e)[k1 +

dt]

(1—e)z (l—e)3 dt.
3=0

Hence, dt can be expressed as

d= e k =ez(1—e) j d
*

(11)

j=0

—.3

*
With this service technology, dt depends on the acquisitions of durable
goods infinitely far into the past. Substitution of (9) and (11) into (8)
gives the desired utility function defined over purchases.

Let nondurable goods be the numeraire.

Then the first—order

conditions for the maximization of (8) with respect to the decision
variables c arid dt and subject to the consumer's budget constraint are:

114

(12)

(13)

Et$t(1 +Ea.83L3)( c:61_1 d1_1} At

Et6t(1_6)e[1_(1_e)L_1J_1(cT d1_T_1} PdtAtI

where A is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the period t budget
constraint (the marginal utility of wealth), dt is the price of durable

goods in terms of the numeraire, L is the forward shift operator (i.e,

11

xt.), and [1_(1...B)L J

L x1

Z £(1_e)L

—1.
J

.

The left—hand—side

of (12) is the marginal utility with respect to c and the left—hand—side

of (13) is the marginal utility with respect to dt.

These expressions

state simply that the marginal utilities with respect to c, and dt must
equal the marginal utility of wealth in units of c and d, respectively.

The marginal utilities of goods in (12) and (13) involve the expected

values of the marginal utilities of future services, because goods
purchased at date t provide services in both current and future periods.
The forms of these relations depend directly on the specifications of the
service technologies.

For instance, nondurable goods acquired at date t

provide services for rn

The

future periods according to (9) .

term

t+JE {c*T_ld*
_'r} in (12) is the expected value to the consumer at
t t+3
t+3
date t of an incremental increase in the consumption of services from
rn

nondurable goods at date t+j. The weight .
3

(divided

by 1 +

E

O.)

is

the

j1

proportion of a unit of services provided at date t+,j by the acquisition

of goods at t. Thus, in utility terms, the services provided at date t+j

by an acquisition of nondurable goods at date t contribute
ajt+36Et{c_ld_)Y} to the total marginal utility obtained from the

- :.;'

e .:

art

C:.,a.

'r:
e.

•

•

.:Jft47.tl(.... •.—cr• cir

t..—c,ek—

t...

.

1.

:'•

5-.

t

Li :.
..•

.St'i. t:.
•

...

?!..

.: -

!,i."t'r(?1

assut)tLa

co!.( .*..

x_.'•.:'

fcr c•

e.s..:-

'Y( t. foP

',t;' trni.t.

S.. —

....

r
4t .1

lar'(
•-.

•

17

—

*

(19)

t6 16 —1
t

t

t2t'

d
dt — (1_e)p1J,
1

where the left—hand—side of (18) is the marginal utility with respect to

services from durable goods, q is the rental price of services from
durable goods, and ,1 EtEpdf+lxt+l/xtJ is the price of' a bond that
pays off one unit of durable goods at t+1.

The interpretation of the

rental price relation (19) is similar to that of (17).

The relatively

simple relation (19) arises because the price of a claim to a unit of'
durable goods for one period is the price of a unit of dt less the present

value of the price at date t+1 of a claim to the remaining stream of'
services from date t+1 onward yielded by the good. A claim to a unit of'

durable goods for one period contributes e

to

a unit of' services from
ft

durable goods at date t, so the value of' a unit of services,

equals

lie times the value of a one period claim to a unit of durable goods.
ft

*

Solving the system of equations (16) and (18) for c and dt yields a

version of the dynamic "demand" equations discussed by Eichenbaum and
Hansen (198L):

—
—

l/(y—1)1
At

'

''6B tE1—M_6)y]/(y._1)
,j

/'1— 6 )8 t1(1—6)y/(y—1)

(20)
d

—

ft

l/(Y—l){ q1 /(68
t)}6Y/(Y—1){ q.
i'(l —5 ) 8
C...,

— x4.

II_.

The demands for services given in (20) are functions of only
ft

contemporaneous service prices q1 and

and the

ft

because preferences are

18

*

*

time—separable in service flows. However, the service prices

and

are linear combinations of the prices of discount bonds with payoffs
denominated in goods and, therefore, changes in these bond prices will in

general affect demands for both goods directly as well as indirectly
through

It is these good—denominated bond prices that have been

considered in previous consumption—based, intertemporal asset pricing
models.

For the special case with in = 0

in (9), c c, q =

1,

and

preferences are time—separable along the nondurable goods dimension.
Nevertheless, changes in bond prices still have direct effects on the
demands for both goods through

are logarithmic (y

0),

If, in addition to in

then Ct is proportional to

0, preferences

[see (16)3 and

focusing on (12) alone leads to a special case of the time—separable model

of c and returns tested in section two.

Thus, only if m=0 and 'r=O will

the effects of changes in bond prices on c, be restricted to the indirect

effects on the marginal utility of wealth.

Changes in interest rates

affect dt directly for all admissible values of y and m.

While the entire class of constant relative risk averse preferences

defined over c alone is not a special case of (8) , our model is
consistent with a richer set of dynamic interactions among consumptions
and returns than the single—good model of section two. Whether or not our

model is consistent with the observed comovements in consurnptions and
returns is an empirical issue to which we turn next.

19
L•

The Econometric Model and the Data
An important characteristic of the utility function (8) combined with

the linear technologies (9) and (11) is that, under the assumptions of

interior optima, complete contingent claims markets for goods, and
invertability of the lag polynomials in (9) and (11), (12) and (13) hold
with Ct and dt being aggregate per capita variables (Eichenbaum and Hansen
19814).

The invertability of the lag polynomials is a technical condition

that, among other things, implies that the existence of contingent claims
markets for goods assures that there are complete markets in services, and

vice—versa. Henceforth we shall assume that, given the production

technologies of the economy, there is a sufficiently rich set of
contingent claims available to investors to assure that (12) and (13)
apply to the aggregate quantities used in the empirical analysis.

Expressions (12) and (13) cannot be used directly for empirical
analyses since the marginal utility of wealth is unobserved. Let MU0(t)

denote the marginal utility of acquiring the numeraire good at date t
(i.e., the left—hand—side of (12)).

Then an alternative expression

involving MU0(t) that does not depend on
the relation rn

(21)

is obtained by substituting

MU(t+n)/MU(t) into (1):

EtEMU(t) — MTJc(t+fl)r,n]

0.

Fror (21) we are able to construct a set of orthogonality conditions like
those in (2) upon which estimation and inference can be based.

The riarginal utility of wealth can be eliminated from (13) by
substituting (12) into (13).

The resulting expression still cannot be

used directly in our empirical analysis, however, since it depends on the

20

infinite order polynomial in the lag operator [1—(1—9)L]. Instead,
we substitute (12) into (18) to obtain

(1)8t{c*Td*(1_T} = Et{[1_(1_O)L]pdtMUc(t)}/9

(22)

The intratemporal relation (22) linking the marginal utility of services
from durables and MU0(t) involves lag polynomials of finite orders m and
one. This relation will also be exploited in estimation and inference.

Throughout this discussion we have abstracted from taxation of
income. One consideration that arises when there is taxation is that the
prices of securities that span two tax years must reflect the value of the

option of taking losses or deferring gains (Constantinides 1983).

At a

more fundamental level, if there is an income tax, then the relations (21)

and (22) will in general not hold.

Further, aggregation across consumers

is in general not possible in the absence of complete markets for both
taxable and noritaxable contingent claims.

Here we restrict our comments

to the latter case of "doubly complete" markets (Dammon 1983) and abstract

from end—of—year tax options in order to assess the implications of
taxation for models in which the representative consumer paradigm is
applicable.

We do allow for the marginal tax rate of the representative

investor to vary over time as a function of income)2

Suppose that the income tax from selling a security at date t+n must
be paid at date t+T CT > n), and that at that time the consumer's marginal

tax rate for ordinary income is g,. Then relation (21), for example, must
be modified to

21
(23)

ErMu0(t) —

+

MU0(t+n)r

MU0(t+T)(rfl

—

1)]

0.

The last term in (23) represents the present value of the loss (gain) from

the payment of taxes (tax deduction).

This term will vary over time with

changes in the consumptions, the marginal tax rate of the consumer, the

returns on securities, and the length of time between the date the
security is sold and the tax payment date.

Consequently, unless

is

near zero, or the present values of the gains and losses over the sample
period are on average approximately zero, the omission of tax obligations

from (21) may affect both the consistency of the estimates and the
validity of the inferences.

Similar observations potentially apply to

expression (3), which with taxes becomes

(214)

Et[NU(t+n)(r _r,n) —

MU0(t+T)g(r _r,)]

0.

When g is known to the investor at the investment date t, and n:t, as

would be the case with three—month holding periods and quarterly tax
payments, (214) simplifies to

—
(25) EJMU C
(t+n)(r1<
t,ri

r3

t,n

which is equivalent to (3).

)] =

0,

If the dates r and n are nearly the same,

then (214) and (25) will be nearly the same. Thus, we expect tests based
on (25) to be relatively robust to the presence of an income tax which is
consistent with our representative consumer model.

In proceeding with estimation, we shall assume that the decision
interval of consumers coincides with the sampling interval of the data,

22

which is one month. This assumption permits the use of the published data

on consumption, without introducing problems associated with temporal
aggregation. However, if decision intervals are much shorter and the time
series properties of the consumption rates for this interval are different

than the properties of the monthly data, then our estimation and inference
procedures may yield incorrect conclusions.

The only ways of circumventing temporal aggregation problems that we
are aware of is to impose strong distributional assumptions on the series

or restrict preferences to be of a very special form.

For the reasons

given in section two, we choose not to impose distributional assumptions
on any of the variables in the model. One can exploit Rubinstein's (1976)

result that, for time—separable utility of the logarithmic form, the
intertemporal marginal rate of substitution of consumption m,1 is equal
to the reciprocal of the real return on the aggregate wealth portfolio.
If the latter return is measured by the value—weighted return on the NYSE,

for example, then tests can be conducted without restricting the decision

interval or having to use consumption data [see Hansen, Richard, and
Singleton (1981) and Brown and Gibbons (1983)L13 Clearly, however, in a

model with durable goods, as considered here, the wealth of consumers
includes the value of the stock of durable goods.

Consequently, all of

the measurement problems that affect consumption—based tests will
potentially affect tests that exploit Rubinstein's result and which
measure wealth correctly.

Suppose the holding—period returns from K investments over n periods

are to be used in the econometric analysis.

The disturbances in our

econometric analysis are constructed from (21) and (22) by substituting
from (12) for MiJ0(t). Specifically, we shall interpret the variables

23

(26)

E(1+Z a3L_3)côd1

Ukt

E .B3L_3)c6T_ld(l_T}rk
)/[e*_ld*_Y]
t+n
t+n
t
t
t,n

-C

as

m

—1

(27) UK+lt

{6(1—(1—e)BL

1-6)

){Pdt(l+zj

(1-e) {cd

L—1)c6 —1 *(16)

1-6) Y}J/rc6Yd 1-6)y,

the disturbances, since EtuktO, k=1,

...,

K+1

(see (21) and (22)).

*6y_1 *(1_5)y

The expressions in (26) and (27) are scaled by Ec,

dt

]

in

order

that the disturbances will be strictly stationary processes in the

of certain types of real growth in purchases of goods. The
disturbances Ukt and U
are functions of returns and ratios of the
K+1,t
form
and ct/(pdtdt).
Therefore, if purchases of
presence

dt/dt

nondurable and durable goods grow over time (possibly at. different rates)

according to geometric trends, and the returns and c/(pdtd) are
stationary,

then the disturbances will be strictly stationary stochastic

processes. This assumption is

maintained throughout our empirical

analysis.

Given that the disturbances are stationary stochastic processes, it
follows from Wold's decomposition theorem that the disturbances have
a moving average representation. Our model of the term structure of

interest rates further restricts the covariance structure of the
disturbances Ukt.
depends

...,

K)

on

In particular, the number of nonzero autocovariances of

the number of periods, n, over which the kth return (k=1,

is computed and the degree

of

non—time—separability of

24

Hansen and Singleton (1982) show that when n > 1 and

preferences.

preferences are separable over time the autocovariance function is that of

a moving average process of order n—i; that is, E(uktukts)

0,

s

>

This follows from the observation that with time—separable
preferences Ukt is not observed by agents until date t+n (i.e., Ukt
1.

),

so (ul_E4uk4)

is an n—period ahead forecast error.

U1

Eichenbaum, Hansen and Singleton (1983) show that when n1 the
disturbances in a model with non—time—separable utility have the
autocovariance structure of a moving average process of order equal to one

less than the maximum number of leads of the decision variables that
appear in the estimation equations. In (26) and (27), (rn+1) future values

of c and dt appear when n1.

Thus, the disturbance uK+1,t follows a

MA(m) process (m+1 less one). Combining non—time—separable utility with a

n—period maturity (n > 1) leads to a disturbance,

E[uktuk

't+n÷m Hence,

0 for s > ns-rn and the disturbance

EEuktEts(ukt$)J

follows a MA(n+m—1) process, k1, ..., K.

Similarly, (ukt_uLt), k

2.,

is a disturbance corresponding to (25) and it will also follow a MA(n+m—1)

process. These observations are exploited when constructing estimators of
the unknown parameters.

Following Hansen and Singleton (1982), we proceed with estimation by

dimensional vectors Zkt with elements in

choosing

fact that EEZktUkt] = 0, k=i, ..., K+1.

and exploit the

Specifically, let b0=(,y,,8,cz1,

denote the parameter vector and let the vector of K+1
disturbances be denoted by Ut
ft

ft

c

t+1

c

ft

t+n+m

d

Xt+n+m :(—

c

(ult....UK+lt)1. To simplify notation, let

c,

Y•

t+1
ft

d

ft

ft

c

d

t+n-i-m

t

p dt+1

1

K
),

dt Pdtdt dt

25

define the function h by the relation

.

zlt 0

.

.

u h(Xtnnb0) and let

0

0 z2 0
.

Z

I

0

ZK1t —

K+ 1

denote an

by (K+1) matrix of instruments, where R =

Z

Associated

k1
with

is an R dimensional vector of

g0(b0)

EEZth(Xt

,

=

b0fl

p.ilt'o'.

h-'.''.ljty conditions,

0.

Treating g0(b) as a function of b

where c is the admissible

parameter space, the method of moments estimator of g0(b) is given by

gT( —

Zth(xt

,

b)

The function g(b) can be constructed from the sample information

[(xt,Zl,...,zKlt),t1,..,T}. Assuming g,..(') is a continuous
function of b, a consistent estimator of b0 can be constructed by
minimizing a quadratic form in g(b) by choice of b c 2• Hansen (1962)

shows that the optimal estimator of b0 is obtained by minimizing the
criterion function

JT(b)

g(b)'S1g(b),

26

where ST is a consistent estimator of

S0 =

z

EtZtutuZJ.

This expression for

can be simplified in our case because the matrix of

instruments is predetermined with zeI and, therefore, the process
tZtut:t=_,...,c} inherits the autocovariance structure of {utJ.

That

is,

Erztutuz]=o for L > n+rn, so (Ztu} has the autocovariance
structure of an MA(n+m—1) process.

Hence, the theoretical model of the

term structure implies that
n+m—1

S0

E[ZtutuZJ.

If, as in our empirical analysis, n > m, then the last

rows and

Z'
columns of the matrices E[Z tut U'
are zero for 9 > m, since U
t..i t—2. ]
K-i-1,t

follows a moving average process of order m. These zero restrictions are
imposed in the estimation a S0.

The optimality of the estimator obtained by minimizing the criterion

function, JT(b), requires a consistent estimator of the weighting matrix
which depends on b0.

Hence, the estimation procedure requires two

steps. First, the identity matrix is substituted for S in the criterion
function to obtain initial estimates of the parameters.

These estimates

are used to construct estimates of the disturbances, which in turn are
used to construct the estimator of S0 proposed by Hansen (1982) and Hansen

and Singleton (1982). The criterion function with the resulting estimate

of the weighting matrix, S, is then minimized to obtain the optimal
estimates of the parameters.

In practice, we repeated the last step using

27

a revised estimate of S calculated using the parameter estimates at
convergence from step two.

This assured that the final parameter

estimates were not sensitive to the estimate of the weighting matrix.

The empirical specification of our model requires making an
assumption about the timing of agents decisions within each month.
real return,

,

is

The

computed using the price at the end of month t and

the real payoff from the security at the end of month t+n.

Consumption

data measured at the end of month t represent purchases during month t. We
assume that consumers know the payoffs from securities at the end of month

t when making their purchase decisions for month t or, equivalently, that

they make their purchase decisions at the end of month t.

If instead

consumers were assumed to make their decisions at the beginning of the
month, then they would be able to use c, to predict returns over month t.

Hence, our assumption about the timing of agents purchase decisions

represents a conservative assumption with respect to consumers'
information set.

The sample period for the empirical analysis is January 1959 through
December 1978.

Several considerations influenced this choice,

data on consumptions are available only after January 1959.

Monthly

The use of

monthly data allows us to get closer to point to point sampling over a
three month holding period than quarterly data. More recent observations

on returns are not considered, because of the well known change in
operating

procedures by

the Federal Reserve in October, 1979.

Monthly data on real purchases of nondurables plus services and real

purchases of durable goods were obtained from the

CITIBASE

data tape.

These series were deflated by the monthly population series published by
the

Bureau of Census in order to obtain the per capita

real series {Ct}

28

and {dJ. The service flow series {c} was then constructed endogenously
using equation (9).

We used equation (11) to compute the service flow

series fd) endogenously as a function of the initial stock of durable
goods and the current and past purchases of durable goods.

The initial

value of the stock of durable goods was set at the net value in December

of the stock of durables computed by Musgrave (197g).15

Then equation

(10) was used to construct the real per capita series {kt}. The price of

durable goods relative to nondurables plus services was computed by
dividing the implicit price deflator for durables by the deflator for
nondurables plus services.

The returns on one—month Treasury bills are

taken from Ibbotson and Sinquefield (1982), and the returns on three— and
six—month bills are those constructed by Huizinga and Mishkin (1983) from

the CRSP government bond tape.

Real returns were calculated by dividing

the numerator and denominator of the nominal returns by the value of the
implicit price deflator for nondurables plus services (the nurneraire) for
the month corresponding to the maturity and purchase, respectively, of the
security.

29
5.

Empirical Results

The results from estimating the model with a single return (K=1) are

displayed in Table II.

*

Initially, we assume that m=1 so that c c, +

The instrument vector, z, associated with the disturbance ult in
(26) included the constant unity, the lagged value of'

the

real rate of

return on the security, and the first lagged value of the growth rates of
real per capita consumption of nondurables plus services, real per capita
purchases of durable goods, and the relative price of durables:

1

(28)

z1 (1, rt — '

— 1, dt

dti

— 1, Ct

—

1,

Ct1

dt

—

1

)

dt—1

To construct the intratemporal orthogonality conditions associated with
the disturbance u2

(27), we set Z2t equal to z1.

In addition to the parameter estimates and estimates of their
respective standard errors, we report a statistic for testing the validity

of the overidentifying restrictions implied by the model.

Five linear

combinations of the B sample orthogonality conditions are set to zero in
estimating

the 5

x

1 vector b0. There are an additional B —

5

independent

linear combinations of g(b) that are not set to zero in estimation, but
that should be close to zero if the model is valid. Hansen (1982) shows
that a test of the null hypothesis that the population counterparts of

these B—5 linear combinations of (b) are zero can be based on the
product of the number of time series observations and the minimized value

of the criterion function.

This statistic is distributed asymptotically

as a chi—square with R—5 degrees of freedom (DF) under the null
hypothesis.

30

The computed values of this statistic for the single—return runs
(R=10) are displayed in column 7 of Table II.

The probability values

(1—significance level) of the statistics are given in parentheses.

None

of these statistics provide strong evidence against the model, although

there is substantially more evidence against the model when the return
used in estimation is the one—month return on a one—month Treasury bill
(TBILL1). One interpretation of the latter finding is that the reliance
on information that is gathered at quarterly intervals in constructing the

monthly data distorts the time series properties of the monthly, relative

to the quarterly, series.16 To the extent this is the case, the results
for the three—month returns, which are based on monthly data point—sampled
at quarterly intervals, may be more reliable.

The parameter estimates displayed in Table II are qualitatively
similar for all of the securities.

The point estimates of the concavity

parameter, y, range from —.1922 for TBILL1 to —1.0209 for the three—month

return from rolling over three one—month bills (ROLL1). The estimates of
the lag for consumption of nondurables, , are economically plausible. In

all cases, the 's are positive and, except for ROLL1, are at least twice

as large as their respective standard errors.
allocation parameter 6 are also plausible.

The estimates of the

The estimates of the discount

factor, 6, are, however, slightly greater than unity,

This could be a

consequence of the occurance of negative ex post real returns in terms of

the nurneraire during the estimation period. Values of 6 less than unity

are within two standard errors of the point estimates.

Finally, the

estimates of the proportion of the capital stock consumed each month, e,

range from .0027 per month (3% per year) to .0082 per month (10% per
year). This fairly wide range of depreciation rates is symptomatic of the
imprecision with which 8 is estimated.

31

There are two differences between the models discussed in sections

two and three that may explain the large values of the test statistics
displayed in Table I relative to those in Table II for the three—month

return on a three—month Treasury bill (TBILL3).

First, the utility

function (8) j a nonseparable function of the acquisitions of nondurable

and durable goods at each date (i.e., the cross—partials of (8) with
respect to c and d are nonzero).

Second, the model described in section

three incorporates the non—time—separable service technology (9) for
nondurable goods.

To determine which difference best accounts for the

better fit of the model with utility function (8), we estimated a version
of a one—good model with the period utility function

given by (9).

where ct is

The chi square statistic with two degrees of freedom is

15.92 with a probability value of .9996, so again the one—good formulation

of the model is not consistent with the data.

We conclude that the

noriseparabjj.jty across decision variables at a point in time is an

important ingredient in the better fit of our two—good model.
particular, despite the imprecision with which I

is

In

estimated, the point

estimates of Y along with the comparisons across the alternative models

suggest that investors are more risk averse than logarithmic utility
(1=0, which implies separability across decision variables).
time, the estimated value of

At the same

is .2923 with a standard error of .063, so

a non—time—separable service technology is common to both models.

Estimates obtained using the three—month returns from two different

investment strategies (K=2) are displayed in Table III.

The column

labeled "Returns" should be read as follows, "TBILL3 & ROLL1" indicates

that the estimates were obtained with the disturbance of the equation
associated with each of these returns given by (26) with n=3 and r3

32

equal to TE1LL3 for ki and ROLL1 for k=2.

Thus, we are testing

simultaneously the restrictions implied by (2) for T3ILL3 and for ROLL1.

On the other hand, "TBILL3 & TB6H3—TBILL3" indicates that the first
disturbance is given by (26) with r3 TBILL3 and the second disturbance

is given by the difference between the versions of (26) for the
three—month holding period return on a six—month Treasury bill (TB6H3) and

In this case, we are testing simultaneously restrictions implied

TBILL3.

by (2) for TBILL3 and restrictions implied by () for TB6H3—TBILL3.

In

all cases the instrument vector associated with the disturbance u1 for
the first return listed was z1 given by (28).

When

DF6 (R

11) the

instrument vector associated with the disturbance for the second return
(or the difference between two returns) was
(P =

12),

1}; while for DF

7

z (1,rnn _}17

The parameter estimates are similar to those displayed in Table II,
with the exception of the y'S and a's. The range of the point estimates
of .

in

Table III is from —1.5038 for TBILL3 & TE6H3 to —2.6302 for TB6}-13

& ROLL1.

These point estimates are suggestive of a higher level of

relative risk aversion than those in Table II, although again the
estimated standard errors are large.

Also, the a's and their respective

standard errors are substantially smaller in Table III than the estimates
obtained for the three—month returns in Table II.

Perhaps the most notable difference, however, is that all of the test
statistics displayed in Table III provide substantial evidence against the
model.

This result seems particularly striking because, for DF:6, the

larger test statistics are a consequence of including only one
orthogonality condition for the disturbance u2 associated with the second
return.

Indeed, adding the lagged value of the second return to z2.

33

(increasing DF from 6 to 7) has little incremental effect on the test
statistics or the estimated parameters.

From the results displayed in Tables I through III we conclude that

there is a vector of admissable parameters for which our model is
consistent with the comovements of consumptions and the return on any
single security (Table II).

Recall that the single—good model with

time—separable preferences was not consistent with these aggregate
comovements (Table I). At the same time1 our model fails to capture the
joint behavior of consurnptions and any two returns (Table III).

In light

of' the findings for the individual securities, the latter conclusion seems

not to be a consequence of our omission of' the future tax obligations for

the representative agent. For if tax considerations of the type discussed
in section four are important, then there should be more evidence against

the model in Table II. Furthermore, by comparing rows three and five in
Table III, it can be seen that replacing TB6H3 by TBILL3—TB6H3 has little

effect on the tes staistics.

18

A second possible explanation for the large test statistic in Table
III is that

larger value of m is required to adequately represent the

technology for producing services from nondurable goods. We pursued this

possibility by setting m2 and re—estimating the model with TBILL3 &
T36H3. The estimated value of the coefficient on ct2 in

2' was of

the order 1O, and the probability value of the test statistic was
approximately unity. Thus, increasing the number of lags in the service
technology for nondurable goods does not alter the conclusions drawn from
Table 111.19

We turn next to an examination of the counterparts of the
unconditional covariance restrictions in (7) for the model with

314

From equation (21) and the definition of a

non—time—separable utility.
covariance, it follows that

(29)

*

*

k

E1r,3] — E[MU0(t)zt]/EEMU0(t+3)ztJ =

—Cov[r3, MU(t+3)z]/ErMU(t+3)zJ,

*Y_l

*

where MU(t+L)

MU(t+1)/Ect

*(_5)y j, P > 0.

dt

The restrictions are

expressed in terms of MU,.jt+9) instead of MU(t+), since it is the former

variable which is used in estimation and assumed to be a strictly
stationary stochastic process.

Also, marginal utilities are studied

instead of the marginal rates of substitution that appear in (7), because

with non—separable preferences the marginal rates of substitutions are

ratios of agents' marginal utilities which involve conditional
expectations that are unobserved to the econometrician.

chosen to study (29) with z.

Finally, we have

1, since this instrument led to a

substantial increase in the test statistics in Table III over those in
Table II.

We calculated the sample versions of the left (ER) and right (RP)
hand sides of (29) using the estimated parameter values from the TBILL3 &

TB6H3 run with DF5 in Table III, and by replacing population moments by
their sample counterparts.

Estimates of ER and RP were calculated for

several values of y, holding the other parameters fixed at their estimated

values. These results are displayed in Table IV.
that for the value of y from Table III (y

Notice, first of all,

—1.581) the estimates of ER

are approximately two orders of magnitude larger than the corresponding
estimates of RP.

Nevertheless, for each return, (ER_RP is zero for

35

values of y within the range (—1.58,—2), which is well inside a one
standard—derivation confidence interval about

This finding is

'.

consistent with the small probability values of the test statistics
displayed in Table II — the restriction (29) for each return is nearly
satisfied at the point estimates.2°

The latter result warrants further discussion, since much attention
has been given to the role of risk aversion in explaining the temporal and

relative behavior of asset returns.

Increasing y leads to an increase

*

in the volatility of MU0(t+3) and, therefore, in a perfect certainty
environment a large value of

yf may be required to reconcile the smooth

behavior of consumptions with the relative choppy behavior of returns over

time Esee e.g., Grossman and Shiller, (1931)].

In an uncertain

environment, however, what is relevant for explaining average differences

between returns is the covarianee of returns with Mu0(t+3) relative to
EEMU(t+3)].

Values of y between

—1.581 and —2 generate sufficient

variability in M!J(t+3) and the appropriate covariability of MU(t+3) and
the returns to satisfy the restrictions in (29) for individual securities.

This was not the case with the singlegood model discussed in section two.

Much stronger evidence against our model is obtained from the
two—return runs, because these runs impose restrictions on the relative
values of the risk premia for TBILL3 and T66H3 that are not imposed in the

singlereturn runs. Specifically, forming the difference of the versions
of (29) for two returns gives

2
(30) E[r3] —
EErt3J
1

-

1

Cov[rt,3

-

r3,

*

MU0(t+3)J/E[Mu(t+3)J.

36

The null hypothesis that the restriction (30) holds is implicitly being
tested when the model is estimated using both TBILL3 and TB6}-i3.

The

sample versions of the left (ER1—ER2) and right (RP1—RP2) hand sides of
(30) are reported in column six of Table IV.

At the estimated value of y

(—1.581), ER1 — ER2 is three orders of magnitude larger than RP1—RP2, a

finding which is reminiscent of the result in Table I for TBILL3.
Moreover, increasing

has a negligible effect on the difference between

ER1_ER2 and RP1-.RP2.

Over a wide range of values of' the risk aversion

parameter, the relative values of the sample covariances of MU0(t+3) and
the returns are not consistent with the relative values of the sample mean
returns.

In this sense, the model fails to capture the relative risk

structure of the two securities.

For the non—time—separable specification of preferences (8), RP1—RP2

is not a monotonic function of y.

The difference between ER1—ER2 and

RP1—RP2 is minimized among the y's considered at y

—25.

Nevertheless,

from Table IV it is clear why the estimated value of y is not closer to
—25.

Increasing yt leads to an increase in EEMUc(t)J/EEMU:(t+3)], since

acquisitions of nondurable and durable goods evidenced positive growth

during

the sample period.

21

*

*

Eecause E[MU(t)J/EEMu(t+3)J increases

substantially relative to the increase in Rp, the required level of the
k

average return E[rt1 increases rapidly with increases in tyl so that the
signs of ER and RP are not consistent with the theory for values of' I'd >

2. The weight given by the criterion function to making IER—RPI small in
estimating the parameters prevents y from approaching —25.

The final experiment we conducted was to let

range between 0 and

.8, holding all of the other parameters (including y) fixed at their
estimated values. Estimates of ER and RP for TBILL3, calculated using the

37

rate of purchases of nondurable goods for Z in (29), are displayed
in Table V. At the estimated value of a for the TBILL3 run reported in
growth

Table II (a

.538k), ER and RP are an order of magnitude apart, but

ER—RPI is zero at a value for a between .2 and .Lt, which is within
two—standard errors of a•

Values of ER and RP for TEILL3 computed using

the point estimates reported in Table III for the TBILL3 & T36H3 run with
DF

6 are also displayed in Table V. For the parameters from the TBILL3

& T36H3 run, the values of ER and RP for TBILL3 do not have the same sign

at the estimated value of a (a = .2891).

Also, IER — Rp decreases with

increasing a, a pattern which is consistent with the estimate of a of
.5383 obtained when only TBILL3 is studied. The relatively large value of

ER—RP at a = .2891 from the TEILL3 & TB6H3 run, compared to the value of
IER—RPI at a

.538k from the TBILL3 run, reflects the tradeoffs involved

in attempting to set different sets of sample orthogonality conditions to
zero in estimating the parameters.

In both cases, the largest difference

between ER and RP occurs at a = 0,

which is the value of a that

corresponds to time—separable utility along the nondurable goods dimension.

38
6.

Concluding Remarks

In this paper we have argued that specifying utility to be a
nonseparable function of the purchases of nondurable and durable goods at
each date allows for much richer term structure relations than models with
separable preferences.

The empirical findings support this view in that

our model with nonseparable preferences is consistent with the observed

comovements of individual real returns on short—term Treasury bills and
aggregate consumptions.

More precisely, for plausible values of the

parameters governing preferences, both the variability of marginal
utilities, and their covariability with returns, were consistent with the

average values of the ex post real returns. In contrast, the consumption

risk inherent in previous models with time—separable utility functions
defined over a single decision variable is not consistent with average
real returns on Treasury bills.

Wnen the implied restrictions on the real returns from following two

different investment strategies with Treasury bills were studied
simultaneously, substantial evidence against the model with nonseparable
utility was obtained.

Thus, this model is not consistent with observed

comovements of real returns on alternative investment strategies.

In the

light of the pattern of parameter estimates and test statistics,
considerations associated with taxation of income appear not to be the
explanation for this finding. A potential explanation for the large test

statistics emerges from examining the restriction that the difference

between the mean returns from two investments be proportional to the
differences between the covariances of the marginal utility of consumption

and each return.

The magnitudes of the covariances are not consistent

with the relative values of the sample means of the returns and in this

39

sense

the model does not capture the relative riskiness of the two

investment strategies. Moreover, increasing relative risk aversion, even
to extreme values, is virtually of no value in attempting to satisfy these

moment restrictions. This is the case even though the variability of ex
post marginal utilities increases with increases in

Previously, Hansen and Singleton (1982) found that a model with a
time—separable utility function defined over purchases of nondurable goods

was not consistent with the comovements of returns on stocks and Treasury

bills.

Our results suggest that incorporating durable goods and

non—time_separable technologies for producing services from goods [at
least as in (8)—(11)] is also not sufficient to reconcile representative

agent, asset pricing models with the observed comovements of security
returns.

What is needed to explain the relative risk structure of

securities is a model in which the marginal utilities have very different

covariance properties with returns than those that have been studied to
date.

Modifications of representative agent models to incorporate money

through the imposition of a cash—in—advance constraint (e.g., Lucas 1983)
is one way of affecting the time series properties of'

marginal

utilities.

However, the analysis in Singleton (1984) suggests that such a
modification to our nonseparable model does not improve the fit for real

Treasury bill returns.

Alternative incomplete market structures for

contingent claims that rationalize a monetary economy with an active
policy authority, or models in which agents are differentially informed,
may be required to explain the temporal behavior of Treasury bill returns.

Such models may not lead to testable restrictions expressed in terms of
aggregate consumptions or wealth, in which case empirical analyses will
require disaggregated data.

140

Finally, we note that our analysis [Dunn and Singleton (1983)3 of

returns on stock, long—term government bonds, and GNMA mortgage
pass—through securities provided little evidence against a model with a

For comparison, we re—estimated our

separable utility function.

nonseparable model with durable and nondurable goods using the
value—weighted return on the New York Stock Exchange from the CRSP tapes

and the long—term government bond return series constructed by Ibbotson
and Sinquefield (1982) .

The

resulting test statistic provides little

evidence against the model [x2(7)

7.75].

Thus, there seems t be an

important difference between the ability of representative agent, asset

pricing models to capture the comovements among certain "long..term"
securities and short—term Treasury bills
warrants further examination.

This pattern of results also

141

TABLE II

ESTIMATES FOR THE INDIVIDUAL SECURITIES
FOR THE PERIOD JANUARY 1959 TO DECEMBER 1978a

Returns
TBILL1

A

A

B

y

1.00214

(.0016)

ROLL1

—.1922
(.6706)

1.00140

—1.0209

(.0032)

TBILL3

TB6H3

a.

P.

A

1—ê

.9003
(.0642)

.
a

2
x

.2664 11.4885
.9918
(.0129) (.0542) (.9575)

(1.3028)

(.0291) (.2318) (.7542)

1.0038
(.0032)

—.9661
(1.2726)

.9207
(.1805)

.9958
(.0228)

1.0031
(.0027)

—.7766

.9303

.9973

(1.09145)

(.12146)

(.0131)

.9952

.5556

6.6775

.9177
(.2170)

5.5835
(.21147) (.6511)
.5384

.5337

14.6953

DF

5

5

5

5

(.2050) (.51458)

TBILL1
one month return on a one month Treasury bill, ROLL1
three
three
month return from rolling over one month Treasury bills, TBILL3
month return on a three month Treasury bill return, T66H3
three month
return on a six month Treasury bill. Standard errors of the parameter
estimates and probability values (1 — significance levels) of' the test

statistics are given in parentheses.

142

TABLE III

ESTIMATES FOR COMBINATIONS OF SECURITES
FOR THE PERIOD JANUARY 1959 TO DECEMBER 1978a

Returns
TBILL3 &
ROLL1

TBILL3 &
ROLL1

A

A

B

y

1.0061 —1.8915

A

i—e

.8611
(.0080)

(.017)4)

.8785
1.00714 —2.3507
(.0051) (2.2195) (.0193)

(.0086)

(.00141) (1.9614)4)

1.0058 —1.5811

.9670

.98144

cx
.2364

x

2

56.0261

.2306

59.6203

.9008
(.1115)

(.0220)

(.0719) (1.0000)

TBILL3 &
TB6H3

1.00514 —1.5038
.90)43
(.0037) (1.6251) (.1528)

.9930
(.0273)

(.0712) (1.0000)

TBILL3 &
TB6H3 —
TBILL3

1.0057 —1.53)49
.9019
(.0039) (1.6721) (.1221)

.9923
(.0235)

(.0711) (1.0000)

TB6H3 &

1.0078 —2.6302
.8689
(.00148) (2.1708) (.0136)

.9788
(.0111)

.2870
41.0502
(.0521) (1.0000)

1.0059 —1.5833
.893)4
(.00140) (1.693)4) (.0582)

(.01145)

TBILL3 &
TB6H3 —
ROLL 1

.9900

7

(.0751) (1.0000)

(.00)40) (1.69714)

ROLL1

6

(.0561) (1.0000)

TBILL3 &
TB6H3

.9921

DF

.2891

.296)4

.2986

.2997

33.7261

3)4.14419

33.65148

141.34149

6

7

6

6

6

(.0693) (1.0000)

one month return on a one month Treasury bill, ROLL1
three
month return from rolling over one month Treasury bills, TBILL3 = three

a. TBILL1

month return on a three month Treasury bill, TB6H3
three month return on
a six month Treasury bill. Standard errors of the parameter estimates and

probability values (1—significance levels) of the test statistics are
given in parentheses.

L3
TABLE IV

Estimates of ER and RP for TEILL3 and TB6H3

TBILL3

Y

TB6H3

ER1

RP1

0.0

1.270—02

6.898—06

—1.581

1.688—03

-2.

ER2

RP2

(ER1—ER2)—(Rp1—Rp2)

1.393—02

7.15)4—06

—1.2360—03

1.750—05

2.92)4—03

1.791—05

—1.2358—03

—1.239—03

2.032-05

-3.167—06

2.077—05

-1.2358—03

—3.

8.2143—03

2.708—05

—7.007—03

2.762—05

—1.2357—03

—l4

—1.527—02

3.386—05

—1i103—02

3.)449O5

1.2356-03

—8.

—.361—02

6.128—05

—'4.238—02

6.223—05

—1.2353—03

—12.

—7.232—02

8.916—05

—7.109—02

9.039—05

—1.2350—03

—16.

.10114

1.175014

—.1001

1.190—0)4

—1.23)48—03

—25.

—.1680

1.831—0l4

—.1667

1.8)47—04

.1,2314603

—50.

—.3605

3.788—04

—.3593

3.786—04

—1.236)4—03

—100.

—.7627

8.330—0'4

—.7615

8.1)43014

—1.25)49—03

1414

TABLE V
Estimates of ER and RP for TBILL3 Using the Growth Rate
of Nondurable Purchases as an Instrument
Parameters from
Run
TBILL3
RP
ER

Parameters from
TEILL3 & TB6H3 Run
RP
ER

0

14.179—03

—1.127—04

7.160—03

—1 .092—04

.2

9.250_Oh

_1.1147_0h

2.990—03

_1.118_014

1.932—03

—1.126—014

1.021—03

—1.135—014

.289 1
•14

—6. 100—04

—1.150—014

.53814

—1. 164—03

—1.166—014

.6

—1.327—03

—1. 169014

9. 970—05

_1.lL46014

.8

—1 . 127—03

_1.175_014

—2.858—014

—1. 155—04

145

FOOTNOTES

1Contrary to most studies, Dunn and Singleton (1983) did not find much
evidence against a single—good model with time—separable utility using
returns on stocks, long—term government bonds, and Ginnie—Mae mortgage
In the conclusion, we comment further on the
pass—through securities.
similarities and differences among the results reported here and those in
our earlier study.
2

The following discussion is easily modified for the case of coupon

paying bonds.

3Sufficient conditions for (1) to obtain in discrete—time are given in
Rubinstein (1976), Breeden and Litzenberger (1978), Lucas (1978), and
Brook (1980) for models with time—separable preferences.
Extensions to
models with multiple goods and certain types of non—time—separable
preferences are provided in Prescott and Mehra (1980), Kydland and

Prescott (1982), and Eichenbaum, Hansen, and Singleton (1983).
Continuous—time versions of (1) were deduced by Cox, Ingersoll, and Ross
(1978), Breeden (1979,1983,19814), and Richard and Sundaresen (1981) for
models with time—separable utiity.
141f

0, then EryZ]

ElytlIt]

0.

EfztE[yjIt]}

0 for any zt

I' since E[YtZt]
to be the
In actual applications, we interpret

sigma—algebra generated by the current and past histories of all
square—integrable random variables observed by agents.

Specifical1y, using arguments like those in Hansen and Singleton (1983)

and Ereeden (19814), let x

that {x: —
process.

<

t < }

is

a normally distributed, stationary stochastic

denote the information set generated by {x5: s <

Also, let

The expectation of (3)

t}.

log r) and suppose

(log mt,, log

conditioned

on

is E[mtrIt) =

Etlog Vt
Var[log v5hJ when the distribution of Vt+3 conditioned

E[rntnrtnkit.

Using the fact that log EEVtSht]

st

+ 1/2

on

log—normal, we obtain
—

t[log rt,n114t1

where

Elog

1<

+

njk

nk is given by
1/2 Var[log

+

log

rn*] —

1/2 Vartlog r,n + log

mt(t].

is

46

Since {xt} is a normally distributed stochastic process, the conditional
expectations are linear functions. Further, the conditional variances are
to be the

is a constant. Thus, by choosing

constants and, hence,

return from buying and holding an n—period, pure discount bond and
t+n—1

k
choosing rt

11 r

st

1'

which is the return from a strategy of rolling

over a sequence of ri one—period, pure discount bonds, we obtain a
log—linear, return—to—maturity expectations model of the real term
structure of interest rates with a constant intercept

t+n—1
•k

E[log r,HtJ

st FElog rs,i'I)t] +

as (y)nl, where 't,n is (one plus) the yield to

By expressing

maturity on the n—period, pure discount bond, we obtain

1 t+n—1

Etlog 't nt —
n

X

1

EElog r

s=t

'

+ —
n

which is a version of the familiar expectations model for yields to
maturity, with a constant intercept

The constant

is sometimes

referred to as a risk premium associated with n—period securities.
However, while

is a constant, the conditional covariance in (6) is in

general not a constant under the assumption of lognormality. Thus, a risk
premium defined in terms of the levels of returns and mt,n is time—varying

in this model. These log—linear, expectations models can be expressed as
linear expectations models in terms of continuously compounded returns.
6Until

recently, attention was focused primarily on versions of the
expectations model, with perhaps the most attention being given to the
which
linear expectations model,
states
that the expected
yield—to—maturity on a long—term bond is an average of the expected

returns of future one—period bonds.

Roll (1970), Shiller (1979),

Singleton (1980), Hansen and Sargent (1981), and Shiller, Campbell, and
Schoenholtz (1983), among others, have provided substantial empirical
evidence against linear expectations models using yields on nominal bonds.

time series {x) is strictly stationary if the marginal distribution

of (xt ,...x )
1

n

is

the same as the distribution of (xt

+T•••Xt
1

n

for

all t1,...t, t.
This does not require that moments of conditional
distributions be constant.
A brief discussion of the estimation
procedures is presented in section four; see Hansen and Singleton (1982)
for details. For instruments we used the constant unity, lagged values of

per capita growth rate of real consumption of nondurables plus
securities. For each return, there were five orthogonality conditions
the

services, and lagged values the real rates of return on the two

used to estimate two parameters, leaving three overidentifying
restrictions to be tested.
8Constantinides and Ingersoll (19814) and Dammon (1983) discuss some of

the implications for bond pricing of taxes in an environment with
heterogeneous investors.

9Similar utility functions were studied by Kydland and Prescott (1982)
and Eichenbaum, Hansen, and Singleton (1983),
They assumed preferences
were defined over consumption of nondurable goods and leisure; consumption
of durable goods did not enter explicitly. Here we include durable goods,
but omit leisure choices thereby assuming that utility is separable across
leisure and consumption goods.
10We have chosen to normalize a to be unity instead of requiring that
a.

1. Our analysis is invarient to the particular normalization

j1
chosen.

sufficient

condition for the polynomial in the lag operator to have
a one—sided inverse is that all of the roots of the polynomial lie outside
the unit circle (i.e., have absolute value greater than one).

the taxation of ordinary income is considered, since short term
bonds are studied in this paper. Also, in the subsequent discussion, the
tax rate may depend on the level of nominal income, but the returns are
after—tax real rates of return.

13lnterestingly, Hansen, Richard, and Singleton (1981) rejected this
version of the time—separable model at small marginal significance levels,
using monthly stock returns. Their findings provide further support for
our claim in section two that the evidence against this class of models is
not due entirely to mismeasurement of consumption.
114When investments

over different holding periods are studied, the

disturbances in the associated estimation equations will have
correspondingly different autocovariance structures.
For instance, the
disturbance in the equation for the three—month bill discussed in section
two follows a moving average process of order two and the disturbance in
the equation for the one—month bill is serially uncorrelated. This fact
was taken into account in both the estimation and inference.
15This estimate of the initial stock of durable goods is less than ideal
since
is based on the assumption of straight—line depreciation, which

it

is inconsistent with the geometric decay implicit in (10).

It can be

148

shown however that, under the assumption of invertible lag polynomials in
(15), and certain regularity conditions on the capital stock,
rnismeasurement of the initial stock does not affect the large sample
properties of the estimates or test statistics.
16This interpretation was suggested to us by Doug Breeden.

1We also estimated the model with the order of the returns reversed
(i.e. with z2 given by (28) and Z1 consisting of the single instrument
unity) and found that the results reported in Table III are insensitive to
this reversal.

18Unfortunately, attempts to estimate the parameter using only returns

in difference form failed in that the minimization algorithm did not
converge.
19Bcth the point estimates and the test statistics for the model with
m2 were sensitive to the choice of starting values and the estimate of
the weighting matrix. Nevertheless, the results from all of the runs with

m2 were qualitatively the same and as described in the text.

2The

estimated pairs (ER,RP) obtained using the point estimates from
the runs in Table II are: ER
—3.0378—05 and RP = 1.3575.-OS for TBILL3;
and ER = '4.73114_OLI and RP

1.25143—05 for T66H3.

This finding suggests that there is a positive relation among {'Y and

the average value of the riskfree real rate in our model,
*
ft
EEMU(t)/NU(t+3)J. Verification of this relation in our model is not
possible, however, because the riskfree rate involves agents' conditional
expectations.

Mehra and Prescott (1983) obtained a positive relation

between risk aversion and the average riskfree real rate in the context of
their single—good model with time—separable utility.

149

REFERENCES

D. T. Breeden. "An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic
Consumption and Investment Opportunities." Journal of Financial
Economics 7 (September 1979), 265—296.

D. T, Breeden. "Interest Rates in a Multi—Good Economy." Research Paper
No. 719, Stanford University (December 1983).

D. T. Breeden. "Consumption, Production, and Interest Rates:

A

Synthesis." Research Paper No. 667, Stanford University (January
19814).

D. T. Breeden and R. H. Litzenberger. "Prices of State—contingent Claims
Implicit in tion Prices."
Journal of Business 51 (Ocboter 1978),
621—651.

W. A. Erock. "Asset Prices in a Production Economy." in J. J. McCall
(e.d.), The Economics of Uncertainty. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1980.

D. P. Brown and M. R. Gibbons.

"A Simple Econometric Approach for

Utility—Based Asset Pricing Models." manuscript, Indiana University,
March 1983.

G. M. Constantinides.

"Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax",

Econornetrica 51 (1983), 611—636.

G. M. Constantinides and J. E. Ingersoll, Jr., "tirnal Bond Trading with
Personal Taxes:
Implications for Bond Prices and Estimated Tax

Brackets and Yield Curves",

Journal of Financial Economics

(forthcoming, 19814).

B. Cornell,
"The Consumption Based Asset Pricing Model:
A Note on
Potential Tests and Applications." Journal of Financial Economics 9
(March 1981), 103—108.

J. C. Cox, J. E. Ingersoll, Jr., and S. A. Ross. "A Theory of the Term
Structure of Interest Rates." Research Paper No. 1468, Stanford
University, 1978, (forthcoming in Econometrica).

J. C. Ccx, J. E. Ingersoll, Jr., and S. A. Ross. "A Reexamination of the
Traditional Hypotheses About the Term Structure of Interest Rates."
Journal of Finance 36 (September 1981), 769—799.

R. H. Dammon,
A
"Portfolio Selection, Capital Structure, and Taxes:
State—Preference Approach," manuscript, University of Wisconsin —

Madison, November 1983.
K. 6. Dunn and K. J. Singleton. "A Empirical Analysis of the Pricing of

Mortgage—Backed Securities." Journal of Finance 38 (May 1983),
6 13—623.

50

M. S. Eichenbaum and L. P. Hansen.
"Uncertainty, Aggregation, and the
Dynamic Demand for Consumption Goods." manuscript, Carnegie—Mellon
University, 1984.

M. S. Eichenbaum, L. P. Hansen and K. J. Singleton. "A Time Series
Analysis of Representative Agent Models of Consumption and Leisure
Choices under Uncertainty." manuscript, Carnegie—Mellon University,
1983.

W. E. Ferson.

"Expectations of Real Interest Rates and Aggregate

Consumption: Empirical Tests." Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 18 (December 1983), 1477_Lt97.

S. Grossman and R.J. Shiller.

"The Determinants of the Variability of
Stock Market Prices." American Economic Review 71 (May 1981), 222—227.

L. P. Hansen. "Jrge Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moment
Estimators." Econometrica 50 (July 1982) 1029—1054.

L. P. Hansen, S.F. Richard and K.J. Singleton. "Econometric Implications
of Intertemporal Asset Pricing Models." manuscript, Carnegie—Mellon
University, 1981.

L. P. Hansen and K. J. Singleton. "Generalized Instrumental Variables
Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models." Econometrica
50 (September 1982), 1269—1286.

L. P. Hansen and K. J. Singleton, "Stochastic Consumption, Risk Aversion
and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns." Journal of Political
Economy 91 (April 1983), 2)49—265.

L. P. Hansen and T. J. Sargent.

"Exact Linear Rational Expectations
Specification and Estimation."
Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, Staff Report 71, September 1981.
Models:

J. 1-luisinga and F. S. Mishkin.

"The Measurement of Short—Term Real
Interest Rates on Assets with Different Risk Characteristics."

manuscript, University of Chicago, May 1983.

R. G. Ibbotson and B. A. Sinquefield. Stocks, Bonds, Bills and Inflation:
The Past and the Future, The Financial Analysts Research Foundation,
1982.

F. E. Kydland and E. C. Prescott. "Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctu—
ations." Econometrica 50 (November 1982), 13)45—1370.

B. E. Lucas, Jr. "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy." Econometrica 146
(November 1978), 129—1446.

B. E. Lucas, Jr. "Money in a Theory of Finance," manuscript, Univeriy of
Chicago, 1983.

T. A. Marsh.

"Capital Asset Pricing Model Tests in a Term Structure

Context (March 1983).

51

R. Mehra and E. C. Prescott.
"A Test of the Intertemporal Asset Pricing
Model." Manuscript, Columbia University, 1983.
J. C. Musgrave.
"Durable Goods 0ned by Consumers in the United States,
1925—1977." Survey of Current Business (March 1979).

E. C. Prescott and R. Mehra. "Recursive Competitive Equilibrium: The Case
of Homogeneous Households." Econornetrica 48 (September 1980),
13 65—1380.

S. F. Richard and M. Sundaresan. "A Continuous Time Equilibrium Model of
Forward Prices and Future Prices in a Multigood Economy." Journal of
Financial Economics 9 (December 1981), 347—371.
R. Roll. The Behavior of Interest Rates. Basic Books (New York, 1970).

M. Rubinstein. "The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the Pricing

of options." Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science 7
(Autumn 1976), 07—425.

R. J. Shiller.

"The Volatility of Long—Term Interest Rates and

Expectations Models of the Term Structure."

Journal of Political

Economy 87 (December 1979), 1190—1219.

R. J. Shiller, J. Y. Campbell, and K, L. Schoenholtz, "Forward Rates and
Future Policy:
Interpreting the Term Structure of Interest Rates."
Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No. 667, Yale University, June
1983.

K. J. Singleton. "Expectations Models of the Term Structure and Implied
Variance Bounds."
Journal of Political Economy 88 (December 1980),
1159—1 176.

K.

J. Singleton.
"Testing Specifications of Economic Agents'
Intertemporal timum Problems Against Non—nested Alternatives."
Manuscript, Carnegie—Mellon University, 1984.

M. Sundaresan. "Consumption and Equilibrium Interest Rates in Stochastic
Production Economies," Journal of Finance 39 (March 19811), 77—92.

L. G. Telser and R. L. Graves.

Functional Analysis in Mathematical
Economics. The University of Chicago Press (Chicago, 1972).

