                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           GLOBAL PORTFOLIO REBALANCING UNDER THE MICROSCOPE

                                           Harald Hau
                                           Hélène Rey

                                       Working Paper 14165
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14165


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2008




Sylvain Champonnois provided excellent research assistance. We are very grateful to the Fondation
Banque de France and especially Henri Pagès for financial support and feedback. We also benefited
greatly from comments by Philippe Bachetta, Mick Devereux, Marcel Fratscher, Stéphane Guibaud,
Karen Lewis, Paolo Mauro, Jay Shambaugh, Andrew Rose, Mark Seasholes, Kenichi Ueda and seminar
participants at the NBER, the CEPR, the University of Amsterdam, the University of Brussel, HEI,
Harvard University and the AEA 2009 meeting. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Harald Hau and Hélène Rey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Global Portfolio Rebalancing Under the Microscope
Harald Hau and Hélène Rey
NBER Working Paper No. 14165
July 2008, Revised October 2009
JEL No. F3,F32,G11,G15

                                             ABSTRACT

Cross border capital flows and returns on assets are two key variables in international macroeconomics.
Difficult endogeneity issues plague any analysis of their correlations in aggregate data. This paper
examines the dynamics of international portfolios with a unique data set on the stock allocations of
approximately 6,500 international equity funds domiciled in four different currency areas during a
5 year period. The disaggregated data structure allows us to examine the effect of realized returns on
portfolio adjustments. Do managers rebalance their portfolios towards their desired weights or do they
increase their exposure to appreciating assets? We find strong support for portfolio rebalancing behavior
aimed at stabilizing exchange rate risk and equity risk exposure around desired levels. These findings
are important for the new open economy macroeconomics models featuring endogenous portfolio
choice. They should also help inform the burgeoning theoretical literature in macroeconomics and
in finance that aims at modeling financial intermediaries.


Harald Hau
INSEAD
Blvd de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau Cedex
FRANCE
harald.hau@insead.edu

Hélène Rey
London Business School
Regents Park
London NW1 4SA
UK
and NBER
hrey@london.edu
1     Introduction
Gross stocks of cross-border assets and liabilities have increased dramatically from roughly 50 percent of
world GDP in the early 1990’s to more than 120 percent a decade later. Capital gains and losses on those
assets have significant eﬀects on the dynamics of countries external asset positions. The macroeconomics
literature finds that valuation eﬀects induced by asset price changes have become quantitatively large relative
to the traditional product account determinants of the current account1 . Recent macroeconomic models such
as Fernandez-Villaverde, Guerron-Quintana, Rubio-Ramirez and Uribe (2009) focus on second moments of
asset returns and point to the importance of risk shocks on investment and other real variables. But, at the
microeconomic level, how do international investors adjust their risk exposure in response to the fluctuations
in realized returns they experience on their positions? Do they rebalance their portfolios towards their
desired weights or do they increase their exposure to appreciating assets? What are the consequences of
those portfolio decisions for international asset price dynamics? International capital flows and returns
are two key variables in international macroeconomics. Yet, little is known on the dynamics of portfolio
allocations of international investors. Most of the existing evidence has been gathered from aggregate data
on cross border capital flows and may give very misleading summary statistics if international investment
strategies are highly heterogeneous.
    This paper analyzes time series variations in international asset allocations of a large cross section of
institutional investors. The main distinctive feature of our approach is that we are able to use a unique
panel data set of investment positions at the stock level for international equity funds located around the
globe. We can thus construct time varying fund specific measures of risk and fund specific measures of
portfolio rebalancing strategies. The richness of our data set allows us to estimate precisely the portfolio
adjustments made by fund managers when faced by fluctuations in the value of equities and exchange rates.
The data even allow us to compute the time series of the marginal risk contribution of an individual stock
to the portfolio of a given fund and observe the reallocation decisions of fund managers due to its variations.
    The main contribution of the paper is empirical. But to better frame the analysis, we start with a
simple model of portfolio rebalancing for international funds facing both exchange rate risk and equity risk.
The model allows us to derive various testable implications about fund rebalancing. Unlike most papers in
the literature our data are disaggregated, have a significant time series dimension and are not only about
US funds. We can therefore observe portfolio rebalancing behavior “under a microscope” in a sample of
pronounced heterogeneity both in investor location and investment destination. This approach provides
a more direct and powerful test of portfolio rebalancing behavior compared to empirical work based on
aggregate data. Our data show a very large degree of heterogeneity in the compositions of portfolios of
institutional investors, with in particular very diﬀerent degrees of home bias2 . They also strongly support
   1 For data on the increase of gross assets and liabilities and valuation eﬀects see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2007), Tille (2004),

Gourinchas and Rey (2007) and Fratscher, Juvenal and Sarno (2007a). For a special focus on exchange rate valuations and
currency composition of external assets see Lane and Shambaugh (2009) and Corte, Sarno and Sestieri (2009).
   2 For a detailed study of home bias at the fund level see Hau and Rey (2008).




                                                                 1
the existence of portfolio rebalancing strategies at the fund level, aimed at mitigating the fluctuations in
portfolio weights due to asset price and exchange rate changes. We highlight the following findings:

    • At the fund level, we study the dynamics of the foreign share of the portfolio. Managers adjust their
      foreign portfolio share to mitigate the valuation eﬀects of asset price changes. A higher equity return on
      the foreign portfolio share compared to the domestic share triggers capital repatriation, while foreign
      asset underperformance coincides with capital expatriation. Corresponding aggregate equity flows are
      economically significant.

    • At the fund level, we calculate a portfolio risk measure based on total holdings of each fund. We find
      that a total portfolio risk increase (decrease) due to valuation eﬀects coincides with active rebalancing
      which decreases (increases) the overall portfolio risk. Fund level rebalancing behavior is documented
      both for changes in total equity risk (in investor currency) as well as for changes in the foreign exchange
      (FX) risk component.

    • At the stock level, we calculate the marginal risk contribution of each stock to the total portfolio risk
      of a given fund. Active reversal of marginal risk changes is found to be strong at the stock level if
      the marginal risk change and the overall portfolio risk change have the same direction, but absent if
      marginal risk and portfolio risk changes have opposite directions. The rebalancing evidence at the
      stock level is very strong for both overall equity risk as well as for the FX component of the portfolio
      risk.

    The determinants of home bias and static portfolio allocations have been extensively studied in the
literature (see e.g. the classic survey of Lewis (1999)). The determinants of international portfolio dynam-
ics have been far less researched. The previous literature tests portfolio balance models3 on the basis of
macroeconomic data on prices and aggregate cross border flows. The corresponding results are generally
inconclusive (Frankel (1982b), Frankel (1982a), Rogoﬀ (1984), Park (1984), Loopesko (1984)). More recently,
Bohn and Tesar (1996) analyzes return chasing and portfolio rebalancing in an ICAPM framework. Brennan
and Cao (1997) studies the eﬀect of information asymmetries between domestic and foreign investors on
correlations between international portfolio flows and returns. Albuquerque, Bauer and Schneider (2007)
and Albuquerque, Bauer and Schneider (2008) provide interesting models with information asymmetries and
investor heterogeneity aimed at fitting stylized facts on aggregate correlations of flows and returns. These
papers all use aggregate data on U.S. international transactions - the U.S. TIC data were the only data set
available at the time - and have to assume that investors hold aggregate indices. The limitations of these
   3 Portfolio balance models of the economy have been developed in the early 1980s (a seminal contribution is due to Kouri

(1982); an excellent survey can be found in Branson and Henderson (1985)). Their lack of microfoundations led them to fall in
disgrace for a while, but they have been ressucitated recently (see in particular Blanchard, Giavazzi and Sa (2005)) due to their
very relevant focus on imperfect asset substitutability and their credible implications for exchange rate dynamics. Due to recent
methodological advances, linearized dynamic stochastic general equilibrium of the open economy with portfolio choice can now
be solved (see for example Coeurdacier (2005), Devereux and Sutherland (2009b) , Tille and Van-Wincoop (2007), Devereux
and Sutherland (2009a) or Devereux and Sutherland (2009c)) and provide a new framework in which portfolio balance eﬀects
can be modelled. For a recent model giving a prominent role to portfolio balance eﬀects to describe deviations from uncovered
interest parity see Bachetta and Van-Wincoop (2008).


                                                               2
data are well known. The aggregate TIC data identify the transaction location, but not the asset location
or currency denomination of the asset. Purchases of U.S. investors in the London markets are reported as
U.K. asset transactions even if they concern a French stock. Furthermore, correlation evidence in aggregate
data is diﬃcult to interpret because of thorny endogeneity issues4 . Our data allow us to get around some
of these problems since we observe the exact portfolio of each individual fund manager and we estimate the
portfolio weight changes induced by past realized valuation changes in our sample of heterogeneous portfo-
lios. Common shocks or aggregate demand eﬀects and their price impact therefore pose less of an inference
problem than they do in aggregate data. The approximately 4.5 million observations in our pooled sample
also imply a tremendous increase in statistical power.
    The only other empirical study on portfolio rebalancing using microeconomic data we are aware of is
Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2009) who investigates whether Swedish households adjust their risk exposure
in response to the portfolio returns they experience during the period 1999-2002. They examine the rebal-
ancing between the risky share of households portfolios and riskless assets and, interestingly, find evidence of
portfolio rebalancing especially for the most educated and wealthiest households. Our study is very diﬀerent
in its focus and methodology: we study institutional investors5 , who are arguably very financially literate
and do so in an international context where market segmentation due to exchange rate risk plays a key role.
We also construct a very detailed array of equity and exchange rate risk measures at the fund and stock
level, which allows us to precisely describe the rebalancing strategies of fund managers. In particular we
make use of the information contained in the entire distribution of stock holdings of our sample.
    Finally, the financial crisis of 2007-2008 has underlined the need to understand better the role of financial
intermediaries in international capital flows. Our empirical findings should help inform the burgeoning
theoretical literature in macroeconomics and in finance that aims at modeling financial intermediaries (see
e.g. Vayanos and Wooley (2008), Mondria and Dziuda (2009)).

    Section 2 sets the stage with a simple two-country model with three periods. Its parsimonious micro-
economic structure allows us to derive 4 testable propositions. Of particular interest are propositions 3 and
4 which concern the rebalancing dynamics at the fund level both for equity risk and foreign exchange risk.
Section 3 presents the new microdata. We examine the model predictions about the foreign equity share
dynamics in section 4.1. In section 4.2, we take up the formidable computational challenge of computing
fund portfolio risk measures, i.e risk measures based on the variance covariance matrix of each fund specific
stock holdings and we study their dynamics. In section 4.3 we introduce a new stock level risk measure,
the marginal risk contribution of a stock to the total portfolio risk. We then analyse stock level rebalancing
conditional on the direction of the marginal risk change and the portfolio risk change. Section 5 concludes.

   4 There is an obvious endogeneity problem with contemporaneous correlations because of common shocks or because of price

eﬀects due to demand pressure. Correlations of aggregate flows with past returns and correlations of aggregate flows with future
returns may also be problematic to interpret as aggregate flows are persistent.
   5 It would doubtless be also interesting to study the global portfolios of the final owners of the securities but unfortunately

our data do not include the relevant information for us to do so.



                                                                3
2     Model
We present a simple model to develop a series of testable implications for the investment dynamics at the
fund level in an international context. The three period model features a mean-variance framework and
abstracts from any consumption related model structure, which accords well with our focus on fund level
investment decisions6 . The model allows for an empirical characterization of portfolio rebalancing consistent
with equilibrium. It accounts for the endogenous price eﬀect of rebalancing on asset prices and exchange
rates. The key mechanism is the following. When faced with a change in valuations of their asset holdings
(due to realized equity price or exchange rate changes), fund managers tend to rebalance towards their
preferred weights, reflecting their risk return preferences. In an international context, if the foreign share
of their portfolio gains in value (due for example to an overperformance of foreign equities), the exchange
rate risk associated with their new portfolio holdings increases. Managers will oﬄoad that increased risk by
selling foreign shares onto their foreign counterparts, who do not face the same currency risk. The exchange
rate will in equilibrium be consistent with market clearing. The important market friction in the model is
that investors cannot internationally trade their FX exposure through state contingent derivative contracts.
The latter assumption captures an observable investment constraint or behavior of many fund managers
discussed in Levich, Hayt and Ripston (1999).


       Assumption 1: Investment Opportunities

       Home and Foreign investors with mean-variance preferences in terminal wealth and a risk aversion
       ρ make optimal portfolio allocation decisions in periods 1 and 2 to maximize their terminal wealth
       in period 3.7 Each investor can invest in risky home and foreign stocks with independent normally
       distributed (period 3) liquidation values, V f and V h , respectively, or in a domestic riskless asset
       with return r. In addition, the home and foreign stock each pay a stochastic (mean zero) dividend
       in period 3, dh and df , respectively. The terminal exchange rate E3 is also assumed to be normally
       distributed and uncorrelated with the stock payoﬀs. Formally the asset payoﬀs are given by

                      P3h    = V h + dh ∼ N (1, σ 2d + σ2V );         P3f = V f + df ∼ N (1, σ 2d + σ 2V )

                       E3    ∼ N (1, σ 2e ).


    The normality assumption for the payoﬀs is a convenient specification to obtain linear asset demand
functions in a mean-variance framework. We assume that the risk aversion of the investors is suﬃciently
   6 The main focus of the paper being empirical and to uncover novel stylized facts, we chose the simplest set up to illustrate our

regressions and abstract from (very complex) general equilibrium features. For more macroeconomics implications stemming
from a more complex model see Hau and Rey (2006). For the same reason, we model here only one source of heterogeneity
(home versus foreign) to elucidate more clearly the role of the exchange rate in segmenting markets. Modelling heterogeneous
agents within countries is certainly also an important and diﬃcult research agenda (see Albuquerque et al. (2007)). In the
empirical part of the paper we take the exogeneity of our funds as given (as heterogeneous portfolios are perfectly observed in
our data) and study its implications on rebalancing behaviour.
   7 Alternatively, we could assume a CARA utility function for the investors, which - for normally distributed returns - amounts

to a mean-variance utility framework. However, only the linearized version of the model features normally distributed returns
to which the utility equivalence applies.


                                                                 4
low (ρ < ρ)8 to ensure that the international risk sharing equilibrium exists under exogenous exchange rate
risk. For simplicity we normalize all unconditional terminal asset payoﬀs to one. We also abstract from more
complicated correlation structures between the terminal asset prices in order to simplify the exposition and
model solution. Any correlation in the payoﬀ structure will diminish the benefits from international asset
diversification without altering any of the qualitative findings in the subsequent analysis. Finally, the model
is formulated only for one home and one foreign asset. However, the general insights carry over to the case
where the home and foreign assets are themselves portfolios of many individual stocks.


       Assumption 2: Information Structure

       At the beginning of period 2, both investors learn of the dividend payments (dh , df ), while the
       liquidation values (V f , V h ) remain unknown. The conditional terminal asset price distributions
       are then given by

                          P3h |dh , df   ∼ N (1 + dh , σ2V );        P3f |dh , df ∼ N (1 + df , σ 2V )

                          E3 |dh , df    ∼ N (1, σ 2e ).


    The analytical focus of the model is on the rebalancing eﬀect of the dividend payoﬀ information. It
is assumed throughout the paper that the exchange rate risk cannot be hedged and that the optimal risk
management of the investors is reflected in their asset holdings. The full revelation of the dividend values in
period 2 and continued investor uncertainty about the liquidation values is just a stylized representation of
partial revelation of diﬀerent stock market fundamentals in the two countries. Other Bayesian formulations
of the same problem are possible, but are likely to be more complicated9 . Next we turn to the asset supply
assumptions and the market clearing conditions.


       Assumption 3: Asset Supplies

       The net supply of equity is constant and normalized to 1. The riskless rate is in perfectly elastic
       supply and is constant at r. Excess demand for foreign currency DtF x is balanced by an elastic
       supply with elasticity η. Let Xt = (xht , xft ) and Xt∗ = (xh∗   f∗
                                                                   t , xt ) denote the equity demands of

       the home and foreign investor, respectively. Let E denote the exchange rate defined such that an
       increase in E is a depreciation of the home country currency. Hence, we have (for t = 1, 2)

                          (xht , xft ) + (xh∗   f∗
                                           t , xt ) = (1, 1);                   DtF x = η(Et − 1).
   8 Seeappendix.
   9 We assume that with a very small probability > 0 the market is closed in period 2 so that investors cannot rebalance
their portfolio. This ensures that investors have an incentive to acquire optimal portfolios in period 1. Otherwise the period 1
holdings would be indeterminate since an investor could always wait until period 2 to implement his optimal portfolio choice.
A small likelihood of market closure in period 2 eliminates this indeterminacy.




                                                                5
    A fully elastic supply of the riskless asset and a fully inelastic supply of the risky asset are common in
the finance literature. This describes a world in which investments with low and safe returns are always
abundant, while investments with high payoﬀ are both risky and in limited or fixed supply. The assumption
about the constant elastic currency supply in periods 1 and 2 is natural. Assuming foreign exchange dealers
with a utility function in mean and variance, we can show that their currency supply corresponds to a linear
function η(Et − 1) given a normally distributed terminal value for foreign exchange balances. The linear
currency supply can therefore be interpreted as a reduced form of a more elaborate FX market model with
risk averse dealers (see Hau and Rey (2006)).10


2.1     Solving the Model

Solving for the model is mostly relegated to the appendix. We simply outline the major steps which allow us
to characterize the solution. In period 1, the excess return of home and foreign investment over the risk-less
rate is given by the vector R = (Rh , Rf )T for the home country investor and by R∗ = (Rh∗ , Rf ∗ )T for the
foreign country investor.11 Excess returns are denominated in the currency of the investor and an increase
in the exchange rate E denotes a depreciation of the domestic currency.

                        Rh    = P3h − (1 + r)P1h ;                      Rf = P3f E3 − (1 + r)P1f E1

                       Rh∗    = P3h /E3 − (1 + r)P1h /E1 ;             Rf ∗ = P3f − P1f (1 + r).

Furthermore, for international equity allocations X1 = (xh1 , xf1 ) and X1∗ = (xh∗   f∗
                                                                                1 , x1 ), the period 3 wealth

follows as
                             W3 = X1 R + (1 + r)W1 ;               W3∗ = X1∗ R∗ + (1 + r)W1∗ ,

for the home and foreign investor, respectively. The utility of the home and foreign investors is given by a
mean-variance framework. Hence, investors optimize

                          h          ρ           i                                     h           ρ            i
          U = max(xh ,xf ) E1 (W3 ) − V ar1 (W3 ) ,               U ∗ = max(xh∗ ,xf ∗ ) E1 (W3∗ ) − V ar1 (W3∗ ) ,
                   1   1             2                                       1    1                2
where ρ denotes the coeﬃcient of absolute risk aversion. For the expectations in period 1 symbolized by E1 ,
we can express the variance-covariance matrix of the returns in home currency by Ω1 = E1 (RRT ) and in
foreign currency by Ω∗1 = E1 (R∗ R∗T ). Optimal equity holdings for home and foreign investors follow as

                                           1                               1
                                    X1 =     E1 (R)Ω−1
                                                    1 ;            X1∗ =     E1 (R∗ )Ω∗−1
                                                                                      1   ,
                                           ρ                               ρ
  10 An alternative specification could assume exogenous stochastic exchange rate changes instead of endogenizing the exchange

rate in periods 1 and 2. This approach produces similar rebalancing results as stated in propositions 3 and 4. It would not be
able to account for the ”uncovered equity parity condition” (proposition 2).
  11 The domestic and foreign riskless rate could possibly diﬀer. But this only introduces a model asymmetry between the home

and foreign country which is of no qualitative relevance for the main model implications. Note also that dates 1 and 2 are
arbitrarily close so that the total interest accrued between dates 1 and 3 is (1 + r) .




                                                              6
respectively. For independently distributed dividends and liquidation values, we find furthermore
                      ⎛                                              ⎞             ⎛                                      ⎞
                          σ 2d + σ2V                0                                   σ2d + σ 2V + σ 2e        0
                Ω1 = ⎝                                               ⎠,       Ω∗1 = ⎝                                     ⎠.
                               0        σ 2d   +   σ 2V   +   σ 2e                              0           σ 2d + σ 2V

Market clearing in both equity markets implies two additional constraints for period 1.
    In period 2, information about the dividends (dh , df ) is revealed, but values (V h , V f ) are still unknown.
Equity holdings need to fulfill the new first order conditions

                                               1                                       1
                                    X2 =         E2 (R)Ω−1
                                                        2 ;                    X2∗ =     E2 (R∗ )Ω∗−1
                                                                                                  2   .
                                               ρ                                       ρ

The conditional covariance Ω2 and Ω∗2 depends on the dividend realization (dh , df ) and we find
                         ⎛                                           ⎞             ⎛                                    ⎞
                             σ 2V               0                                       σ 2V + (1 + dh )2 σ 2e    0
                  Ω2 = ⎝                                             ⎠,       Ω∗2 = ⎝                                   ⎠.
                              0     σ2V + (1 + df )2 σ 2e                                           0            σ 2V

The period 3 equity prices (P3h , P3f ) will now reflect any asymmetric realization of dividend payouts (dh , df ).
This in turn implies that, under high foreign dividends, the foreign asset is more valuable and therefore the
foreign investment constitutes a large exchange rate exposure. Optimal asset demands in period 2 have to
account for the higher conditional variance. We show that it leads to rebalancing into domestic equity.12
This rebalancing simultaneously changes the currency demand, which in turn aﬀects the exchange rate. In
order to solve the model for the two periods, we have to first conjecture a linear solution for all asset prices
as a function of the dividend realizations. In a second step, we substitute these asset price solutions into
the demand functions and use the market clearing and supply constraints to determine all coeﬃcients. The
appendix provides the solutions.


2.2     Model Implications

We summarize the implications of the model in 4 separate testable propositions. Propositions 1 and 2 concern
stylized facts documented in the literature (see in particular Hau and Rey (2006)). Propositions 3 and 4
concern directly the rebalancing behavior at the fund level. These implications have not yet been subjected
to empirical testing and are the main focus of this paper .


      Proposition 1: Portfolio Allocations

      International investors exposed to exchange rate risk (as described in assumptions 1 and 2) choose
  12 The model considers partial revelation of the stocks payoﬀs in period 2, which diminishes the payoﬀ risk. In contrast,

exchange rate risk is fixed. Hence exchange rate risk plays conditionally a bigger role in period 2 compared to period 1. This
gives rise to an ”automatic rebalancing” eﬀect towards home currency holdings in period 2. But this is of no consequence
for our theoretical and our empirical results. Our results are about the covariance between rebalancing and returns and the
covariance between active and passive risk rebalancing. The ”automatic rebalancing” described above is like a time eﬀect and
does not alter any of these covariances. The model could be purged of the ”automatic rebalancing” eﬀect by assuming that
conditional exchange rate risk decreases in the same proportion as stock payoﬀs. Such a modification is however immaterial for
our results. Hence we favor the simpler model set-up.



                                                                          7
        optimal period 1 asset allocations given by

                                        σ 2d + σ 2V + σ 2e                                          σ 2d + σ 2V
                   xh1   = xf1 ∗   =                        ;               xf1   = xh∗
                                                                                     1     =                        .
                                       2σ 2d + 2σ 2V + σ 2e                                     2σ2d + 2σ 2V + σ 2e

        Proof: For the derivation see Appendix.

    Home and foreign investors hold symmetric positions biased towards home assets. The home bias can
                             f∗   f                       σ 2e
be quantified as xh1 − xh∗
                        1 = x1 − x1 =              2σ 2d +2σ 2V +σ 2e
                                                                      ,   and equals the proportion of foreign exchange rate
       1 2                                     2     2       1 2
risk   2 σe   relative to total payoﬀ risk   σ d + σ V + 2 σ e of         an allocation of identical home and foreign portfolio
shares. Higher exchange rate volatility should therefore reinforce the home bias. The home bias has been
extensively documented in the international finance literature.13 A variety of alternative explanations can
also account for the home bias and are complementary to ours14 ; for example higher transaction costs for
foreign stocks, international information asymmetries, or diﬀerences in investor familiarity. While these
alternative hypotheses explain the level eﬀect of the home bias, they may not have the same dynamic
implications. The particular asset price dynamics in our exchange risk based model of market segmentation
is captured by Proposition 2.


        Proposition 2: Dividend Information and the Covariance Structure of Prices

    Information revealed at date 2 about diﬀerent stock market fundamentals (dh −df 6= 0) creates a negative
covariance between relative home and foreign stock price performance P2h − P2f and the exchange rate:
                                                      h              i
                                                   Cov P2h − P2f , E2 < 0.

        Proof: For the derivation see Appendix.

    Asset prices in period 2 feature a particular correlation structure in spite of the assumed independence
of the final asset payoﬀs. When faced by increased foreign exchange risk due to an appreciation of the
foreign assets of their portfolios relative to the domestic ones, investors rebalance out of foreign assets. This
risk rebalancing investment strategy implies net sales of the foreign currency and hence an appreciation
of the domestic exchange rate, which mitigates the original valuation shock in the equity market15 . Such
covariance structures could however potentially be induced by macroeconomic channels which do not rely on
portfolio rebalancing. It is therefore interesting to explore direct microeconomic evidence on the relevance of
  13 For evidence linking exchange rate volatility to home bias see Fratscher, Fidora and Thimann (2007b). For a study of the

home bias at the fund level see Hau and Rey (2008). For recent country level evidence, see Chan, Covrig and Ng (2005) or
Portes and Rey (2005). For a classic survey on home bias see Lewis (1999).
  14 We are evidently not claiming that our model is the only possible explanation for the home bias. It is also out of the scope

of this paper to provide a quantitative assessment of the home bias due to exchange rate risk.
  15 This correlation structure of stock prices and exchange rates, called “uncovered equity parity condition” (Hau and Rey

(2006)), has also been examined by Brooks, Edison, Kumar and Slok (2001), Krylova, Cappiello and Santis (2005), Chaban
(2008). Gyntelberg, Loretan, Subhanij and Chan (2009) provide evidence that foreign excess returns on Thai equity are
followed by capital outflows of foreign investors which simultaneously depreciates the Thai bath. For most OECD countries the
exchange rate returns and diﬀerential stock market returns feature the predicted negative correlation at all frequencies from
daily to quarterly data.


                                                                    8
the portfolio channel. Propositions 3 and 4 state the microeconomic hypothesis of fund rebalancing, which
constitute the heart of the empirical tests of this paper.


      Proposition 3: Portfolio Rebalancing Measures Based on Portfolio Shares

      Denote by wbf the portfolio weight induced by passively holding the previous period 1 portfolio.
               ³ 2f´
                1+r
      b2f = w1f 1+rP2 ,where r2P represents the home investor’s total portfolio return (between dates
      w
                     2

      1 and 2), while r2h and r2f denote the return on his home and foreign investment component,
      respectively. We define a measure of ‘active rebalancing’ from foreign to domestic equity for the
      home country investor as
                                               RB f = w2f − w
                                                            b2f ,

      where w2f = xf2 E2 P2f /(xh2 P2h + xf2 E2 P2f ) denotes the foreign portfolio weight for an optimal
      rebalanced allocation at the beginning of period 2. The model implies a negative covariance
      between RB f and the return diﬀerential r2f − r2h , that is
                                              h                i
                                           Cov RB f , r2f − r2h < 0.


      Proof: For the derivation see Appendix.

   The active rebalancing measure RB f is intuitive. If the return on the foreign share of the portfolio r2f
is higher than the return on the total portfolio r2P then the share of foreign assets in the portfolio increases
automatically and such ‘passive weight changes’ are not captured in the measure RB f . If investors pursue a
passive holding strategy, then the new foreign portfolio share in period 2 follows as w2f = w
                                                                                            b2f . In this case the
active rebalancing measure RB f is zero. Active rebalancing into home equity implies RB f < 0 and occurs
for foreign market excess returns, whenever r2f − r2h > 0. The international equity fund manager rebalances
out of foreign equities into domestic equities whenever the foreign component of their portfolio outperforms
the domestic component. Intuitively, the exposure of international equity managers to exchange rate risk
increases as the weight of foreign securities increases. Rebalancing towards domestic equity decreases the
exchange rate exposure. This behavior corresponds to the negative covariance between RB f and r2f − r2h .
A positive covariance by contrast would imply a change in weights that further increases exchange rate
exposure after such exposure has increased due to valuation eﬀects.
   Even more finely, we can decompose the return vector denominated in home currency R into a pure
equity return vector denominated in local currency REq and the complementary exchange rate vector
RF x = R − REq . The covariance matrix can then be decomposed into the pure equity covariance and
into a complementary exchange rate covariance matrix, that is


                                         Et (RRT ) = Ωt = ΩEq   Fx
                                                           t + Ωt ,




                                                        9
where we define


     ΩEq
      t     = Et (REq (REq )T );           ΩF
                                            t
                                              x
                                                  = Et (REq (RF x )T ) + Et (RF x (REq )T ) + Et (RF x (RF x )T )

The total portfolio risk of an international investor and the exchange rate component can be defined as


                      Risk(wt ) = wt Ωt wtT ;                  Risk F x (wt ) = wt ΩF x T
                                                                                    t wt ,


respectively. We can now characterize rebalancing behavior based on portfolio risk as follows:


      Proposition 4: Portfolio Rebalancing Measures Based on Portfolio Risk

      We denote by w1 = (w1h , w1f ) the initial portfolio weights in period 1, w           b2f ) the portfolio
                                                                                      b2h , w
                                                                                b2 = (w
      weights of the home investor resulting from a passive investment strategy in period 2 and by
      w2 = (w2h , w2f ) the actual portfolio weights in period 2. The passive risk changes (without
      rebalancing) between period 1 and 2 are given by


              b2 , w1 ) = w
        ∆Risk(w                 b2T − w1 Ω1 w1T ; ∆Risk F x (w
                          b2 Ω2 w                                        b2 ΩF
                                                             b2 , w1 ) = w     x T
                                                                             2 wb2 − w1 ΩF x T
                                                                                         1 w1 ,

                                                                                                            (1)
      where the first expression corresponds to the total portfolio risk while the second expression
      accounts for changes in foreign exchange risk only. Active risk changes due to optimal portfolio
      management are given by


                   b2 ) = w2 Ω2 w2T − w
        ∆Risk(w2 , w                        b2T ; ∆Risk F x (w2 , w
                                      b2 Ω2 w                     b2 ) = w2 ΩF x T
                                                                                    b2 ΩF
                                                                             2 w2 − w
                                                                                          x T
                                                                                        2 wb2 ,
                                                                                                            (2)
      Risk rebalancing implies a negative covariance between passive and active weight changes

                                              b2 ), ∆Risk(w
                              Cov [∆Risk(w2 , w             b2 , w1 )]          < 0
                                  £     Fx                   Fx
                                                                              ¤
                              Cov ∆Risk (w2 , w   b2 ), ∆Risk (w   b2 , w1 ),   < 0,

      for total risk and exchange rate risk rebalancing, respectively.

      Proof: For the derivation see Appendix.

    The model predicts that any risk increase of a passive strategy should be counterbalanced by active
weight changes inducing a portfolio risk reduction. Hence the negative covariance.


3     Data
A data set of global equity holdings from Thomson Financial Securities (TFS) is used to explore the the-
oretical predictions. The data documents individual mutual fund and other institutional holdings at the
stock level. TFS itself was created by the merger of The Investext Group, Security Data Company and


                                                         10
CDA/Spectrum. Our data covers the five year period 1997 to 2002 and has therefore an interesting cross
sectional and time series dimension. This key distinctive feature allows us to investigate portfolio dynamics
                                       16
as opposed to static allocations.           .
    The TFS holding data comprise fund number, fund name, management company name, country code of
the fund incorporation, stock identifier, country code of the stock, stock position (number of stocks held),
reporting dates for which holding data is available, security price on the reporting date and the security price
on the closest previous days in case the reporting date had no price information on the security, total return
index (including dividend reinvestments) in local currency, and daily dollar exchange rates for all investment
destinations. Most funds report only with a frequency of 6 months. This suggests that the analysis is best
carried out at a semi-annual frequency. Reporting dates diﬀer somewhat, but more than 90 percent of the
reporting occurs in the last 30 days of each half-year. Roughly a third of the funds also report on a quarterly
frequency and a still smaller percentage at the monthly frequency. Moving to quarterly or monthly reporting
frequency implies a substantial sample reduction.
    A limitation of the data is that they do not include any information on cash holdings, financial leverage,
investments in fixed income instruments or investments in derivative contracts. All the portfolio characteris-
tics we calculate therefore concern only the equity proportion of a fund’s investment. We believe that missing
cash holdings in home currency or financial leverage are not a major concern for our analysis, since leverage
simply implies a scaling of the absolute risk by a leverage factor. All our analysis is based on portfolio
shares and therefore not aﬀected by leverage decisions which scale the absolute risk but do not alter the
unit risk based on portfolio shares.17 A more serious concern is that funds may carry out additional hedging
operations which escape our inference. In spite of this data shortcoming, we believe that the analysis is still
informative. As documented in previous surveys (Levich et al. (1999)), most mutual funds do not engage in
any derivative trading and their equity position may therefore represent an accurate representation of their
risk taking. We also note that any additional hedging is likely to attenuate rebalancing and therefore bias
the predicted negative correlation towards zero.
    To keep the data processing manageable, we focus our analysis on funds domiciled in four geographic
regions, namely the United States (US), Canada (CA), United Kingdom (UK) and the Euro area (EU).18 .
  16 Other papers using disaggregated data on international institutional investors holdings albeit with a diﬀerent focus are

Chan et al. (2005) who look at the determinants of static allocations at the country level and Covrig, Fontaine, Jimenez-Garcs
and Seasholes (2007) who studies the eﬀect of information asymmetries on home bias. Broner, Gelos and Reinhart (2006) is an
interesting study which focuses on country allocations of emerging market funds and looks at channels of crisis transmission.
They present a model with time varying risk aversion which predicts in particular that overexposed investors tend to revert to
the market portfolio in crisis times. They assume, in the absence of stock level data, that funds hold a portfolio well proxied
by the IFC US$ total return investable index. Our empirical exercise and focus is very diﬀerent. Our sample is not restricted
to emerging market funds nor to aggregate return indices. It is also much larger. The total capitalization of the funds under
study in Broner et al. (2006) is $120 bn at the end of their sample in 2000 while our sample totals around $3,000 bn in market
capitalization that year. Froot, O’Connell and Seasholes (2001) is a high frequency study based on the transaction data of
one global custodian (State Street Bank &Trust). They look at the eﬀect of aggregate cross country flows on MSCI country
returns. Our study focuses on a diﬀerent time scale (semester instead of daily frequency) and uses a whole cross section of fund
specific investment decisions and stock level data. For a high frequency study linking exchange rates to aggregated institutional
investors flows using State Street Bank & Trust data see Froot and Ramadorai (2005).
  17 This argument is only valid for home currency cash and cannot be maintained if cash is held in foreign currency. In the

latter case the exchange rate risk alters the risk features of the portfolio.
  18 Ireland, Finland, France, Greece, Germany, Austria, Netherlands, Italy, Belgium, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain.




                                                               11
These locations represent 88 percent of all semi-annual fund reports in our data and constitute 91 percent
of all reported positions. Euro area funds are pooled together because of their common currency after 1999
and very little relative exchange rate movement in 1997 to 1999. In order to reduce data outliers and limit
the role of reporting errors, a number of data filters are employed:

    • We retain holding data only from the last reporting date of a fund in half-year. Fund holdings are
      only taken into account for reporting dates within the last 100 days of the half-year. A fund has to
      feature in two consecutive half-year periods in order to be retained. Consecutive reporting dates are
      a pre-requisite for the dynamic inference in this paper. The first reporting half-year to be retained is
      1998.19

    • Funds are retained if their total asset holding exceeds 10 million U.S. Dollars. Smaller funds might
      represent incubator funds and other non-representative entities.

    • We retain only international funds which hold at least 5 stocks in the domestic currency and at least
      5 stocks in another currency area. This excludes all funds with less than 10 stock positions and
      also purely domestic or purely international funds. International rebalancing for the latter might be
      incompatible with the fund investment objective.20

    • Non-diversified funds with extreme investment biases in very few stocks are also ignored. We consider
      a fund diversified if fund weights produce a Herfindahl-Hirschman index below 20 percent.

    • We discard funds if their return on combined equity holdings exceed 200 percent or if they lose more
      than 50 percent of their equity holdings over a half-year. Individual stock observations are ignored if
      they feature extreme half-annual returns which exceed 500 percent or below −80 percent21 .

    To start we examine the representativeness of our disaggregated data set. For this purpose we compute
the correlations statistics of aggregate destination country holdings in our sample with the aggregate cross-
country holdings data of the Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey of the IMF. The CPIS data have been
systematically collected since 2001 and constitute the best measures we have of aggregate cross-country asset
holdings. The correlations of our holdings with the CPIS geographical distribution22 are very high as shown
in Table 1. They range from 0.73 for Euro area funds to 0.99 for Canadian funds. The high correlations for
both years suggests that our sample is representative of foreign equity positions in the world economy.
    Next, we document the summary statistics for the fund holding data according to fund domicile. In Table
2, Panel A, we report by half-year the number of funds in each fund domicile, the number of equity positions
and their aggregate market value. The sample period extends over 10 half-years from 1998/1 to 2002/2.
   19 Very few holdings were reported in the first semester of 1997. The first sizeable combination of consecutive reporting dates

is therefore 1997/2 and 1998/1 which is reported under 1998/1.
   20 We are also unable to capture any ‘household rebalancing’ which might consist in rebalancing out of foreign country funds

into purely domestic equity funds.
   21 We discard less than 1 percent of the observations this way. Extreme return values may be attributable to data errors.
   22 These correlations have been computed on foreign holdings only and do not include zeros. Adding investments into the

domestic markets would push these correlations even higher.


                                                               12
The number of funds in the sample generally increased over time. For example, for the U.S. in 2002, first
half-year, we have 1422 funds with a total of 390,849 stock positions valued at around $1,658 billion. For
the same half-year, the European fund sample comprises 1,782 funds, and their aggregate holding amounts
to only $205 billion. While the U.S. and European fund sample contain roughly the same number of fund
periods, both the number of equity positions and the aggregate fund value over all half-years is considerably
higher for the U.S. funds. In Panel B, we report the total investment over the period 1998-2002 by investment
destination, broken up into U.S., Euro area, U.K., Canada, other OECD economies, oﬀ-shore markets23 and
emerging markets. As expected, our data show a clear home bias and sizable cross-country investments
among the more developed economies.


4     Empirical analysis
The main contribution of this paper is to document the dynamics of portfolios induced by valuation changes
using microeconomic data across a broad sample of funds and countries. Using disaggregated data allows for
a more precise identification of portfolio rebalancing both in response to equity risk and to exchange rate risk.
Section 4.1 examines rebalancing evidence based on the time series of the foreign portfolio share. Rebalancing
out of foreign equity is an implicit risk reduction due to a decrease in exchange rate risk exposure. In Section
4.2, we analyze fund portfolio risk measures. Rebalancing is defined here as the reversal of portfolio risk
changes. Section 4.3 introduces a new stock level risk measure, the marginal risk contribution of a stock to
the total portfolio risk and studies its dynamics.


4.1    Foreign Portfolio Share Rebalancing

According to proposition 3, domestic and foreign equity are imperfect substitutes because of diﬀerences in
exchange rate risk exposure for the home and foreign investors. If exchange rate risk is imperfectly traded,
equity holdings themselves dynamically reflects this lack of substitutability. In particular, a relative increase
in the value of the foreign portfolio share triggers a rebalancing in favor of domestic equity and vice versa.
The rebalancing behavior reflects the desire of investors to partly oﬀ-set exogenous changes in exchange rate
risk exposure. The domestic investor is not exposed to exchange rate risk and therefore accommodates the
rebalancing desire of the foreign investor. But do fund managers indeed sell foreign equities whenever foreign
holdings outperform the domestic part of their portfolio in order to decrease their exposure to exchange rate
risk? In order to answer this question, we measure portfolio rebalancing by computing the active rebalancing
statistic RB f of proposition 3. It compares the actual foreign equity weights to those implied by a simple
holding strategy which induces weight changes stemming only from valuation eﬀects. A negative rebalancing
statistic implies an active decrease of the foreign equity weight in the portfolio, while a positive rebalancing
statistic indicates an active increase in foreign exchange rate exposure. Let the portfolio weight of foreign
 23 The oﬀ-shore markets in our sample are Bermuda, Cayman Islands, Netherlands Antilles, Bahamas, Belize, British and US

Virgin Islands, Jersey, Guernesey, Liechtenstein, Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic.




                                                           13
                                                               f
securities at date t in the portfolio of fund j be denoted by wj,t . Formally, the active rebalancing statistic
for fund j is defined as
                                                                                                Ã        f
                                                                                                               !
                             f           f           f                        f         f           1 + rj,t
                           RBj,t    =   wj,t   −   bj,t
                                                   w          with          bj,t
                                                                            w      =   wj,t−1            P
                                                                                                                   ,
                                                                                                    1 + rj,t

       P                                              f
where rj,t represents the total portfolio return and rj,t the return on the foreign component of the portfolio
of fund j between dates t − 1 and t. Furthermore,

                                                              Nj
                                                    f
                                                              X
                                                   wj,t   =         1s=f × ws,j,t−1 ,
                                                              s=1

where 1s=f is a dummy variable which is 1 if stock s is a foreign stock and 0 otherwise. Figure 1 illustrate
the distribution of the rebalancing measure for each of the 4 fund domiciles. We graph the realized foreign
                 f                                            f
portfolio share wj,t                                        bj,t
                     of each fund against the implied share w    under a passive holding strategy. The vertical
                                                                                                f
distance of any fund observation from the 45 degree line measures active portfolio management RBj,t for the
respective fund. Fund rebalancing over a half-year has a standard deviation of 8 percent for the full sample
of 26,436 fund periods as stated in Table 3. It is highest for Euro area funds at 10 percent and lowest for
the U.K. and U.S. funds at 5.5 and 6.1 percent, respectively. The lower variation for both the U.K. and the
U.S. follow from a strong foreign investment bias for U.K. funds and a strong home bias for U.S. funds. By
contrast, the E.U. fund sample is more evenly distributed in terms of its foreign investment share, which
leaves more scope for valuation eﬀects and consecutive rebalancing.
                               P
   The total portfolio return rj,t on fund j is defined as

                                                                  Nj
                                                                  X
                                                       P
                                                      rj,t    =         wi,j,t−1 ri,t ,
                                                                  i=1

where ri,t is the return on security i and Nj is the total number of stocks in the portfolio of fund j. The
foreign and domestic return components of the portfolio are defined as

                                  Nj                                                  Nj
                        f
                                  X  ws,j,t−1                                         X  ws,j,t−1
                                                                            h
                       rj,t   =          f
                                                   rs,t × 1s=f             rj,t   =          h
                                                                                                      rs,t × 1s=h .
                                  s=1   wj,t−1                                        s=1
                                                                                            wj,t−1

As a test of the rebalancing hypothesis, we regress the portfolio rebalancing measure on the excess return of
the foreign part of the portfolio over the home part of the portfolio, that is
                                            h                  i
                                f             f
                              RBj,t = cj + α rj,t−k − rh j,t−k                              + βDt + εj,t ,
                                                                                  k=0;k=1


where k = 0 represents instantaneous rebalancing and k = 1, 2, 3... captures delayed portfolio reallocations.
Time dummies Dt capture all common reallocations in each period which are not related to relative return
diﬀerences and cj represents a fund fixed eﬀect. For the half-annual data in our data set, we restrict the
analysis to k = 0 and k = 1. The rebalancing hypothesis outlined in the model implies a negative regression



                                                                     14
                                                                                    f
coeﬃcient (α < 0). Note that a passive buy and hold strategy of an index produces RBj,t = 0 and should
imply a zero coeﬃcient.
   Table 4 reports the regressions results for funds from the United States (US), Canada (CA), the United
Kingdom (UK) and Euro area (EU), respectively, as well as the pooled regression results. The baseline
regression with contemporaneous returns (k = 0) yields a statistically significant negative coeﬃcient for all
the geographic areas. The results are very robust and hold when we include time fixed eﬀects and fund
fixed eﬀects as well as the lagged dependant variable. The strongest rebalancing is found for Canadian and
Euro area funds with coeﬃcients of −8.99 and −6.00, respectively. We note that such rebalancing generates
important aggregate capital flows if the home and foreign market show pronounced performance diﬀerences.
An excess performance of the foreign portfolio share by 10 percent implies a 0.466 (= .10 × 4.66) percent
aggregate shift towards domestic holdings in the pooled sample (our preferred specification includes time,
country and funds fixed eﬀects). Applied to an aggregate foreign equity position of 4 trillion U.S. dollars,
the corresponding equity flow amounts to around 18.6 billion U.S. dollars.24 US TIC data show that on
average net purchases of foreign equities by US investors over the period 1998-2002 amount in absolute value
to approximately 28.9 billions per semester. Thus the portfolio rebalancing channel generates economically
significant international equity flows.
   It is also interesting to explore the possible asymmetries in the rebalancing behavior of international
investors. For this purpose, we split the sample into negative and positive excess returns and estimate
separate regression coeﬃcients α+ and α− for positive and negative return diﬀerentials. Formally, we have
                                h             i            h            i
                   f              f                          f
                 RBj,t = cj + α+ rj,t − rh j,t × 1∆r≥0 + α− rj,t    h
                                                                 − rj,t   × 1∆r<0 + βDt + εj,t ,

                                                                                            f
where 1∆r≥0 represents a dummy which is equal to 1 whenever the foreign excess return ∆r = rj,t−k −
rh j,t−k ≥ 0 and 0 otherwise. The complementary dummy marking negative foreign excess returns is given
by 1∆r<0 . Both coeﬃcients are generally negative for all geographical areas, but rebalancing appears to be
stronger for an overexposure to exchange rate risk than for an underexposure except for the U.K. funds. In
the pooled sample, the rebalancing coeﬃcient for positive foreign excess performance is at −6.79, almost
twice as negative as the −3.37 in case of negative foreign underperformance. The equity capital repatriation
eﬀect is quantitatively stronger than the capital expatriation eﬀect.25
   Looking only at contemporaneous rebalancing (k = 0) may underestimate the permanent eﬀect of return
diﬀerentials on capital reallocation. Some rebalancing might occur with a time lag. Columns (3), (7),
(11), and (15) show that the lagged return diﬀerentials (k = 1) are also statistically significant for all four
  24 The Bureau of Economic Analysis of the U.S. Department of Commerce reports in International Economic Accounts private

corporate stock holdings of U.S. residents in foreign companies of 4.2 trillion U.S. dollars for year end 2006.
  25 We also ran the following regressions

                                          f           f
                                        RBj,t = c + αrj,t−k + γrh j,t−k + βDt + εj,t ;
that is we allowed for diﬀerent coeﬃcients on the domestic and the foreign returns. We found that both coeﬃcients α and γ
are significant, of the expected sign and of similar magnitude (−4.7 and 5.4 respectively for the pooled sample for k = 0 and
−2.6 and 3.1 respectively for the pooled sample for k = 1 ).




                                                             15
fund locations, though of smaller magnitude. Using lagged returns also has the advantage of controlling for
                                                          f
                                                        bj,t
potential measurement errors. The implied foreign share w    on the left-hand-side uses (by construction)
                                            f                                          P
the returns on the foreign portfolio share rj,t and the return on the total portfolio rj,t (linear combination of
 f
rj,t and rh j,t ), which are also part of the a right-hand-side regressor (with opposite sign). Mismeasurement
    f
of rj,t or rh j,t may therefore generate a spurious negative coeﬃcient estimate α for the contemporaneous
regression (k = 0), but not for the lagged return diﬀerential (k = 1). An additional robustness check consists
                                                                 f
in an IV regression, where we use lagged foreign excess returns rj,t−1 interacted with fixed time and domicile
dummies as instruments.26 The IV regression confirms statistically negative coeﬃcients for both the U.S.
and Canadian samples (not reported). However, standard errors are inconclusively large for the U.K. and
European fund samples (not reported). The IV regression for the pooled sample yields a coeﬃcient estimate
αIV = −4.83 which is negative and highly significant. We note that both OLS regressions with lagged
regressors and the IV regressions are immune to any simultaneity problem since realized returns between
date t − 2 and t − 1 are used to account for rebalancing between date t − 1 and t. The equity flows induced
by portfolio rebalancing after date t − 1 cannot drive the lagged return changes. Rather they are a response
to the returns realizations.
                                                                               f
   As an additional robustness check, we include a lagged dependent variable RBj,t−1 as additional regressor.
To obtain consistent estimates under the short time span of the panel data, we use the Arellano Bond
estimator. It corroborates the previous results (columns 4, 8, 12, 16, 24). The coeﬃcient estimate of −0.12
for the lagged term (column 24) shows that foreign portfolio share rebalancing is highly persistent and that
only 12 percent is reversed in the next semester.
   It is also interesting to compare our results to the rebalancing regressions pertaining to risky and riskless
holdings of Swedish households in Calvet et al. (2009) by relating the active change in the foreign share
on the passive change. They found that Swedish households oﬀset about 50 percent of the passive change
in risky share of their portfolio. Interestingly, we find a number which is similar in magnitude, i.e. that
international equity funds oﬀset about a third of any passive change in foreign equity share through active
rebalancing (see columns 25 and 26).
   The rebalancing model developed in section 2 does not allow for expected returns that would change
because of realized returns. All the eﬀects come from realized values in our model, which are exogenous from
the point of view of the investor and given time invariant expected returns. The hypothesis we maintain in the
empirical exercise is therefore that time varying expected returns enter the error term and are uncorrelated
with the realized excess return. Note that if changes in expected returns were positively correlated with
current realized excess returns, then this would bias the results against finding a negative correlation. Only
in the case where changes in expectations are negatively correlated with current realized excess returns
could we get a potentially spurious negative coeﬃcient. However, the regressions based on lagged returns
or the IV specification should still produce the correct coeﬃcient as long as changes in expected returns are
 26 Using   only time and domicile dummies as instruments (no fund specific variable) gives qualitatively similar results.




                                                               16
uncorrelated with the lagged returns or with the instruments.27


4.2     Risk Rebalancing at the Fund Level

In this section we take up the formidable computational challenge of computing fund portfolio risk measures,
i.e. risk measures based on the variance covariance matrix of each fund specific stock holdings. While the
previous section proxied exchange rate risk with the foreign portfolio share, we now measure risk directly
based on the estimated covariance matrix of each fund portfolio. Proposition 4 states that active rebalancing
should produce a portfolio risk change which counteracts any passive risk change due to valuation eﬀects.
Testing proposition 4 is a daunting task. The portfolio risk needs to be calculated for approximately 20,000
fund periods with each fund period requiring the data input from a set of approximately 30,000 diﬀerent
international stocks. We use an algorithm to construct a data base with daily equity return and exchange
rate data for each fund period. The covariance estimation for the half-year t is based on daily returns over the
three preceding half-year periods S = {t − 1, t − 2, t − 3} . A typical covariance element is therefore estimated
using approximately n = 380 daily return observations. We calculate the historical sample covariance matrix
b j,t−1 for fund j using the vector of (log) daily equity returns Rs = RsEq +RsF x . It is expressed in home (fund
Ω
domicile) currency and corresponds (in its stock ordering) to the vector of portfolio weights wj,t . Equity
returns are measured as ‘total returns’ and generally account for stocks splits and dividend reinvestment. We
                                               b Eq based on equity returns RsEq in local currency. The
separately estimate a second covariance matrix Ω j,t−1
                                     b F x then represents the complementary matrix in the decomposition
exchange rate risk covariance matrix Ω j,t−1



                                                b j,t−1 = Ω
                                                Ω         b Eq + ΩbF x
                                                                   j,t−1 ,
                                                            j,t−1


where

                    b Eq            1 X Eq Eq T
                    Ω j,t−1   =           Rs (Rs )
                                    n
                                      s∈S

                    bF x            1 X F x Eq T     1 X Eq F x T  1 X Fx Fx T
                    Ωj,t−1    =           Rs (Rs ) +    Rs (Rs ) +    Rs (Rs ) .
                                    n                n             n
                                      s∈S                     s∈S                     s∈S


                b j,t−1 and Ω
The covariances Ω           b Eq are identical under the assumption that all exchange rates are constant.
                              j,t−1
                      b F x therefore captures the portfolio risk due to exchange rate movements.
The covariance matrix Ω j,t−1

    We apply the same data filters with respect to the fund data as in the previous section on share rebalancing
measures. However, estimating the covariance matrix for each fund poses additional challenges. In particular,
the return data must be suﬃciently complete. We include a matrix element in the calculation of the portfolio
risk if we dispose of at least 150 non-missing return pairs of daily return observations over the 18 months
data window. If too many return observations are missing, we replace the covariance element by the average
covariance of the stock with all other stocks in the portfolio. Moreover, a fund is discarded from the sample
  27 Note that we could have assumed a time varying expected return in the model (such as a mean reverting process for the

expected returns). This would not change our results as long as all investors expected a mean reverting process from date zero.
In fact in Hau and Rey (2006) we assumed Orstein Uhlenbeck processes for the returns without altering our results.


                                                              17
if more than 20 percent of its stocks (in terms of the fund asset value) feature incomplete return data. We
found that more stringent selection criteria like a 5 percent of 10 percent threshold for data completeness did
not qualitatively change the main results, even though it reduced the number of available funds observations.
   In a first step we document the relationship between the foreign portfolio share of a fund and its corre-
sponding share of FX risk. The FX risk share is formally calculated as the standard deviation of the FX
risk relative to the standard deviation of total risk, hence
                                          ¯                 ¯1
                                          ¯     b F x wT ¯¯ 2
                                          ¯wj,t Ω j,t−1 j,t
                        F X risk sharej = ¯                                  bF
                                                            ¯ 12 × sign(wj,t Ω
                                                                                x    T
                                                                              j,t−1 wj,t ),
                                          ¯     b       T   ¯
                                          ¯wj,t Ωj,t−1 wj,t ¯

where sign function adjusts for the sign of the FX risk

                                    bF
                               wj,t Ω  x    T          b       T          b Eq    T
                                     j,t−1 wj,t = wj,t Ωj,t−1 wj,t − wj,t Ωj,t−1 wj,t .


           b F x for the exchange rate risk is symmetric, but not necessarily positive definite. In other
The matrix Ω j,t−1

words exchange rate exposure may make a negative contribution to overall portfolio risk. Figure 2 plots the
FX risk share as a function of the foreign portfolio share wf separately for the U.S., Canada, the U.K. and the
Euro area. U.S. The FX risk share is very dispersed across diﬀerent funds, though its fitted mean is generally
increasing in the foreign portfolio share. There are also pronounced diﬀerences across countries. U.S. funds
generally have small foreign portfolio shares and their FX risk share is close to zero. Only for a foreign
portfolio share beyond 70 percent do we find an increase in the FX risk share. For the U.K. most sample
funds have a foreign portfolio share between 80 and 100 percent and their mean FX risk share for those funds
is above 30 percent. Canada stands out by its generally negative FX risk share which is just slowly increasing
in the foreign portfolio share of a fund. Canadian funds are mostly invested in the U.S. (see Table 2). Hence
their foreign exchange risk exposure is driven by the correlation between US equity returns and the Canadian
dollar exchange rate. This correlation is negative at −0.0428 in our sample period. Therefore the Canadian
exchange rate provides a natural hedge for Canadian investors. It is worth highlighting that a low or even
negative level of fund exposure to FX risk does not imply that rebalancing with respect to changes in this
risk is irrelevant. Canadian funds may rebalance after an increased in their FX risk component even though
the level of the FX exposure remains negative. The situation is very diﬀerent for the U.K. whose exchange
rate is positively correlated with U.S. returns during the same period. As a result, foreign exchange risk
exposure of U.K. funds increases with their foreign portfolio share. The increase in the FX risk share as a
function of the foreign portfolio share is also steep for Euro area funds. Their FX risk share reaches almost
50 percent for the funds with the largest foreign investment weights.
   While the structure of equity and FX risk is interesting in its own right, our study is focused on the
dynamic aspect of risk choices. To what extent are valuation related portfolio risk changes reversed by
active rebalancing? In accordance with proposition 4, the empirical portfolio risk changes due to valuation




                                                         18
eﬀects are defined as

                              bj,t , wj,t−1 )
                        ∆Risk(w                          b j,t−1 w
                                                    bj,t Ω
                                                  = w              T
                                                                 bj,t          b j,t−1 wT
                                                                      − wj,t−1 Ω        j,t−1

                        ∆Risk F x (w
                                   bj,t , wj,t−1 ) = w    bF x w
                                                     bj,t Ω       T            bF x    T
                                                           j,t−1 bj,t − wj,t−1 Ωj,t−1 wj,t−1


for total and FX risk, respectively; and the portfolio risks change due to rebalancing is given by

                                        bj,t )
                           ∆Risk(wj,t , w                 b j,t−1 wT − w
                                                   = wj,t Ω                 b j,t−1 w
                                                                       bj,t Ω         T
                                                                                    bj,t
                                                                   j,t

                           ∆Risk F x (wj,t , w             b F x wT − w
                                             bj,t ) = wj,t Ω                bF x w
                                                                       bj,t Ω       T
                                                             j,t−1 j,t       j,t−1 bj,t ,


where wj,t denotes the vector of weights at the end of period t for fund j, respectively. The risk rebalancing
hypothesis is tested through a linear regression given by

                         bj,t )
            ∆Risk(wj,t , w                           bj,t , wj,t−k )k=0;k=1 + βDt + εj,t
                                    = cj + α × ∆Risk(w
            ∆Risk F x (wj,t , w                               bj,t , wj,t−k )k=0;k=1 + β F X Dt + εj,t .
                              bj,t ) = cj + αF x × ∆Risk F x (w

A negative coeﬃcient α < 0 indicates mean reversion for the total portfolio risk through active risk rebal-
ancing and αF x < 0 confirms active risk rebalancing for the foreign exchange rate risk component.
   Table 5 reports the regression results for portfolio risk rebalancing. We report separate results for each
of the four fund domiciles and pooled results in column (15). In order to reduce the importance of outliers,
we eliminate the 1 percent lowest and higher observations of both the dependent and independent variables.
Panel A presents evidence for the rebalancing of total risk and Panel B focuses on rebalancing for the FX
risk component. All the regressions have fixed fund eﬀects. The pooled OLS regressions in Panel A show
strong evidence for a negative coeﬃcient (see column 14 in particular). A coeﬃcient estimate of α = −0.32
(= −0.2 − 0.12) that takes into account lagged rebalancing suggests that (on average) a third of any portfolio
risk change resulting from valuation eﬀects is reversed by active rebalancing over a year. The robust standard
errors of 0.03 and 0.04 on the estimate are very low, which implies a high level of statistical significance.
Reported standard errors account for clustering eﬀects at the fund level. The point estimates for the mean
reversion parameter are more negative for funds domiciled in Canada and the Euro area. Only U.K. based
funds provide no evidence for mean reversion of total portfolio risk. Controlling for fixed time eﬀects slightly
increases the adjusted R2 without much impact on the respective point estimate. The evidence for exchange
rate risk rebalancing in Panel B is very similar. The point estimates αF x = −0.31 for the mean reversion
parameter is almost identical to the parameter estimate in Panel A. Evidence in favor of FX risk rebalancing
is uniform except for the U.K. The peculiar behavior of the U.K. in our sample may be linked to the very
high degree of internationalization of the U.K. market with many of final securities owners not being U.K.,
but international investors.
   An obvious concern about the regression analysis in risk changes is spurious negative correlation implied
by measurement error. The term w    b j,t−1 w
                               bj,t Ω         T
                                            bj,t represents the portfolio risk implied by a passive holding
strategy and is only estimated. But it features on both the left-hand and right-hand side of the regression
with opposite signs. A substantial measurement error would induce a negative estimation bias for α. Such


                                                        19
measurement error is likely to be fund specific. An instrumental variable approach allows us to obtain an
unbiased parameter estimate. We use fixed time eﬀects interacted with domicile dummies as instruments
to capture the portfolio risk changes common across all funds in a given fund domicile and half-year. The
F-test of the first stage regression shows that such fixed time eﬀects provide reasonably good instruments for
the U.S. and Canadian fund sample. The pooled IV regression in Panel A implies a parameter estimate of
α = −0.29, which is very close to the OLS estimate. Eliminating fund specific measurement error from the
right-hand side of the regression by projection of the portfolio risk change into a set of aggregate fixed eﬀects
does not qualitatively change the estimation result. We therefore conclude that our negative point estimate
α is not due to fund specific measurement error of the portfolio risk. The corresponding IV estimates in
Panel B also imply generally negative point estimates. However, the standard errors are large here given the
poor quality of the instruments as indicated by the F-statistics of the first stage regression.
   Next, we examine if the rebalancing eﬀect diﬀers across fund sizes. We classify funds above 500 millions
of market capitalization as large and funds below as small. This threshold has been chosen to roughly match
the median of the US sample. The OLS regressions are now repeated separately for each subsample with
the coeﬃcient estimates reported in Table 6. We find that for equity risk the rebalancing eﬀect is generally
larger for small funds. The point estimate for the pooled sample in Panel A is α = −0.27 for small funds
and α = −0.07 for large funds (not significant). This would be consistent with the world in which large
funds trade less because of higher price impact. The diﬀerence is statistically significant. Panel B shows
that rebalancing with respect to FX risk are not as clear cut. The diﬀerence between small and large funds
in the pooled sample is not statistically significant.


4.3    Risk Rebalancing at the Stock Level

We now study rebalancing at the stock level. To do so we introduce a new measure of risk: the marginal
risk contribution of a given stock to the total portfolio risk of a fund. Like in the previous section, we use
the information of the entire cross section of stock holdings of our sample. In order to reduce portfolio risk
induced by valuation eﬀects, a fund manager needs to reduce the risk contribution of certain stocks to the
total portfolio risk. The marginal risk contribution of a stock will depend on its weight in the portfolio and
the volatility of its return but also on the covariances of its return with the other stocks of the portfolio. We
are, to our knowledge, the first ones to estimate marginal risk contributions of assets, which is a measure
of independent interest. Once more, however we focus on the dynamics of portfolio allocation. A passive
change of the marginal risk contribution (due to valuation eﬀects) of stock i in portfolio j is defined as
                              b j,t−1 )i• (w
           bj,t , wj,t−1 ) = (Ω
∆M Risk(i, w                                                        b j,t−1 )i denotes row i of the variance covariance
                                           bj,t − wj,t−1 )T ,where (Ω
       b j,t−1 for fund j. Active portfolio management results in marginal risk changes characterized by
matrix Ω

                                                            b j,t−1 )i• (wj,t − w
                                                  bj,t ) = (Ω
                                ∆M Risk(i, wj,t , w                             bj,t )T .

   The change in total risk of the portfolio of fund j is a weighted average of the changes in marginal risk



                                                           20
contributions of all the stocks i of the portfolio. Rebalancing at the fund level will therefore imply rebalancing
the marginal risk of some specific stocks. Imagine there is an increase in the marginal risk contribution of
a specific stock i, which brings about an increase in aggregate risk at the fund level. We should see the
marginal risk contribution of this stock decrease as a result of active rebalancing. This may consist in either
reducing the portfolio weight of stock i itself or in reducing the weight of other stocks with high covariances
with stock i. In contrast if we see an increase in the marginal risk contribution of a given stock i but at the
same time a decrease in the aggregate portfolio risk (due to changes in marginal risks of other stocks), there
is less reason to expect that active rebalancing of the marginal risk of stock i will occur. Hence the magnitude
of the stock level rebalancing should be conditioned by the aggregate portfolio risk change. The rebalancing
in the marginal risk contribution of a stock should occur if its marginal risk change, and the portfolio risk
change have the same direction and not if they have opposite directions. The following regression captures
the diﬀerential rebalancing at the stock level across these diﬀerent states,

                     bj,t ) = c + α × ∆M Risk(i, w
   ∆M Risk(i, wj,t , w                           bj,t , wj,t−1 ) ×

                                             bj,t , wj,t−1 )) × sign(∆M Risk(i, w
                                 ×sign(∆Risk(w                                  bj,t , wj,t−1 )) + Dt + εj,i,t ,

where the product of the two sign functions takes the value of 1 if portfolio risk and marginal stock risk
move in the same direction and −1 in the opposite case. We highlight that the coeﬃcient α captures only
diﬀerences in the mean reversion across the two conditioning states where marginal stock risk and portfolio
risk move in either the same or opposite directions. Potential measurement errors in the marginal risk term
 b j,t−1 )i• w
(Ω           bj,t would bias the coeﬃcient estimate for α in each of the four sign combinations towards a
negative value, but not the diﬀerences in the mean reversion across the two states captured by the product
of the sign functions. This stock level regression specification based on mean reversion diﬀerences should
therefore be very robust to concern about measurement errors.
   The evidence for marginal stock risk rebalancing is presented in Table 7. Panel A provides the regression
results for total risk and Panel B for the marginal FX risk. We present again separate regression results
for each fund domicile and split the regressor into the four conditional components: The dummy variables
1∆Risk(wej,t ,wj,t−1 )≥0 and 1∆Risk(wej,t ,wj,t−1 )<0 mark a portfolio risk increase and decrease, respectively. Simi-
larly, we define dummies 1∆MRisk(i,wej,t ,wj,t−1 )≥0 and 1∆MRisk(i,wej,t ,wj,t−1 )<0 which condition on a marginal
risk increase or decrease in stock i, respectively. The pooled results in Panel A, column (9) show very strong
rebalancing in the case where marginal stock risk and portfolio risk both increase. The coeﬃcient estimate of
α = −0.85 implies that most of the marginal risk increase of valuation eﬀects is reversed by active portfolio
management if overall portfolio risk increases. A high negative coeﬃcient of α = −0.45 is also obtained for
a marginal risk decrease combined with an overall portfolio risk decrease. In both cases, the direction of the
marginal risk change and the portfolio risk change is the same and the product of the two sign functions
is 1. The case where the two sign functions have opposite signs provides no evidence for rebalancing. The
coeﬃcient estimates here are significantly positive. The results are qualitatively similar across all 4 fund


                                                         21
domiciles. The second regression for each fund domicile uses the sign function and therefore captures the
diﬀerence in the mean reversion of marginal risk changes. The point estimates are uniformly negative at
high levels of statistical significance. A qualitatively similar picture is obtained for the marginal FX risk
rebalancing documented in Panel B. Some of the point estimates for marginal risk reversion are lower than
1. The pooled regression in Panel B, column (9) for example yields a point estimate of α = −1.19 for the
            bj,t , wj,t−1 ) ≥ 0 and ∆M Risk(i, w
state ∆Risk(w                                  bj,t , wj,t−1 ) ≥ 0. This implies that not only the marginal risk
increase due to the valuation eﬀect is completely reversed, but that the portfolio manager reduces the mar-
ginal risk contribution in stock i further conditional on an overall portfolio risk decrease. The quantitatively
strongest eﬀects for marginal FX risk rebalancing are found for funds from the U.K. and the Euro area.
Both feature a relatively large FX risk share compared to funds in the U.S. and Canada.


4.4    Alternative interpretations

Our empirical results provide strong support in favour of portfolio rebalancing. Can the observed rebalancing
result from a simple behavioral hypothesis? One such behavioral hypothesis concerns “profit taking” on
appreciating stocks. Fund managers might sell stocks once a certain target price is reached. The evidence
presented here reflects the decisions of investment professionals who should be less prone to behavioral
biases compared to households. But we can identify two additional aspects of the data which cannot be
easily reconciled with a “profit taking motive” as explanatory alternative. First, this behavioral hypothesis
does not explain why funds buy foreign shares when they underperform domestic holdings as documented in
section 4.1. Second, the “profit taking motive” evaluates each stock in isolation from the other portfolio assets
unlike the risk based paradigm. In this context the stock level evidence in section 4.3 becomes important. A
central finding there is that individual stock rebalancing is explained by the interaction of the marginal risk
change of stock and the portfolio risk change. What happens to the remaining portfolio therefore enters into
the rebalancing decision for the individual stock. The latter finding cannot be obtained from stock specific
selling targets.
   A second alternative interpretation concerns exogenous investment policies and mandates for the funds.
Could the observed rebalancing behavior result from investment policies which commit a fund to a certain
range of foreign stock ownership? French and Poterba (1991) note that funds mandates are an unlikely
explanation for the home bias in equity. This does not preclude their greater importance for the rebalancing
dynamics documented in this paper. To the extent that such mandates exist, we can interpret them as
reflecting risk management objectives of the ultimate fund investors. As such they can be interpreted as
direct evidence for limited asset substitutability and support rather than contradict the main message of
the paper. But rationalizing such mandates in the context of agency problems is beyond the scope of this
paper. Distinguishing between mandated rebalancing and autonomous fund based rebalancing presents an
interesting issue for future research. In order to make progress on these issues we doubtless need a better
theoretical understanding of delegated investment strategies and one which is compatible with the stylized



                                                       22
facts that we uncover in this paper: large heterogeneity of portfolios as measured by domestic and foreign
weights or exposure to exchange rate and equity risk. Modelling financial intermediaries more realistically
is an important agenda for future research.


5     Conclusions
International capital flows and returns are two key variables in international macroeconomics. We use
new data on the stock allocations of approximately 6,500 international equity funds from four diﬀerent
currency areas over 5 years to study the time series properties of portfolio weights following valuation
changes. Portfolio rebalancing due to equity risk as well as exchange rate risk is tested at the fund and stock
level using a variety of measures. We introduce two new empirical measures of risk, fund level portfolio risk
measures and stock level marginal risk contribution measures. We find evidence supporting rebalancing of the
foreign portfolio share as well as rebalancing based on portfolio risk and stock risk measures. Fund managers
tend to revert towards their preferred risk exposure instead of increasing the weights of appreciating assets.
Active risk rebalancing reverses about a third of the risk change due to valuation eﬀects in the course of
a year. Corresponding aggregate capital flows are economically significant. Our measures concern both
changes of the total equity risk as well as its FX component. We also find that equity risk rebalancing is
larger for smaller funds. Both small funds and large funds engage in foreign exchange risk rebalancing. The
estimated magnitude of portfolio rebalancing can therefore generate sizeable macroeconomic equity flows.
The micro-evidence on fund level rebalancing is consistent with international asset pricing eﬀects like the
‘equity parity condition’ found in the recent literature (see Hau and Rey (2006)).
    Evidence on portfolio rebalancing underscores the importance of imperfect international asset substi-
tutability and casts new light on the international financial adjustment mechanism. The short and medium
term adjustment to trade imbalance seems to rely to a considerable degree on valuation eﬀects (see Gour-
inchas and Rey (2007) or Fratscher et al. (2007a)), which can only exist if assets are imperfect substitutes.
Increasing holdings in dollar denominated assets by foreign investors go hand in hand with a dollar depre-
ciation. A depreciating dollar lowers the foreign investors’ portfolio weight in U.S. assets and represents
the adjustment to the new asset market equilibrium (see Blanchard et al. (2005) for a formal macroeco-
nomic presentation of such a dynamics). A strong valuation channel for the process of external adjustment
is therefore complementary to the evidence for portfolio rebalancing presented in this paper. Overall, we
hope our empirical findings will be a useful guide for macroeconomic research aimed at developing richer and
empirically relevant microfounded open economy models with endogenous portfolio choice such as Devereux
and Sutherland (2009b) or Tille and Van-Wincoop (2007). We also hope that the stylized facts we un-
cover on individual funds portfolios will be useful for the growing literature that aims at modelling financial
intermediation.




                                                      23
References
Albuquerque, Rui, Gregory Bauer, and Martin Schneider, “International Equity Flows and
  Returns: A Quantitative Equilibrium Approach,” Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74, 1—30.
   ,     , and     , “Global Private Information in International Equity Markets,” Journal of Financial
  Economics, 2008. forthcoming.
Bachetta, Philippe and Eric Van-Wincoop, “Infrequent Portfolio Decisions: a Solution to the
  Forward Discount Puzzle,” April 2008. mimeo.
Blanchard, Olivier, Francesco Giavazzi, and Filipa Sa, “International Investors, the U.S. Current
  Account, and the Dollar,” in “Brookings Papers on Economic Activity” Spring 2005.
Bohn, Henning and Linda Tesar, “US equity investment in foreign markets: portfolio rebalancing or
  return chasing?,” American Economic Review, May 1996, 86, 77—81.
Branson, William and Dale Henderson, “The Specification and Influence of Asset Makets,” in
  P. Kenen and R. Jones, eds., Handbook of International Economics, North-Holland, 1985.
Brennan, Michael and Henri Cao, “International Portfolio Investment Flows,” Journal of Finance,
  1997, 52, 1851—1880.
Broner, Fernando, Gadston Gelos, and Carmen Reinhart, “When in peril, retrench: Testing the
  portfolio channel of contagion,” Journal of International Economics, 2006, 69, 203230.
Brooks, Edison, Kumar, and Slok, “Exchange Rates and Capital Flows,” IMF Working Papers, 2001,
  01/190.
Calvet, Laurent, John Campbell, and Paolo Sodini, “Fight of Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing by
  Individual Investors,” 2009. Quarterly Journal of Economics forthcoming.
Chaban, Maxym, “Commodity Currencies and Equity Flows,” may 2008. mimeo.
Chan, Kalok, Vicentiu Covrig, and Lilian Ng, “What Determines the Domestic Bias and Foreign
  Bias?Evidence from Equity Mutual Fund Allocations Worldwide,” Journal of Finance, 2005, 60 (3),
  1495—1534.
Coeurdacier, Nicolas, “Do trade costs in goods markets lead to home bias in equities?,” 2005. mimeo,
  Paris Jourdan Sciences Economiques.
Corte, Pasquale Della, Lucio Sarno, and Giulia Sestieri, “The Predictive Information Content of
  External Imbalances for Exchange Rate Returns: How Much Is It Worth?,” February 2009. Cass
  Business School.
Covrig, Vicentiu, Patrice Fontaine, Sonia Jimenez-Garcs, and Mark Seasholes, “Information
  Asymmetries, Common Factors, and International Portfolio Choice,” SSRN eLibrary, 2007.
Devereux, Michael and Alan Sutherland, “Country Portfolio Dynamics,” February 2009. University
  of British Columbia.
     and     , “Country Portfolios in Open Economy Macro Models,” Journal of the European Economic
  Association, 2009. forthcoming.
     and     , “Valuation Eﬀects and the Dynamics of Net External Assets,” Journal of International
  Economics, 2009. forthcoming.
Fernandez-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo Guerron-Quintana, Juan Rubio-Ramirez, and Martin
  Uribe, “Risk Matters: The Real Eﬀects of Volatility Shocks,” April 2009. mimeo, University of
  Pennsylvania.
Frankel, Jeﬀrey, “In Search of the Exchange Risk Premium: A Six-Currency Test Assuming Mean-
  Variance Optimization,” Journal of International Money and Finance, December 1982, 1, 255—274.
   , “A Test of Perfect Substitutability in the Foreign Exchange Market,” Southern Economic Journal,
  October 1982, 49 (2), 406—416.
Fratscher, Marcel, L. Juvenal, and L. Sarno, “Asset Prices and Current Account Fluctuations in
  Industrialized Economies,” August 2007. ECB Working Paper No. 790.
   , M. Fidora, and C. Thimann, “Home bias in global bond and equity markets: the role of real
  exchange rate volatility,” Journal of International Money and Finance, June 2007, 26, 631—655.
French, Kenneth and James Poterba, “International Diversification and International Equity
  Markets,” American Economic Review, May 1991.
Froot, Ken, Paul O’Connell, and Mark Seasholes, “The Portfolio Flows of International Investors,”
  Journal of Financial Economics, 2001, 59 (2), 151—193.
Froot, Kenneth and Tarun Ramadorai, “Currency returns, intrinsic value and institutional investor


                                                  24
  flows,” Journal of Finance, 2005, pp. 1535—1566.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey, “International Financial Adjustment,” Journal of
  Political Economy, August 2007, 115 (4), 665—703.
Gyntelberg, Jacob, Mico Loretan, Tientip Subhanij, and Eric Chan, “International portfolio
  rebalancing and exchange rate fluctuations in Thailand,” August 2009. mimeo, Working Papers No 287
  BIS.
Hau, Harald and Hélène Rey, “Exchange Rate, Equity Prices and Capital Flows,” Review of Financial
  Studies, 2006, 19 (1), 273—317.
    and      , “Home Bias at the Fund Level,” American Economic Review, 2008.
Kouri, Pentti, “Balance of Payment and the Foreign Exchange Market: A Dynamic Partial Equilibrium
  Model,” in Jagdeep Bhandari and Bluford Putnam, eds., Economic Interdependance and Flexible
  Exchange Rates, MIT Press, 1982, pp. 116—156.
Krylova, Elizaveta, Lorenzo Cappiello, and Roberto A. De Santis, “Explaining exchange rate
  dynamics - the uncovered equity return parity condition,” Working Paper Series 529, European Central
  Bank September 2005.
Lane, Philip and Jay Shambaugh, “Financial Exchange Rates and International Currency Exposures,”
  American Economic Review, 2009. forthcoming.
Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “A Global Perspective on External Positions,” in
  Richard Clarida, ed., G-7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability and Adjustment, 2007.
Levich, R, G. Hayt, and B Ripston, “1998 Survey of Derivative and Risk Management Practices by
  U.S. Institutional Investors,” Survey conducted by the NYU Salomon Center, CIBC World Markets, and
  KPMG, 1999.
Lewis, Karen, “Trying to Explain Home Bias in Equities and Consumption,” Journal of Economic
  Literature, 1999, pp. 571—608.
Loopesko, B., “Relationships among Exchange Rates, Intervention, and Interest Rates: An Empirical
  Investigation,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 1984, pp. 257—277.
Mondria, Jordi and Wioletta Dziuda, “Asymmetric Information, Portfolio Managers and Home Bias,”
  February 2009. Kellog School of Management.
Park, K., “Tests of the Hypothesis of the Existence of Risk Premium in the Foreign Exchange Market,”
  Journal of International Money and Finance, 1984, 3, 169—178.
Portes, Richard and Hélène Rey, “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,” Journal of
  International Economics, 2005, 65 (2), 269—296.
Rogoﬀ, Kenneth, “On the Eﬀects of Sterilized Intervention:an Analysis of Weekly Data,” Journal of
  Monetary Economics, 1984, 14, 133—150.
Tille, Cedric, “Financial Integration and the Wealth Eﬀect of Exchange Rate Fluctuations.,” mimeo,
  Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2004.
Tille, Cédric and Eric Van-Wincoop, “International Capital Flows,” 2007. University of Virginia.
Vayanos, Dimitri and Paul Wooley, “An Institutional Theory of Momentum and Reversal,” november
  2008. London School of Economics.




                                                 25
Appendix
    Proof of Proposition 1.
    The notations mark with an overbar X the steady state value of a variable X . Variables referring to
the foreign country are denoted by a star (∗ ). The investment problem is strictly symmetric for the home
and foreign investors in period 1. Hence, we can assume that the equilibrium in period 1 coincides with the
steady state, that is P1h = P1f = P 1 and E1 = E 1 = 1 since final payoﬀs V h + dh and V f + df have identical
distributions. Symmetric holdings imply xh1 = xf1 ∗ and xf1 = xh∗1 . The returns for the home investor follow
as

                            Rh = P3h − (1 + r)P 1 ;           Rf = P3f E3 − (1 + r)P 1 E 1 ,
and linearizing the second equation around the steady state gives
                                  f       f ¡        ¢      ³     f
                                                                    ´
                        Rf = P 3 E 3 + P 3 E3 − E 3 + E 3 P3f − P 3 − (1 + r)P
                                                                       f
                              = E3 + P3f − (1 + r)P − E 3 P 3
                              = E3 + P3f − (1 + r)P − 1.

It is straightforward to derive the period 1 holdings as

                                                      E1 (P3h − (1 + r)P 1 )
                                   xh1   = xf1 ∗ =
                                                           ρ (σ 2d + σ2V )
                                                      E1 (E3 + P3f − (1 + r)P 1 − 1)
                                   xf1   = xh∗
                                            1 =
                                                            ρ (σ 2d + σ 2V + σ2e )
or
                                                 (1 − (1 + r)P 1 )   σ 2 + σ 2V + σ 2e
                             xh1    = xf1 ∗ =           2     2    = d2
                                                   ρ (σ d + σ V )   2σ d + 2σ 2V + σ 2e
                                                  (1 − (1 + r)P 1 )             σ 2d + σ2V
                             xf1    = xh∗
                                       1 =                               =                      ,
                                                 ρ (σ 2d + σ 2V + σ 2e )   2σ 2d + 2σ 2V + σ 2e

where we substituted the solution for P 1 obtained from equity market clearing as

                                      1 − (1 + r)P 1          1 − (1 + r)P 1
                              1 =                       +
                                       ρ (σ 2d + σ 2V )     ρ (σ 2d + σ 2V + σ 2e )
                                      "    ¡                   ¢¡            ¢              #
                                          ρ σ 2d + σ 2V + σ 2e σ 2d + σ 2V             1
                             P1     =  −                                       +              .
                                             (1 + r) [2σ 2d + 2σ 2V + σ 2e ]        (1 + r)

   The term 1/(1 + r) denotes the present value of the expected liquidation value and the second term
captures a price discount linear in the risk aversion ρ of the investors.

     Proof of Proposition 2.
     To solve for the equilibrium in period 2, we linearize again the foreign return equations to obtain
                                    f        f ¡        ¢       ³        f
                                                                           ´
                         Rf = P 3 E 3 + P 3 E3 − E 3 + E 3 P3f − P 3
                                           h f         f ¡         ¢       ³        f
                                                                                      ´i
                                  −(1 + r) P 2 E 2 + P 2 E2 − E 2 + E 2 P2f − P 2
                                                   f
                                                              h f                      f
                                                                                         i
                               = E3 + P3f − E 3 P 3 − (1 + r) P 2 E2 + E 2 P2f − E 2 P 2
                                                          h f                    f
                                                                                   i
                               = E3 + P3f − 1 − (1 + r) P 2 E2 + E 2 P2f − E 2 P 2




                                                             26
                             h          h¡        ¢ ¡ ¢2 ³            h
                                                                        ´
                  Rh∗    = P 3 /E 3 − P 3 E3 − E 3 / E 3 + P3h − P 3 /E 3
                                     h h         h¡        ¢ ¡ ¢2 ³              h
                                                                                   ´ i
                           −(1 + r) P 2 /E 2 − P 2 E2 − E 2 / E 2 + P2h − P 2 /E 2
                                                   h    h                 h
                                                                                i
                         = −E3 + P3h + 1 − (1 + r) −P 2 E2 + P2h /E 2 + P 2 /E 2 .

Next, we conjecture a linear solution in the two state variables dh and df , namely

                                      P2h   = P 2 + γ(dh − df ) + β(dh + df )                                (3)
                                      P2f                   h       f
                                            = P 2 − γ(d − d ) + β(d + d )        h         f
                                                                                                             (4)
                                      E2    = E 2 + θ(dh − df )                                              (5)

where (γ, β, θ) represent coeﬃcients to be determined using the market clearing conditions. Equity demand
depends on the period 2 conditional return covariances. We note in particular that cov(Rh , Rf |dh , df ) = 0
and cov(Rh∗ , Rf ∗ |dh , df ) = 0. The conditional return covariances therefore follow as
                         µ 2                          ¶           µ 2                           ¶
                             σV           0                   ∗      σ V + (1 + dh )2 σ 2e 0
                 Ω2 =                                   ,   Ω2 =                                  .
                              0 σ2V + (1 + df )2 σ 2e                         0            σ 2V
Using market clearing for the equity markets, we can derive the following two equilibrium conditions for the
parameters (γ, β, θ) given by

                                                                        ¡           ¢
                                                                 (γ − β) 2σ2V + σ2e
                                                    θ   =                                                    (6)
                                                                           P 2 σ 2V
                                                                        σ 2V
                                  2(1 + r)(γ − β) =                                 > 0.                     (7)
                                                                 (2σ 2V    + σ 2e )

Eq. (7) shows that γ − β > 0 and it follows from eq. (6) that θ > 0. We can also show that ρ <
(2σ2V + σ 2e )/2σ2V σ 2e = ρ represents a suﬃcient condition for 12 > β > 0 and for γ > 0.
    For the steady state values of the asset holdings, we have

                                                    (1 − (1 + r)P 2 )    σ2V + σ 2e
                                xh2     = xf2 ∗ =                     =
                                                          ρσ 2V         2σ 2V + σ 2e
                                                    (1 − (1 + r)P 2 )        σ 2V
                                xf2     = xh∗
                                           2 =                        =              ,
                                                      ρ (σ 2V + σ2e )   2σ 2V + σ 2e

where we use dh = df = 0 and
                                                        ¡             ¢
                                                       ρ σ 2V + σ2e σ 2V       1
                                            P2   = −               2     2
                                                                             +
                                                     (1 + r) [2σ V + σ e ] (1 + r)
                                                     ¡ 2        ¢
                                                   ρ σ V + σ 2e σ2V
                              1 − (1 + r)P 2     =                      > 0.
                                                      [2σ 2V + σ 2e ]

Finally, market clearing in the currency market implies

                                (xf2 − xf1 )P2f E2 − (xh∗   h∗  h
                                                       2 − x1 )P2 = η(E2 − 1).

Using the linear approximation P 2 E 2 (xf2 − xf1 ) − P 2 (xh∗   h∗                           f        h∗
                                                            2 − x1 ) = η(E2 − 1) and P 2 E 2 x1 = P 2 x1 , we get

                                                                ηθ h
                                             (xf2 − xh∗
                                                     2 )=          (d − df )
                                                                P2
with ηθ > 0. The relative foreign equity allocation (xf2 − xh∗
                                                            2 ) of the home investor is therefore reduced by



                                                            27
relatively higher foreign dividends, that is (dh − df ) < 0. Combining eqs. (3) and (4) to

                                             P2f − P2h = −2γ(dh − df )

implies for the covariance between diﬀerential equity price performance and the exchange rate
                                         h             i
                                    Cov P2f − P2h , E2 = −4γθσ 2d < 0.

Generally, θ > 0 and γ > 0 follows for suﬃciently low risk aversion ρ < ρ. Under a high risk aversion and a
high exogenous exchange rate risk σ 2e , the risk sharing equilibrium may no longer exist if the exchange rate
risk is too large relative to the risk aversion of the agents. Then the only solution is the autarky solution in
which every investor only holds his home equity.

   Proof of Proposition 3: Portfolio Rebalancing Measures Based on Foreign Portfolio Shares
   The portfolio return for the home country investor can be stated as
                                               £           ¤           h               i
                 rP = wh rh + (1 − wh )rf = wh P2h /P 1 − 1 + (1 − wh ) E2 P2f /P 1 − 1 .

Using the linear solution in eqs (3) to (5) and E 2 = 1, we obtain

                       P2 − P1   1                1 £                             ¤
                rP =           +    β(dh + df ) +    (−1 + 2wh )γ + (1 − wh )P 2 θ (dh − df ) .
                         P1      P1               P1
The home investor’s return on his foreign and domestic portfolio component is given by

                 1     h                        i P −P          1                 1 £         ¤
                                                     2    1
       rf   =           P2f − P 1 + P 2 (E2 − 1) =          +      β(dh + df ) −     γ − P 2 θ (dh − df )
                 P1                                    P1       P1               P1
                 1     £ h       ¤ P2 − P1        1                1
       rh   =           P2 − P 1 =             +    β(dh + df ) +    γ(dh − df ),
                 P1                      P1      P1               P1
respectively. The excess return of the foreign over the domestic foreign component is then
                                                         1 £          ¤
                                      rf − rh = −           2γ − P 2 θ (dh − df ).                          (8)
                                                         P1
                                        (γ−β)(2σ 2V +σ 2e )        2γ
We have 2γ − P 2 θ > 0, because θ =           P 2 σ 2V
                                                               <   P2
                                                                      .
   News about high future foreign dividends imply high returns on the foreign equity. The term P 2 θ captures
the diminished home currency return of the foreign country investment due to the depreciation of the foreign
currency.
   Next, we derive the implications for the portfolio shares of the home country investor. In period 1, we
have P h = P f = P 1 and therefore total equity wealth is W = P 1 (xh1 + xf1 ) and the wealth shares follow as

                                                         P 1 xh1
                                      w1h   =                              = xh1
                                                    P 1 (xh1   +   xf1 )
                                                         P 1 xf1
                                      w1f   =                              = xf1 = 1 − xh1
                                                    P 1 (xh1 + xf1 )

           b2f ) denote the new period 2 wealth shares under the new prices, but absent any portfolio adjust-
     b2h , w
Let (w




                                                               28
ments. These are
                                                           P2h xh1                           1
                                   b2h
                                   w      =                                     =
                                                 P2h xh1   +   P2f E2 xf1           1+
                                                                                            P2f E2 xf1
                                                                                             P2h xh
                                                                                                  1

                                                      P2f E2 xf1                             1
                                   b2f
                                   w      =                                     =                           b2h
                                                                                                         =1−w
                                                 P2h xh1 + P2f E2 xf1               1+
                                                                                             P2h xh
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                            P2f E2 xf1

However, under period 2 prices, the home investor will also adjust his portfolio share. The observable wealth
shares are given by


                                                                 P2h xh2                            1
                                          w2h    =                                    =
                                                       P2h xh2       +   P2f E2 xf2          1+
                                                                                                   P2f E2 xf2
                                                                                                    P2h xh
                                                                                                         2

                                                                P2f E2 xf2                          1
                                          w2f    =                                    =
                                                       P2h xh2       +   P2f E2 xf2          1+
                                                                                                    P2h xh
                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                   P2f E2 xf2

                            f        h
Linearization around P 2 = P 2 and E = 1 implies (using eq. (8))

                                 xf1 xh1 ³            ´                          xf xh h      h
                                                                                                 i
            b2h
            w      = xh1 +          h
                                             P2h − P2f − xf1 xh1 (E2 − 1) = xh1 + 1 h1 2γ − P 2 θ (dh − df )
                                  P2                                              P2
                                 xf1 xh1 P 1
                   = xh1 −           h
                                          [rf    − rh ]
                                    P2
                                  f h
                                 x1 x1 P 1 f
            b2f
            w      = xf1 +           h
                                          [r     − rh ]
                                    P2

The terms w2h and w2f capture the total portfolio weight eﬀect, which can be decomposed into the previous
             b2h and w
price eﬀects w        b2f and the reallocation eﬀects w2h − w
                                                            b2h and w2f − w
                                                                          b2f due to changes in the holdings.
Again, linearizing the total portfolio weight change eﬀect implies

                                        [1 − (1 + r) (β + γ)] dh    (1 + r)(β − γ)df
                      w2h         b2h +
                                = w                  2            −
                                                  ρσ V                    ρσ 2V
                                                   [1 − (1 + r) (β + γ)] h (1 + r)(β − γ) f
                      w2f                   b2f −
                                = 1 − w2h = w                           d +              d .
                                                           ρσ 2V                  ρσ 2V

The portfolio rebalancing statistics RB f is simply given by

                                                           [1 − (1 + r) (β + γ)] h (1 + r)(β − γ) f
                         RB f = w2f − w
                                      b2f = −                                   d +              d
                                                                   ρσ 2V                ρσ 2V

and its covariance with the foreign excess return in eq. (8) follows as
             £              ¤     h                   i                                1         £          ¤
          Cov RB f , rf − rh = Cov w2f − w
                                         b2f , rf − rh =                                          2γ − P 2 θ [1 − (1 + r)2γ] σ2d < 0
                                                                                    ρσ 2V   P1
because

                       2γ − P 2 θ > 0
                                                          £             ¤
                                    2ρσ2V σ 2e σ 2V − σ 2V 2σ 2V + σ 2e               2σ 2V + σ 2e
                  [1 − (1 + r)2γ] =                           2           < 0 for ρ <              = ρ.
                                               (2σ 2V + σ 2e )                         2σ 2V σ 2e




                                                                           29
   Proof of Proposition 4: Portfolio Rebalancing Measures Based on Portfolio Risk
   For portfolio risk changes defined in eqs. (1) and (2), we have to show that

                                  Cov [∆Risk(w2 , w  b2 ), ∆Risk(wb2 , w1 )] < 0
                                £                                          ¤
                             Cov ∆Risk F x (w2 , w
                                                 b2 ), ∆Risk F x (w
                                                                  b2 , w1 ) < 0.

The matrices for the portfolio risks are
                     µ 2                          ¶                       µ                                     ¶
                       σ d + σ 2V        0                               σ 2d + σ 2V + σ 2e            0
          Ω1     =                                            Ω∗1     =
                     µ     0 ¶ σ 2d + σ 2V + σ 2e                       µ 2      0¶               σ 2d + σ 2V
                       0 0                                               σe 0
          ΩF x
                 =                                            ΩF x∗
                                                                      =
           1           0 σ 2e                                  1          0 0
                       µ                             ¶                    µ                                     ¶
                       σ 2V          0                                    σ 2V + (1 + dh )2 σ 2e 0
            Ω2     =          2                               Ω∗2     =
                     µ  0   σ V + (1 + d¶f )2 σ 2e                      µ           0        ¶ σV
                                                                                                  2
                                                                                 h 2 2
                       0        0                                         (1 + d ) σ e 0
            ΩF x
                   =                                          ΩF x∗
                                                                      =                         .
             2         0 (1 + df )2 σ 2e                       2                0         0
  A first order Taylor expansion around the steady state with dh = df = 0 gives
                              ¡                         ¢ 2
  ∆Risk F x (w
             b2 , w1 )/σ 2e = w b2 ΩF x T
                                    2 w b2 − w1 ΩF  x T
                                                   1 w1 /σ e
                              Ã                                 !
                                                 f h h         i
                                             f x1 x1         h                     xf xh h      h
                                                                                                  i
                            ≈   2(x1 ) + 2x1 h 2γ − P 2 θ (df − 0) − 2xf1 1 h1 2γ − P 2 θ (dh − 0)
                                    f 2

                                                P2                                  P2
         Fx               2
                              ¡     Fx T           Fx T
                                                        ¢ 2
  ∆Risk (w2 , w   b2 )/σ e = w2 Ω2 w2 − w     b2 Ω2 wb2 /σ e =
                                     [1 − (1 + r) (β + γ)] h             (1 + r)(β − γ) f
                            ≈ −2xf1                       (d − 0) + 2xf1                 (d − 0).
                                             ρσ 2V                            ρσ2V

The covariance of the exchange rate risk change (around the steady state with dh = df = 0) follows as
    £                                        ¤        £                                               ¤
Cov ∆Risk F x (w2 , w
                    b2 ), ∆RiskF x (w
                                    b2 , w1 ) /σ4e = E ∆Risk F x (w2 , w  b2 ) × ∆Risk F x (w
                                                                                            b2 , w1 )
                                                                    "                                             #
                                                     4(xf1 )3 σ d 2                   xh1 h            h
                                                                                                         i
                                                   =                 (1 + r)(β − γ) + h 2γ − P 2 θ [1 − (1 + r)2γ] .
                                                        ρσ 2V                         P       2

The covariance of the full equity risk change is given by


                    b2 ), ∆Risk(w
    Cov [∆Risk(w2 , w           b2 , w1 )] = E [∆Risk(w2 , w
                                                           b2 ) × ∆Risk(w  b2 , w1 )]
                                               ³        ´             xf h
                                                                                  h
                                                                                      i             σ2
                                           = 2 xh1 − xf1 4σ 2V (xh1 )2 1h 2γ − P 2 θ [1 − (1 + r)2γ] d .
                                                                      P2                             ρ

                                                              h
Both covariances are negative because β − γ < 0, 2γ − P 2 θ > 0, xh1 − xf1 > 0, and 1 − (1 + r)2γ < 0 for ρ < ρ.




                                                         30
Data Appendix
    Thomson Financial Securities provided us with the following four data files: (i) the ‘Holding Master File’,
containing the fund number, fund name, management company name, country code of the fund incorporation,
reporting date, stock identifier, country code of the stock, and stock position (number of stocks held); (ii) the
‘Security Price File’, containing the stock identifier, the currency denomination of the stock price, reporting
dates for which holding data is available, security price on the reporting date and the security price on the
closest previous days in case the reporting date had no price information on the security; (iii) the ‘Return
File’ containing the stock identifier, the country code of the stock, the total return index (including dividend
reinvestments) in local currency; (iv) ‘Exchange Rate File’ containing daily dollar exchange rates for all
investment destinations.
    In a first step, we match holding data for each fund with holding data in the same fund in the two
previous half-years. Holding data for which no holding date is reported in the previous half-year is discarded.
Additional holding data from half-year t − 2 is matched whenever available. For each fund we retain only the
latest reporting date within a half-year as long as this reporting date is within 100 day from the end of the
half-year. The price from the ‘Security Price File’, the return data from the ‘Return File’ and the exchange
rate data from the ‘Exchange Rate File’ is matched for the same reporting date as the holding data. If the
price or return data is not available, we search for the nearest previous date with available data.
    Similar to Calvet et al.(2009), we use a sequence of data filters to eliminate the role of reporting errors
in the data. We focus on the 4 largest fund domiciles, namely the U.S., Canada, U.K. and the Euro area.
All small funds with a capitalization of less than $10 million are deleted. These small funds might represent
incubator funds or other non-representative entities. Funds with a growth in total assets growth over the half-
year of more than 200 percent or less than −50 percent are also discarded. Finally we treat as missing those
stock observations for which the return exceeds 500 percent or is below −80 percent. Missing observations
do not enter into the calculation of the stock weights or the foreign excess returns. Two additional selection
criteria guarantee a minimal degree of fund diversification. We ignore funds with less and 5 foreign stocks
and less than 5 domestic stocks in their portfolio. Pure country funds or pure domestic funds are thereby
excluded from the sample. Secondly, all funds with a Herfindahl-Hirschman index over all stock weights
above
√       20 percent are discarded. This fund concentration threshold is surpassed if a fund holds more than
  0.2 ≈ 0.447 percent in a single stock. Funds with such extreme stock weights are unlikely to exhibit
risk diversification considerations. The latter criterion eliminates approximately 4,100 fund periods from
the sample. We verify that the qualitative conclusions of our analysis is robust to changes in the fund
concentration threshold.
    Additional computational consideration are required for the calculation of the covariance matrix for each
fund period. For a fund period t, we use a covariance estimate based on (log) return data over consecutive
trading days in the 3 half-years S = {t − 1, t − 2, t − 3}. Such a data window implies typically up to n = 380
return observations for the estimation of each covariance element of the matrix. We discard as data outliers
daily log returns above 50 percent and below −50 percent for both the exchange rate and the equity returns.
Separate covariances are calculated for stock returns measured under constant exchange rates and for stock
return converted into the currency of the fund domicile. This allows the calculation of the FX component
of the portfolio risk as the diﬀerence of the two covariances. The incompleteness of the return sequence
for some stocks and exchange rates requires that each covariance element be calculated individually. If the
number of common return pairs for any covariance element dropped below 50 observations, we marked the
corresponding covariance element as missing. Missing elements are replaced be the average covariance of
the row vector. To track the degree of incompleteness of the covariance matrix, we created a quality matrix
Qjt−1 which marks all missing elements by one and all computable elements by zero. The risk based analysis
in Tables 5 to 7 uses the matrix Qjt−1 as an additional censoring criterion for fund inclusion. We only
                                                             T                  T                   T
used fund periods for which the products w     bj,t Qj,t−1 w
                                                           bj,t   bj,t Qj,t−1 w
                                                                , w           bj,t , wj,t−1 Qj,t−1 wj,t−1 remains below
0.2. Funds with more than 20 percent (value weighted) missing covariance elements are discarded. Again
we check that the results are qualitatively stable with respect to modifications of this quality threshold for
estimation of the covariance matrix.




                                                          31
                                                                                          bt implied by a passive
Figure 1: We plot the realized foreign portfolio share wt relative to the portfolio share w
holding strategy for funds domiciled in the U.S., Canada, U.K. and the Euro area. The vertical distance
                                                                         f
from the 45 degree line characterizes active rebalancing measure RBj,t     .




                                                       32
Figure 2: We define the FX risk share of a fund as the percentage contribution of FX risk to the standard
deviation of total portfolio risk. It is plotted against the fund’s foreign portfolio shares. The graphs pool
half-annual observations from 10 semesters from 1998 to 2002. The fitted red line denotes the estimated
conditional mean.




                                                     33
                                                                                  Table 1: Geographic Holding Correlation with IMF Data

For funds domiciled in the United States (US), Canada (CA), the United Kingdom (UK) and the Euro area (EU) we correlate the end of the year aggregate asset holdings in each of 97 investment destination countries with the
corresponding asset holdings reported in ‘Coordinated Portfolio Investment Survey’ of the IMF.


                                                                               Country of Fund Registration         Correlations
                                                                                                                    Year 2001      Year 2002

                                                                               US                                        0.94           0.94
                                                                               CA                                        0.99           0.99
                                                                               UK                                        0.95           0.97
                                                                               EU                                        0.81           0.73
                                                                               Average                                   0.92           0.91
                                                                                        Table 2: Summary Statistics on Fund Holdings

For funds domiciled in the United States (US), Canada (CA), the United Kingdom (UK) and the Euro area (EU) we report by half-year (Panel A) and by investment destination (Panel B) the number of funds, their total number
of stock positions, and the corresponding asset value (in $billion).


                                                                                          Panel A: Summary Statistics by Semester

                                               (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)      (10)       (11)        (12)      (13)        (14)         (15)
                  Fund domicile                           US                              CA                             UK                             EU                               Pooled
                  Half-year                  Funds      Positions     Value    Funds    Positions   Value     Funds    Positions   Value    Funds      Positions    Value     Funds      Positions     Value

                  1998/1                         955     199, 113     2, 436     144      17, 195      57       135      20, 153     147        348      31, 201      162      1, 582     267, 662     2, 803
                  1998/2                         943     199, 101     2, 377     163      17, 506      56       137      17, 750     117        426      35, 709      205      1, 669     270, 066     2, 755
                  1999/1                         962     212, 884     2, 360     179      19, 596      65       147      21, 414     184        663      62, 177      267      1, 951     316, 071     2, 876
                  1999/2                      1, 028     231, 287     2, 533     191      21, 197      69       188      28, 999     179        950      89, 843      348      2, 357     371, 326     3, 130
                  2000/1                      1, 140     271, 970     2, 588     188      23, 831      66       201      34, 790     168     1, 084     105, 281      390      2, 613     435, 872     3, 212
                  2000/2                      1, 288     310, 916     2, 383     202      25, 431      65       209      35, 193     148     1, 085     101, 203      331      2, 784     472, 743     2, 927
                  2001/1                      1, 212     327, 133     1, 897     191      25, 654      51       235      44, 160     104     1, 091     106, 511      165      2, 729     503, 458     2, 217
                  2001/2                      1, 328     349, 364     1, 731     191      27, 137      48       269      48, 261      91     1, 532     148, 140      190      3, 320     572, 902     2, 060
                  2002/1                      1, 422     390, 849     1, 658     232      28, 712      56       322      53, 821     108     1, 782     175, 611      205      3, 758     648, 993     2, 028
                  2002/2                      1, 276     318, 963     1, 180     244      24, 537      52       368      63, 366      94     1, 784     177, 159      182      3, 672     584, 025     1, 509

                  Total                      11, 554   2, 811, 580   21, 143   1, 925    230, 796    586      2, 211    367, 907   1, 341   10, 745   1, 032, 835   2, 447    26, 435   4, 443, 118   25, 517


                                                                                   Panel B: Summary Statistics by Investment Destination

                                               (1)        (2)         (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)        (9)      (10)       (11)        (12)      (13)        (14)         (15)
                  Fund domicile.                          US                              CA                             UK                             EU                               Pooled
                  Investment destination     Funds      Positions     Value    Funds    Positions   Value     Funds    Positions   Value    Funds      Positions    Value     Funds      Positions     Value

                  US                         11, 554   2, 373, 630   17, 612   1, 924    109, 805    124      1, 745     81, 543     205     7, 273     217, 955      343     22, 496   2, 782, 933   18, 284
                  CA                         10, 764       54, 082       330   1, 925     86, 046    409      1, 209      5, 039      20     3, 972       9, 114        9     17, 870      154, 281       768
                  UK                          9, 290       72, 029       488   1, 096      6, 648      7      2, 211     88, 511     243    10, 408     138, 512      230     23, 005      305, 700       968
                  EU                         11, 031      122, 584       907   1, 233     11, 801     14      2, 205     81, 351     323    10, 745     463, 940      974     25, 214      679, 676    2, 217
                  Other OECD                  8, 203      114, 773    1, 394   1, 051     11, 560     26      2, 115     77, 951     491    10, 617     169, 880      859     21, 986      374, 164    2, 770
                  Oﬀ-shore                    9, 089       20, 166       106      922      1, 576      1      1, 669      9, 199      19     3, 010       8, 228        7     14, 690       39, 169       133
                  Emerg. Mkts                10, 149       54, 316       306   1, 167      3, 360      3      1, 820     24, 313      40     3, 731      25, 206       26     16, 867      107, 195       375

                  Total                      70, 080   2, 811, 580   21, 143   9, 318    230, 796    586     12, 974    367, 907   1, 341   49, 756   1, 032, 835   2, 447   142, 128   4, 443, 118   25, 517
                                                                                             Table 3: Summary statistics on regression variables
                                                                                                                                                   f              f      f
For each of the 4 fund domiciles (US, CA, UK, EU) we report summary statistics on all regresssion variables. The rebalancing statistices RBj,t         = 100 × (wj,t −w bj,t ) for fund j in semester t states the aggregate weight change of the
                                                                                            f
foreign investment share relative to the weight of a passive holding strategy. The term rj,t   − rh j,t denotes the excess return performance of the foreign portfolio share over the domestic share. Portfolio risk changes ∆Risk(wj,t , w bj,t )
characterize the portfolio risk diﬀerence between the observed weights wj,t and weights w     bj,t of a passive holding strategy. The change in the marginal risk contribution of stock i to the portfolio risk of fund j due to rebalancing
from weights wbj,t to wj,t is denoted by ∆M Risk(i, wj,t , w
                                                           bj,t ). In each case we distinguish the foreign exchange risk component of the total portfolio risk by a superscript F x. For all regression variables the 1 percent highest and
lowest values are discarded.



                                                           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)       (8)       (9)           (10)       (11)      (12)           (13)       (14)       (15)
                 Fund Reg.                                           US                                CA                               UK                                 EU                                Pooled
                 Variable                                    Obs.     Mean       S.D.         Obs.      Mean      S.D.         Obs.     Mean       S.D.            Obs.     Mean       S.D.             Obs.    Mean       S.D.

                 Total Assets (USD millions)               11, 554    1, 830   8, 224        1, 925       304      502        2, 211       607    2, 744         10, 745       228      837          26, 435       965    5, 576
                 Home Assets (USD millions)                11, 554    1, 524   6, 727        1, 925       213      386        2, 211       110       338         10, 745        91      303          26, 435       728    4, 509
                 Foreign Assets (USD millions)             11, 554       306   2, 271        1, 925        92      157        2, 211       497    2, 546         10, 745       137      619          26, 435       237    1, 723
                                     h
                 Home Asset Share wj,t                     11, 554    0.765    0.275         1, 925     0.667    0.238        2, 211     0.254    0.238          10, 745     0.464    0.232          26, 435     0.592    0.306
                                       f
                 Foreign Asset Share wj,t                  11, 554    0.235    0.275         1, 925     0.333    0.238        2, 211     0.746    0.238          10, 745     0.536    0.232          26, 435     0.407    0.306
                                   ³           ´
                      f                f    f
                 RBj,t   = 100 × wj,t     bj,t
                                         −w                11, 554   −0.420     6.091        1, 925     0.331    6.972        2, 211   −0.654     5.453          10, 745     0.883   10.093          26, 435     0.145    8.004
                 h              i
                   rf − rh j,t                             11, 554   −0.022     0.176        1, 925   −0.021     0.191        2, 211   −0.012     0.148          10, 745     0.002    0.142          26, 435    −0.011    0.162
                 h j,t          i
                    f
                   rj,t − rh j,t × 1∆r≥0                   11, 554     0.055    0.098        1, 925     0.060    0.122        2, 211     0.048    0.088          10, 745     0.054    0.083          26, 435     0.054    0.094
                 h              i
                   rf − rh j,t × 1∆r≤0                     11, 554   −0.078     0.113        1, 925   −0.080     0.109        2, 211   −0.060     0.092          10, 745   −0.052     0.088          26, 435    −0.066    0.102
                 h j,t               i
                    f
                   rj,t−1 − rh j,t−1                       10, 562   −0.034     0.223        1, 759   −0.037     0.228        1, 822   −0.024     0.185           8, 883     0.000    0.169          23, 026    −0.020    0.202

                 ∆Risk(wj,t , wbj,t )                       9, 462   −0.045     0.321        1, 609   −0.042     0.219        1, 468   −0.034     0.300           7, 286   −0.029     0.298          19, 821    −0.038    0.302
                 ∆RiskF x (wj,t , w
                                  bj,t )                    9, 462    0.001     0.021        1, 609    0.000     0.018        1, 468    0.002     0.063           7, 286   −0.001     0.084          19, 821     0.000    0.049
                 ∆Risk(wbj,t , wj,t−1 )                     9, 462   −0.022     0.225        1, 609    0.016     0.156        1, 468    0.003     0.105           7, 286    0.005     0.109          19, 821    −0.006    0.168
                 ∆RiskF x (w
                           bj,t , wj,t−1 )                  9, 462   −0.000     0.007        1, 609    0.001     0.007        1, 468   −0.002     0.020           7, 286    0.001     0.024          19, 821     0.000    0.015

                 ∆M Risk(i, wj,t , w bj,t )            3, 767, 383   −0.005     0.150      310, 063   −0.004     0.121      408, 072    0.007     0.141      1, 070, 933    0.005     0.168       5, 556, 447   −0.002    0.151
                 ∆M Risk F x (i, wj,t , w
                                        bj,t )         3, 767, 383    0.000     0.010      310, 063   −0.000     0.015      408, 072    0.001     0.035      1, 070, 933   −0.001     0.045       5, 556, 447    0.000    0.020
                 ∆M Risk(i, w bj,t , wj,t−1 )          3, 767, 383   −0.031     0.124      310, 063   −0.013     0.082      408, 072   −0.001     0.038      1, 070, 933   −0.002     0.051       5, 556, 447   −0.021    0.102
                         Fx
                 ∆M Risk (i, w   bj,t , wj,t−1 )       3, 767, 383   −0.000     0.003      310, 063    0.000     0.005      408, 072   −0.000     0.010      1, 070, 933    0.001     0.012       5, 556, 447    0.000    0.006
                                                                                                       Table 4: Rebalancing of the Foreign Portfolio Share
                                                      f          f                                                                         f                                                                       f
The portfolio rebalancing statistics RBj,t =  100 × (wjt       bjt
                                                              −w   )
                                                               of fund j in semester t is defined as the observed foreign portfolio share wjt                                                                    bjt
                                                                                                                                              at the end of a semester minus the implied foreign portfolio share w   under passive asset
                                                                                   f
holding strategy over the same semester. We regress RBj,t on the excess return rj,t−k    − rh j,t−k of the foreign over the home component of the portfolio and also its decomposition into positive and negative excess returns using
dummy variables for positive (1∆r≥0 ) and negative (1∆r≤0 ) excess returns, respectively. Separate regressions results are reported for funds registered in the United States (US), Canada (CA), the United Kingdom (UK).and the
Euro currency area (EU). Our sample spans each semester between 1998 and 2002. We included fixed time eﬀects (unreported) for each half-year and fixed fund eﬀects (unreported) as indicated. Columns (4), (8), (12), (16) and
(24) add a lagged dependent variable and report coeﬃcient estimates obtained for the Arellano-Bond dynamic panel-data estimator (ABDP). The IV regression in column (22) uses as instrument for the contemporaneous excess
returns (k = 0) the lagged excess return (k = 1) as well as interacted time and country fixed eﬀects. Columns (25) and (26) use “passive rebalancing” as the independent variable similar to Calvet, Campbell and Sodini (2008).
Robust standard errors are stated below the coeﬃcients. We mark significance on a 5 percent level (∗ ) and a 1 percent level (∗∗ ).


                                            (1)           (2)            (3)        (4)              (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)             (9)           (10)          (11)          (12)              (13)         (14)         (15)       (16)
              Fund domicile                                      US                                                       CA                                                          UK                                                       EU
              Regression type              OLS           OLS           OLS        ABDP               OLS           OLS           OLS       ABDP                OLS           OLS           OLS           ABDP              OLS          OLS          OLS       ABDP
              h                i
                f
               rj,t − rh j,t              −3.01∗∗                    −2.89∗∗      −2.63∗∗        −8.99∗∗                         −9.19     −8.03∗∗         −3.81∗∗                         −1.01         −3.32∗           −6.00∗∗                   −8.63∗∗    −8.37∗∗
              h             i              (0.38)                     (0.37)       (0.54)         (1.10)                         (1.02)     (1.45)          (1.25)                         (1.12)         (1.51)           (1.13)                    (1.10)     (1.37)
                f
               rj,t − rh j,t × 1∆r≥0                   −4.89∗∗                                                 −9.69∗∗                                                     2.19                                                       −11.78∗∗
              h             i                           (0.75)                                                  (1.85)                                                   (1.98)                                                         (1.88)
                f
               rj,t − rh j,t × 1∆r≤0                      −1.24                                                −7.14∗∗                                                   −3.33                                                          −1.63
              h                       i                   (0.65)                                                (1.80)                                                   (2.22)                                                         (1.94)
                   f
                  rj,t−1 − rh j,t−1                                  −2.26∗∗      −2.10∗∗                                    −5.09∗∗       −6.11∗∗                                       −4.00∗∗      −4.80∗∗                                       −3.62∗∗     −1.51
                                                                      (0.32)       (0.49)                                     (0.94)        (1.37)                                        (0.99)       (1.05)                                        (1.03)     (1.39)
              RBj,t−1                                                             −0.14∗∗                                                  −0.13∗∗                                                    −0.24∗∗                                                  −0.10∗∗
              (lagged dep. variable)                                               (0.02)                                                   (0.04)                                                     (0.05)                                                   (0.02)

              Fixed time eﬀects               Yes            No              No         No              Yes           No            No             No             Yes            No            No            No               Yes            No           No         No
              Fixed fund eﬀects               Yes            Yes            Yes        Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes
              Obs.                        11, 102        11, 102         9, 954     5, 457           1, 850        1, 850        1, 660        1, 030          2, 125        2, 125        1, 730           812           10, 321       10, 321       8, 395     3, 243
              Funds                        2, 859         2, 859         2, 561     1, 554              361           361           325           237             608           608           505           300            3, 457        3, 457       2, 901     1, 544




                                                                                              (17)          (18)          (19)          (20)          (21)    (22)               (23)             (24)       (25)          (26)
                                                  Fund domicile                                                                                           Pooled
                                                  Regression type                             OLS           OLS           OLS           OLS           OLS       GLS                 IV        ABDP              OLS          OLS
                                                  h              i
                                                    f
                                                   rj,t − rh j,t                             −4.94∗∗       −4.66∗∗                                   −4.85∗∗   −4.76∗∗         −4.83∗∗        −4.64∗∗
                                                  h             i                             (0.32)        (0.39)                                    (0.37)    (0.31)          (0.71)         (0.49)
                                                    f
                                                   rj,t − rh j,t × 1∆r≥0                                                 −6.79∗∗       −7.57∗∗
                                                  h             i                                                         (0.62)        (0.80)
                                                    f
                                                   rj,t − rh j,t × 1∆r≤0                                                 −3.37∗∗       −2.21∗∗
                                                  h                  i                                                    (0.55)        (0.72)
                                                    f
                                                   rj,t−1 − rh j,t−1                                                                                 −2.63∗∗   −2.53∗∗         −2.63∗∗        −2.54∗∗
                                                                                                                                                      (0.33)    (0.27)          (0.32)         (0.44)
                                                  RBj,t−1 (lagged dep. variable)                                                                                                              −0.12∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                                              (0.014)
                                                           f    f
                                                         bjt
                                                  100 × (w   − wjt−1 )                                                                                                                                       −0.32∗∗       −0.32∗∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (0.03)        (0.03)

                                                  Fixed time and country eﬀects                  Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes            No         No               No               No            No         Yes
                                                  Fixed fund eﬀects                               No           Yes            No           Yes           Yes         No              Yes              Yes           Yes         Yes
                                                  Obs.                                       25, 387       25, 387       25, 387       25, 387       21, 715    21, 715          21, 715          10, 530       25, 387     25, 387
                                                  Funds                                       7, 297        7, 297        7, 297        7, 297        6, 300     6, 300           6, 300           3, 631        7, 297      7, 297
                                                  F-statistic first stage                                                                                                         73.36
                                                  Hausman test (p-value)                                                                                             0.828        0.999
                                                                                                     Table 5: Portfolio Risk Rebalancing

The risk rebalancing measure ∆Risk(wj,t , w bj,t ) for fund j in semester t is regressed on the risk change ∆Risk(w
                                                                                                                  bj,t , wj,t−1 ) (and its lagged value) between weights w
                                                                                                                                                                         bj,t implied by a passive holding strategy and the risk of the
the original weights wj,t−1 observed at the end of semester t − 1. We undertake separate regressions for funds domiciled in the United States (US), Canada (CA), the United Kingdom (UK) and the Euro currency area (EU),
respectively. The IV regression uses time fixed eﬀects interacted with fund domicile dummies as instruments. Panel A reports the risk rebalancing regression for the total equity risk ∆Risk measured in local currency of the fund
domicile and Panel B reports risk rebalancing regression for the exchange rate component ∆RiskF x of the portfolio risk. The unbalanced panel includes fund data for 10 semesters over the period 1998 to 2002. All regressions
include fixed eﬀects for each fund and for each half-year. Robust standard errors are stated below the coeﬃcients. We mark significance on a 5 percent level (∗ ) and a 1 percent level (∗∗ ).


                                                                                                     Panel A: Equity Risk Rebalancing

                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)       (11)       (12)         (13)      (14)       (15)
                 Fund domicile                                 US                                 CA                               UK                             EU                               Pooled
                 Regression type                  OLS          OLS         IV        OLS          OLS         IV         OLS       OLS        IV       OLS        OLS         IV          OLS       OLS         IV

                       bj,t , wj,t−1 )
                 ∆Risk(w                         −0.20∗∗      −0.15∗∗    −0.25∗∗    −0.36∗∗      −0.37∗∗    −0.38∗∗         0.10    −0.29      0.93   −0.48∗∗    −0.61∗∗    −1.34∗∗     −0.24∗∗    −0.20∗∗    −0.29∗∗
                                                  (0.02)       (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.07)       (0.08)     (0.09)       (0.19)    (0.33)   (0.86)    (0.07)     (0.11)     (0.45)      (0.02)     (0.04)     (0.03)
                       bj,t−1 , wj,t−2 )
                 ∆Risk(w                                      −0.13∗∗    −0.18∗∗                  −0.07      −0.11                  −0.32    −0.08                −0.14      −0.26                 −0.12∗∗
                                                               (0.03)     (0.02)                  (0.06)     (0.04)                (0.18)∗   (0.23)               (0.08)     (0.09)                 (0.03)

                 Fixed time eﬀects                    Yes          Yes         No        Yes          Yes         No         Yes      Yes       No         Yes        Yes         No         Yes        Yes         No
                 Fixed fund eﬀects                    Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
                 Obs.                              9, 323       6, 212     6, 212     1, 583       1, 072     1, 072      1, 452      778      778      7, 181     3, 772     3, 772     19, 520    11, 801    11, 801
                 Funds                             2, 614       1, 855     1, 855        349          268        268         552      348      348      2, 963     1, 910     1, 910      6, 485     4, 382     4, 382
                 Adjusted R2                       0.170        0.061                 0.101        0.080                −0.0192     0.026               0.041      0.038                  0.099      0.005
                 F-statistic first stage                                  185.33                              33.34                           8.69                            23.07                             78.86

                                                                                                  Panel B: FX Portfolio Risk Rebalancing

                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)       (11)       (12)         (13)      (14)       (15)
                 Fund domicile.                                US                                 CA                               UK                             EU                               Pooled
                 Regression type                  OLS          OLS         IV        OLS          OLS         IV         OLS       OLS        IV       OLS        OLS         IV          OLS       OLS         IV

                         Fx                              ∗∗                                 ∗∗        ∗∗                                                   ∗∗         ∗∗            ∗         ∗∗         ∗∗
                 ∆Risk         bj,t , wj,t−1 )
                              (w                 −0.28         −0.17        0.89    −0.29        −0.35       −0.11        −0.24     −0.18      0.23   −0.33      −0.62      −3.44       −0.28      −0.31       −0.51∗
                                                  (0.11)       (0.15)     (0.39)     (0.11)       (0.13)     (0.29)       (0.20)    (0.29)   (0.65)    (0.06)     (0.19)     (0.98)      (0.03)     (0.09)      (0.28)
                 ∆Risk F x (w
                            bj,t−1 , wj,t−2 )                 −0.15∗∗     −0.06                     0.04       0.04                 −0.20    −0.15                −0.23      −0.65                  −0.19     −0.21∗∗
                                                               (0.07)     (0.05)                  (0.07)     (0.07)                 (0.14)   (0.10)                (.14)      (.18)                 (0.05)      (0.05)

                 Fixed time eﬀects                    Yes          Yes         No        Yes          Yes         No         Yes      Yes       No         Yes        Yes         No         Yes        Yes         No
                 Fixed fund eﬀects                    Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
                 Obs.                              9, 347        6287       6287      1, 587       1, 068     1, 068      1, 450      781      781      7, 164     3, 806     3, 806     19, 531    11, 966    11, 966
                 Funds                             2, 599       1, 863     1, 863        350          268        268         551      346      346      2, 946     1, 912     1, 912      6, 421     4, 384     4, 384
                 Adjusted R2                       0.100        0.025                 0.018        0.018                 −0.073     0.015               0.050      0.029                  0.112      0.001
                 F-statistic first stage                                   37.69                              11.71                           6.50                            20.84                             23.39
                                                                                            Table 6: Portfolio Risk Rebalancing by Fund Size

Similar to Table 5, the risk rebalancing measure ∆Risk(wj,t , wbj,t ) for fund j in semester t is regressed on the risk change ∆Risk(w
                                                                                                                                     bj,t , wj,t−1 ) (and its lagged value) between weights w
                                                                                                                                                                                            bj,t implied by a passive holding strategy and
the risk of the the original weights wj,t−1 observed at the end of semester t − 1. We undertake separate regressions for funds domiciled in the United States (US), Canada (CA), the United Kingdom (UK) and the Euro currency
area (EU), respectively. Funds are grouped in the small or large group based on a fund capitalization below or above $500 million in a given semester. Panel A reports the risk rebalancing regression for the total equity risk ∆Risk
measured in local currency of the fund domicile and Panel B reports risk rebalancing regressions for the exchange rate component ∆Risk F x of the portfolio risk. The unbalanced panel includes fund data for 10 semesters over the
period 1998 to 2002. All regressions include fixed eﬀects for each half-year and fixed eﬀects for each fund. Robust standard errors are stated below the coeﬃcients. We mark significance on a 5 percent level (∗ ) and a 1 percent
level (∗∗ ).


                                                                                                   Panel A: Equity Risk Rebalancing

                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)       (8)       (9)          (10)     (11)       (12)         (13)       (14)       (15)
                  Fund domicile.                              US                                 CA                                UK                               EU                               Pooled
                  Fund size                        Small      Large        All        Small      Large         All       Small     Large       All        Small    Large         All        Small     Large         All

                        bj,t , wj,t−1 )
                  ∆Risk(w                        −0.22∗∗     −0.08     −0.15∗∗      −0.37∗∗    −0.25∗∗    −0.37∗∗       −0.39     −0.02     −0.29       −0.62∗∗    −0.31    −0.61∗∗      −0.27∗∗      −0.07     −0.20∗∗
                                                  (0.06)     (0.05)     (0.04)       (0.10)     (0.15)     (0.08)       (0.36)    (0.76)    (0.33)       (0.12)    (0.50)    (0.11)       (0.05)      (0.06)     (0.04)
                        bj,t−1 , wj,t−2 )
                  ∆Risk(w                        −0.13∗∗    −0.15∗∗    −0.13∗∗       −0.10        0.09     −0.07        −0.31     −0.75    −0.32∗        −0.13     −0.25     −0.14       −0.13∗∗     −0.13∗∗    −0.12∗∗
                                                  (0.04)     (0.04)     (0.03)       (0.06)     (0.10)     (0.06)       (0.20)    (0.57)    (0.18)       (0.08)    (0.45)    (0.08)       (0.04)      (0.04)     (0.03)

                  Fixed time eﬀects                   Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes     Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes
                  Fixed fund eﬀects                   Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes           Yes     Yes         Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes
                  Obs.                             3, 549     2, 663     6, 212          885        187     1, 072        667       111        778        3, 514     258      3, 772        8, 599     3, 202   11, 801
                  Funds                            1, 278        705     1, 855          142         51        268        308        55        348        1, 815     138      1, 910        3, 641        950    4, 382
                  Adjusted R2                      0.160      0.191      0.061         0.075      0.086       0.08     −0.057    −0.043      0.026        0.016    −0.10      0.038         0.064      0.177     0.005


                                                                                                Panel B: FX Portfolio Risk Rebalancing

                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)          (7)       (8)       (9)          (10)     (11)       (12)         (13)       (14)       (15)
                  Fund domicile.                              US                                 CA                                UK                               EU                               Pooled
                  Fund size                        Small      Large        All        Small      Large         All       Small     Large       All        Small    Large         All        Small     Large         All

                  ∆Risk F x (w
                             bj,t , wj,t−1 )      −0.18     −0.241      −0.17       −0.29∗∗    −0.70∗∗    −0.35∗∗       −0.11     −0.00     −0.18       −0.56∗∗    −1.48    −0.62∗∗      −0.32∗∗     −0.47∗∗    −0.31∗∗
                                                  (0.21)     (0.21)     (0.15)       (0.15)     (0.25)     (0.13)       (0.29)    (0.96)    (0.29)       (0.20)    (0.97)    (0.19)       (0.11)      (0.19)     (0.09)
                  ∆Risk F x (w
                             bj,t−1 , wj,t−2 )   −0.28∗∗    −0.035     −0.15∗∗        0.035     −0.06        0.04       −0.11     −0.98     −0.20        −0.24     −0.13     −0.23       −0.20∗∗      −0.14      −0.19
                                                  (0.08)     (0.10)     (0.07)       (0.08)     (0.12)     (0.07)       (0.16)    (0.35)    (0.14)       (0.15)    (0.73)    (0.14)       (0.06)      (0.11)     (0.05)

                  Fixed time eﬀects                   Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes
                  Fixed Fund eﬀects                   Yes        Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes           Yes      Yes        Yes           Yes        Yes       Yes
                  Obs.                             3, 615     2, 672      6287           883        185     1, 068        670        111       781        3, 542      264     3, 806        8, 607     3, 259   11, 966
                  Funds                            1, 286        701     1, 863          237         51        268        307         54       346        1, 814      142     1, 912        3, 640        951    4, 384
                  Adjusted R2                      0.100      0.143      0.025         -0.05       0.17     0.018      −0.028      0.157     0.015       −0.003     0.097     0.029         0.110      0.255     0.001
                                                              Table 7: Marginal Stock Risk Rebalancing Conditional on Marginal RiskDirection and Portfolio Risk Direction
                                                                                bj,t ) in stock i due to rebalancing is regressed on the marginal risk change under a passive holding strategy denoted by ∆M Risk(i, w
For each stock i held by each fund j the marginal risk change ∆M Risk(i, wj,t , w                                                                                                                                    bj,t , wj,t−1 ). The
latter is interacted with a set of dummy variables for the sign of the passive marginal risk change ∆M Risk in stock i and the passive portfolio risk change ∆Risk of fund j. Panel A reports regressions for the the total marginal
risk changes in the currency of the fund domicile and Panel B reports the corresponding regressions on for the FX component of the marginal risk, where the covariance matrix is replaced by a covariance matrix capturing only
the FX risk. Formally the dependent variables are defined as

                                                                                                          bj,t )
                                                                                        ∆M Risk(i, wj,t , w              b j,t−1 )i• (wj,t+1 − w
                                                                                                                      = (Ω                     bj,t )T
                                                                                        ∆M Risk F x (i, wj,t , w         b j,t−1 )F x (wj,t+1 − w
                                                                                                               bj,t ) = (Ω                      bj,t )T
                                                                                                                                  i•

where (Ωb j,t )i• represents the i-th row of the covariance matrix of stocks held by fund j. A marginal risk increase in stock i is marked by a dummy 1∆MRisk≥0 and a marginal risk decrease by the dummy 1∆M Risk<0 . These
dummies are interacted with a second conditioning dummy 1∆Risk≥0 denoting a passive portfolio risk increase in portfolio j or a dummy 1∆Risk<0 denoting a passive portfolio risk decrease. Panel A reports regressions for the the
total marginal risk changes measured in the currency of the fund domicile and Panel B reports the corresponding regressions for the FX component of the marginal risk. All regressions include fixed eﬀects for each half-year, fixed
eﬀects for each fund and fixed eﬀects for the combinations of the four dummies. Robust standard errors are stated below the coeﬃcients. We mark significance on a 5 percent level (∗ ) and a 1 percent level(∗∗ ).

                                                                                                  Panel A: Marginal Stock Risk Rebalancing

                                                                                       (1)            (2)               (3)         (4)               (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)               (9)             (10)
        Fund Reg.                                                                              US                            CA                             UK                       EU                            Pooled
        Symmetry Imposed?                                                                    No             Yes            No          Yes                No       Yes             No            Yes               No           Yes

                   bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk≥0 × 1∆Risk≥0
        ∆M Risk(i, w                                                                  −0.83∗∗                         −0.80∗∗                       −0.70∗∗                 −1.13∗∗                        −0.85∗∗
                                                                                      (0.004)                         (0.014)                       (0.025)                 (0.013)                        (0.004)
                   bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk<0 × 1∆Risk≥0
        ∆M Risk(i, w                                                                   0.28∗∗                          0.24∗∗                        0.48∗∗                  0.64∗∗                         0.30∗∗
                                                                                      (0.001)                         (0.007)                       (0.024)                 (0.012)                        (0.001)
                   bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk≥0 × 1∆Risk<0
        ∆M Risk(i, w                                                                   0.47∗∗                          0.13∗∗                        0.46∗∗                  0.62∗∗                         0.46∗∗
                                                                                      (0.006)                         (0.018)                       (0.026)                 (0.015)                        (0.006)
                   bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk<0 × 1∆Risk<0
        ∆M Risk(i, w                                                                  −0.42∗∗                         −0.39∗∗                       −0.99∗∗                 −0.85∗∗                        −0.45∗∗
                                                                                      (0.002)                         (0.007)                       (0.022)                 (0.010)                        (0.002)
                   bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × sign(∆M Risk) × sign(∆Risk)
        ∆M Risk(i, w                                                                                 −0.37∗∗                      −0.35∗∗                      −0.67∗∗                    −0.81∗∗                            −0.40∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.001)                      (0.005)                      (0.012)                    (0.006)                            (0.001)

        Fixed time eﬀects                                                                   Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes               Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
        Fixed fund eﬀects                                                                   Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes               Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
        Obs.                                                                        3, 709, 512    3, 709, 512        305, 444    305, 444          402, 145   402, 145   1, 054, 530   1, 054, 530      5, 470, 427    5, 470, 427
        Funds                                                                            2, 637         2, 637             349         349               548        548        2, 964        2, 964           6, 498         6, 498
        Adjusted R2                                                                      0.267          0.260           0.148       0.139             0.108      0.104         0.163         0.161            0.221          0.214

                                                                                                   Panel B: Marginal FX Risk Rebalancing

                                                                                       (1)            (2)               (3)         (4)               (5)        (6)         (7)           (8)               (9)             (10)
        Fund Reg.                                                                              US                            CA                             UK                       EU                             Pooled
        Symmetry Imposed                                                                     No             Yes            No          Yes                No       Yes             No            Yes               No           Yes

        ∆M Risk F x (i, w
                        bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk≥0 × 1∆Risk≥0                        −0.44∗∗                         −0.67∗∗                       −1.26∗∗                 −1.42∗∗                        −1.19∗∗
                                                                                      (0.010)                         (0.017)                       (0.024)                 (0.014)                        (0.007)
        ∆M Risk F x (i, w
                        bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk<0 × 1∆Risk≥0                         0.23∗∗                            0.02                        0.82∗∗                  1.06∗∗                         0.75∗∗
                                                                                      (0.011)                         (0.024)                       (0.023)                 (0.016)                        (0.009)
        ∆M Risk F x (i, w
                        bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk≥0 × 1∆Risk<0                         0.68∗∗                          0.23∗∗                        0.54∗∗                  1.04∗∗                         0.92∗∗
                                                                                      (0.010)                         (0.024)                       (0.026)                 (0.015)                        (0.007)
        ∆M Risk F x (i, w
                        bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × 1∆MRisk<0 × 1∆Risk<0                        −0.96∗∗                         −0.97∗∗                       −1.18∗∗                 −1.11∗∗                        −1.20∗∗
                                                                                      (0.009)                         (0.024)                       (0.021)                 (0.014)                        (0.007)
        ∆M Risk F x (i, w
                        bj,t , wj,t−1 ) × sign(∆M Risk F x ) × sign(∆Risk F x )                      −0.61∗∗                      −0.49∗∗                      −0.96∗∗                    −1.17∗∗                            −1.03∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.005)                      (0.011)                      (0.012)                    (0.007)                            (0.004)

        Fixed time eﬀects                                                                   Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes               Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
        Fixed fund eﬀects                                                                   Yes            Yes             Yes         Yes               Yes        Yes           Yes           Yes              Yes            Yes
        Obs.                                                                        3, 721, 244    3, 721, 244        306, 147    306, 147          402, 167   402, 167   1, 053, 575   1, 053, 575      5, 479, 996    5, 479, 996
        Funds                                                                            2, 637         2, 637             349         349               548        548        2, 964        2, 964           6, 498         6, 498
        Adjusted R2                                                                      0.086          0.082           0.138       0.129             0.191      0.188         0.317         0.317            0.202          0.200
