                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       E-COMMERCE AND THE MARKET STRUCTURE OF RETAIL INDUSTRIES

                                           Maris Goldmanis
                                             Ali Hortacsu
                                            Chad Syverson
                                             Onsel Emre

                                         Working Paper 14166
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14166


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




We thank Tim Bresnahan, Francine Lafontaine, Michael Rauh, and participants at multiple seminars
for valuable suggestions. We gratefully acknowledge financial support for this research from the NET
Institute (www.NETinst.org) and the NSF (award no. SES-0242031). The authors can be contacted
at the Department of Economics, University of Chicago, 1126 E. 59th Street, Chicago, IL 60637. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Maris Goldmanis, Ali Hortacsu, Chad Syverson, and Onsel Emre. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
E-commerce and the Market Structure of Retail Industries
Maris Goldmanis, Ali Hortaçsu, Chad Syverson, and Önsel Emre
NBER Working Paper No. 14166
July 2008
JEL No. D4,L1,L8

                                                ABSTRACT

While a fast-growing body of research has looked at how the advent and diffusion of e-commerce
has affected prices, much less work has investigated e-commerce's impact on the number and type
of producers operating in an industry. This paper theoretically and empirically takes up the question
of which businesses most benefit and most suffer as consumers switch to purchasing products online.
We specify a general industry model involving consumers with differing search costs buying products
from heterogeneous-type producers. We interpret e-commerce as having reduced consumers' search
costs. We show how such reductions reallocate market shares from an industry's low-type producers
to its high-type businesses. We test the model using U.S. data for three industries in which e-commerce
has arguably decreased consumers' search costs considerably: travel agencies, bookstores, and new
auto dealers. Each industry exhibits the market share shifts predicted by the model. Interestingly, while
the industries experienced similar changes, the specific mechanisms through which e-commerce induced
them differed. For bookstores and auto dealers, industry-wide declines in small outlets reflected market-specific
impacts, evidenced by the fact that more small-store exit occurred in local markets where consumers'
use of e-commerce channels grew fastest. For travel agencies, on the other hand, the shifts reflected
aggregate changes driven by airlines cutting agent commissions as consumers started buying tickets
online.


Maris Goldmanis                                         Chad Syverson
Department of Economics                                 Department of Economics
1126 E. 59th St.                                        University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637                                       1126 East 59th Street
mgoldma@uchicago.edu                                    Chicago, IL 60637
                                                        and NBER
Ali Hortaçsu                                            syverson@uchicago.edu
Department of Economics
University of Chicago                                   Önsel Emre
1126 East 59th Street                                   Department of Economics
Chicago, IL 60637                                       1126 E. 59th St.
and NBER                                                Chicago, IL 60637
hortacsu@uchicago.edu                                   emre@uchicago.edu
1     Introduction
This paper explores how the advent and diffusion of e-commerce impacts the structure
of retail and similar industries. While there is a burgeoning literature studying how e-
commerce has affected prices and price dispersion (e.g., Brynjolfsson and Smith (2000);
Clay, Krishnan, and Wolff (2001); Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2001); Brown
and Goolsbee (2002); and Baye, Morgan, and Scholten (2004)), much less work has looked
at how the diffusion of the internet has influenced the number or type of producers that
operate in an industry. That is, questions of which businesses most benefit and most suffer
(perhaps to the point of having to cease operations) from the new consumer-matching and
distribution systems that e-commerce brings have received little attention. Conventional
wisdom suggests that such effects can be large and diverse in impact; the rapid growth
of Orbitz, Travelocity, and Expedia at the expense of local travel agencies is one oft-cited
example. Yet we do not yet know quantitatively just how large this particular effect has
been or whether similar mechanisms operate across different industries. This paper seeks
to begin to address these issues.
    It is almost certain that more than just equilibrium prices are affected when e-commerce
spreads in an industry. Market shares are very likely to change; given the reduction in con-
sumer search costs that e-commerce can bring, any firm’s price advantage will be multiplied
in terms of market-share gains. Higher cross-price elasticities imply differential impacts on
industry firms depending on whether they have a cost advantage or disadvantage relative
to their competitors. It is also quite likely that these market share changes can be drastic
enough to lead some firms to exit from the market entirely. On the other hand, lower search
costs could also induce new entry into the industry. Presumably, though, these entrants
may differ on average from industry incumbents because e-commerce has raised the return
to being efficient (or, alternatively, to being able to produce high-quality goods). In such
ways, e-commerce can have important entry and exit consequences as well.
    Our investigative approach combines theoretical and empirical analyses. We first model
equilibrium in an industry comprised of heterogeneous firms selling to a set of consumers
who differ in their search costs. Heterogeneity across firms arise from differences in un-
derlying abilities like production costs or output quality. We embody them as differing
marginal costs for the sake of concreteness, though it is easy to modify the model to allow
variation in product quality levels instead. Industry consumers search sequentially when
deciding from whom to buy. Firms set prices given consumers’ optimal search behavior as


                                             1
well as their own and their rivals’ production costs. Firms that cannot cover their fixed
costs exit the industry. Initial entry into the industry is governed by an entry cost.
   We interpret the advent and diffusion of e-commerce as a leftward shift in the consumer
search cost distribution. We use our model to show how e-commerce activity impacts
equilibrium market structure. The model offers predictions about not just equilibrium
prices but also market shares, the number of producers, and the producer type (marginal
cost) distribution.
   The model predicts, as the previous literature has focused on, a decline in equilibrium
average price levels and price dispersion. The more novel implications of our work, however,
regard what happens to the equilibrium distribution of firm types. Here the model predicts
that the introduction of e-commerce into an industry should result in the shrinking and
sometimes exit of low-type (i.e., high-cost) firms, a shift in market share to high-type (low-
cost) firms, and with some additional assumptions about the firm type and consumer search
cost distributions, a drop in the number of producers as well.
   We test the model using U.S. County Business Patterns (CBP) data from 1994-2003.
CBP data contain, at the detailed industry level, the total number of establishments (stores)
as well as their size distribution. While we cannot measure producer types directly, we can
use size as a proxy; hence shifts in the size distribution are informative about heterogeneous
effects of e-commerce within an industry. The panel nature of the data allows us to focus on
changes in the distribution over time within local markets, removing possibly confounding
differences in technology or demand across markets. We identify local differences in the
impact of e-commerce (i.e., the size of the shift in the local search cost distribution) using
consumer-level survey data to measure the fraction of the local population who report
buying goods and services online.
   We focus the empirical tests on three industries perceived to have been considerably
impacted by e-commerce: travel agencies, bookstores, and new auto dealers. We find sup-
port for the predictions of the theoretical model. Growth in consumers’ use of Internet for
purchases is linked to declines in the number of small (and presumably low-type) estab-
lishments, but has either no significant impact or even positive impact on growth in the
industries’ numbers of large establishments. Interestingly, while the industries experience
similar patterns in market share shifts, the specific mechanisms linking declining search
costs to the shifts differed across the industries. The shifts in the travel agency industry re-
flected aggregate changes driven largely by airlines cutting agent commissions as consumers
increasingly shifted to online ticket sources. In bookstores and new car dealers, on the other


                                               2
hand, the evidence suggests that the decline in small retail outlets reflect market-specific
impacts of Internet diffusion.
    We present the general industry model in the next section and explore its predictions for
how shifts in search costs impact equilibrium in an industry with heterogeneous producers.
The third section discusses the data used in the empirical analysis. This is followed by a
presentation and discussion of the empirical results. A short discussion concludes.


2     Model
Our model combines elements of two distinct theoretical literatures. One is the set of
search models with consumers that have heterogeneous search costs. Examples include
Carlson and McAfee (1983), Rob (1985), Benabou (1993), and Hortaçsu and Syverson
(2004). Our conceptual approach of treating the diffusion of e-commerce technologies
as shifting consumers’ search costs (perhaps disparately for different consumers) is the
obvious motivation for drawing on this previous work. The second literature involves
industry equilibrium models that feature heterogenous producers and endogenous selection
into production, like Hopenhayn (1992), Melitz (2003), Syverson (2004), and Asplund and
Nocke (2006). Endogenizing the set of equilibrium producers is important to meet our
goal of assessing how e-commerce might differentially impact industry producers by type,
including determining which types enter and exit when search costs change.


2.1    Setup
There is a continuum of firms selling a homogeneous good for consumption by a continuum
of consumers. All consumers have perfectly inelastic unit demand for the good being sold,
but are heterogeneous in their search costs s ∈ R+ . The total mass of consumers is fixed
and normalized to one. The probability distribution of consumer search costs is given by
cdf Q having a continuously differentiable pdf q. It is assumed that 0 is the greatest lower
bound of the support of q and that Q(0) = q(0) = 0. Like in Benabou (1993), firms
are also heterogeneous, differing in their marginal costs of production c ∈ R+ , which are
their private information. The total mass of all operating firms is L. Unlike Benabou, we
let the mass of firms be determined endogenously, through an zero-profit condition (see
Section 2.4).
    The timing of decisions by firms and consumers is as follows. At the beginning of the


                                              3
period, potential firms consider entering the industry. If a firm decides to enter, it pays
the sunk cost of entry, κ and learns its own marginal cost c, which is drawn i.i.d. from a
publicly known probability distribution with cdf Γ and pdf γ, whose support lies in [0, 1].
Next, firms decide whether to stay in the industry or not. Those that choose to stay then
decide how much to charge and produce. Production requires a fixed cost of operation ν ,
which is identical in all firms. This cost can be avoided if the firm chooses to stay out of
the market.1


2.2        Consumers’ Problem
We make the standard assumption that consumers know the price distribution, F (p) (with
density f (p)), but must engage in costly search to learn the price charged by any particular
firm. Consumers’ search is undirected and sequential; they visit a store to learn its price
and then compare after every visit the benefit and cost of continued search. If the expected
price reduction from visiting another store is greater than the marginal (search) cost s, the
consumer continues to search; otherwise, she buys the product at the lowest price in hand.
Thus, as in McCall (1970), the optimal stopping rule is characterized by a reservation
price where a consumer continues to search as long as she finds a price greater than some
reservation price ρ(s), where ρ(s) is given by:
                                             Z    ρ(s)
                                        s=               (ρ(s) − p)f (p) dp.                              (1)
                                              0

As seen in the equation, the reservation price is such that, if the price in hand is ρ(s), the
marginal cost of search s equals the expected benefit from continuing search. (The integral
on the right-hand side is the expected reduction in price from another search, accounting
for the option value of discarding higher price draws.) It also implies that a consumer
with zero search cost always buys from the firm with the lowest price. We convert this
optimality condition into an equivalent but slightly less intuitive form (albeit easier to work
with analytically) by integrating (1) by parts. This yields:
                                                    Z        ρ(s)
                                             s=                     F (p) dp.                             (2)
                                                         0
   1
       We could have eliminated the fixed cost of operation from the model, but in that case, those firms that
otherwise exit the market would stay in the market by charging prices equal to their marginal costs. Thus
having a fixed cost in the model leads to the sensible implication that only firms that make positive profits
stay in the market.


                                                               4
Differentiating this with respect to s yields 1 = F (ρ(s))ρ′ (s), which shows that ρ(s) is
strictly increasing in s, and hence invertible on its range. The inverse is given by
                                              Z r
                                     −1
                                    ρ (r) =       F (p) dp.
                                                       0


2.3       Sellers’ Problem
We assume that firms do not know the marginal costs and hence the prices set by their
rivals, but instead know the marginal-cost distribution Γ. Further, firms do not know the
search cost of any individual consumer, but do know the distribution Q of search costs.
Taking as given the distributions of search costs and marginal costs, each firm determines
its optimal price based on the demand it faces, characterized by the reservation price rule
ρ(s) implied by (1).
      Let us now consider the optimization program of a firm with marginal cost draw c
that chooses to stay in the industry. We first determine market share as a function of the
price p charged by the firm: x(p).2 The optimal search rule implies that only consumers
with reservation prices ρ(s) above p will buy from the firm. Take one such consumer with
reservation price r. Recalling that the price distribution in the market is given by the cdf F
and that the total mass of operating firms is L, the mass of firms charging a price less than
r is LF (r). The assumption of undirected search implies that this particular consumer is
equally likely to buy from any one of these firms. That is, the probability that she will buy
from a particular firm charging price p is 1/(LF (r)). Integrating over all such potential
customers of this firm yields an expression for market share:
                                          Z ∞
                                                g(r)
                                   x(p) =             dr,                                               (3)
                                           p   LF (r)

where g(r) is the pdf of the reservation price. We can use (2) to write the corresponding
cdf as                                                     Z                  
                                                                    r
                                             −1
                                G(r) = Q(ρ (r)) = Q                     F (p) dp .                      (4)
                                                                0

Taking the derivative of G(r) with respect to r, we find g(r) as
                                                         
                                         g(r) = q ρ−1 (r) F (r).                                        (5)
  2
      We use the market share interchangeably with the price because there is no outside good, each consumer
demands one unit of the good, and the total mass of consumers equals one.




                                                      5
We use the reservation price distribution to simplify the integral for market share. Inserting
(5) into (3) gives                             Z       ∞
                                           1                        
                                    x(p) =                 q ρ−1 (r) dr.                    (6)
                                           L       p

   This equation is a standard (residual) demand curve: a firm faces demand determined
by its own price as well as its competitors’ prices. Here, these prices are embodied in the
distribution F (p). Note that demand is downward sloping, since
                                              1         
                                    x′ (p) = − q ρ−1 (p) < 0.
                                              L
   The profit function of a firm with marginal cost c choosing to stay in the industry can
be expressed as the solution to the firm’s optimization program:

                                    π(c) = max(p − c)x(p) − ν.                              (7)
                                               p

The values of p that maximize this equation for given values of c will define the equilibrium
pricing function p(c). The first-order condition for an optimum requires that, for all c,

                              (p(c) − c)x′ (p(c)) + x(p(c)) = 0,                            (8)

while the second-order condition for a maximum at this point stipulates that

                             (p(c) − c)x′′ (p(c)) + 2x′ (p(c)) < 0.                         (9)


2.4        Industry Equilibrium
Let p(·) and x(·) be, respectively, the pricing and residual demand functions in equilib-
rium. Note that this implies that p(·) is optimal for each firm, given x(·), and therefore
the first and second order conditions for individual optimality, (8) and (9), must hold at
each point. The downward-sloping demand then yields three important properties of the
industry equilibrium.

Property 1. The equilibrium pricing function p(c) is increasing with marginal cost: p′ (c) >
0 (∀ c).

Proof. Applying the Implicit Function Theorem to the first-order condition (8) yields
                                                  x′ (p)
                         p′ (c) =                                     > 0,
                                    (p(c) − c)x′′ (p(c)) + 2x′ (p(c))
since demand slopes downward and the denominator is negative by the second-order con-
dition.

                                                       6
                                                                                                        dx
Property 2. The demand function x(p(c)) is decreasing with marginal cost:                               dc
                                                                                                           (p(c))   <0
(∀ c).

Proof.
                            dx
                               (p(c)) = x′ (p(c))p′ (c) < 0
                            dc
by downward-sloping demand and Property 1.

Property 3. The profit function is decreasing with marginal cost: π ′ (c) < 0 (∀c).

Proof. Applying the Envelope Theorem to (7) yields π ′ (c) = −x(p(c)) < 0.

      Note that Property 3 implies that the firms’ decision rule for staying in the industry
or leaving is characterized by a cutoff value: there exists a threshold c̄ > 0 such that firms
stay in the industry if and only if their marginal cost is c ≤ c̄ (we assume here that the exit
decision is non-trivial, i.e., some firms do exit and some produce). The threshold value is
given by
                                         0 = π(c̄) = (p(c̄) − c̄)x(p(c̄)) − ν                                       (10)

      The initial stage involves ex-ante identical potential entrants deciding whether or not
to commence operations. We assume that there is unlimited entry into the industry: firms
keep entering until the expected value of post-entry profits equals the sunk entry cost. That
is,                     Z                            Z
                                c̄                           c̄
                   κ=                π(c)γ(c) dc =                (p(c) − c)x(p(c))γ(c) dc − Γ(c̄)ν.                (11)
                            0                            0
Note that this entry condition implies ex-ante zero profits and ex-post positive profits.
      Finally, note that Property 1 implies that prices will be distributed with support [p, p̄],
where p = p(0) and p̄ = p(c̄), with the cdf (for q ∈ [p, p̄]) given by

                                                                    Pr{c ≤ p−1 (q) & c ≤ c̄}   Γ(p−1 (q))
            F (q) = Pr{p(c) ≤ q | π(c) ≥ 0} =                                                =            .         (12)
                                                                          Pr {c ≤ c̄}            Γ(c̄)

      Note that F (q) = 0 for q < p and F (q) = 1 for q > p̄. We are now ready to define the
equilibrium in this industry.

Definition 1. A search equilibrium is a set {ρ : R+ → R+ , p : R+ → R+ , x : R+ →
R+ , F : R+ → [0, 1], c̄ > 0} satisfying equations (2), (6), (8), (10), (11), and (12), along
with inequality (9).




                                                                     7
3         Comparative Statics
Our goal is to determine the effect of a decrease in search costs on the search equilibrium.
In particular, we are interested in how shifts in search costs affect the equilibrium price
distribution F , the operating cutoff cost c̄ and the total mass of firms L. To this end,
consider a family of search cost distributions Q(· | t), where higher t corresponds to higher
search costs in the sense of the monotone likelihood ratio property (MLRP).3
        First, let us consider the function p(c, F, t), which gives the best-response price for a
firm with marginal cost c when the price distribution of all operating firms is F and the
search costs are Q(· | t). Examining the firm’s first-order condition and applying the MLRP
condition, we obtain our first comparative statics result.

Proposition 1. The best-response pricing function p(c, F, t) is increasing in t.

Proof. See Appendix 7.2.

        Thus, the optimal price charged by each firm is increasing in the search costs, holding
fixed other firms’ pricing and entry/exit decisions (which affect F ). However, this by itself
does not guarantee that the equilibrium prices will increase with search costs. Therefore,
we must look for conditions on the search cost distribution that will guarantee that the
equilibria will move in the same direction as the individual response functions. To this end,
we must first make precise the notion of increasing price distributions. Following Rauh
(2008), we adopt the following partial order ≥ on the set of distribution functions with
support in (0, ∞): F ≥ F ′ iff F first-order stochastically dominates F ′ (i.e., F (p) ≤ F ′ (p)
for all p > 0). We now ask for conditions on q that will guarantee that the equilibrium
distribution F will be increasing in t (with respect to the partial order ≥).
        As explained in Appendix 7.1, a natural sufficient condition for the equilibrium distri-
bution to be increasing in search costs is that the market be supermodular in the sense
of Rauh (2008). Verifying this condition is not trivial in our model, however, since our
setting differs substantially from Rauh’s model due to the endogenous entry/exit decisions
of firms. Therefore, for the rest of our analysis, we will restrict our attention to the case
when the search cost distribution is uniform, where we can characterize equilibria explicitly.
Although we are able to obtain exact results only in the uniform search cost case, numerical
simulations show that the comparative statics under other search cost distributions (such
    3
        That is, for each s1 > s0 , the ratio q(s1 | t)/q(s0 | t) is increasing in t.




                                                             8
as the exponential distribution) tend to be very similar to those obtained under the uniform
distribution (see Appendix 7.4).


3.1    Uniform Search Costs
Following the discussion in Appendix 7.1, we focus on uniform search cost distributions:

Assumption 1. The search cost distribution is uniform on [0, a] for a > 0.

   With this formulation, a decrease in search costs can be identified with a decrease
in the parameter a. The marginal cost distribution, on the other hand, is allowed to
take a very general form, subject only to the weak condition of log-concave cdf, which
is satisfied by most commonly used distributions (such as uniform, normal, lognormal,
gamma, exponential, Pareto, and others, see Bagnoli and Bergstrom (2005)):

Assumption 2. The cdf of the marginal cost distribution is log-concave, i.e., γ(c)/Γ(c) is
decreasing in c for all c.

   Given Assumption 1, the demand function (6) for any p ≥ p simplifies to
               Z                               Z ∞
              1 ∞1                           1                            1
       x(p) =         I{ρ−1 (r)∈[0,a]} da =        I{r∈[ρ(0),ρ(a)]} da =    (ρ(a) − p).   (13)
              L p a                         aL p                         aL
The second equality follows, because ρ is increasing. The final equality holds, because it
is not optimal for any firm to charge less than ρ(0), so that p > ρ(0). Note that x′ (p) =
−1/(aL) < 0 and x′′ (p) = 0, so that the second-order condition (9) holds. Plugging (13)
into (8), the first-order condition becomes
                                            1
                                      p(c) = (ρ(a) + c),                                  (14)
                                            2
so that the demand and profit functions reduce to
                                           1
                                   x(c) =     (ρ(a) − c) and                              (15)
                                          2aL
                                           1
                                   π(c) =     (ρ(a) − c)2 ,                               (16)
                                          4aL
and the operating threshold equation (10) yields
                                                   √
                                      c̄ = ρ(a) − 2 aLν.                                  (17)

The upper and lower limits of the support of the equilibrium price distribution are therefore
                                      √
p = p(0) = ρ(a)/2 and p̄ = p(c̄) = ρ − aLν.

                                               9
   We now see that a search equilibrium is fully determined by two parameters, ρ̄ ≡
ρ(a) > 0 and L, satisfying equations (2) (for s = a), (11), (12), and (14) through (17).
Plugging (14) and (12) into (2) for s = a yields
                                      Z       √                            Z
                                           ρ̄− aLν                             ρ̄
                            1
                  a=         √                       Γ(2p − ρ̄) dp +           √
                                                                                      1 dp
                     Γ(ρ̄ − 2 aLν)        ρ̄/2                              ρ̄− aLν
                                       Z           √
                             1                 ρ̄−2 aLν               √
                    =          √                          Γ(c) dc +       aLν.
                      2Γ(ρ̄ − 2 aLν)       0

Finally, we insert equations (14) through (17) into the entry condition (11), reducing the
conditions for a search equilibrium to the following system of two equations in ρ̄ and L:
                                              Z ρ̄−2√aLν            √
                                   1
             Ψ(ρ̄, L; a) ≡           √                    Γ(c) dc + aLν − a = 0;             (18)
                           2Γ(ρ̄ − 2 aLν) 0
                                Z ρ̄−2√aLν                             √
                            1
             Φ(ρ̄, L; a) ≡                 (ρ̄ − c)2 γ(c) dc − Γ(ρ̄ − 2 aLν)ν = κ.           (19)
                           4aL 0

   Manipulating the first equation (details in Appendix 7.2) shows that either the mass of
firms or the reservation threshold of the consumer with the highest search costs (or both)
must increase as the search cost distribution shifts right.

Lemma 1. At least one of the quantities ρ̄ and L must be increasing in a:
                                    ∂L      ∂ ρ̄
                                       ≤0 ⇒      > 0.
                                    ∂a      ∂a
   The proof, which is provided in Appendix 7.2, amounts to showing that if both L and ρ̄
were non-increasing in a, the left-hand side of (18) would be decreasing in a, which would
violate that identity. The logic of this result is straightforward: a decrease in search costs
(a), if not accompanied by a decrease in search opportunities (higher L), will result in
increased marginal benefit of continued search, which will cause searchers to become more
selective, thus decreasing ρ̄.
   In a similar manner, equation (19) implies that if the mass of firms decreases as the
search cost distribution shifts left, the reservation threshold of the consumer with the
highest search costs must also decrease.

Lemma 2. If L is increasing in a, so is ρ̄:
                                    ∂L      ∂ ρ̄
                                       >0 ⇒      > 0.
                                    ∂a      ∂a


                                                   10
   The proof, shown in Appendix 7.2, consists of demonstrating that the contrary state-
ment would cause the left-hand side of (19) to be decreasing in a, violating that identity.
Whereas Lemma 1 relied on the consumer side, Lemma 2 relies on the producer side: the
intuition is that an increase in competition (higher L) must be accompanied by a compen-
sating increase in searchers’ reservation prices (thus increasing firms’ expected profits per
transaction) in order for average profits to stay constant.
   The results above, (25) and (29), imply that ρ must be strictly increasing in a:

                                             ∂ ρ̄
                                                  > 0.
                                             ∂a
Together with the pricing equation (14) this gives us our first key result:

Proposition 2. When search costs decrease, the price p(c) charged by a firm with marginal
cost c decreases for any operating firm.

   Our next objective is to determine the effect of a change in a on the operating cutoff
value c̄ and on the level of concentration in the market. It will be convenient to first define
the quantity
                                                     1
                                          δ(a) ≡         ,
                                                   aL(a)
where we write L(a) to emphasize its dependence on a. Note that this can be interpreted as
the per-firm density of consumers with a given level of search costs, since the total number
of firms is L(a) and the density of consumers with any level of search cost s is simply 1/a.
It is easy to see that δ(a) is decreasing in a:

Lemma 3. The per-firm density of consumers with any given level of search costs is de-
creasing in a: δ ′ (a) < 0.

   The proof of this result is straightforward (see Appendix 7.2): since ρ̄ is increasing with
a, δ needs to decrease with a in order to preserve equality in (19).
   The profit function of a firm with marginal cost c now becomes:
                                     1                  1
                       π(c; a) =          (ρ̄(a) − c)2 = δ(a)(ρ̄(a) − c)2 ,               (20)
                                   4aL(a)               4

where we have written L(a) and ρ̄(a) to emphasize the dependence of these parameters on
a. Taking the derivative of this expression with respect to a and applying Lemma 3 (details
in Appendix 7.2), we can now easily make our next observation: if an increase of search
costs hurts any currently operating firm, it must also hurt all firms with lower search costs:

                                                11
Lemma 4. If there exists c0 ≤ c̄(a) such that πa (c0 ; a) ≤ 0, then πa (c; a) < 0 for all c < c0 .

   The intuition for this result is again quite simple. The only negative effect on a firm of
increasing a and thus increasing ρ̄(a) is that the firm now has to share its current customer
base with more higher-cost firms. This effect becomes larger and larger, as the marginal cost
of the firm decreases. (Note, for example, that the firm with marginal cost c̄(a) was already
sharing all of its consumers with all operating firms, so that the only additional sharing
comes from the additional firms that were not operating before, whereas the zero-cost firm
now needs to share each of its customers with more of the firms that were operating before.)
   It now becomes clear that the profit of the firm at the current marginal cost cutoff
level c̄(a) must decrease as search costs decrease. If this were not the case, the profits of
all currently operating firms would increase, which would result in an overall increase of
ex-ante expected profits. This would violate the entry condition (19), which states that the
ex-ante expected profits must remain constant at κ. Since the profit function (for each a)
is strictly decreasing in c, the fact that the profit of the current cutoff-level firm falls below
the operating threshold ν implies that the new cutoff level will be lower than the current
level. Formalizing these arguments (Appendix 7.2), we obtain our second key result:

Proposition 3. When search costs decrease, so does the operating-cutoff marginal cost, c̄.

   Proposition 3 has the immediate empirically testable implication that some of the firms
with the highest marginal costs of production will exit the industry in response to a decrease
in consumers’ search costs.
   Propositions 2 and 3 together yield two more testable implications: both the prices
charged in equilibrium and the marginal costs of operating firms will decrease, as search
costs decrease (formal details in Appendix 7.2):

Corollary 1. When search costs decrease, the distributions of equilibrium prices and mar-
ginal costs of operating firms shift to the left in the sense of first-order stochastic dominance.

   Thus, search cost decreases lead to increased efficiency of operating firms and to lower
prices for consumers. As Proposition 3 shows, this increased efficiency is due to the fact that
the lowering of consumer search costs diminishes the profits of inefficient (high-marginal
cost) firms, causing some of these firms to exit the industry. It is easy to see, however, that
the more efficient firms will actually benefit from a search cost reduction. If a decrease in
c̄ (and thus a reduced likelihood of staying in the market) were accompanied by decreased
profits of all operating firms, the ex-ante expected profits would decrease, violating the
entry condition that says that those are constant and equal to the cost of entry.

                                               12
Corollary 2. A decrease in search costs causes the profits of firms with sufficiently low
marginal costs to increase: for each a, there exists ĉ(a) < c̄(a) such that πa (c; a) < 0 for all
c < ĉ(a).

    Similar reasoning leads to the conclusion that the total market share of low-cost firms
should increase in response to decreasing consumer search costs, as the share of high-cost
firms decreases. To state this formally, let us denote the total market share of all firms
with marginal cost in (c, c + dc) (for infinitesimal dc) by X(c; a) dc. Then, for each c,

                                   X(c, a) dc = Lx(c; a)γ(c) dc.

Applying similar arguments to those we used for determining the change in profits, we can
readily obtain the following result (see Appendix 7.2 for details):

Corollary 3. A decrease in search costs causes the total market share of all firms with
sufficiently low marginal costs to increase: for each a, there exists ĉ(a) < c̄(a) such that
Xa (c; a) < 0 for all c < ĉ(a).

    The results of Proposition 3 and Corollaries 2 and 3 establish the main empirical hy-
pothesis of our model: search cost declines driven by the advent and diffusion of e-commerce
have differing effects across businesses in an industry. Low-type (high-cost) sellers are hurt,
sometimes to the point of being forced to exit. Higher types (low-cost sellers), however,
actually gain from the shift: the market share of low-cost firms grows, resulting in increas-
ing concentration of the market. Finally, it appears to be impossible to sign the change
in the total mass of firms analytically (see Appendix 7.3), but numerical simulations with
a variety of marginal cost distributions suggest that the mass of firms may decrease when
search costs decrease (Appendix 7.4).


4     Data
Our empirical analysis uses data from two primary sources: industry employment and
establishment counts from the U.S. Census Bureau’s County Business Patterns (CBP),
and U.S. consumers’ online purchasing behavior from Forrester Research Technographics
surveys. We briefly describe these data sets here, as well as discuss our market definition.




                                                13
4.1        County Business Patterns
Annual County Business Patterns data contain, by detailed industry, the number of es-
tablishments in each U.S. county. Establishments are unique geographic locations where
economic activity takes place (i.e., offices in the travel agency industry, storefronts in the
bookstore industry, and car lots in the auto dealerships industry). A firm can own one or
more establishments.4 Both the total number of establishments and establishment counts
by employment range are included in the data.5 In cases where disclosure of confidential
information is not an issue, total industry employment and payroll in the county are also re-
ported. However, these are often missing in the industries we study, particularly in smaller
counties served by only a handful of firms. We can, however, impute total employment by
multiplying the establishment counts in an employment range category by an estimate of
the average number of employees per establishment in the category. We use the simple av-
erage of the categories’ endpoints for this estimate. While imputations invariably introduce
measurement error, we are reassured by the fact that the correlation between imputed and
actual reported employment for those counties where the latter is available is quite high.
Further, most of the empirical work below focuses on establishment counts, which we never
have to impute.
       We use data spanning 1994 to 2003, which surrounds the period when the advent of
browser software began the internet’s diffusion into the broader population. It is also the
time span over for which CBP data are available with the level of industry detail necessary
for our purposes here. We focus on three industries: travel agencies (SIC 4724/NAICS
561510), bookstores (SIC 5942, NAICS 451211), and new auto dealers (SIC 5510/NAICS
441110). While a major change in the industry classification scheme occurred in 1997 (from
the SIC system to the NAICS taxonomy), these industries’ boundaries remained unaffected,
so values before and after the change are comparable.
   4
       While it would be very interesting to study the issues at hand in the context of within- and across-firm
shifts, there is unfortunately no way to identify firms in the CBP data. “Firms” in the model above can be
interpreted here as distinct operations (offices, storefronts, or lots) in an industry. While it is possible that
common ownership may affect individual establishments’ reactions to the shift to e-commerce, we think
that the model’s basic implications about the relative impacts on low- versus high-type producers remain
to a large extent even within multiple-establishment firms. For example, all else equal, a firm seeking to
reduce its size will tend to close its low-type operations first.
   5
     The reported ranges are: 1-4 employees, 5-9, 10-19, 20-49, 50-99, 100-249, 250-499, 500-999, and over
1000 employees. Since very large establishments are relatively uncommon in the industries we study here,
we aggregate the largest categories into a single category.


                                                       14
4.2        Household Internet Use
The data on households’ e-commerce activity comes from Forrester Research, a market re-
search company with a program focusing on consumers’ technology use. Its annual Techno-
graphics survey is designed to be nationally representative and includes the responses of
roughly 55,000 people living in the continental U.S.6
       We have access to the 2003 and 2004 surveys. Survey responses reflect behavior in the
year previous to the title year, because the survey is typically administered from prior-year
December through title-year January. For example, when the 2004 survey asks respondents
about their behavior over the past year, the answers reflect actions taken in 2003.
       While the survey is primarily cross-sectional, conveniently for us there is a retrospective
question asking when the respondent “start[ed] purchasing products or services online.”
The respondent can choose one of several time ranges: “less than 1 year ago,” “1 year
to less than 2 years ago,” and so on up to “8 years ago or more.” We construct from
these responses the fraction of market consumers that had started purchasing products or
services online for each year from 1994 through 2003.7


4.3        Market Definition
We define markets using the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis’ Component Economic
Areas (CEAs). CEAs are collections of counties usually, but not always, centered on
Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). Counties are selected for inclusion in a given
CEA based upon their MSA status, commuting flows, and newspaper circulation patterns,
subject to the condition that CEAs counties are contiguous. CEA boundaries need not
coincide with state boundaries. The selection criteria ensure that counties in a given CEA
   6
       See Goolsbee (2000) for additional details about the survey.
   7
       We used the 2003 survey to compute the fraction of online shoppers in 1994 and 1995, and the 2004
survey to compute the fractions from 1996 to 2003. The use of two surveys was necessary because the
“8 years ago or more” responses in the 2004 survey correspond to any purchases occurring before 1996,
not necessarily those in 1995 exclusively. We do see 1995 purchase patterns, however, in the 2003 survey
(through the “7 years to less than 8 years ago” responses). We are still left with online activity in 1994 being
measured with “8 years ago or more” responses from the earlier survey. However, given the small fractions
of respondents reporting buying products online in 1995 (see below), as well as the fact that the internet’s
commercial structure at that time was quite embryonic, it is unlikely that many of the purchases attributed
to 1994 actually occurred before that year. The use of two separate surveys over the observation period
does not seem to have created spurious increases in reported online purchases. There is no discernable
trend break between 1995 and 1996, the surveys’ point of contact.


                                                      15
are economically intertwined. The roughly 3200 U.S. counties are grouped this way into
348 markets that are mutually exclusive and exhaustive of the land mass of the United
States. Since our internet use data excludes Alaska and Hawaii, our empirical analysis uses
data for the 345 CEAs in the continental U.S.8
        Using CEAs offers a compromise between conflicting requirements of the analysis. The
most constraining is that, with an internet use sample of 55,000, using smaller market
areas (like counties) would result in many markets having very thin samples. We use the
county indicator in the Technographics survey to aggregate the respondents to the CEA
level. This reduces the sampling error involved, though of course with the tradeoff of losing
some variation in market structures. Further, counties may in some cases be too small to
accurately capture market areas in the industries we investigate. This is especially true
in more rural areas, where cross-county commerce in travel agency, book sales, and auto
purchases is likely to be commonplace. CEAs should be large enough to envelop businesses’
catchment areas in most cases.9
        To give an idea of the size of markets in our data, Table 1 presents summary statistics
of within-CEA establishment counts in our industries. In order to highlight across-market
differences, we first take the within-market average establishment counts over our sample
period, and then report quantiles of the cross-sectional distribution of these averages. The
table shows quantiles for the total number of establishments as well as for each of the
employment size categories. We note, however, that our empirical specifications below
include market fixed effects, so that the estimated relationships between market structure
and consumers’ online shopping behavior reflect within-market variation over time.


5         Empirical Tests
We seek to test the model’s implications regarding how a shift in the consumer search cost
distribution impacts industry market structure, particularly with regard to the relative
fortunes of high- and low-type businesses. Our focus, as mentioned previously, is on indus-
tries where a shift in consumer activity to e-commerce channels has been cited as having
a noted impact on industry businesses. While these industries are in many ways suitable
    8
        See U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (1995) for more detailed information about creation of CEAs
and the super-regions that they comprise, Economic Areas.
   9
     Since our consumer e-commerce use measure is built from responses of a fixed set of consumers to a
retrospective question, we must also assume that any across-CEA population movements over our sample
period are unrelated to local growth in e-commerce infrastructure.

                                                    16
for our analysis, they are not perfect matches to the stylized industry in the model. We
do find it entirely plausible, as the model assumes, that there are significant and persistent
differences in producers’ types in these industries. The most relevant type dimension in
these industries is, it seems to us, the per-dollar cost to industry businesses of delivering a
bundle of goods and services at a given quality level.
    An important dimension where reality and the model depart, however, is with respect to
horizontal product differentiation. We do not model this above, but it almost surely exists
to some extent in each industry we study. Horizontal product differentiation may dampen
the quantitative impact of the substitutability-enhancing (via reduced search cost) features
of e-commerce. (Researchers have noted efforts along these lines among booksellers; see
Clay et al. (2002), for example.) To the extent that any changes did occur, our estimates
offer guidance as to the magnitude of e-commerce’s impact net of product differentiation
shifts.
    Another potential point of departure between our model and our analysis is that in two
of the industries, travel agencies and bookstores, the diffusion of the Internet has allowed
the entry of online-only retailers. As in Latcovich and Smith (2001), these businesses have
different cost structures than traditional “brick-and-mortar” retailers, in that they may
have higher fixed costs, but lower marginal costs. Moreover, such Internet only retailers
arguably provide a different bundle of goods/services, in that customers cannot inspect the
good first-hand and must wait for it to be shipped. By assuming uniform fixed costs and
homogenous products, our model does not explicitly account for the creation of Internet-
only retailers, focusing rather on how brick-and-mortar retailer demand might change in
response to a reduction in consumer search costs brought about by the Internet. An
advantage of investigating new car dealers, however, is that regulations prevent similar
“online-only”entrants in this industry, making it a close match to our theoretical model.
    Yet another dimension we do not model is the endogeneity of certain fixed costs, such as
advertising, which can lead to industry dominance patterns as in Sutton (1991). Latcovich
and Smith (2001) document high level of advertising expenditure among online booksellers.
If consumers are not fully informed about the quality of their retail service, and if adver-
tising can signal vertical characteristics such as reliability, security, and ease of use, firms
advertise heavily to increase consumers’ willingness to pay. Just as with search costs, hori-
zontal or vertical differentiation decreases consumers’ abilities to substitute across industry
producers.



                                              17
5.1        Travel Agencies
Much has been made of the demise of the travel agent as consumers shifted their travel
purchases to e-commerce sites like travel search engines (e.g., Orbitz or Expedia) or to travel
service providers themselves (especially by buying tickets directly from airlines’ websites).
       Aggregate statistics leave little doubt that the diffusion of the internet coincided with
considerable establishment exit in the travel agency industry. Figure 3 plots two time
series: the total number of industry establishments, and the fraction of Technographics
survey respondents reporting that they had first purchased products or services online by a
given year. The number of travel agency establishments was fairly steady, slightly rising in
fact, until 1997, at which time it began to fall substantially. The number of establishments
in the industry dropped by over 35 percent between 1997 and 2003. As can be seen, this
exit coincided with a post-1997 acceleration in the fraction of surveyed consumers reporting
online purchases.
       This broad exit pattern was concentrated among the industry’s smaller operations.
Panel A of Table 2 contains establishment counts by establishment size category (size is
measured by number of employees).10 Over the sample period, establishment counts fell
in the four smallest employment categories, those including businesses with fewer than
50 employees. The drop was especially precipitous among establishments with less than
10 employees. At the same time, though, the number of establishments with 50 or more
employees actually rose. The number of operations with 100 or more employees grew 70
percent. The vicious shakeout at the low end was therefore accompanied by growth among
the largest industry businesses.11
       These patterns are consistent with those predicted by the model. A decline in search
  10
       The U.S. aggregate numbers in Table 2 include a few establishments not in the market-level data we
use below, since the aggregate numbers include establishments in Alaska and Hawaii as well as those not
placed into a specific county within a state (this latter group is referred to as “statewide” establishments
in the CBP).
  11
     The CBP data does not allow one to track individual establishments through time. It is therefore
conceptually possible that even a growing industry could exhibit net establishment losses at lower employ-
ment ranges due to formerly small businesses growing into larger size categories. However, this scenario
would imply that the total number of establishments in the industry remained roughly unchanged. This
is clearly not the case here. One possibility that cannot be ruled out, however, is that many small es-
tablishments were merged into larger ones. This would shrink establishment counts both at the low end
of the distribution and in total. To the extent mergers played a role, though, we show shortly that the
employment growth among large establishments did not fully make up for employment losses among the
industry’s small operators.


                                                    18
costs, made possible through the diffusion of the internet and the advent and improve-
ment of travel-shopping websites, shifted equilibrium production to the larger, higher-type
producers in the industry. Indeed, some of these high-type producers may host the very
portals that led to the decline of their smaller competitors.
       To show the connection more formally, we regress the (logged) number of industry em-
ployees and establishments in a CEA market-year observation on the fraction of people
in the market who reported making purchases online by that year. Because internet use
diffused sooner into certain markets with high demand for travel services (e.g., New York
and San Francisco), but for reasons likely unrelated to its use for purchasing those services,
there is an underlying positive correlation across markets in the number of travel agencies
and the fraction of consumers using the internet. If we did not control for these differences,
we would spuriously conclude that greater internet use led to increases in travel agency
numbers. We therefore include CEA fixed effects in this and all of our empirical speci-
fications. The estimates thus reflect the relationship between changes in online purchase
frequencies and industry activity within CEA markets. We also control for employment
across all industries in the market-year (also taken from the CBP data) to account the
influence of overall market growth or decline on the industry.
       The results, reported in Panel B of Table 2, reflect the aggregate patterns above. Higher
fractions of consumers buying goods and services online are associated with declines in the
numbers of industry employees and establishments in the market. The estimated impact
of consumers’ e-commerce activity is quite substantial for the smallest establishments. For
example, a 15 percentage point increase in the fraction of consumers making purchases
online – a one standard deviation change – corresponds to a 13 percent (21 percent) drop
in establishments with 1-4 employees (5-9 employees). Notice, however, that this negative
impact lessens as one works up the establishment size distribution. Indeed, it eventually
becomes insignificant with positive point estimates for establishments with 50-99 employees
and those with 100 employees or more.12
  12
       The different sample sizes across establishment size categories reflect the fact that not all market-
year observations have a positive number of establishments in a particular category. The small number
of large establishments in the industry makes the sample for the largest size categories particularly small
and may in part explain the imprecise results in these cases. To explore this issue further, we estimated
an alternative specification for the 50-99 and 100+ employee size categories where, rather than using the
logged number of establishments as the dependent variable, we used a dummy equal to one if there was at
least one establishment in the size category in a market-year and zero otherwise. (The numbers in Table 1
indicate most of the observations where this dummy equalled one correspond to the presence of only one


                                                      19
    Greater e-commerce activity among consumers is therefore associated with losses among
the smallest industry producers, but a positive influence on the largest producers. Despite
the inclusion of market fixed effects, however, the test above does not answer the question
of whether the market structure impact of the shift to e-commerce acts locally or instead
more broadly. It could be that the many within-market changes reflect aggregate shifts,
and while the overall increase in internet purchasing behavior shifts industry market shares
in the direction predicted by the model, there is no sense in which this impact is noticeably
stronger in markets that saw larger increases in consumers’ internet use than in those that
experienced smaller gains. To answer the question of the geographic scope of e-commerce’s
impact in the industry, we add a set of year dummies to the regression. This removes
the impact of aggregate shifts in internet use, leaving only the idiosyncratic within-market
variation in the growth of online purchasing patterns and establishment counts to identify
the coefficient. In essence, this regression tests if markets that had unusually high increases
in internet use also saw larger-than-average declines in small-establishment counts.13
    The regression results (with year dummy coefficients not reported for parsimony) are
in Table 2, Panel C. In this case all coefficients on the measure of consumers’ e-commerce
activity are statistically insignificant. There is no measurable market-specific influence of
online purchases on local travel agencies. This indicates, very interestingly, that the shifts
in industry market structure seen above, while coincident with consumers’ increasing use of
online sites to conduct their travel purchases, did not arise from a set of coordinated market
structure shifts in specific markets that produced the observed patterns once aggregated up.
Instead, the influence of internet use on market structure in the industry is a completely
establishment.) In this case, all market-year observations can be included in the sample. This alternative
specification also indicated a positive correlation between consumers using online commerce channels and
growth among large establishments, but in this case the relationship was statistically stronger (significant
at the 10 percent level for establishments with 50-99 employees and at the 5 percent level for those with
more than 100.) The results in the first numerical column indicate that any employment gains in the
larger size classes are swamped by employment losses due to the exit of smaller operations. Overall market
employment, not shown here, enters positively and significantly in most of the specifications, as one might
expect.
  13
     Specifically, the coefficient on the fraction of consumers in the market shopping online is identified off
of the correlation between two values: a market’s growth rate in the number of industry establishments
relative to the average across all markets in that year, and that same market’s change in the fraction
of consumers reporting shopping online relative to the across-market average. That is, the coefficient
is negative if markets with larger-than-average declines in establishment counts saw higher-than average
growth in internet purchases.



                                                      20
aggregate phenomenon.
       A consideration of the specific way e-commerce impacted this industry offers a likely
explanation for this result. As internet purchases of airline tickets became more common
over our observation period, airlines incrementally decreased the commissions they paid
to travel agents. The first, modest commission cut (imposing a $50 cap per domestic
ticket, which given the standard 10 percent rate at the time meant it was only binding
for tickets above $500) occurred in 1995.14 This ended up being only the first cut of a
series, however. By 2002, major carriers had ceased paying commissions altogether. Since
airline tickets accounted for an estimated 58 percent of travel agencies’ revenues in 1996,
these commission declines resulted in a serious income loss for the industry (some lost
commissions were replaced by fees charged directly to the consumer, though these did not
cover the losses). Small operations, having high fixed costs relative to their sales volume,
found profitability increasingly difficult to obtain and began to exit, as seen in the data.
Importantly, however, airlines cut commissions across-the-board nationwide – presumably
in response to perceived changes in consumers’ aggregate ticket purchasing patterns – rather
than market-by-market. We are aware of no instances where airlines selectively reduced
commissions more in those particular markets where online purchases were growing fastest.
This would explain why the connection between internet use and market structure changes
is starkly evident in aggregate changes over time but not so across markets within a period.
It is also consistent with the fact that any growth among the largest establishments was
uncorrelated with local internet use, because many of these establishments plausibly tapped
into the new (and national) internet market, and drew their business growth largely from
customers outside their local area.


5.2        Bookstores
Another line of business that has by many accounts in the popular press been affected
by the diffusion of internet commerce is the retail bookstore industry. Several booksellers
have blamed their demise in large part on the competitive demands of e-commerce (see,
for example, Herman 2001, Weisman 2004, and Melo 2005). The process through which
  14
       The facts on travel agent commissions discussed in this paragraph are from a 2002 report by the
National Commission to Ensure Consumer Information and Choice in the Airline Industry (NCECICAI).
The creation of the NCECICAI was a provision of the Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21st
Century. The commission’s congressionally mandated mission was to study the travel agent industry and,
more generally, the airline services information available to consumers.


                                                    21
this competitive effect would take place is again that which is highlighted in our model:
e-commerce induced reductions in consumers’ search costs shift market share across the
industry type distribution.
   We investigate this possibility by repeating the empirical analyses above, this time
using CBP data for the bookstores (SIC 5942/NAICS 451211) industry. We begin with
the industry-wide establishment counts shown in Panel A of Table 3. They reflect similar
patterns to those seen with the travel agency aggregates: declines in establishments in the
smaller employment size categories with coincident expansion in the larger categories. For
instance, while the number of bookstores with fewer than 20 employees fell by over one-
fourth during the sample, those with more than 20 employees more than doubled. This
growth was particularly pronounced among the 50-99 employee size category. So we again
see the pattern of market share shifts from small (low-type) operations to large (high-type)
ones.
   Again the question arises of whether these effects reflect aggregate impacts or instead
coincide with local internet commerce patterns. No obvious analogy exists in the book-
stores industry to the airlines’ commission reductions and their impact on travel agencies.
Therefore one might expect the impact of the internet here to be more concentrated within
particular markets. If this is the case, the overall shift from smaller to larger bookstores
noted above reflects aggregated changes that occurred market-by-market.
   We investigate this issue by estimating the above specification that includes year fixed
effects, this time using bookstores CBP data. The results are reported in Panel B of Table
3. Again we have suppressed the estimated year effects and the coefficients on overall
market employment.
   In contrast to the market structure shifts in the travel agency industry, there is more
evidence that local market effects matter in bookstores. Markets seeing faster growth in
local consumers making online purchases had greater declines in bookstore employment
and the total number of bookstores, with establishment exit being driven by losses among
operations having fewer than 20 employees. This increased exit was statistically significant,
except for establishments with less than five employees.
   There is weaker evidence, on the other hand, that local online purchasing behavior
impacted the growth seen among larger booksellers. None of the e-commerce activity
(“fraction online”) coefficients for the three largest size categories, while reflecting the
positive comovement between online shopping and the numbers of larger bookstores, are
statistically significant. This is likely due to the fact that the industry classification sys-


                                              22
tem includes an industry separate from bookstores, ”Electronic Shopping and Mail-Order
Houses” (NAICS 45411), into which the largest online booksellers are classified.15 The
expansion seen in large bookstores may instead reflect the ascendance of the new-format
large-store chains like Barnes and Noble and Borders. Their growth is not strongly corre-
lated with local online shopping habits because, while these sellers have extensive online
operations (Barnes and Noble has its own website and Borders has teamed with Amazon),
their online operations have industrial classifications that are separate in the CBP data
from their brick-and-mortar locations.


5.3        New Auto Dealers
The last industry in which we investigate the impact of e-commerce on different producer
types is new auto dealers. The new auto dealers industry has special appeal as a forum
for testing our model. Specifically, franchise law restrictions make it extremely difficult to
operate internet-only sales channels.16
       This means that e-commerce in this industry functions in a way that almost exactly
matches how we embody it in the model; i.e., it is purely a demand-side device that lowers
consumers’ costs of gathering product information. The essential technology of production
and delivery in the industry is unchanged, even among any new producers that might enter
the market after the change in search costs. There are no issues of retailers selling the
industry’s product but not being counted in the industry’s CBP data (as with Amazon or
WalMart with regard to the bookstores industry, for instance), and consumers cannot use
e-commerce channels to bypass retailers altogether and buy from manufacturers directly
(as is the case for many airline ticket purchases). Thus new car dealers allow us to see
quite directly how reductions in search costs impact an essentially isolated set of retailers
whose basic distribution technology is not impacted by e-commerce. The only change they
  15
       Note that online airline ticket sales operations are not included in this industry. According to the U.S.
Census Bureau, businesses in NAICS 45411 sold $4.16 billion of books and magazines in 2003, $2.14 billion
of which was exchanged via ”e-commerce” channels (these are defined as transactions over open networks
like the internet or proprietary networks running systems like Electronic Data Interchange). These book
and magazine sales accounted for 3.2 percent and 5.3 percent of the industry’s total and e-commerce
product sales, respectively. See U.S. Census Bureau (2005) for details.
  16
     See, for example, Katz and Payne (2000) and Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2001). Auto
manufacturers are prohibited from selling their cars directly. Even online buying services like autobytel.com
and carsdirect.com do not sell their own inventories of cars to their customers. Instead, they act as referral
services, matching customers to their affiliated physical dealers.


                                                       23
face is in how easy it is for consumers to find out about their products or to be matched
to low-price dealerships.
       There is anecdotal evidence that e-commerce channels have increased the number of
dealers from whom they obtain quotes before purchasing (Gartner 2004). Furthermore,
Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso examine in a set of papers the relationship
between buyers’ use of e-commerce channels and the (lower) final prices they pay for their
cars.17 However, we are unaware of any attempt to formally analyze what this reduction
in search costs leads to in terms of the market structure of auto dealerships. The model
offers guidance as to the likely mechanism and its impact; namely, that declining search
costs led to shrinking and exit among the low-type dealers and shifted market share to the
highest-type operations.
       Panel A of Table 4 shows changes in the number of new auto dealer establishments
by size over the sample period. Unlike travel agencies and bookstores, total number of
establishments did not decline. In fact, the number rose slightly. Some of this gain came
from growth in the number of establishments with less than ten employees. It is not clear
what types of operations these are, particularly those with 1-4 employees, which is quite
small even for “standard” dealerships in isolated rural settings.
       Excepting these, however, the remainder of the establishment size types exhibit the
patterns seen before. (Note also from panel C of Table 1 that, unlike travel agencies and
bookstores, the bulk of the industry’s establishments are not concentrated in the smallest
employment categories. Over two-thirds have between 10 and 100 employees.) There
were drops in the number of dealerships in the 10-19 and 20-49 employee categories –
just under 20 percent in the former case and 10 percent in the latter – but growth in the
number of larger-sized establishments. Moreover, the growth rate in the establishment
counts increases with the size category. (Because the number of auto dealers with 100-249
employees is so much larger than in the travel agency and bookstores industry, we have
included this as a separate category in our analysis here and aggregated establishments
with 250 or more employees together.)
       The regression results are shown in panel B of Table 4. Again only the specification
with year fixed effects is shown. The changes in the aggregate establishment counts just
  17
       Scott Morton, Zettelmeyer, and Silva-Risso (2001) show that car shoppers using Autobytel.com to get
free quotes from dealers in their market end up paying lower prices. Zettelmeyer, Morton, and Silva-Risso
(2005) provide evidence that the lower prices obtained by consumers utilizing online resources is not solely
due to a selection bias in which hard-bargaining or low-search-cost customers choose to use the Internet.



                                                     24
discussed are in fact related to local consumers’ use of the internet to make purchases. While
the coefficients on fraction online are insignificant for the three smallest establishment size
categories, there is a significant negative impact of local online purchasing on the number of
dealerships with 20-49 employees in the market. Its economic size strikes us as nontrivial; a
one-standard-deviation increase in online shopping corresponds to a 3.5 percent drop in the
establishment count. At the same time, increasing e-commerce activity drives growth in
the number of local dealerships with 50 or more employees. The result is not significant for
the largest establishment size category (though the coefficient is large and positive), likely
due to the small number of market-years in our sample with very large dealerships. If we
estimate as above an alternative specification using an indicator for market-years where
at least one such establishment exists, however, we do find a significant positive impact of
e-commerce on the presence of very large auto dealers.
    Interestingly, the first two columns of panel B suggest that e-commerce has had an
expansionary effect on the industry overall. Markets where internet purchasing grew more
than average saw higher increases in auto dealer establishment counts and employment
(recall that this is controlling for overall employment changes in the market). This is of
course opposite what is seen in the travel agency and bookstores industries. This likely
reflects the fact discussed above that e-commerce did not facilitate growth in new auto
sales through channels external to the industry, unlike what happened for travel agents
and booksellers. Thus here, industry producers overall were able to benefit from market
expansions driven by reductions in consumers’ search costs, rather than losing part or all
of the expanded market to sellers outside the industry.


6     Conclusions
This paper has investigated the equilibrium market structure changes spurred by the in-
troduction of e-commerce tools that reduce consumers’ search costs. We specified a gen-
eral industry model involving consumers with differing search costs buying products from
heterogeneous-type producers. Solving for the equilibrium in the general case, we showed
how shifts in the consumer search cost distribution impact equilibrium prices and market
shares. Specifically, downward shifts in search costs lead to lower prices and shift market
share from low-type producers to the industry’s high-type businesses.
    While there is an empirical literature investigating the advent and diffusion of e-commerce
on prices, little has been done regarding the market structure impacts – specifically, the

                                              25
shifts in market share from low- to high-type businesses that our model predicts. We test
these predictions in three industries for which the introduction of e-commerce has arguably
decreased consumers’ search costs considerably: travel agencies, bookstores, and new auto
dealers.
    We found evidence of the market share shifts predicted by the model. As consumers’
use of the internet to make purchases rose, smaller establishments (where size reflects firm
“type”) declined in number and larger establishments became more dominant.
    Interestingly, while the nature of the market share reallocations were similar in the
industries, the specific mechanisms through which the declining search costs created them
were different. For travel agencies, the shifts reflected aggregate changes, common across
markets, driven in large part by airlines’ reductions in agent commissions in response
to consumers’ increasing use of online sources to buy tickets. This is evidenced by the
fact that once these aggregate changes in internet purchasing patterns were controlled for,
there was no indication that the magnitude of the market share changes were any larger
(smaller) in markets experiencing idiosyncratically high (low) growth in consumers’ online
purchases. For bookstores and auto dealers, on the other hand, there was evidence that
more exit occurred among smaller stores in those markets where internet use grew fastest.
This suggests that the industry-wide declines in small bookstores and auto dealers reflect
market-specific impacts.


7     Appendix

7.1    Rationale for Uniform Search Costs
Since we know (from Proposition 1) that the best-response price function p(c, F, t) is in-
creasing in t for all F and c, a natural sufficient condition for the equilibrium price function
p∗ and equilibrium distribution F ∗ to be increasing in t is that the market be supermod-
ular in the sense of Rauh (2008). That is, we look for conditions under which each firm’s
profit function has increasing differences in own price p and market price distribution F .
If this is the case, the best-response function p(c, F, t) is increasing in F . Since p(c, F, t)
is also increasing in t, this implies that the equilibrium price function p∗ (c, t) is increasing
in t for all c. Intuitively, the increase of t has two effects on the price function of a given
firm: first, the direct effect, holding the price distribution constant (which is positive by
Proposition 1) and, second, the indirect effect due to the increase in the prices of other


                                               26
firms (which is positive by supermodularity). While the condition of supermodularity is
not strictly necessary for the equilibrium price function to be increasing in t, intuition
suggests that an unambiguous general comparative statics result for p∗ with respect to t
is unlikely to obtain when the effect of the market price on the best-response individual
pricing function is ambiguous, which will typically be the case when the market exhibits
no complementarities.
   We now turn to Rauh (2008) for a general insight into the class of search cost distribu-
tions that result in a supermodular search market. Before we do so, we must note, however,
that the class of models considered in Rauh (2008) differs from ours in two fundamental
ways: first, our model contains an endogenous probability of firms quitting the market af-
ter realizing that their marginal cost exceeds the threshold c̄, which is absent from Rauh’s
model, and, second, the total mass of firms L is endogenously determined in our model,
but is fixed at an exogenous level in Rauh’s. These additional features make our model
more complicated than Rauh’s, yet the same basic forces are at play in determining the
interaction between own price p and market price F . In particular, the nature of the added
complexity suggests that the cases for which supermodularity can be guaranteed in our
model is a subset of those that yield supermodularity in Rauh’s model.
   Unfortunately, it turns out that this observation forces us to restrict our attention to
the uniform distribution of search costs. The reason for this conclusion is as follows. First,
note that if the search cost density is increasing sharply over its range, a rightward shift of
the distribution (i.e., an increase of search costs) decreases the advantage of low-cost firms,
because they now need to share more of their customer base with more high-cost firms.
Thus, in his Proposition 3, Rauh shows that the search cost density must not be increasing
too sharply, lest an increase in the search costs should actually decrease the demand faced
by low-cost firms. Second, note that if the search cost density is decreasing sharply over its
range, an increase in search costs increases the mass of marginal consumers (i.e., consumers
indifferent between buying and not buying) at a range of prices, consequently decreasing
incentives to raise prices. This observation is at the heart of Rauh’s Proposition 5, which
gives an upper bound on the rate of decrease in the search cost density. Propositions 3 and 5
together show that supermodularity cannot be guaranteed unless the search cost is neither
increasing nor decreasing too sharply. To quote Rauh (p. 15): “The uniform distribution
therefore represents the canonical example of complementarities.” Furthermore, the bounds
that Rauh’s Propositions 3 and 5 place on the absolute value of the slope of the search cost
density reduce to zero when there is no set price cap, beyond which consumers always have


                                              27
zero demand. Thus, with infinitely inelastic unit demand, as in our model, complementarity
in the baseline model of Rauh (2008) can be ensured only if the search cost distribution is
uniform. This leads us to restrict our attention to the uniform distribution.


7.2      Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1
   Denoting p∗ ≡ p(c, F, t) and rewriting the FOC for the best-response price (8), we
obtain
                                                                          x(p∗ , F, t)
                                  0 = ψ(p∗ , F, t) ≡ (p∗ − c) +                          .
                                                                          xp (p∗ , F, t)
   Differentiating with respect to p∗ yields (omitting the arguments for visual clarity):
                                                 
                 (xp )2 − xxpp    1           x      (8) 1
       ψp = 1 +             2
                               =      2xp − xpp =            (2xp + (p∗ − c)xpp ) > 0,
                      (xp )      xp          xp          xp |         {z       }
                                                        |{z}       <0 by (9)
                                                                             <0

   By the Implicit Function Theorem,
                                                              ∂p∗   ψt
                                                                  =− ,
                                                              ∂t    ψp
                        ∂p∗
which implies that       ∂t
                               > 0 iff ψt < 0.
   Now, we can write
                                 R∞         Rr            Z ∞    Rr             
              x(p∗ , F, t)        p∗
                                       q F (u) du | t dr
                                             0                  q 0 F (u) du | t
                             =       R ∗              =−       R ∗              dr.
              xp (p∗ , F, t)           p
                                   −q 0 F (u) du | t        p∗ q
                                                                    p
                                                                      F (u) du | t
                                                                   0
        Rr                R p∗
Since    0
             F (u) du >    0
                                 F (u) du for all r > p∗ , the MLRP implies that the integrand is
increasing in t for each r. Consequently, the entire expression is decreasing in t, and thus
                                           ∂p∗
also ψt < 0. But this implies               ∂t
                                                  > 0, as noted above.
   Proof of Lemma 1
   Implicitly differentiating the two identities that define a search equilibrium, (18) and (19),
                                                 ∂ ρ̄         ∂L
yields a system of equations for                 ∂a
                                                        and   ∂a
                                                                 :
                                                          ∂ ρ̄      ∂L
                                                 Ψa + Ψρ̄      + ΨL    = 0;                  (21)
                                                          ∂a        ∂a
                                                          ∂ ρ̄      ∂L
                                                 Φa + Φρ̄      + ΦL    = 0,                  (22)
                                                          ∂a        ∂a
where the subscripts indicate partial derivatives. Denoting
                               √       R ρ̄−2√aLν                 R c̄
                       γ(ρ̄ − 2 aLν) 0            Γ(c) dc   γ(c̄) 0 Γ(c) dc
                  I≡                    √                 =                 ,                (23)
                               2Γ(ρ̄ − 2 aLν)2                   2Γ(c̄)2

                                                                     28
the derivatives of the reservation price condition (18) are
                 r                                                              r
                    Lν                         1                                      aν
           Ψa =        I − 1;            Ψρ̄ = − I;                      ΨL =            I > 0.   (24)
                     a                         2                                      L
   Now, by Assumption 2, γ(c)/Γ(c) > γ(c̄)/Γ(c̄) for all c < c̄, so that
                       Z c̄           Z c̄
                                                Γ(c̄)      Γ(c̄)2
                            Γ(c) dc <      γ(c)       dc =        .
                         0             0        γ(c̄)      γ(c̄)
Plugging this into (23) yields I < 1/2, which immediately implies that Ψρ̄ > 0. Notice
                                                                    √
also that, sinceqthe integral in (18) is positive, (18) implies that aLν < a, from which
it follows that Lν a
                     < 1 and therefore that Ψa < I − 1 < 0. Consequently, equation (21)
implies that at least one of ρ̄ and L must be increasing in a:
                                           ∂L      ∂ ρ̄
                                              ≤0 ⇒      > 0.                                      (25)
                                           ∂a      ∂a
If both L and ρ̄ were non-increasing in a, the left-hand side of (21) would be negative,
which would contradict (21).
   Proof of Lemma 2
   The derivatives in (22) are
                                         Z ρ̄−2√aLν
                                     1
                           Φa = − 2                  (ρ̄ − c)2 γ(c) dc < 0;                       (26)
                                   4a L 0
                                      Z ρ̄−2√aLν
                                  1
                           Φρ̄ =                 (ρ̄ − c)γ(c) dc > 0;                             (27)
                                 2aL 0
                                               √
                                         Z ρ̄−2 aLν
                                     1                        2           a
                           ΦL = −                    (ρ̄ − c)   γ(c) dc =   Φa < 0.               (28)
                                   4aL2 0                                 L
Thus, (22) implies that if L is increasing in a, then ρ̄ must also be strictly increasing in a:
                                           ∂L      ∂ ρ̄
                                              >0 ⇒      > 0.                                      (29)
                                           ∂a      ∂a
If this were not true, the left-hand side of (22) would be negative, which would contra-
dict (22).
   Proof of Lemma 3 From (22) and (28),
                                                       
                ∂ ρ̄    1            ∂L      Φa      a ∂L
                     =−      Φa + ΦL      =−      1+        .                                     (30)
                ∂a      Φρ̄          ∂a      Φρ̄     L ∂a
             ∂ ρ̄
Since the    ∂a
                    > 0, Φa < 0, and Φρ̄ > 0, this implies that
                                                 ∂L   L
                                                    >− ,                                          (31)
                                                 ∂a   a
                                                     29
that is, aL is increasing in a, and thus δ = 1/(aL) is decreasing in a.
    Proof of Lemma 4
    Taking the derivative of the profit function with respect to a, we obtain
                               1                      1               ∂ ρ̄
                πa (c̄(a), a) = (ρ̄(a) − c)2 δ ′ (a) + δ(a)(ρ̄(a) − c) (a)
                               4                     2               ∂a        
                               1                   ′            ′          ∂ ρ̄
                              = (ρ̄(a) − c) −δ (a)c + ρ̄(a)δ (a) + 2δ(a) (a) .
                               4                                           ∂a
Thus, for any c ≤ c̄ < ρ̄(a), the sign of πa (c̄(a), a) equals the sign of the rightmost term
above. Since δ ′ (a) < 0 by Lemma 3, this term is increasing in c. It follows that if the term
is negative for c0 , it is, a fortiori, negative for all c < c0 .
    Proof of Proposition 3
    We begin by showing that the profit of the firm at the current marginal cost cutoff level
c̄(a) must decrease as search costs decrease. First, rewrite the entry condition (19) as
                            Z c̄(a)
                                    π(c; a)γ(c) dc − Γ(c̄(a))ν = a.
                                 0

Fully differentiating this with respect to a and noting that π(c̄(a); a) = ν, yields
                                   Z c̄(a)
                                           πa (c; a)γ(c) dc = 0.                               (32)
                                        0

Together with Lemma 4, this implies that πa (c̄(a); a) > 0: otherwise, the integrand in (32)
would be everywhere negative (by Lemma 4), which would contradict (32).
    It is now obvious that the marginal cost threshold c̄(a) decreases as a decreases. Let a
change from a1 to a2 < a1 . Then

                          π(c̄(a2 ), a2 ) = ν = π(c̄(a1 ), a1 ) > π(c̄(a1 ), a2 ),

where both equalities follow from the definition of c̄(a), and the inequality follows from
πa (c̄(a); a) > 0. Since πc (c, a) < 0 for all a and c by Property 3, this implies that c̄(a1 ) >
c̄(a2 ), as desired.
    Proof of Corollary 1
    Let a change from a0 to a1 < a0 . Let us index all corresponding quantities and func-
tions by 0 and 1, respectively. By Proposition 3, c̄1 < c̄0 . The cdf of the marginal-cost
distribution of operating firms is given by Γ̃(c) = Γ(c)/Γ(c̄). Since c1 < c0 , it immediately
follows that Γ̃1 (c) > Γ̃0 (c) for all c.
    Next, observe that p1 (0) < p0 (0) (by Proposition 2) and that p1 (c̄1 ) < p1 (c̄0 ) < p0 (c̄0 )
(the first inequality by Property 2 and c̄1 < c̄0 ; the second by Proposition 2). Thus, the sup-
port of the equilibrium price distribution shifts down, p1 < p0 and p̄1 < p̄0 . Consequently,

                                                    30
F1 (p) ≥ F0 (p) on the complement of [p0 , p̄1 ], since F0 (p) = 0 for p < p0 and F1 (p) = 1 for
p > p̄1 .
    Finally, by Proposition 2, p1 (c) < p0 (c) for all c ∈ [0, c1 ], so that p−1       −1
                                                                              1 (r) > p0 (r) for all

r ∈ [p0 , p̄1 ]. Since c̄1 < c̄0 , it follows from the definition of F ((12)) that F1 (p) > F0 (p) for
all p ∈ [p0 , p1 ].
    Proof of Corollary 2
    Recall the equation from the proof of Proposition 3:
                                       Z       c̄(a)
                                                       πa (c; a)γ(c) dc = 0.
                                           0

    This would be violated if πa (c; a) > 0 for all c < c̄. Thus, there exists ĉ < c̄ such that
πa (ĉ; a) ≤ 0. But then, by Lemma 4, πa (c; a) < 0 for all c < ĉ.
      Proof of Corollary 3 The total market share of all operating firms equals one: 1 =
R c̄(a)
 0
        X(c, a) dc. Differentiating this with respect to a yields
                                                                  Z   c̄(a)
                                   ′
                             0 = c̄ (a)X(c̄(a), a) +                          Xa (c, a) dc.
                                                                  0
                                                                         R c̄(a)
Since c′ (a) > 0 by Proposition 3, this implies that                          0
                                                                                   Xa (c, a) < 0. In particular, there
exists ĉ < c̄ such that Xa (ĉ, a) < 0.
    By definition,
                                                                       1
                           X(c, a) = Lx(c; a)γ(c) =                      (ρ̄(a) − c)γ(c).
                                                                      2a
Thus,                                                       
                                       1               1 ′
                         Xa (c, a) = − 2 (ρ̄(a) − c) + ρ̄ (a) γ(c).
                                      2a              2a
The sign of this expression equals the sign of the expression in parentheses, which is clearly
increasing in c. Thus, Xa (ĉ; a) < 0 implies that Xa (c; a) < 0 for all c < ĉ.


7.3         Conditions for Increasing L
Substituting (30) into (21) and collecting terms yields
                                              
                             ∂L          a Φa          Φa
                                  ΨL −           = Ψρ̄     − Ψa .
                             ∂a          L Φρ̄         Φρ̄

Since ΨL > 0, Φa < 0, and Φρ̄ > 0,
                                                   
                                 ∂L           Φa
                           sgn      = sgn Ψρ̄     − Ψa .
                                 ∂a           Φρ̄

                                                             31
Applying equations (24) and (26) through (28), we get
                                          r          !                       R ρ̄−2√aLν
                Φa                              Lν                    1             0
                                                                                               (ρ̄ − c)2 γ(c) dc
            Ψρ̄     − Ψa =       1−I                         −          −I       R ρ̄−2√aLν                           ,
                Φρ̄                              a                    2        2a 0         (ρ̄     − c)γ(c) dc

where I is as defined in(23). Noting that I < 12 , we see that
                                                   q         
                                                         Lν             R ρ̄−2√aLν
                   ∂L                 1−I                a                              (ρ̄ − c)2 γ(c) dc
                                                                         0
                      >0 ⇔                  1
                                                                 >      R ρ̄−2√aLν                          .
                   ∂a                       2
                                                −I                     2a 0         (ρ̄      − c)γ(c) dc

Integrating both the numerator and the denominator in the fraction on the right-hand side
by parts and substituting in the reservation price condition (19) transforms the condition
to                                       q          
                                                Lν                                      √
              ∂L                 1−I            a          Lν   1
                                                                              Z     ρ̄−2 aLν
                                                                                                          Γ(c)
                 >0 ⇔             1
                                                        >    + 2                              (ρ̄ − c)         dc.       (33)
              ∂a                  2
                                      −I                    a  2a               0                         Γ(c̄)
Since the left-hand expression is greater than or equal to 2 and the first summand on the
                                                                                                    ∂L
right-hand side is less than or equal to 1, a sufficient condition for                              ∂a
                                                                                                           > 0 would be
                                  Z           √
                                          ρ̄−2 aLν
                                                                       Γ(c)      a2
                                                         (ρ̄ − c)            dc ≥ .
                                      0                                Γ(c̄)     2

Even though numerical simulations suggest that this condition does hold for most, if not
all, distributions Γ, there does not appear an analytically tractable way of showing this or
any other condition leading to (33).


7.4    Numerical Simulations
Closed-form solutions for equilibrium components such as the price distribution, the marginal
cost cutoff, and the mass of firms do not exist even in the case when the search cost distri-
bution is uniform. When search costs are not uniformly distributed, algebraic means are
even less successful: not only are there no closed form solutions, but also, as explained in
Appendix 7.1, it is in general very hard even to derive comparative statics results. We there-
fore turn to numerical simulations in this section. The goal is twofold: first, to illustrate the
known comparative statics results for the uniform distribution, and, second, to determine
whether similar results can be obtained for another class of distributions. These latter
investigations show that comparative results analogous to those from the uniform search
cost distribution case do obtain when search costs follow an exponential distribution.


                                                                  32
   Since the equilibrium is straightforwardly defined by a system of equations ((2), (6),
(8), (10), (11), and (12)), there is no need for an ad-hoc numerical algorithm. We simply
discretize the search cost, marginal cost, and price spaces and solve the resulting system
of nonlinear equations using the mathematical modeling language AMPL with the solvers
SNOPT and MINOS.


7.4.1   Uniform Search Cost Distribution

Let the search cost distribution be uniform on [0, a]. The results derived in the theoretical
section then show that the marginal cost threshold c̄ should be increasing in a and that
equilibrium price distributions should shift to the right as a increases. Consequently, the
                     R p(c̄)
expected price µp = 0 pf (p) dp should also be increasing in a. The theoretical analysis
remains silent about the direction of change in the mass of firms L. Using three different
distributions for the marginal cost distribution, we confirm the theoretical results for c̄, F ,
and µp . Furthermore, for all of the cases studied we also observe that the mass of firms, L,
increases in a.
   The changes of c̄, µp , and L with respect to a are shown in Figure 1. Equilibrium price
distributions F for three different levels of a are shown in Figure 2.




                                              33
                                                                               20
         .8
         .7




                                                                               15
                                                                        Mass of firms
         .6
 Cutoff MC




                                                                            10
  .5     .4




                                                                               5
         .3




                                                                               0
                    .5        1                1.5                 2                    .5        1                1.5                 2
                                           a                                                                   a

                         Uniform(0,1) MC       Exponential(1) MC                             Uniform(0,1) MC       Exponential(1) MC
                         Beta(2,1) MC                                                        Beta(2,1) MC
         2.5    2
 Expected price
     1.5 1
         .5




                    .5        1                1.5                 2
                                           a

                         Uniform(0,1) MC       Exponential(1) MC
                         Beta(2,1) MC




Figure 1: Comparative statics with respect to search cost increases when search costs are
uniform (for three types of marginal cost (MC) distribution)




                                                                   34
                  Marginal cost distribution: Uniform(0,1)                               Marginal cost distribution: Exp(1)
        1




                                                                               1
        .8




                                                                               .8
        .6




                                                                               .6
 F(p)




                                                                        F(p)
        .4




                                                                               .4
        .2




                                                                               .2
        0




             .5       1            1.5         2             2.5               0    .5    1            1.5         2          2.5
                                         p                                                                   p

                               a = 0.5       a = 1.25                                              a = 0.5       a = 1.25
                               a = 2.0                                                             a = 2.0



                   Marginal cost distribution: Beta(2,1)
        1
        .8
        .6
 F(p)
        .4
        .2
        0




             .5       1            1.5         2             2.5
                                         p

                               a = 0.5       a = 1.25
                               a = 2.0




Figure 2: Equilibrium price distributions for three levels of uniform search costs (a) under
three types of marginal cost distribution




                                                                   35
7.4.2    Exponential Search Cost Distribution

Let the search cost distribution have an exponential distribution with parameter λ = −a >
0. Then, higher a corresponds to higher search costs (in the sense of MLRP). Using three
different distributions for the marginal cost distribution, we find that the local comparative
statics are analogous to those obtained for uniform search cost distributions. In particular,
c̄, F , µp , and L are all increasing in a.
   The changes of c̄, µp , and L with respect to a are shown in Figure 3. Equilibrium price
distributions F for three different levels of a are shown in Figure 4.




                                              36
                                                                                  25
         .7




                                                                                  20
           .6




                                                                           Mass of firms
 Cutoff MC




                                                                                 15
  .5




                                                                                  10
         .4




                                                                                  5
         .3




                   −1.5                     −1                       −.5                   −1.5                     −1                       −.5
                                            a                                                                       a

                          Uniform(0,1) MC        Exponential(1) MC                                Uniform(0,1) MC        Exponential(1) MC
                          Beta(2,1) MC                                                            Beta(2,1) MC
         2.5   2
 Expected price
  1.5    1




                   −1.5                     −1                       −.5
                                            a

                          Uniform(0,1) MC        Exponential(1) MC
                          Beta(2,1) MC




Figure 3: Comparative statics with respect to search cost increases when search costs are
exponential (for three types of marginal cost (MC) distribution)




                                                                     37
                  Marginal cost distribution: Uniform(0,1)                                      Marginal cost distribution: Exp(1)
        1




                                                                                      1
        .8




                                                                                      .8
        .6




                                                                                      .6
 F(p)




                                                                               F(p)
        .4




                                                                                      .4
        .2




                                                                                      .2
        0




             .5         1            1.5            2               2.5               0    .5    1           1.5          2          2.5
                                           p                                                                        p

                              a = −1.5             a = −1.0                                              a = −1.5        a = −1.0
                              a = −0.5                                                                   a = −0.5



                   Marginal cost distribution: Beta(2,1)
        1
        .8
        .6
 F(p)
        .4
        .2
        0




             .5     1          1.5             2              2.5         3
                                           p

                              a = −1.5             a = −1.0
                              a = −0.5




Figure 4: Equilibrium price distributions for three levels of exponential search costs (a)
under three types of marginal cost distribution




                                                                          38
   References
   Asplund, Marcus and Volker Nocke. “Firm Turnover in Imperfectly Competitive Mar-
kets.” Review of Economic Studies, 73(2), 2006, 295-327.
   Bagnoli, Mark, and Bergstrom, Ted. “Log-Concave Probability and its Applications,”
Economic Theory, 26(2), 2005, 445-469.
   Baye, Michael R., John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten. “Price Dispersion in the Small
and in the Large: Evidence from an Internet Price Comparison Site.” Journal of Industrial
Economics, 52(4), 2004, 463-96.
   Benabou, Roland. “Search Market Equilibrium, Bilateral Heterogeneity, and Repeat
Purchases.” Journal of Economic Theory, 60(1), 1993, 140-58.
   Brown, Jeffrey R. and Austan Goolsbee. “Does the Internet Make Markets More Com-
petitive? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry.” Journal of Political Economy, 110(3),
2002, 481-507.
   Brynjolfsson, Erik and Michael Smith. “Frictionless Commerce? A Comparison of
Internet and Conventional Retailers.” Management Science, 46(4), 2000, 563-585.
   Clay, Karen, Ramayya Krishnan, Eric Wolff, and Danny Fernandes. “Retail Strategies
on the Web: Price and Non-price Competition in the Online Book Industry.” Journal of
Industrial Economics, 50(3), 2002, 351-367.
   Clay, Karen, Ramayya Krishnan, and Eric Wolff. “Prices and Price Dispersion on the
Web: Evidence from the Online Book Industry.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 49(4),
2001, 521-539.
   Diamond, Peter. “A Model of Price Adjustment.” Journal of Economic Theory, 3,
1971, 156-168.
   Gartner, John. “Car Dealers Feel Net Effect.” Wired, June 11, 2004.
   Goolsbee, Austan. “In a World Without Borders: The Impact of Taxes on Internet
Commerce.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2), 2000, 561-576.
   Herman, Eric. “Independent New York City Bookstore Reaches Final Chapter.” New
York Daily News, December 21, 2001.
   Hopenhayn, Hugo A. “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium.”
Econometrica, 60(5), 1992, 1127-50.
   Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson. “Product Differentiation, Search Costs, and Com-
petition in the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 Index Funds.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 119(2), 2004, 403-56.



                                              39
   Katz, Diane and Henry Payne. “Traffic Jam: Auto Dealers Use Government to Build
Internet Roadblocks.” Reason, July 2000.
   Latcovich, Simon and Howard Smith. ”Pricing, Sunk Costs, and Market Structure
Online: Evidence from Book Retailing.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 17 (2), Summer
2001, 217-234.
   McCall, John J., 1970, “Economics of Information and Job Search.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 84, 113-126.
   Melitz, Marc J. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity.” Econometrica, 71(6), 2003, 1695-1725.
   Melo, Frederick. “Bookstore No More.” St. Paul Pioneer Press, August 26, 2005.
   National Commission to Ensure Consumer Information and Choice in the Airline Indus-
try. “Upheaval in Travel Distribution: Impact on Consumers and Travel Agents.” Report
to Congress and the President, 2002.
   Rauh, Michael T. “Nonstandard Foundations of Equilibrium Search Models.” Journal
of Economic Theory, 132(1), 2007, 518-529.
   Rauh, Michael T. “Strategic Complementarities and Search Market Equilibrium.” Forth-
coming in Games and Economic Behavior. 2008.
   Rob, Rafael, “Equilibrium Price Distributions.” Review of Economic Studies, 52, 1985,
487-504.
   Scott Morton, Fiona, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Jorge Silva-Risso. “Internet Car Retail-
ing.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 49(4), 2001, 501-19.
   Stigler, G. J. “The Economics of Information.” Journal of Political Economy, 69(3),
1961, 213-225.
   Sutton, J. Sunk Costs and Market Structure, 1991, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
   Syverson, Chad. “Market Structure and Productivity: A Concrete Example.” Journal
of Political Economy, 112(6), 2004, 1181-1222.
   U.S. Census Bureau. “2003 E-commerce Multi-sector Report.” Available at URL:
http://www.census.gov/eos/www/ebusiness614.htm. 2005.
   Weisman, Robert. “Final Chapter for WordsWorth Books on Boston’s Harvard Square
is Saturday.” Boston Globe, October 27, 2004.
   Zettelmeyer, Florian, Fiona Scott Morton, and Jorge Silva-Risso. “How the Internet
Lowers Prices: Evidence from Matched Survey and Auto Transaction Data.” NBER Work-
ing Paper 11515, 2005.



                                             40
Table 1. Cross‐Sectional Comparison of CEA Markets: Average Establishment Counts


A. Travel Agencies

                                         Mean          25%ile        Median        75%ile
        Total establishments             74.3           10.8          22.4          58.3
      Estabs w/ 1‐4 employees            48.4            6.6          13.6          35.7
      Estabs w/ 5‐9 employees            16.8             3             6           13.7
    Estabs w/ 10‐19 employees             5.9            0.7           1.9           4.5
    Estabs w/ 20‐49 employees             2.3             0            0.6           1.8
    Estabs w/ 50‐99 employees             0.6             0             0            0.4
   Estabs w/ over 100 employees           0.4             0             0            0.1


B. Bookstores

                                         Mean          25%ile        Median        75%ile
        Total establishments             35.4            9.8          17.8          36.6
      Estabs w/ 1‐4 employees            15.3            4.3           8.3          17.8
      Estabs w/ 5‐9 employees             9.9            2.8            5           10.5
    Estabs w/ 10‐19 employees             6.0            1.4           2.8           6.2
    Estabs w/ 20‐49 employees             3.1            0.6           1.4           3.5
    Estabs w/ 50‐99 employees             1.0             0            0.3           1.1
   Estabs w/ over 100 employees           0.2             0             0            0.1


C. Auto Dealers

                                         Mean          25%ile        Median        75%ile
        Total establishments             73.5           24.8          41.7           82
      Estabs w/ 1‐4 employees            11.3            3.2           5.8          12.1
      Estabs w/ 5‐9 employees             5.2            1.7           3.3           6.7
    Estabs w/ 10‐19 employees            10.5            3.6           7.2          13.5
    Estabs w/ 20‐49 employees            24.8             9           15.5          28.3
    Estabs w/ 50‐99 employees            15.4            3.9           7.4          16.3
   Estabs w/ 100‐249 employees             6             0.4           1.9           5.6
   Estabs w/ over 250 employees           0.4             0             0            0.2
Table 2. Market Structure Patterns: Travel Agencies


A. Establishment Counts: U.S. Aggregates

                                               Employment Category
 Year        Total       1‐4          5‐9       10‐19      20‐49         50‐99        100+
 1994       28,118      18,186       6,774      2,121       759           169          109
 1995       28,099      18,089       6,710      2,212       802           176          110
 1996       28,735      18,654       6,724      2,181       859           200          117
 1997       29,452      19,183       6,758      2,332       834           206          139
 1998       28,776      18,460       6,755      2,325       861           212          163
 1999       27,390      17,611       6,281      2,276       821           225          176
 2000       25,975      16,783       5,836      2,091       845           234          186
 2001       24,654      16,050       5,306      2,000       853           243          202
 2002       21,079      14,281       4,151      1,581       681           201          184
 2003       18,860      12,865       3,556      1,430       653           182          174


B. Local Market Structure and Fraction Purchasing Online in Market

             ln(total   ln(total          ln(establishments) by employment category
              emp.)     estabs.)     1‐4       5‐9     10‐19     20‐49   50‐99      100+
    N         3449       3449       3426      3306      2548      1740     783       538
    R2         0.96       0.98       0.97      0.94     0.91      0.89    0.83       0.84
 Fraction    ‐0.932*    ‐1.117*    ‐0.906* ‐1.538* ‐0.870* ‐0.357*       0.072      0.161
  Online     (0.047)    (0.026)    (0.036) (0.047) (0.065) (0.070) (0.106) (0.137)


C. Local Market Structure and Fraction Purchasing Online in Market, with Year Fixed
Effects

             ln(total   ln(total          ln(establishments) by employment category
              emp.)     estabs.)     1‐4        5‐9    10‐19     20‐49   50‐99       100+
    N         3449       3449       3426       3306     2548      1740     783        538
    R2         0.96       0.99       0.97      0.94     0.91      0.89    0.84       0.84
 Fraction     0.278      0.033      0.029     ‐0.075   ‐0.178    0.180   ‐0.218     ‐0.195
  Online     (0.165)    (0.084)    (0.138) (0.161) (0.226) (0.251) (0.509) (0.592)

Notes: All regression specifications include CEA market fixed effects and control for (logged) overall
employment in the market‐year. Robust standard errors in parentheses. An asterisk denotes
significance at
the five percent level.
Table 3. Market Structure Patterns: Bookstores


A. Establishment Counts: U.S. Aggregates

                                               Employment Category
 Year        Total        1‐4         5‐9       10‐19      20‐49         50‐99        100+
 1994       13,520       6,625       3,840      2,198       708           102          47
 1995       13,403       6,234       3,985      2,165       806           154          59
 1996       13,134       5,916       4,039      1,940       966           211          62
 1997       12,301       5,254       3,753      2,021       933           286          54
 1998       12,151       5,031       3,588      2,025      1,088          357          62
 1999       11,957       4,878       3,467      2,063      1,076          410          63
 2000       11,662       4,641       2,953      2,349      1,163          485          71
 2001       11,559       4,678       3,100      2,023      1,276          411          71
 2002       12,178       5,494       2,777      2,089      1,275          475          68
 2003       11,036       4,493       2,900      1,909      1,237          428          69


B. Local Market Structure and Fraction Purchasing Online in Market, with Year Fixed
Effects

             ln(total   ln(total          ln(establishments) by employment category
              emp.)     estabs.)      1‐4      5‐9     10‐19     20‐49   50‐99      100+
    N         3448       3448        3386     3338      3031      2400    1275       423
    R2         0.94       0.96       0.91      0.89     0.86      0.86    0.81       0.74
 Fraction    ‐0.307*    ‐0.316*     ‐0.161 ‐0.398* ‐0.817*       0.220   0.485      0.003
  Online     (0.148)    (0.115)    (0.172) (0.187) (0.210) (0.208) (0.357) (0.377)

Notes: All regression specifications include CEA market fixed effects and control for (logged) overall
employment in the market‐year. Robust standard errors in parentheses. An asterisk denotes
significance at the five percent level.
     Table 4. Market Structure Patterns: New Auto Dealers


     A. Establishment Counts: U.S. Aggregates

                                                   Employment Category
      Year       Total       1‐4       5‐9      10‐19    20‐49    50‐99       100‐249       250+
      1994      24,130      2,715     1,724     4,142    9,017    4,853        1,601          78
      1995      24,230      2,850     1,653     3,882    8,927    5,063        1,755         100
      1996      24,639      3,320     1,691     3,735    8,757    5,155        1,866         115
      1997      26,208      3,848     1,941     3,825    9,065    5,376        2,022         131
      1998      26,216      4,117     1,971     3,777    8,873    5,421        1,931         126
      1999      26,117      4,287     1,948     3,611    8,616    5,437        2,083         135
      2000      26,225      4,440     1,841     3,505    8,380    5,592        2,303         164
      2001      26,444      4,759     1,863     3,462    8,373    5,493        2,332         162
      2002      25,625      4,176     1,723     3,282    8,202    5,600        2,451         191
      2003      26,707      4,654     1,891     3,394    8,237    5,768        2,532         231


     B. Local Market Structure and Fraction Purchasing Online in Market, with Year Fixed
     Effects

             ln(total    ln(total                 ln(establishments) by employment category
              emp.)      estabs.)     1‐4        5‐9      10‐19     20‐49      50‐99   100‐249        250+
   N           3423        3425      3300       3021       3311      3423      3363      2455          643
   R2          0.99        0.99       0.88      0.82       0.91      0.95       0.95      0.94         0.80
Fraction      0.155*      0.130*     0.200     ‐0.081     ‐0.063   ‐0.231*    0.230*    0.595*        0.530
 Online      (0.054)     (0.042)    (0.187)   (0.215)    (0.146)   (0.091)    (0.117)   (0.175)      (0.602)

     Notes: All regression specifications include CEA market fixed effects and control for (logged) overall
     employment in the market‐year. Robust standard errors in parentheses. An asterisk denotes
     significance at the five percent level.
