                                       NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       LIFTING THE CURSE OF DIMENSIONALITY:
MEASURES OF THE LABOR LEGISLATION CLIMATE IN THE STATES DURING THE PROGRESSIVE ERA

                                                 Price V. Fishback
                                                 Rebecca Holmes
                                                   Samuel Allen

                                               Working Paper 14167
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w14167


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             July 2008




       Price V. Fishback is the Frank and Clara Kramer Professor of Economics at the University of Arizona
       and a Research Associate with the National Bureau of Economic Research, Department of Economics,
       University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 (520-621-4421, pfishback@bpa.arizona.edu). Rebecca
       Holmes is Director of Economics, Cox Communications, 1550 W. Deer Valley Rd, Phoenix, AZ 85027,(phone
       623-328-3983, Rebecca.Holmes@cox.com. Samuel Allen is an Assistant Professor of Economics
       at the Virginia Military Institute. Department of Economics and Business, 341 Scott Shipp Hall, Virginia
       Military Institute, Lexington, VA 24450 (540-464-7061, AllenSK@vmi.edu). We would like to thank
       Robert Margo, Paul Rhode, Andy Daughety, Gerald Friedman, Claudia Goldin, Lawrence Katz, Sumner
       LaCroix, Jeremy Atack, Shawn Kantor, Bill Collins, Ronald Oaxaca, Joshua Rosenbloom, Lou Cain,
       and Tom Weiss for helpful comments. Keith Poole deserves special thanks for his generosity in sharing
       information about and guiding us through the process of using the optimal classification technique
       for the COORDINATE measures. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
       necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

       NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
       reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
       NBER publications.

       © 2008 by Price V. Fishback, Rebecca Holmes, and Samuel Allen. All rights reserved. Short sections
       of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
       credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Lifting the Curse of Dimensionality: Measures of the Labor Legislation Climate in the States
During the Progressive Era
Price V. Fishback, Rebecca Holmes , and Samuel Allen
NBER Working Paper No. 14167
July 2008
JEL No. J18,K31,N31,N32,N41,N42

                                                ABSTRACT

One of the most difficult problems in the social sciences is measuring the policy climate in societies.
Prior to the 1930s the vast majority of labor regulations in the U.S. were enacted at the state level.
In this paper we develop several summary measures of labor regulation that document the changes
in labor regulation across states and over time during the Progressive Era. The measures include an
Employer-Share-Weighted Index (ESWI) that weights regulations by the share of workers affected
and builds up the overall index from 17 categories of regulation; the number of pages of laws; appropriations
for spending on labor issues per worker; and two nonparametric COORDINATES that summarize
locations in a policy space. We describe the pluses and minuses of the measures, how strongly they
are correlated, and show the stories that they tell about the changes in labor regulation during the progressive
era. We then provide preliminary evidence on the extent to which the labor regulation measures are
associated with political and economic correlates identified as important in histories of industrial relations
and labor markets.


Price V. Fishback                                      Samuel Allen
Department of Economics                                Virginia Military Institute
University of Arizona                                  341 Scott Shipp Hall
Tucson, AZ 85721                                       Lexington, VA 24450
and NBER                                               allensk@vmi.edu
pfishback@eller.arizona.edu

Rebecca Holmes
Cox Communications
rebecca.holmes@cox.com
                                                                                                 3


        Lifting the Curse of Dimensionality: Measures of the Labor Legislation Climate

                              in the States During the Progressive Era


       One of the most difficult problems in the social sciences arises when trying to develop

summary measures of the policy climate in societies. Government regulation, constitutions,

and legal structures are often messy and not easily quantified. In modern societies they often

involve thousands of pages of laws, court decisions, and administrative decisions within the

government, as well as in external assessments by politicians, lawyers, and scholars. Yet

summary measures that isolate the key components of the policy climate are necessary for

developing an understanding of how the measures were adopted and their impact on societies.

       Over the past few decades, as statistical analysis has begun to play an increasing role in

the social sciences, scholars have developed a wide variety of quantitative measures of features

that do not lend themselves easily to measurement. For example, Jack Walker (1969)

developed an “innovation score” to describe the changes in state government policies before

1965 for 88 different programs.1 Poole and Rosenthal (1991, 1997, 2000) and Poole (2005)

use measures of legislative voting to develop “spatial coordinates” that describe the typical

positions in the public policy space of the U.S. Congress and the British Parliament.

Alternative measures of voting ideology have been created during the same era by Berry,

Ringquist, Fording, and Hanson (1998). Numerous scholars have found this work useful for

estimating the influences on policy and the influence of policy on social factors.2

       Scholars and policy makers interested in the study of the importance of Democracy, the

extent of market economies, and the protection of individual freedoms have developed indices

like the Index of Economic Freedom, the Freedom House scores, and the rule-of-law. These
                                                                                                    4


have been used by a large number of social scientists in analyzing the determinants of these

policies and their impact on economic growth and other measures of the success of society.3

        Nearly every historian of labor relations and labor markets examines the role of

governments in determining (or not determining) rules for collective action, arbitration of

disagreements between workers and employers, and standards for the terms of employment.4

Whether the work is narrative or quantitative in nature, nearly all grapple with issues about

how best to describe the nature of government policies.5

        To aid businesses, unions, and workers understanding of the labor regulation climate

during the Progressive Era, the U.S. Commissioner of Labor and then the Bureau of Labor

Statistics published volumes that described the text of all of the labor statutes on the books in

the states. In the 1930s John R. Commons and his Associates, in particular, Elizabeth

Brandeis, offered detailed assessments of these policies in their History of Labor in the United

States. 6 Having worked with these sources and the original statutes and studied many court

decisions in the course of studying workers’ compensation and other labor issues, we have seen

the great diversity and breadth in labor regulations. This diversity sometimes gets lost in the

analysis of labor legislation during the Progressive Era because most scholars have sought to

focus on specific policies, like workers’ compensation or child labor laws. Recognizing the

interactions of these laws with the broader regulatory climate is likely to be important,

however, because the broader setting likely influenced the adoption and impact of the specific

policies.

        Our goal in working on this project has been to develop several summary measures of

the overall labor regulation climate at the state level during the Progressive Era. We offer

several different types of measures to try to capture different aspects of the regulatory climate
                                                                                                   5


and to check the degree to which these measures are correlated with each other. The measures

are used to show the expansion of labor regulation both within and across states over the

course of the Progressive Era. We conclude with some preliminary analysis of political and

labor market correlates that influenced the spatial and geographic variation in the measures

over time.

       Another goal of the project is to give more recognition to the extent of labor legislation

at the state level that existed before the federal involvement that arose during the New Deal.

Labor historians are well aware of the role played by the states in regulating labor markets in

the early 1900s. Based on our observations at conferences, many social scientists who study

the modern era are not. By creating measures of labor market regulation that can be

aggregated to the national level, we hope that the measures will cause such social scientists to

be aware of the extent of regulation in place before the national government got involved.



       HISTORICAL BACKGROUND

       Increasingly large numbers of workers entered the industrial sector between the end of

the Civil War and the 1920s. The adoption of new machinery and new methods of organizing

work led to an expansion in the size of workplaces. Workers who entered the workforce in the

1870s experienced dramatic changes in the nature of workplaces. Many started in agriculture

or in small hand manufacturing operations where there were strong personal relations between

the worker and the employer. As the decades passed, many ended up in larger operations with

more impersonal relationships.

       Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of immigrants arrived and began working in the

mines and many of the leading industries. Many workers felt that they had lost a significant
                                                                                                   6


degree of control over their work situation. They had less interaction with the owners of the

firm and their employment situation could be threatened by national and international market

forces over which even their employer had no control. A number of workers responded by

joining unions, including unions with broad coverage like the Knights of Labor in the late

1870s and the 1880s, and the more narrowly construed unions focused on their craft or

industry.

       Another response was for workers to join with a wide range of social reform groups to

seek more state regulation of the workplace. Workers were not always opposed by employers

when they sought regulations. In fact, Fishback (1998), among others, has suggested that

progressive employers, often larger and more likely to be unionized, supported new regulations

that codified their own practices or cost them little to put in place. He argues that many of the

progressive era labor regulations were enacted when leading employers joined workers and

reformers in pushing for new regulation. One sign that this was likely to be true was the lack

of success of workers and reformers in their attempts to push for state health insurance and

unemployment insurance, two policies actively opposed by many large employers.7

       Nearly all the regulatory activity during the Progressive Era took place in state

governments.8 As a result, the national regulatory environment often looked like a patchwork

quilt that was constantly being reworked. One reason was that some activities, like coal

mining, took place in half or fewer states. For more general regulations, like workers’

compensation, the political structure and the strength of interest groups in the economy varied

substantially from state to state, leading to differences in the timing of adoption of the laws.

       The range of issues addressed was impressive. As seen in Table 1, many of the mining

states were early adopters of rudimentary mining regulations that called for the filing of maps
                                                                                                  7


and provision of basic ventilation between 1869 and 1880. Simultaneously at the behest of the

nascent union movement many states established bureaus to collect labor statistics, often in the

form of surveys of workers. By the 1880s some states had began putting more teeth in the

regulations by providing for inspectors of boilers, factories, and mines.   When the inspectors

found violations, the state attorney general or prosecutors would then take the employer to

court to determine the extent of the defense and the fine to be paid. As the pressures for

collective bargaining arose in the late 1870s and 1880s, a number of states established

mediation, arbitration, and conciliatory bodies to aid in settling strikes (Currie and Ferrie

2000). The struggles between striking workers and employers carried into the legislature as

each side sought support from the state in establishing the rules for bargaining. Some states

passed laws that promoted unionization by outlawing “yellow dog” contracts and protecting

union trademarks and labels. On the other hand, other states seemed bent on limiting

unionization with the passage of anti-enticement laws and laws that limited picketing and were

specifically targeted at reducing intimidation of non-union workers. Meanwhile, a number of

professionals sought forms of occupational licensing that can be seen as attempts to control the

quality of service provided and/or to raise the incomes of the licensed professionals by limiting

entry.9

          Various states legislated limits on wages and hours of male workers, although such

laws were so broadly written as to have little meaning or were struck down by the courts.

Limits established for child labor and women’s hours were more successful. Perceptions of

increased dangers associated with industrialization caused states to pass laws regulating

workplace safety and developing new rules for the compensation of injured workers.
                                                                                                     8


       Using the volumes published by the U.S. Commissioner of Labor (1896, 1904, 1908)

and later the Bureau of Labor Statistics (1914, 1925), Commons and Associates (1966), and the

annual or semiannual state reports on new statutes passed by the legislatures, Rebecca Holmes

(2003, 2005) accumulated a database that covers each year from 1900 through 1925 and

identifies which states had each of 135 different labor laws for her dissertation. In the course

of pursuing other projects, we have added information on the total number of pages devoted to

all labor laws in the states, and the extent of state legislature’s appropriations for spending on

the administration and enforcement of their labor laws. The goal of this paper is to use this

information to develop measures of the changing labor regulatory climate in the states during

the Progressive Era.

       The presence of so many types of laws would have been considered a blessing to those

who succeeded in getting them passed. However, someone seeking to develop a broad picture

of the regulatory climate faces the curse of dimensionality. We seek to lift the curse by coming

up with a series of summary measures of the regulatory climate that allow for summary

comparisons both across states and time.

       In a recent paper in a volume honoring Thomas Weiss, we began to lift the curse by

creating a series of indexes that involved a simple count of the laws, an index that reweighted

the laws by putting them into specific categories of laws and then summing across categories,

and then indices that weighted laws by the share of the workforce affected by the laws (see

Holmes, Fishback, and Allen 2008). We found that all of these measures were highly

correlated with each other. Cross-sectional correlations for the 48 states between the measures

were above 0.96 in 1919, 0.97 in 1909, and 0.96 in 1899. Correlations of the change over time
                                                                                                 9


in the indices were above 0.89 for the change from 1899 to 1919, above 0.87 for the change

from 1899 to 1909, and above 0.89 for the change from 1909 to 1919.

       The most conceptually appealing of the indices in that paper was the Employment-

Share-Weighted Index (ESWI). In the index we divided the laws into 17 categories and each

of the laws within the categories are weighted by the share of workers directly covered by the

law. In this way multiple laws dealing with the same issue are not given too much weight.

Nor were laws specific to a subset of the workforce given weight that exceeded their share of

the workforce.

       In this paper we compare the ESWI with other measures of labor legislation, including

the number of pages devoted to labor laws, the state appropriations for administering and

enforcing the labor laws, and a pair of COORDINATE measures that use the information on

over 130 labor laws to examine how closely the labor laws of each state match each other. No

single measure fully captures the labor climate. Scholars will likely differ on how much

weight to give to each law in the ESWI. There are so many laws that a debate over weights

could be endless. Page numbers and labor spending provide alternative ways of measuring the

breadth and depth of the laws and enforcement and the COORDINATE measures offer an

alternative check that is largely derived from a data-mining exercise.

       Our goal is to provide all of these measures and check their comparability to see if they

describe similar patterns over time and across states. We chose these measures because they

seemed a reasonable start. The complete set of data on the laws will be posted at Price

Fishback’s website in the medium run and eventually the ICPSR website, so that other scholars

can develop their own indices if they find the ones described in this paper do not meet their

research goals. Readers should recognize one caveat on the use of the information that will be
                                                                                                  10


posted. Scholars focusing on a specific law or set of laws should see the information as a

starting point for their research. We have no illusions that we have captured all of the

subtleties of particular laws and careful reading of the laws to further refine the measures is

advised when analyzing each specific law.



CONSTRUCTING THE ESWI

       The ESWI is constructed with the laws listed in Appendix Table 1 compiled from the

reports on “Labor Laws in the United States by the U.S. Commissioner of Labor (1896, 1904,

1908) and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (1914, 1925).10 The laws are divided into 17

categories: Workplace activity regulation, which includes specific regulations for factories,

mines, railroads, street railroads, and limits on occupational entry; Hours regulations for

women, children and some groups; Workplace activity regulation for women and children,

which are additional regulations of workplace activity specifically focused on women and

children and thus kept separate; Employer liability and workers’ compensation; Steam boiler

inspections; Unionization and Bargaining, which include positive values for laws that favored

unions and negative values for those making unionization more difficult; Laws that prohibit

bribery and coercion and protect political freedoms; the presence of a Department of Labor or

Bureau of Labor Statistics; the presence of a State Board of Arbitration, Mediation, or

Conciliation; the presence of a Rehabilitation Commission; the presence of an Industrial

Commission, which is kept separate from Departments of Labor because some commissions

had rule-making authority not given to labor departments; Free Employment Offices; Anti-

Discrimination; Payday Regulations; Holiday Regulations; Minimum Wage Regulations; and

Miscellaneous Regulations.
                                                                                                      11


        Within each law category j we develop an Employment Share-Weighted Index (ESWI)

that is designed to sum to a maximum value of one for that category. We chose the value of

one as a maximum to avoid giving too much weight to a law that is just one of many in a

category like workplace activity. In this method the categories of laws are given equal weight.

        A law within any category is weighted by the share of the nonagricultural workforce

covered by the law as of 1900. If the law deals only with miners, for example, it is therefore

given a much smaller weight than if it deals with all workers. The mathematical formula for

the ESWI within category j is

        ESWIjst =       Σ (Lijstk *Ss1900k)/ mj for i = 1 to mj.
for the state s in year t. The law Lijstk refers to the ith law in category j in state s in year t

covering the kth category of workers. If the law is in force, Lijstk has a value of one; if not, it

takes a value of zero. As an example of how an actual law fits the subscripts, consider bakery

regulation. The bakery regulation law (i) comes under the category Economic Activity

Regulations (j) in West Virginia (s) in 1919 (t) for bakers (k).

        To take into account the fact that the bakery regulations only cover bakers and not the

rest of the workforce, we multiply the law by the share of nonfarm workers in baking (k) in

state s in the year 1900 (Ss1900k). The employment weight is one when the k subscript refers to

regulations that apply to all nonagricultural workers.11 The weights for each employment

category k in each state are based on information from the 1900 census on the number of

gainfully employed men, women, and children in occupations in 1900 and the average numbers

of each type employed in various manufacturing industries in 1899 (U.S. Bureau of Census,

1904, 1902 volumes 7 and 8, and Haines (ICPSR 2896)). We chose the 1900/1899 weights to

reflect the situation in the first year for which we make cross-state comparisons of the labor
                                                                                                 12


laws. We then continue to use the 1900/1899 weights for all other periods to avoid feedback

problems where changes in regulation are causing changes in the shares of people in industries.

This weighting still potentially has some problems with feedback effects for the 1899 ESW

index. We chose this period to develop the employment shares because we thought that the

situation in 1890 would not be reflective of the employment in the 20th century because the late

1800s were a period of industrial change.    As another way to avoid problems with specific

state distributions being influenced by the labor laws in the state, we have also developed an

index where the weights are based on the national distributions across occupations and

industries (and thus the s subscript is dropped for the employment share). It turns out that the

indices based on the national employment weights are very strongly correlated with the indices

based on the state employment weights.

       In calculating the employment shares we use as the denominator an “employment base”

composed of the number of gainfully employed in trade, transport, manufacturing, and

mechanical pursuits from the 1900 Census of Occupations. These categories include miners

and construction workers and were the focus of nearly all of the labor regulations. The

denominator probably overstates the number of people likely to be affected by regulation

because workers in wholesale and retail trade were less affected by the labor regulations. The

workers left out of the base are professional workers, domestic and personal service workers,

and agricultural workers. The agricultural, domestic, and personal service workers were often

explicitly left uncovered by many regulations. Some professionals were licensed and we do

include in the numerator a licensing measure for specific occupations but the workers in these

occupations account for a very small share of the professionals and an even smaller share of
                                                                                                13


workers subject to regulation; therefore, we don’t see that their absence in the denominator will

be a serious problem.12

       After weighting the law by the employment share, we sum the values for the laws in

category j and divide by the number of laws in that category (mj). This insures that the

maximum value for category j is one. As seen in Appendix Table 2, the number of laws (mj) in

the Workplace Activity category (j) is 38, so the sum of all of the laws after they have been

weighted by their employment share is then divided by 38. Given that the laws are weighted

by the share of people employed and some of the laws were likely to be focused on only

subgroups of workers, the ESWI for category k could be substantially less than one.

       The ESWI for two law categories are based on measures other than pure law counts. In

the employer liability and workers’ compensation category, we used Fishback’s and Kantor’s

(2000) expected benefits measures as a percentage of annual income as the basis for the index.

For years when workers’ compensation was in place the expected benefits were calculated

using the specific parameters for the laws. The typical workers’ compensation value was

above 1 and ranged as high as 2.82. For years in which no workers’ compensation laws were

in force, we started with a ratio of expected benefits to annual income of 0.5 based on Fishback

and Kantor’s comparisons of expected payouts under employer liability and workers’

compensation. The expected benefit/income ratio for states without workers’ compensation

was then adjusted upwards from 0.5 in states where the actuaries suggested higher employer

liability premiums to insurers based on employer liability laws that would lead to higher

payouts to workers. The expected benefit/income ratio was lowered from 0.5 in states where

lower premiums were suggested by the actuaries. The variable is expben10 in the wcdata.xls

Excel spreadsheet under Workers’ Compensation Project Data at
                                                                                                  14


http://www.u.arizona.edu/~fishback/ used in March 2006. Descriptions of the construction of

the variable are in Fishback and Kantor (2000, Appendix B) and at the same website. To

index the values we divided by the maximum value of 2.82 so the value would range between

zero and one.

       In the male-hours category, a number of states passed general maximum hours laws in

the late 1800s that stated that the official work day was an eight-hour day but typically added

the proviso, “unless specified otherwise by contract.” We gave them a maximum value of 0.1.

The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics suggested that these laws had little effect because of the

contracting out clause and lack of enforcement. The laws were weakened further after the U.S.

Supreme Court in 1905 declared that New York state regulation of bakers’ hours violated the

U.S. Constitution.13 We decided to assign them some positive value because some employers

might have routinely followed the law even without much enforcement and because the laws

likely triggered some negotiations of contracts that might have led to hours reductions. Once

the new hours structure was in place, these employers might have decided to leave them in

place even after the 1905 decision.14

       To calculate the overall ESWI for a state-year, we take the ESWI for each category j

and sum across all seventeen categories and then divide by 17.15 Thus, the formula for the

overall ESW Index for state s in year t in year




ESWIst =        Σ ESWIjst /17 for j = 1 to 17.

=   Σ (Σ (Lijstk*Ss1900k)/mj for i = 1 to mj)/17 for j = 1 to 17.16
                                                                                                 15


The final value has a maximum value of one when all workers are covered by every phase of

regulations that workers favored. If there were no laws except anti-union laws, the value could

fall below zero.

       The maps in Figure 1 shows the ESWI for the states in 1899, 1909, 1914, and 1919,

respectively. The scale for each of the maps is the same and is based on putting states into 5

roughly equal groupings based on the ESWIs in 1919; therefore, the changes over time can

also be seen. Figure 2 shows the information in a scatter plot with more precise values visible

for the ESWI for 1899 and 1919. The highest ESWIs in 1899 were above 0.4 in Pennsylvania

and New Jersey, which collectively had the broadest range of industries. Several Midwestern

states, Colorado, Massachusetts, and Montana were next in line.

       By 1909 New York had become the leader with an ESWI near .5, while Indiana,

Colorado, Massachusetts, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania were close

behind (see Figure 2). By 1919 Massachusetts had surpassed New York, which had stayed in

roughly the same position. The academic and political activity by institutional economists like

John R. Commons and Richard Ely had contributed to Minnesota and Wisconsin being close

behind. Also, among the leaders were Pennsylvania, Ohio, and California. The one state that

seems to have lagged behind was New Jersey.

       In general, the rankings of the states with respect to the ESWI are pretty stable over

time. The upward slope of the majority of spots on scatter plots in Figure 2 show that many of

the states who had more labor regulation circa 1899 tended to also rank highly in 1919. The

correlations across time of the ESWIs in Table 2 are all positive and above 0.725.

       The changes in labor legislation shed some different light on the labor regulatory

activities in New York. Recent media strongly states that much of the labor legislation of the
                                                                                                  16


Progressive Era was stimulated by the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire, in which dozens of

women textile workers died in New York City in March 1911. The rise in the ESWI for New

York between 1899 and 1909 and the relatively small change in the ESWI between 1909 and

1919 suggest that there was a great deal of interest in labor legislation in New York well before

the Fire. The Triangle Shirtwaist Factory had been inspected and no fines imposed within the

prior month even though it was in violation of several of the existing laws with respect to fire

escapes and other fire prevention measures. Many of the legislative changes that followed the

Fire were attempts to tighten these laws and enhance enforcement. The state did eventually

increase its spending on inspections, but the increase in inspectors was small relative to the

number of inspections that would have been required for all factories to be inspected annually.

Scholars have found complaints in New York newspapers after the new laws were passed that

many of the laws were still largely ignored and that inspections continued to be rare events.17



PAGE COUNTS

       Some scholars have experimented with using page counts as a measure of labor

regulation (for example, see Mulligan and Shleifer (2004)). The argument is based on the

notion that states with more extensive laws would have to describe them in depth. There are

certainly flaws in this simple method. Laws with negative consequences for labor are given

the same page value as those with positive consequences. The length of the legal text also

might overstate its power. A law banning all labor by children under 16 and appropriating one

million dollars to hire 500 people to enforce it can be stated succinctly. Meanwhile, it might

take a dozen pages to describe a set of regulations designed to make workplaces safer for
                                                                                                      17


children. The first does far more to guarantee that a child under 16 is safe from manufacturing

risk.

          In other situations states might adopt specific laws for four different industries, while

another state adopts a general law with broader coverage. This happened with hours laws in a

number of states, and the broader laws have greater effect even though the text of the laws is

shorter.

          The BLS reports on the text of laws made it relatively easy to develop page counts in

1904, 1907, and 1914 when the volumes were published. The reports do not include

information on the workers’ compensation laws, but this will only affect the measure for

1914.18

          As can be seen in Figures 3 and 4, Pennsylvania is far and away the leader in page

counts throughout the early twentieth century with many of the same states with high ESWIs

following behind. Figure 3 shows maps of page counts for the states with the scale used in the

legend based on a roughly equal distribution of states in five categories as of 1914. The

stability of state rankings over time is shown in the scatter plots for the page counts in 1904

and 1914. Most states increase the text of their labor legislation even though workers’

compensation is not included in the 1914 page counts. The states held more tightly to the

relative rankings over time than for the ESWI. The correlations in Table 2 for the page counts

are above .9 for all comparisons across the 18 years covered. Notice that there appears to be

more clumping of states around the same text levels in both periods than we saw with the law

sum and ESW Index.

          The situations for Pennsylvania and New York help illustrate the possible

overstatement of regulation from counting pages when there are laws written for specific
                                                                                                 18


industries. Pennsylvania probably had the most diverse coverage of American industries of

any state.19 They wrote separate and specific safety regulations for bituminous coal mining,

anthracite coal mining, and the factories. The state ranks near the top in the ESW Index

comparisons, but the large body of text devoted to specific industries is what makes them a

strong outlier here. New York had similar breadth of coverage of industries but had almost no

mining industry and therefore has page counts much closer to the counts in the other states.



EXPENDITURES BY STATES ON LABOR ISSUES

       The presence of laws offers only one indication of the regulatory climate for labor

markets in the states. Laws on the books have little impact if they are not enforced and labor

administrators and inspectors are likely to have more influence over labor markets with more

resources available to them. As an additional measure of the labor regulatory climate, we have

collected information from the legislative statutes on the appropriations for the state labor

department, board of arbitration, free employment offices, mining inspection, boiler inspection

and other administrations related to labor markets.20 To date, we have coverage for all states

in the years 1903 through 1916. We then calculate a measure of state labor spending in 1967

dollars per person employed in mining and manufacturing. The denominator does not include

groups of gainfully employed workers who typically were not subject to labor regulation:

agricultural pursuits, domestic and personal service. Railroad workers, street railroad workers,

and professionals were affected by some of the labor regulations, so the use of only mining and

manufacturing as the denominator overstates the spending per worker covered to some degree.

It turns out, however, that the relative ranking of states is generally the same when we try

different groups of workers in the denominators.21
                                                                                                 19


       The spending per worker serves as an index that simultaneously measures the coverage

of the legislation and the extent to which it is enforced. Enforcement is still imperfectly

measured because enforcement of many safety regulations often relied on the courts so that

violations might have been uncovered but not punished (see Fishback 2006; Graebner 1979).22

Complete bans or bright-line rules might also require little in the way of enforcement or

administration because violations are so obvious. Finally, regulations tend to involve a fixed

cost of basic administration. In states with regulation and small industrial workforces, the

spending per worker measure might overstate the strength of the regulatory climate.

       The spending measure tells a somewhat different story than the page and law sum and

index measures. The correlations between time periods reported in Table 3 are weaker, as the

correlation of the 1916 and 1903 measures are much lower at .49 than the correlations for any

of the other measures in the Table. The correlations between the measures for 1903 and 1909

and again for 1909 and 1916 are also somewhat weaker at 0.74 and 0.78.

       The maps in Figure 5 and scatter plots in Figure 6 show many similarities to the

comparisons for the other measures. In general, high values of labor spending per worker were

probably associated with more extensive labor regulation. Massachusetts, New York, Indiana,

Ohio, Colorado, Pennsylvania and Minnesota all rank relatively high as they did in the other

rankings.

       A number of western states are scattered around the outer range of the scatter plot in

Figure 6. The locations came about through a combination of fixed costs of setting up labor

regulations, small numbers of industrial workers, and generally better labor conditions in the

west. Most of the western states were relatively new to industrialization and had relatively

small numbers of industrial workers. To attract workers western employers tended to pay
                                                                                                 20


higher wages. Roughly 20 to 40 percent of the nonagricultural employment base in the

western states was in mining, which was among the most dangerous of activities. The

employers’ desire to attract workers and to limit collective action by active western unions led

them to support the adoption of mining and other regulations in territorial and state legislatures,

a trend actively encouraged by reformers and unionized workers. At the same time

establishing and administering regulations required significant annual fixed costs and the hiring

of inspectors often came in increments of $1000 to $2000. Therefore, as the number of

industrial workers in the West increased, the fixed costs of regulation were divided by an

increasing number of workers, and the spending per worker declined. This helps explain the

declines in real spending associated with Colorado, North Dakota, Idaho, and Wyoming.

Nevada, and Washington were relative latecomers to industrialization and thus by 1916 they

may have been situated in the position where these other western states were sitting in the late

1890s.

         West Virginia and Pennsylvania are similar to the western states in that mining, coal in

this case, was a leading industry. Coal miners accounted for a high percentage of the

employment base in both states, higher in West Virginia. Because West Virginia and

Pennsylvania were further advanced in terms of employing miners and other industrial workers

in 1903 and 1916, our sense is that the rise in spending per worker in Pennsylvania and West

Virginia likely reflects more of an increase in intensity of labor regulation than it does for

Nevada, and Washington.



NONPARAMETRIC SPATIAL COORDINATES
                                                                                                 21


       Our measures thus far have been designed to try to capture the intensity of the

regulatory climate. The various measures each have advantages and disadvantages based on

the weighting given to laws and allocation of spending. The weightings have been explicitly

designed and scholars may have alternative a priori interpretations of the regulations that

would lead them to reweight the laws.

       Another route is to take an agnostic approach and use nonparametric methods to

measure the similarities in portfolios of policy choice across states. The method we use is a

version of the Optimal Classification method that Keith Poole and Howard Rosenthal have

used to describe voting patterns in Congress.23 The method is designed to establish coordinates

in a “policy space” for which no explicit dimensions are established in advance. The

COORDINATE measures we develop essentially show which states have the combination of

policies that look the most alike. Since we have not pre-assigned any specific weighting

scheme in advance, the COORDINATE measures can serve as a useful robustness check of the

other measures.

       In other settings scholars have offered interpretations of what the dimensions of the

policy space mean, similar to the way that social scientists have interpreted the factors that

come out of factor analysis. Poole and Rosenthal (1997, 1994, 1993, 1991), for example, use

their spatial coordinates, called NOMINATEs, to show the degree to which Congressmen

voted in similar ways on a large number of policy issues. They found that after examination of

voting patterns for a large number of issues that the similarities in voting patterns between

Congressmen can be shown relatively effectively by two dimensional coordinates. Although,

their spatial coordinate method does not assign any interpretation to the vertical and horizontal

measures, Poole and Rosenthal assigned ad hoc interpretations to the dimensions by comparing
                                                                                                 22


the spatial locations to attributes of the Congressmen, the attributes of their constituents and the

way people voted on a set of laws.

       Tomas Nonnenmacher (2002) has applied a nonparametric Binomial Unfolding

technique, which is an updating of NOMINATE by Poole (2000, 2001), for a similar purpose

to ours. Nonnenmacher’s goal was to develop measures of location in policy space for the

states based on the extent to which they adopted the laws collected by Jack Walker (1969) in

his policy diffusion study. As was the case in Poole and Rosenthal’s Congressional study, the

spatial dimensions have no obvious interpretation from the data examined. Nonnenmacher

applies interpretations to the relative rankings based on the extent to which they are correlated

with socio-economic measures.

       We estimated two COORDINATEs for each state in each year. In the sample for

estimation we treated each state in each year as a separate observation and included an

observation for each state for each year from 1896 through 1924. By performing the

estimation in this way we developed COORDINATE measures that allowed comparisons both

across states within the same year and also comparisons of the policy choices across time. For

example, by pooling the data and treating Connecticut in 1896 as a separate observation from

Connecticut in 1924, the COORDINATE measures could be used to compare the location of

Connecticut in 1896 to another state like West Virginia in 1896 but also to Connecticut in 1924

or Virginia in 1920.24

       The changes over time in the two COORDINATE coordinates are shown in the maps in

Figures 7 and 8 and in the scatter plots in Figure 9. As is the case with factor analysis and the

Congressional voting analysis, there is no obvious interpretation of the dimensions of the

coordinates without adding extra information. Some insights can be gained by examining the
                                                                                                  23


correlations with various types of laws. The COORDINATE ONE coordinate, the vertical

coordinate in Figure 9 seems to be strongly associated with factory regulations, while

COORDINATE TWO appears to be strongly associated with mining regulations. The raw

correlations between the COORDINATE ONE measure and the subcategory estimate for

factory regulations is 0.81, while the correlation with the mining subcategory is -0.01.

Meanwhile, the correlation of COORDINATE TWO with the mining regulations subcategory

is 0.63 compared with -0.25 for its correlation with factory regulations. We can see these

patterns in the maps in Figures 7 and 8. COORDINATE ONE has higher values primarily in

manufacturing states in New England in the Midwest, while COORDINATE TWO has higher

values mostly in states known for mining.



                           IV. Correlations Between the Measures

       Each of the measures can be considered to be summary measures in their own right, yet

to some extent they measure different aspects of regulation as well. The relationships between

the measures are shown in Tables 3 and 4. The cross-sectional correlations in Table 3 show

the relationships in 1903, 1909, and again in 1919 between the stock of laws (level of

spending), in essence, a snapshot of the entire body of state codes at a point in time. The same

general patterns (with some minor exceptions) of correlation are present in all three years. In

all three years relatively strong positive correlations above 0.61 can be found between the

levels of the ESWI, the Page Counts, and the COORDINATE ONE measures. Labor

Spending has positive but somewhat weaker correlations with those three measures; between

0.3 and 0.5 with the ESW Index, between 0.2 and 0.39 with the pages and 0.098 to 0.309 with

the COORDINATE ONE. The COORDINATE TWO measure, which appears more focused
                                                                                                24


on mining, has consistent correlations with labor spending per worker that ranges between 0.38

and 0.42. It has positive and weaker correlations with the number of pages, 0.23 to 0.31 and

with the ESWI, 0.12 to 0.22, is also positively correlated.

       The changes in the measures of the legal climate arise due to the new legislation

enacted between time periods. Table 4 offers correlations across states for the change over the

entire period from around 1900 to around 1919, and then separately for each of the two

decades. The correlations of changes in the ESWI, labor spending per worker, COORDINATE

ONE, and COORDINATE TWO for entire period from around 1900 to around 1919 range

between .11 and .53 with the weakest correlation between COORDINATE ONE and labor

spending per worker. Most of the strength of the correlations comes from the period 1909 to

around 1919 because the correlations for that period are relatively close to those for the entire

1900 to 1919 period. The correlations from around 1900 to 1909 are much weaker.



NATIONAL CHANGES

       The regulatory rise was a nation-wide phenomenon. In every scatter plot comparison

of 1899 and 1919 nearly every state lies above the 45 degree line, which implies that the

regulation measure has grown over time. Similarly, the maps for the regulatory measures all

show a darkening over time for nearly every state. The national rise can also be seen when we

aggregate the measures for the entire United States in Figure 10. We developed the national

ESWI by weighting each of the state ESWI’s in that year by that state’s share of national

employment in that year.25 The national labor spending per worker measure was developed by

the labor spending measure and then dividing by the national total of mining and

manufacturing workers.
                                                                                                 25


       The national ESWI displays an 0.2 rise in the extent of regulation from 1900 through

1924 from a weighted index of 0.31 in 1899 to over 0.51 in 1924. There was a relatively sharp

rise between 1899 and 1903 and then the trend was relatively flat with a dip in 1908. Between

1908 and 1914 there was a substantial rise in the index from about .35 to about .47 that

coincided with the introduction of many employer liability and workers’ compensation laws.

The trend stayed relatively flat through the end of World War I, followed by a rise to around

0.51 in the aftermath of the War.

       Meanwhile labor spending per mining and manufacturing worker in 1967 dollars rose

by roughly 8 cents between 1903 and 1905, stayed flat for several years, and then spiked by

nearly 10 cents in 1908. The spending stayed flat another two years and then rose by nearly 60

cents between 1910 and 1915 with the wave of increased resources for inspection, the

introduction of commissions to operate workers’ compensation, and the expansion in a few

states into Industrial Commissions that had their own rule-making authority. We have not yet

collected information for all states for the period 1917 through 1920, but the information for

the states for which we have collected data suggests that labor spending per worker in 1967

dollars declined. Increases in nominal labor spending were more than outpaced by the

doubling of the consumer prices during that time period.



       CORRELATES OF THE LABOR REGULATORY CLIMATE

       The overall labor regulatory climate was the result of an accumulation of a broad range

of policy choices in each state. The adoption of each labor law was the result of a series of

proposals, counter proposals, negotiations, and compromises between the specific interest

groups interested in those laws, the legislators, the governor, and voters, directly when the
                                                                                                26


legislation was voted on in a referendum or indirectly through their representatives. At the

same time many of the stances chosen on specific forms of regulation were part of broader

agendas for the major interest groups, employers, unions, nonunion workers, and political

parties. Our goal in this section is to show the fundamental correlations between the labor

climate and politics and economic interest groups. We do this in two ways. First, we examine

cross-sectional correlations that show the long run relationships between these factors and the

stock of laws circa 1903/1904 near the beginning of the period of measurement and again in

1919. Second we examine the factors that influenced the changes in those laws in the first two

decades of the twentieth century.

        Table 5 shows the relationship between various measures of the stock of regulation and

a series of political party and economic variables commonly seen as correlates of measures of

labor legislation in 1904 and in 1919.26 We have tried a variety of cross-sectional analyses

using different time periods, and the results are not dramatically different from those reported

here.

        The political party variables are the percentage of the population voting in presidential

elections for the Republican presidential candidate, voting for the Socialist candidate, and

voting for the 1912 Progressive Party candidate. We focus more on presidential voting

because the stances taken by the candidates were on nationwide platforms and thus broadly

consistent from state to state. The Democratic and Republican parties’ positions in state

politics often varied to some degree across states, particularly when comparing southern

Democrats to Democrats in the rest of the country. Generally, Democrats outside the South,

Progressives, and Socialists have been considered to have been more in tune with the interest

of unions and workers than were Republicans, so we have incorporated a Democratic governor
                                                                                                   27


variable. Since nearly all southern Governors were Democrats, the South region dummy

variable that we included and discuss later serves partly as an interaction term between the

South and Democratic Governor.

        We have also incorporated a series of variables that are broadly descriptive of the clout

of major interest groups. An index of unionization shows the extent to which workers in the

state are employed in industries where unions had a stronger nationwide presence. The size of

the labor force and the percentages working in mining, manufacturing, and agriculture give a

sense of the industrial structure of the states. Generally, agricultural states were expected to

be more likely to be opposed to labor regulation, even though agricultural workers were

typically exempted from the rules. There was a fear that the rules might be extended to

agriculture in the future and that better workplaces would make it harder to keep workers from

leaving agriculture for industrial jobs. The relative importance of large and small firms in

manufacturing are measured by the percentage of manufacturing establishments with fewer

than 20 workers and the percentage with more than 500 workers. We include the percentage

foreign-born, black, and illiterate to examine the extent to which their relative lack of political

clout and antipathy toward their presence influenced the labor regulation climate. Finally, to

examine whether the southern legacy of slavery had additional impact on the choice of labor

regulation above and beyond the political and economic factors we have incorporated a dummy

variable for the Southern states that had been members of the Confederacy.27

       The results from Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions summarized in Tables 5

and 6 show the relationship of each of the major variables with the stock of the laws and level

of labor spending per worker at the turn of the 20th century and just after World War I, holding

the other correlates constant. The Tables report one-standard-deviation (OSD) relationships
                                                                                                    28


that show how many standard deviations the labor regulation measure changes in response to a

one-standard-deviation increase in the correlate. The t-statistic for the coefficient estimate is

reported below each OSD measure. In the case of dummy variables we report the coefficient.

To avoid simultaneity between the correlates and labor regulation measure in the same year,

the values for the correlates with the labor climate in 1904 are from the years 1900 and 1899

and the values for correlates for the later year are from the period around 1910 and 1912. We

have also run the analysis with just the political variables and just the economic variables, and

the basic results reported here for each of the factors are similar to the findings in those

analyses.

        The overall size of the gainfully employed has a positive effect on both the ESWI and

the labor spending measure that strengthened over time. An increase of one standard

deviation in the size of the labor force was associated with an increase of 0.166 standard

deviations in the ESWI in 1904 and 0.324 standard deviations in 1919. The OSD relationships

for the labor spending measure were 0.277 in 1904 and 0.286 in 1916. The positive

relationship between the labor force and regulation might arise because of the presence of

substantial fixed costs of setting up and maintaining a regulatory regime. Regulations that

have large public good effects are more likely to be established because so many more workers

benefit relative to the costs of establishing the regulation.28

        A higher share of gainfully employed in agriculture was associated with substantially

less regulation as measured by the ESWI but displayed virtually no relationship with the labor

spending measure.29 An OSD rise in the percent of the gainfully employed in agriculture was

associated with a -0.731 standard deviation reduction in the ESWI in 1904 and a -0.791

reduction in 1919. Only the second relationship is estimated precisely enough that it is
                                                                                                   29


statistically significant in a two-tailed test at the 10 percent level.30 The farmers’ antipathy

toward regulation was shown not only by their success in ensuring that labor regulations were

not applied to farming in many cases, but also the reduced degree of labor regulation in farm

states. Once the regulations were established, however, the farmers did not appear to display

much opposition to labor spending per worker in the nonagricultural fields. The OSD

relationships with labor spending were both positive and imprecisely estimated.

        In contrast, the share of workers in mining had a positive relationship with labor

spending per mining and manufacturing worker. The dangers of the mines contributed to more

extensive safety regulations in mines and a larger ratio of inspectors to workers in mining and

in manufacturing. The OSD relationship was 0.916 for 1904 and 0.43 in 1919, although the

latter was imprecisely estimated, and the hypothesis of no effect can not be rejected at the 10-

percent level.

        A number of scholars have suggested that large firms often contributed to the adoption

of labor regulation, while workers and unions had a more mixed attitude toward regulation,

particularly before 1910, because they feared that employers had enough clout in state

legislatures to control the regulations.31 The results here appear consistent with this description

for the period around 1904, less so for 1919. If unions favored regulation, we would expect to

see strong positive relationships between the regulation measures and the union index.32 The

OSD relationships in states with a larger share of workers in industries with strong national

unions are relatively small and positive in 1904 relative to most other effects in 1904, and they

are not statistically significant.   Large firms in manufacturing, on the other hand, displayed a

strong positive relationship with regulation. The OSD relationships of the share of

establishments with more than 500 workers were 0.549 and 0.705, respectively.
                                                                                                  30


       Given the controls for unionization and large manufacturing firms, the share of

gainfully employed workers in manufacturing might be considered a measure of the political

clout of either nonunion workers as voters or the overall weight of manufacturing employers

and workers in the state. The share of manufacturing workers has very strong negative OSD

relationships with the measures of labor regulation in 1904. A one standard deviation increase

in the percent of workers in manufacturing was associated with an ESWI that was -0.873

standard deviations lower and a labor spending measure that was -0.557 lower, although only

the former relationship is precisely estimated. The combination of findings for unions, large

employers, and manufacturing suggest an important role for large manufacturing employers as

early progenitors of regulation. By 1919, however, the relationships had weakened

considerably in magnitude and were no longer precisely estimated.

         The political party, Democratic governor, and the South dummy generally do not

show consistently strong relationships with the stock of labor legislation at the two points in

time. None of the political coefficients were precisely estimated and we cannot reject the

hypothesis of no effect in two-tailed tests at the 10-percent level. States with more voting for

Socialist presidential candidates were more likely to have more regulation and more labor

spending with OSD relationships of 0.166 and 0.272 in 1904, and similar effects in later years.

Progressive presidential votes in 1912 were slightly negatively associated with labor

regulation. Meanwhile, Republican voting states had fewer laws but greater spending per

worker in both years.    These results fit with findings that Taft, Wilson, and Roosevelt all

included a number of progressive planks related to labor in their political agendas.

       States with Democratic governors show no strong association one way or the other with

the state labor climates. The largest OSD relationships for the Democratic Governors were
                                                                                                     31


negative for the ESWI in 1904 and higher for the labor spending measure in 1919. Southern

states in both periods were more likely to have lower labor spending per mining and

manufacturing worker with OSD relationships of -0.654. They appeared to have similar levels

of the ESWI in 1904 but -0.309 standard deviation lower levels in 1919. Thus, after

controlling for other economic features, the southern legacy appears to be more laws and less

labor spending per worker in 1904, and less of both in 1919. Although here again, the

coefficients are all imprecisely estimated.

        Since the stock of legislation was the accumulation of a large number of laws that may

have been passed between one to thirty years earlier, we also examine the relationships

between the correlates and the change in labor legislation within the decade. Table 6 shows the

OSD effects from regressions with two observations for nearly every state, the change in labor

legislation or labor spending per worker in the first decade of the 1900s and the changes in the

second decade. The correlates are measures of the situation at the beginning of each decade

in most cases. The exceptions are measures of the number of changes in the political party of

the governor and the party in power in the houses of the state legislature during the decade.

These were included because studies by Fishback and Kantor (2000) and Pavalko (1989) both

found effects of party power shifts on the adoption of workers’ compensation.

       Estimates are reported for regressions with and without fixed effects for the states and

the timing. The state fixed effects are dummy variables for all states except Connecticut that

are used to control for unmeasured factors that do not change over time within the same state

but vary across states over time. These would include long-term political and economic

features of the state that are unchanging over time, as well as the physical terrain of the state.

The Second Decade year effect is a dummy variable for the observations on changes in labor
                                                                                                    32


regulation for the second decade of the 1900s. The dummy acts as a control for unmeasured

nationwide factors that affected all states, including World War I or a national recession. The

OSD effects in the estimations incorporating fixed effects are similar to estimating the average

difference-in-difference relationship across states. In essence, we are seeing, on average, how

differences in the correlates within the states influence differences in the changes in the state

labor climate.

       The main result that comes out of the analysis is the finding that the changes in the

labor measure have a strong negative relationship with the prior stock of labor legislation or the

prior level of labor spending. States with ESWI laws at the beginning of the period that are

one standard deviation higher, experience changes in labor legislation that is -0.634 standard

deviations lower in the absence of fixed effects and      -1.953 standard deviations lower when

fixed effects are incorporated. The OSD effects are smaller for the labor spending per worker

at -0.298 without fixed effects and -0.762 with fixed effects. The results suggest that there tend

to be a reasonably strong catch-up effects in labor legislation. Other states eventually join the

early adopting states in adopting many forms of labor legislation. In the fixed effects analysis,

states with a larger share of large firms are more likely to adopt new legislation although not

necessarily to increase spending per worker.

       Most of the strong effects found when fixed effects are not incorporated in the analysis

are weakened or reversed with the inclusion of fixed effects. This includes the positive

relationships for the share of the population voting Socialist for president for both labor

measures. For labor spending per worker, the positive relationships are reversed for the mining

share and the agricultural share, the percent foreign-born, and diminished sharply for the

number of changes in the party in charge of the lower house of the legislature.
                                                                                                   33


        In the fixed effects analysis there were sizeable OSD relationships between the labor

measures and the number of gainfully employed workers and the percent black (OSDs over 1

for both). Large firms had a strong positive OSD relationship with the ESWI at 0.81, as did

Democratic Governors at 0.676. Collective action had mixed effects. Increased strike activity

during the decade was associated with over 0.6 OSD relationships with both measures.

Meanwhile, the unionization index showed both a positive relationship with the ESWI and a

negative relationship with the spending measures. In all of these cases, some care must be

exercised in drawing conclusions due to the imprecision of the estimation shown by the low

absolute values of the t-statistics.

        The fixed effects show the effects of unmeasured factors related to the states that

influenced the choice of labor legislation. The states that ranked in the top 10 in unmeasured

factors that were positively related to larger increases in the ESWI, include, in order from the

top, the western and Midwestern states of Colorado, Montana, Nevada, Idaho, Utah,

Minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin, Kansas, and Iowa. The bottom ten were generally in the

South and the Mid-Atlantic, including from bottom South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida,

Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, Virginia, North Carolina, Texas, and New York.

        The states that ranked in the top 10 in unmeasured factors that were positively related to

larger increases in labor regulation spending per worker, include, in order from the top, the

mostly western states of North Dakota, Idaho, South Dakota, Nevada, Montana, New Mexico,

Arizona, West Virginia, Minnesota, and Colorado. The bottom ten were again generally in the

South and the Mid-Atlantic, including from bottom Mississippi, South Carolina, Georgia,

Louisiana, Florida, Alabama, Virginia,New York, North Carolina, and Maryland.
                                                                                                    34


       Note that these estimates are effects estimated after controlling for the size of the labor

force, the shares of mining, agriculture, firm sizes, industrial mix related to unionization, and

many political factors. The results for the changes in laws thus suggest a stronger negative role

for the unmeasured Southern Legacy than the results for the stock of laws. The results also

leave a great deal of room for the important type of institutional analysis traditionally

performed in narrative labor and business histories.



                                        CONCLUSIONS

       The regulatory climate in the labor arena during the progressive era was marked by

both great breadth and complexity. In the search for understanding about the inter-

relationships between labor markets, politics, and labor regulation we need both summary

measures as well as studies in-depth of the institutions. The summary measures allow people

to make broad comparisons of the overall labor regulation across states and how these changed

over time. There is no doubt that they can be improved by going into more depth on each type

of regulation. Suggestions for improvement, particularly when accompanied by new

information that will improve the measures, are welcome.

       Further, we can use the measures to perform rudimentary statistical analysis of the

interactions of these factors. The brief analysis of the correlates of the stock of labor regulation

and the changes in labor regulation show several important relationships that appear after

holding other factors constant. The extent of labor regulation was related to the overall size of

the labor force. States with larger establishments tended to have more regulation early on and

were more likely to adopt changes in labor legislation. States with industries with a strong

national union presence do not seem to be associated positively or negatively with the
                                                                                                     35


regulatory climate. States that lagged behind the early adopters tended to eventually catch-up

and adopt many forms of labor regulation. Finally, southern states were typically at the bottom

of the list in terms of making changes in their regulations.

        The results of the analysis also show that the statistical studies can only carry us part of

the way toward understanding the development of labor regulation. Hidden in the fixed

effects in the statistical analysis are many factors in the states that are not necessarily easily

measured quantitatively. Careful analysis of both statistical and narrative evidence is

important for understanding the relationships between labor regulations and the society. Our

hope is that scholars of all types find these summary measures useful for comparative purposes

in their own work.
                                                                                            36


                                     Table 1
Years of Introduction of Labor Commission, Factory Inspectors, Departments of Labor,
    Industrial Commissions, Workers’ Compensation and Coal Mine Safety Laws


    State        First      Factory       Industrial   Extent of    Permanent       Coal
                Labor      Inspection   Commission      Code-        Workers'     Mining
                Bureau      Adopted      Introduced    Writing     Compensation    Safety
                                                        by Ind.        Law          Law
                                                        Comm.                     Adopted

Alabama         1907 a      1907 a                                    1919         1891
                       b       b
Arizona         1925                       1925          Few          1913        no coal
                               c
Arkansas        1913                                                  1939         1889
California       1883        1885          1913        extensive      1911        no coal
Colorado         1887        1911          1915        no codes       1915         1883
Connecticut      1887        1887                                     1913        no coal
Delaware         1893        1893                                     1917        no coal
Florida         1893 d         e
                                                                      1935        no coal
Georgia         1911         1916                                     1920        no coal
Idaho           1890 f         g
                                           1917        no codes       1917        no coal
Illinois         1879        1893                                     1911         1872
Indiana          1879        1899                                     1915         1879
Iowa             1884        1897                                     1913         1873
Kansas           1885        1901                                     1911         1883
Kentucky        1892 h       1903                                     1914         1884
Louisiana       1900         1908                                     1914        no coal
Maine           1887         1887                                     1915        no coal
Maryland        1888 i       1898          1928        no codes       1912         1876
Massachusetts   1869         1879          1913        extensive      1911        no coal
Michigan        1883         1893                                     1912         1887
Minnesota       1887 j       1891                                     1913        no coal
Mississippi     1914         1914                                     1948        no coal
Missouri        1879        1891 k                                    1926         1881
Montana         1893 l        lm
                                           1915        no codes       1915         1889
                       n           n
Nebraska        1887        1895           1929        no codes       1913        no coal
Nevada          1915         1915          1919          Few          1913        no coal
New             1893         1917          1917        no codes       1911        no coal
Hampshire
New Jersey      1877         1878                                     1911        no coal
                  o            o
New Mexico                                                            1917         1891
New York        1882         1883          1913        extensive      1913        no coal
                                                                                                           37

                                     e
 North                 1887                       1931                         1929          no coal
 Carolina
 North Dakota          1899        1905           1919        no codes         1919           1905
 Ohio                  1877        1884           1913        extensive        1911           1874
 Oklahoma              1907        1910                                        1915           1891
 Oregon                1903        1907          1920            few           1913          no coal
 Pennsylvania          1872        1889         1913 for      extensive        1915           1869
                                               mines only                                  Anthracite;
                                                                                              1877
                                                                                           Bituminous
 Rhode Island          1887        1894                                        1912          no coal
 South                 1912        1912                                        1935          no coal
 Carolina
                                     p
 South Dakota          1890                                                    1917          no coal
                                          r
 Tennessee            1881-84      1897           1923           few           1919            1881
                         q

 Texas                  1911       1911                                        1913            1907
 Utah                  1892 s      1917           1917        extensive        1917            1896
 Vermont               1912        1912                                        1915          no coal
 Virginia              1897        1919                                        1918           1912
 Washington            1903        1910           1919           few           1911           1883
 West Virginia         1890 t      1899 r                                      1913           1883
 Wisconsin             1883        1883           1911        extensive        1911          no coal
 Wyoming               1917        1917                                        1915           1886



Sources: First Labor Bureau refers to the introduction of either a commissioner of labor, a bureau of
labor statistics, or a factory inspector. Factory inspection adopted refers to the first statutory provision
for a factory inspector. For dates of adoption of inspectors and departments of labor I started with
evidence from Brandeis (1935, pp. 628-645) and the U.S. Commissioner of Labor (1896). When the
precise date of introduction was unknown, the microfiche for the State Session Laws of American
States and Territories was searched until the original act was found. The earliest commissioner of labor
was in Massachusetts in 1869 and the earliest factory inspector was in Massachusetts in 1879.
Information on workers and establishments for 1880 is from the Report on Manufacturing for the
Eleventh Census (U.S. Census Bureau, 1895, pp. 67-69). Information on Industrial Commissions is
from Brandeis (1935, p. 654), who was citing work of John Andrews of the American Association of
Labor Legislation. The information on the adoption of workers’ compensation is from Fishback and
Kantor (2000, pp. 103-4). Information that was not available is marked as n.a. Year of coal law
adoption is from Aldrich (1997, p. 70).
         a
             Alabama had a mine inspector and later a board of arbitration but no official department of
labor.
         b
         Arizona had a mine inspector as of 1908.
         c
         Arkansas had an inspector of mines in 1894 or earlier.
       d
         The Florida Agriculture department was given the responsibility to collect statistics on
manufactures.
       e
         No law as of 1924.
                                                                                                        38

        f
            Idaho established commission in Constitution. No record of laws passed between 1879 and
1890.
        g
            Idaho had an inspector of mines in 1893 or earlier.
        h
            The Kentucky commissioner was to devote efforts to collect statistics on agriculture,
manufacturing and mining.
          i
            The initial Maryland law in 1868 was for agriculture and industry with most of the focus on
agriculture. The code of 1888 with amendments in 1892 is more specific to industry.
          j
           The Minnesota law included language about enforcing laws and prosecuting violations by the
commissioner but only funds for the commissioner were provided.
          k
            Missouri statute for inspector in 1891. Not found in earlier years.
          l
            The Montana act established a bureau of agriculture, labor, and industry.
          m
             Montana had a mine inspector in 1895 or earlier.
          n
            Nebraska gave the commissioner the power to inspect workplaces.
          o
            New Mexico had a mine inspector as of 1908.
          p
            South Dakota had a mine inspector as of 1903.
          q
            The Tennessee Law called for the Bureau of Agriculture, Mining, and Statistics to collect
information on labor. The original Bureau of Agriculture was established in 1871, became the Bureau
of Agriculture, Mining, and Statistics in 1875, but appears to have obtained the role of collecting labor
statistics sometime between 1881 and 1884. We have had trouble pinning down the date.
          r
            In Tennessee and West Virginia there were no regular inspectors. Commissioner merely had
the power to inspect.
          s
            The Utah legislature had authorized a bureau of labor statistics or labor department earlier.
          t
            West Virginia gave the commissioner the power to inspect workplaces but only to report on
findings there.


                                                    *
                                                                 39


                                      Table 2
                    Correlations of Labor Measures Across Time

                               ESW       ESW       ESW
                               Index     Index     Index
                               1899      1909      1919
ESW Index 1899                   1
ESW Index 1909                0.8322        1
ESW Index 1919                0.7257     0.8618      1

                              Pages      Pages     Pages
                               1904      1907      1914
Pages 1904                       1
Pages 1907                    0.9813        1
Pages 1914                    0.9098     0.9339      1

                              Labor    Labor    Labor
                             Spending Spending Spending
                                per      per      per
                              Worker   Worker   Worker
                               1903     1909     1916
Labor Spending per Worker,       1
1903
Labor Spending per Worker     0.7458       1
1909
Labor Spending per Worker     0.4953     0.7766      1
1916
                              COORD     COORD     COORD
                               ONE       ONE       ONE
                               1899      1909      1919
COORD ONE 1899                  1

COORD ONE 1909                0.8099        1
COORD ONE 1919                 0.76      0.7399      1

                              COORD     COORD     COORD
                               TWO       TWO       TWO
                               1899      1909      1919
COORD TWO 1899                  1

COORD TWO 1909                0.8503        1
COORD TWO 1919                0.7227     0.8743      1
                                                                                  40



                                       Table 3
      Cross-Sectional Correlations of Labor Measures At Specific Points in Time

                                ESW       Pages      Labor   COORD COORD
                                Index     1904      Spending  ONE   TWO
                                1899                   per    1899  1899
                                                     Worker
                                                      1903
ESW Index 1899                     1
Pages 1904                      0.7277       1
Labor Spending per Mining and   0.4784    0.3831       1
Manufacturing Worker 1903
COORD ONE 1899                  0.8338    0.7946    0.3094        1
COORD TWO 1899                  0.2193    0.3112    0.3831     0.1134      1

                                ESW       Pages      Labor   COORD COORD
                                Index     1907      Spending  ONE   TWO
                                1909                   per    1909  1909
                                                     Worker
                                                      1909
ESW Index 1909                     1
Pages 1907                      0.6327       1
Labor Spending per Mining and   0.3537    0.2163       1
Manufacturing Worker 1909
COORD ONE 1909                  0.7684    0.7297    0.0977        1
COORD TWO 1909                  0.1767    0.2322    0.3827     0.0314      1

                                ESW       Labor     COORD     COORD
                                Index    Spending    ONE       TWO
                                1919        per      1919      1919
                                          Worker
                                           1916
ESW Index 1919                     1
Labor Spending per Mining and   0.4907      1
Manufacturing Worker 1916
COORD ONE 1919                  0.8295    0.2754       1
COORD TWO 1919                  0.1235    0.4261    -0.0335      1
                                                                         41


                                       Table 4
             Cross-Sectional Correlations of Changes in Labor Measures

                                ESW      Labor   COORD COORD
                                Index   Spending  ONE   TWO
                                1919-      per    1919- 1919-
                                1899     Worker   1899  1899
                                         1916-
                                          1903

ESW Index 1919-1899               1
Labor Spending per             0.5309       1
Manufacturing and Mining
Worker 1916-1903
COORD ONE 1919-1899            0.4622    0.1125       1
COORD TWO 1919-1899            0.3684    0.4319    0.3331       1

                                ESW      Labor   COORD COORD
                                Index   Spending  ONE   TWO
                                1919-      per    1919- 1919-
                                1909     Worker   1909  1909
                                         1916-
                                          1909

ESW Index 1919-1909               1
Labor Spending per             0.2645       1
Manufacturing and Mining
Worker 1916-1909
COORD ONE 1919-1909            0.5537    0.1125       1
COORD TWO 1919-1909            0.245     0.4319    0.3149       1

                                ESW      Labor   COORD COORD
                                Index   Spending  ONE   TWO
                                1909-      per    1909- 1909-
                                1899     Worker   1899  1899
                                         1909-
                                          1903

ESW Index 1909-1899               1
Labor Spending per             0.2776       1
Manufacturing and Mining
Worker 1909-1903
COORD ONE 1909-1899            0.2368    -0.0702      1
COORD TWO 1909-1899            0.1188     0.3347   -0.0363      1
                                                                                           42


                                         Table 5
One Standard Deviation Effects of Correlates on Stock of Labor Legislation and Labor
             Spending per Mining and Manufacturing Worker (1967$)
              (t-statistics of Coefficients in Italics Below OSD Effects)
                    (Standard Deviation of Correlate Below Mean)

                                    Labor                                                Labor
                                   Spending                                             Spending
                                      per       Mean                                       per          Mean
                           ESWI,   Worker,      Std.                            ESWI,   Worker,         Std.
Correlate                   1904     1904       Dev.          Correlate          1919     1916          Dev.
Unionization Index, 1899     0.124     0.131       6.5 Unionization Index,       -0.097    -0.016          8.5
                              0.75      0.76       2.9 1909                        -0.54        -0.06      3.5
% Voting Republican for     -0.388     0.267     48.2  % Voting Republican       -0.023     0.425        46.5
President, 1900               -1.36     0.64     14.2  for President, 1912         -0.08        1.34     14.8
% Voting Socialist for      0.166      0.272       0.5 % Voting Socialist for    0.128      0.337          6.0
President, 1900               1.03      1.33       0.6 President, 1912             0.54         1.22       4.2
                                                       % Voting Progressive      -0.070    -0.170        24.5
                                                       Party for President,
                                                       1912                        -0.41        -1.08     10.3
Number of Gainfully         0.264      0.277    559090 Number of Gainfully       0.324      0.286       716988
Employed, 1900                2.19      1.68    568534 Employed, 1910               2.4          2.4    701803
% of Manu. Estabs. With     -0.060     0.087      71.3 % of Manu. Estabs.        0.075     -0.002         75.2
fewer than 20 workers,                                 With fewer than 20
1899                                                   workers, 1909
                              -0.28     0.36       6.5                             0.28         -0.01      5.5
% of Manu. Estabs. With     0.549      0.705       0.4 % of Manu. Estabs.        0.274      0.114          0.6
More than 500 workers,                                 With More than 500
1899                          1.94      2.14       0.4 workers, 1909               0.98         0.47       0.5
% black, 1900               -0.606     0.387      11.2   % black, 1910           -0.179     0.512         10.6
                              -0.92     0.48      17.4                             -0.57        1.75      16.4
% foreign born, 1900        -0.300     0.040      14.0   % foreign born, 1910    -0.001     0.214         14.0
                              -1.43     0.19      10.2                             -0.01        0.98      10.1
% Illiterate, 1900          -0.216    -0.546      11.9   % Illiterate, 1910      -0.219    -0.322          8.4
                              -0.32     -0.69     10.8                             -0.83        -1.42      7.3
% of Gainfully Employed     -0.731     0.429      39.4   % of Gainfully          -0.791     0.057         37.3
in Agriculture, 1900                                     Employed in
                               -1.3     0.57      18.9   Agriculture, 1910         -1.77        0.11      19.1
% of Gainfully Employed     0.131      0.916       2.8   % of Gainfully          -0.183     0.430          3.4
in Mining, 1900                                          Employed in Mining,
                              0.66      3.11       4.5   1910                      -0.84        1.39       4.8
% of Gainfully Employed     -0.873    -0.557      22.6   % of Gainfully          -0.544    -0.278         24.9
in Manufacturing, 1900                                   Employed in
                              -1.77     -0.84     11.7   Manufacturing, 1910       -0.99        -0.56     12.4
Dummy Variables
Governor is a Democrat,     -0.298     0.014     0.438 Governor is a             0.031      0.219        0.563
1900                             -1     0.03     0.501 Democrat, 1912              0.11         0.79     0.501
                            0.105     -0.654     0.216 Southern State            -0.309    -0.640        0.216
                                                                                             43


Southern State                 0.14      -1.13    0.415                              -0.77         -1.2   0.415
Constant                     7.064     -2.092             Constant                  4.370     -0.675
                               2.76      -0.65                                       0.89         -0.13
Rsquared                     0.676      0.593                                      0.625      0.672




Notes. The One-Standard Deviation (OSD) Effects for continuous variables show the number
of standard deviations by which the dependent variable changes with respect to a one-standard-
deviation increase in the variable. The OSD Effects for dummy variables show the number of
standard deviations by which the dependent variable changes with respect to a move from zero
to one of the dummy variable. Robust t-statistics are presented in italics below the OSD
Effects. Means with Standard Deviations are reported for each of the Correlates to the right of
the OSD Effects and the t-statistics.
        The dependent variables are the ESWI in 1904 and 1919 and Labor Spending (in
$1967) per mining and manufacturing worker in 1904 and 1916. For the ESWI in 1904 the
mean is 0.24 and the standard deviation is 0.125, for the labor spending measure in 1904 the
mean is 0.42 and standard deviation is 0.36. For the ESWI in 1919 the mean is 0.35 and the
standard deviation is 0.14, for the labor spending measure in 1916 the mean is 0.92 and
standard deviation is 0.77.
        There are observations for all 48 states in the 1916 and 1919 regressions. Arizona,
New Mexico, and Oklahoma are missing from the 1904 regressions due to lack of presidential
voting information in 1900. The data sources are described in Fishback and Kantor (2000) and
the data on all correlates were pulled from the workers’ compensation data sets on Price
Fishback’s website at the University of Arizona Department of Economics:
http://economics.eller.arizona.edu/faculty/Fishback.aspx.
                                                                                                     44


                                        Table 6
  One Standard Deviation Effects of Correlates on Changes in Labor Legislation and
        Changes in Labor Spending per Mining and Manufacturing Worker
                    (t-statistics of Coefficients in Italics Below)

                                   ESWI at End of        Labor Spending
                                      Decade             per Mining and
                                                          Manufacturing
                                                         Worker at End of
                                                         Decade (1967$)

                                     No       Fixed        No       Fixed      Mean     Std.
                                   Fixed      Effects    Fixed      Effects             Dev.
                                   Effects               Effects
ESWI at Beginning of Decade         -0.634     -1.953                            0.23      0.13
                                      -3.05      -4.71
Labor Spending per Mining and                             -0.298     -0.762      0.51      0.47
Manufacturing Worker ($1967)                                -2.45      -1.76
at Start of Decade
% Voting Republican for             -0.239     -0.757      0.091      0.294      47.3      14.4
President                             -0.99      -1.34       0.46       0.37
% Voting Socialist for President    0.206      -0.137      0.339     -0.196       3.3          4.1
                                      1.33       -0.36       2.18      -0.49
% Voting Progressive for            0.000       0.000      0.000      0.000      11.9      14.2
President                             0.42        0.23      -0.36      -1.06
Number of Gainfully Employed        0.148       1.067      0.037      1.353    638039   640222
Workers                               0.47        1.02       0.14       1.15
% of Manu. Estabs with fewer        0.152      -0.037     -0.145      0.039      73.3          6.3
than 20 workers                       0.95       -0.13      -1.05       0.14
% of Manu. Estabs with More         0.160       0.813     -0.187     -0.521       0.5          0.5
than 500 workers
                                      0.69        1.29      -0.83      -0.85
% of Gainfully Employed in          -0.427     -1.490      0.689     -2.920      38.3      18.9
Agriculture                           -0.98      -0.72       1.89      -1.24
% of Gainfully Employed in          -0.067     -0.692      0.509     -0.286       3.1          4.6
Mining
                                      -0.46      -1.41       3.36      -0.39
% of Gainfully Employed in          -0.204     -0.415      0.363     -1.127      23.7      12.1
Manufacturing
                                      -0.42      -0.47       1.06       -0.8
Unionization Index                  -0.097      0.231     -0.038     -0.336       7.5          3.4
                                      -0.59       0.85      -0.23      -0.77
% Black                             -0.364      3.570      0.143      5.997      10.9      16.8
                                      -1.26       0.78       0.56       1.22
% Foreign-Born                      0.009       0.057      0.389      0.178      14.0      10.1
                                      0.07        0.05       2.01       0.16
                                    0.107       0.673      0.242      0.624      62.5     111.5
                                                                                                  45


Average Number of Strikes in         0.35         0.45     0.79         0.46
Decade
Governor is Democrat at start of   0.211        0.676    -0.091       0.003       0.427   0.497
decade                               0.83         1.38      -0.3              0
Number of Changes of Party of      -0.046       0.062    0.010       -0.211       1.354   1.046
Governor in Decade
                                     -0.46        0.27       0.1       -0.86
Number of Changes in Party         0.047       -0.270    -0.024      -0.063       0.740   1.215
Control of Upper House of            0.32        -0.86     -0.23       -0.36
Legislature in Decade
Number of Changes in Party         -0.014      -0.111    0.296        0.301       0.834   1.382
Control of Lower House of            -0.17       -0.47     2.87         1.35
Legislature in Decade
Southern State                     -0.626                -0.078                   0.216   0.413
                                     -1.23                 -0.17
Second Decade Dummy                             0.783                 1.977
                                                  0.42                  1.01
Constant                           2.472        6.652    -1.104       5.684
                                     0.89         0.71     -0.56        0.56
R-Squared                            0.31          0.5     0.34         0.87
State Effects                                Included              Included
ME                                              3.103                 0.762
                                                  1.24                  0.31
MA                                             -0.580                -1.915
                                                 -0.23                 -0.88
NH                                              2.296                 1.349
                                                  1.29                  0.95
RI                                             -2.007                 0.241
                                                 -1.31                  0.24
VT                                              2.564                 1.373
                                                  0.75                  0.44
DE                                             -3.346                -5.148
                                                 -0.61                 -0.82
NJ                                             -1.915                -3.583
                                                 -0.98                 -1.78
NY                                             -4.577                -9.873
                                                 -0.51                 -1.37
PA                                             -2.851                -5.088
                                                 -0.51                 -1.07
IL                                             -1.332                -3.754
                                                 -0.36                 -1.17
IN                                              3.238                 0.003
                                                  0.84                        0
MI                                              3.989                -0.230
                                                  1.49                 -0.09
                           46


OH    0.650      -1.396
        0.16        -0.4
WI    3.924      1.048
        1.52       0.43
IO    3.433      0.939
        0.91       0.25
KS    3.519      1.652
        0.91       0.38
MN    4.349      2.961
        1.68       1.11
MO    0.252      -2.047
        0.06       -0.49
NE    2.528      2.307
        0.84       0.61
ND    3.069      6.729
        0.74       1.56
SD    1.585      4.943
         0.4       1.16
VA    -7.782    -10.638
         -0.8      -0.89
AL   -10.343    -11.402
        -0.84      -0.72
AR    -4.476     -5.942
         -0.5      -0.51
FL   -11.287    -12.933
        -0.91      -0.92
GA   -10.885    -14.059
        -0.84      -0.87
LA    -8.564    -13.907
        -0.68      -0.89
MS   -13.167    -16.015
        -0.81      -0.79
NC    -5.788     -8.227
        -0.61      -0.68
SC   -13.524    -14.811
        -0.87      -0.75
TX    -4.600     -4.891
        -0.69      -0.54
KY    -1.496     -1.569
        -0.28      -0.24
MD    -2.979     -6.487
        -0.52      -0.97
OK    2.407      2.178
        0.44       0.34
TN    -3.405     -5.158
        -0.46      -0.54
                                                                                            47


WV                                            3.051               3.654
                                                0.66                0.66
AZ                                            2.579               3.955
                                                0.73                 0.7
CO                                            5.792               2.580
                                                1.96                0.71
ID                                            5.108               5.274
                                                1.38                 1.2
MT                                            5.622               4.037
                                                2.05                1.18
NV                                            5.372               4.799
                                                1.57                0.97
NM                                            3.179               3.978
                                                0.73                0.74
UT                                            5.011               1.869
                                                1.71                0.53
WY                                            3.362               1.848
                                                0.99                0.45
CA                                            2.761              -2.282
                                                1.27               -0.82
OR                                            2.859               0.734
                                                1.01                0.22
WA                                            3.566               2.018
                                                1.52                0.69



Notes. The numbers for continuous variables show the number of standard deviations by
which the dependent variable changes with respect to a one-standard-deviation increase in the
variable. The numbers for dummy variables show the number of standard deviations by which
the dependent variable changes with respect to a move from zero to one of the dummy
variable. Robust t-statistics, clustered by states are presented in italics below the numbers.
        The dependent variables are the change in the ESWI between 1899 and 1909 and again
from 1909 to 1919 and the change in Labor Spending (in $1967) per mining and manufacturing
worker between 1903 and 1909 and again from 1909 to 1916. The means are .077 for the
changes in the ESWI and .25 for the labor spending measure with standard deviations of .073
and .43 respectively.
        There are two observations for each state except Arizona, New Mexico, and Oklahoma,
which did not have presidential voting in the first period. The values for most variables are
from the beginning of the decade. Presidential voting for the early observation is from 1900
and from 1912 for the later observation. The democratic governor variable is from 1900 and
1909. The manufacturing size variables are from 1899 and 1909, the gainful employment
shares for mining, manufacturing, and agriculture are from 1900 and 1910. The change in the
governor and changes in party control of legislatures are for the periods 1900 to 1909 and 1910
to 1919. The data sources are described in Fishback and Kantor (2000) and the data are
available from Price Fishback’s website at the University of Arizona Department of
Economics: http://economics.eller.arizona.edu/faculty/Fishback.aspx.
                              48



Figure 1
State Map of the ESW Index,
1999, 1909, 1914, 1919
                                                                                                     49


                                                                         Figure 2
                                                       Scatter Plot of ESW Index in 1899 and 1899
esw index 1909 , state wgts
                       .5




                                                                          NY
                                                                                  CO
                                                                               MI
                                                                                IN MT
                                                                                   MA
                                                                             CT MNOH
               .4




                                                        MD                   WI
                                                                           IL CA MO
                                                                               IA
                                                                MEWAKS
                                                                                                NJ
        .3




                                                                 RI     NE                 PA
                                                        WVID   LA    UT
                                    OR
                                                       NH
                                                      TN
                                    NV
  .2




                                     OK          VA WY
                                               KY
                                           ND
                                   AZ AR NC SDTX
                                        VTSC FL NM
              .1




                                        DE
                                  MS    GA
                                       AL
              0




                              0              .1              .2          .3         .4        .5
                                                                  esw index 1899 , state wgts




                                                                                    MA
              .6




                                                                          NY
                                                                                  IN
                                                                                   CO
                                                                                 MI MNOH
esw index 1919 , state wgts




                                                                               WI
                                                                               CA
                                                                                           PA
                                       NV                            UT
                                                                  NH
                                                                   WA               MT
                                                                               CT
                                                                                                NJ
               .4




                                       OK                   IL
                                                        MD       MO
                                                     ME KS     IA
                                    OR              LA
                                                 ID
                                                  WY RI
                                                           NE
                                   AZ VTND TX WV
                                        SC
                                       DE            TN
                                       GA NC KY
                                             NM
                                              VA
  .2




                                       AR         SD

                                  MS    AL
                                                  FL
              0




                              0              .1              .2          .3         .4        .5
                                                                  esw index 1899 , state wgts
                              50




Figure 3
Maps Showing Pages of Labor
Legislation Reported by the
Department of Labor
                                                                                  51



                                                  Figure 4
                               Scatter Plots of the Number of Pages
         150




                                                                       PA
         100




                                                    NY
page14




                                    MA         OH
                                          IL
                                     IN

                                    WICO
                                     NJ MO
         50




                               CA  MT
                                      MI
                                 WA MD MN
                   OK NEIA        KS
                                 TN
                   AZNV ALTXOR
                      ARVA LA
                          IDCTUT
                         KY   WV
                      ME
                      DE   RIWY
                        SDND
                     NMNC
                       SC
                      NH
                   VTFLGA
                    MS
         0




               0          20          40                  60      80        100
                                                         page04
                       52




         Figure 5
Maps of Labor Spending per
 Mining and Manufacturing
Worker in 1967 Dollars, 1903
                                                                                53



                                    Figure 6
Scatter Plots of Labor Spending per Mining and Manufacturing Worker in 1967$,
            3                    1903 and 1916



                                      WV
                    NV
                          WA

                                                                     MT
                                                CO
            2




                               NY                   ND
                                 OK       OH
                                                         ID
  rspmm16




                               MN          MA
                                      PA
                    AZ

                                    WI                        WY
            1




                                     IL        UT

                             TNMDIN MOKS
                             NJ
                    TX          SD    NM
                     DE AL IA
                          ORRI    CT
                    VT NHCA NE KYMI
                    SCVAAR
                         ME
                           LA
                    GA
                    MS
                    FL NC
            0




                0              .5               1                 1.5     2
                                                               rspmm03
                         54



Figure 7
Maps of COORDINATE ONE
                         55

Figure 8
Maps of COORDINATE TWO
                                                                                                                                            56



                                                                  Figure 9
                                       Scatter Plots of COORDINATE ONE Against COORDINATE TWO,
                                                               1899 and 1919
nominate first coordinate 1899
                           .5




                                                                                                       PA


                                                                                     NY            OH            MO
                                                              MA             NJ
                                                                             MN
                                                                              MI

                                                                         WILA
               0




                                        RI
                                                    NH CT                                                                    COIN
                                                                                                        CA IL                    IA WY
                                                                                                                                MD
                                                      NE                                                   TN        WA
                                                                                                                     WV        KS
                                              ME                                             SD         KY                        UT
                                                                                                        MT
                                                   VT
                                                    ND
                                                                      GADE                                      AL
 -.5




                                                                   VA
                                                                    OK                  NM
                                                                   MS      NV
                                                                            AZ                                   AR
                                                                    TX     OR                     ID            NC
                                                                            FLSC
                -1




                                             -.5                            0                                                    .5
                                                              nominate second coordinate 1899
                .8




                                                         MA
                                                                                          NY            PA
                                                                                                                 OH CA
                    .2 .4 .6
nominate first coordinate, 1919




                                                                                   WI              NJ
                                                              CT                                        MO
                                                                                                        MI                    MD
                                                                                                       OR                           IN CO
                                                                                                                     IL          OK
                                                          NH                  DE
                                                                             LA                                       IA
                                                                        NE                                                   MN KSMTTX
                                                         ME
                                                                                              TN
                                                                                             VA                            WV WA
                                                                                                                              UT
                                                         RI                                             KYID                   NV WY
                                                                   VT                                  ND
        -.2 0




                                                                                                                                      AZ
                                                                                             SC                SD                     AR
                                                                         GA     FL                 NC           AL          NM
                                                                         MS




                                  -1                           -.5                 0                                                  .5
                                                              nominate second coordinate, 1919
                                                            57




                       Figure 10
National EWSI and Labor Spending per Worker, 1899 to 1924
                                                                                            58



                                       Appendix Table 1
          Number of States with Each Type of Law, 1895, 1908, 1918, and 1924
     [This Table is substantially reorganized to match the ESWI categories and differs in
       organization from the table that appeared in Holmes, Fishback, and Allen 2008]
WORKPLACE ACTIVITY REGULATION
 Factory Safety
   Sanitation/bathroom regulations                      11       22      34     35
   Ventilation                                          10       22      25     26
   Guards required on machines                          12       22      34     35
   Electrical Regulations                                0        0       6      8
   Building Regulations                                  5       13      23     24
   Other                                                 1        3      10     11
   Bakery Regulations                                    7       14      27     32
   Sweatshop Regulations                                 9       11      14     14
   Fire escapes                                         23       30      36     37
   Factory Inspector                                    15       29      39     41
   Factory accidents                                    10       14      22     23
   Occupational disease reporting                        1        1      16     17
 Mining Regulations
   Mine inspectors                                      23       30      33     33
   Mine Safety Regulations: Employees/Individuals       18       23      30     32

     Mine Safety Regulations: Companies                 22       30      33     35
     No screening/fine if not weight coal               14       21      22     23
     Mine Inspector fined for not doing job              9       13      17     18
     Miners' Hospital and or Home                        4        5       5      5
     No Women and Children in Mines                     25       31      35     35
     Mine accidents Reporting                           19       26      33     32
  Railroad Regulations
     Safety Regulations                                 20       32      45     45
     Railroad Inspectors                                 4        7       6      6
     Railroad accidents reporting                        3       21      36     39
  Street Railroad safety regulations                     7       28      30     30
  Occupational Licensing
     Railroad telegraph operators                        3        1       1      2
     Plumbers                                            9       19      22     23
     Horseshoers                                         2        5       6      6
     Chauffers                                           0        1      27     36
     Aviators                                            0        0       2      6
     Other                                               0        0       2      2
     Motion Picture Operator                             0        0       8      8
     Barbers                                             1       13      16     16
     Steam engineers (firemen)                          11       16      17     17
     Mine manager                                        7       11      13     16
     Elevator operators                                  1        2       2      2
     Railroad employees                                  1        1       1      1
     Electricians                                        0        1       2      4
                                                                              59


    Stevedores                                             2    2    2    2
HOURS REGULATION
  Women's Hours
    Night labor                                            3    4   11   13
    General/All Employment                                 2    6   24   28
    Mercantile                                             3    8   24   27
    Mechanical                                            12   16   25   28
    Textiles                                               8   13   25   27
  Child hours law
    General                                                7   18   30   35
    Mercantile                                             6   15   22   22
    Mechanical                                            18   30   30   28
    Textile                                               15   27   27   26
    Other                                                  2    8   10   10
    Minimum Age for night labor for children               7   29   42   45
 General Hours Laws
   Textiles                                                6    6    6    6
   Mines                                                   5   13   15   15
   Manufacture                                             7    7    8    9
   Railroads                                               8   26   27   27
   Street Railroads                                        8   10   10   10
   Public Employment                                      14   22   29   30
   Other                                                   5    5   11   11
   General Hours Law                                      13   12   11   11
   Public Roads                                            2   23   16   16
   1 hr for meals                                          6    9   17   19
WOMEN AND CHILDREN ACTIVITY REGULATION
 Child Labor
   Child safety commission                                 0    1   10   14
   Child labor inspector                                  13   30   40   41
   Children in manufacture/mercantile/mechanical jobs     20   42   42   44

     Minimum Age                                          17   33   40   42
     Penalty for false certificate of age                 16   36   38   38
     Certificates of Age required for employment          19   38   45   46

     Fine for children working to support idle parents.    1    7    7    7

     No children cleaning or handling moving parts        10   20   36   39

   No children in immoral jobs (acrobat) Is this street 25     30   34   34
   jobs?
   No women and children in bars                         6     23    5    6
  Women's Regulation
   Special accommodations (seats)                       23     33   44   44
   Earnings of married women belong to her              31     43   46   46
EMPLOYER LIABILITY AND WORKERS' COMPENSATION
   Restates Common Law                                  15     28   23   21
   General                                              21     47   48   47
                                                                                     60


    Railroads                                                    16   31   32   32
    Street Railroads                                              1    8    7    7
    Mines                                                         1    4    4    4
    Can't require employees to sign contracts waiving            14   25   28   28
    damages
    Workers' Compensation Law                                     0    0   37   42
STEAM BOILER INSPECTION                                          15   17   15   17
UNIONIZATION AND BARGAINING
  Pro-Union
    False use of union cards or employers' certificates           1   10   12   13

     Incorporation of labor unions.                               9    9   10   11
     Labor organizations exempt from antitrust                    5    5   10   14

     Strikes: Agreements not to work allowed                      3    5    7   10

     Conspiracy vs. workmen (conspiring to prevent               11   14   15   17
     someone from working
     Labor agreement is not a conspiracy                          6    8    8   10
     No blacklisting                                             14   23   25   25
     Yellow dog contract (Not allowed to join a union as a       11   16   12   12
     condition of employment) (illegal for anyone to coerce
     to join or not to join a union)

     Prohibition on hiring armed guards                          17   12    9    9
     Misrepresentation about a strike or other job                2    7   12   13
     characteristics
     Limits on injunctions                                        0    1    4    8
     Labor organizations--embezzlement of funds by                2    2    3    3
     officers
     Combinations of employers to fix wages illegal               0    1    0    0

    Union trademark fine                                         25   42   43   44
  Anti-Union
    Enticement fines                                             11   11   11   11
    Interfere with or intimidate in railroads or workers         25   11    9    9
    abandoning trains or obstructing track

     Interference with railroad employees                        14    9    9    9
     Interference with street railroad employees                  4    1    1    2

     No intimidation of miners                                    4    6    7    7
     Illegal to interfere with a business or the employment of   15   16   19   21
     others
     Anti-picketing                                               0    2    2    6
     Anti-boycott                                                 3    7    5    5
     Anti-intimidation                                           19   23   26   27
     Industrial police are legal                                  1    9   19   22
                                                                                   61


     Criminal Syndicalism (advocating violence or sabotage     0    0     7   19
     for political or industrial ends)

    No Trespass without employer consent                        1    1    0    0
BRIBERY, COERCION AND POLITICAL FREEDOMS
    Foreman accepting fees for employment illegal               1    4   12   14

    Bribing Employees                                           0   13   17   17
    Coercion of Employees is illegal                           10   13   19   19
    Company Stores Cannot Gouge                                 6    8    8    8
    Coercing the votes of employees illegal                    30   33   38   38
    Time off to Vote                                           18   22   24   24
BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS/DEPT. OF LABOR                      28   34   43   44
STATE BOARD OF ARBITRATION, MEDIATION                          20   26   32   33
REHABILITATION COMMISSION                                       0    0    0    4
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION                                           0    0    9   17
FREE EMPLOYMENT OFFICES                                         0   14   23   32
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION
    Cannot fire due to age only                                0    1     1    1
    Sex discrimination                                         3    3     4    6
    Antidiscrimination                                         1    1     1    1
PAYDAY REGULATIONS
    Nonpayment                                                  1    1    3    4
    Wages in cash                                              19   29   28   30
    Wage payment frequency                                     20   26   32   37
    Repayment of advance made by employer                       1    9    9   12

     No forced contributions by employers                      5    6     7    8
     Railroad workers: Notice of reduction of wages            1    2     2    2
     required
     Fine for no notice of discharge if employee has to give   6    9    10   10
     notice too
HOLIDAYS
    No work on legal holidays                                   0    0    3    3
    Labor Day a holiday                                        29   48   51   51
    Sunday labor fines                                         43   48   49   50
MINIMUM WAGES
    Minimum wage for public work                               1    4     9   10
    Minimum wage for women/children (<18)                      0    0    12   14

     Minimum Wage Commission                                   0    0     9   10
MISCELLANEOUS
     illegal to desert a ship                                   5    1    0    0
     Convict Labor Regulations                                 22   27   32   33
  Alien Labor
     Importing alien labor illegal                             2     1    0    0
     No aliens in public employment                            5    12   14   17
     Chinese labor illegal                                     3     3    3    3
  Employment Agents
                                                                                            62


     Emigrant agent license                              3       6      11     12
     Regulation of Employment Agencies                  11      25      35     42
Source: Holmes (2003, chapter 3). Includes all states as of 1912, Alaska, Hawaii, and the

District of Columbia.
                                                                             63


                             Appendix Table Two
ESWI and Labor Regulation Spending per Mining and Manufacturing Worker (1967$)
                           by State in Various Years

                                         Spending   Spending   Spending
                                            per        per        per
                 ESWI,   ESWI,   ESWI,    Worker     Worker,    Worker,
STATNAME         1899    1909    1919      1904       1909       1916
Alabama          0.057   0.043   0.105     $0.19      $0.24      $0.55
Arizona          0.025   0.129   0.274     $0.00      $0.00      $1.32
Arkansas         0.050   0.130   0.167     $0.19      $0.15      $0.28
California       0.311   0.376   0.510     $0.16      $0.20      $0.34
Colorado         0.340   0.470   0.561     $0.93      $1.45      $2.14
Connecticut      0.307   0.421   0.439     $0.55      $0.49      $0.43
Delaware         0.070   0.084   0.250     $0.05      $0.14      $0.53
Florida          0.107   0.097   0.064     $0.00      $0.00      $0.08
Georgia          0.068   0.062   0.227     $0.00      $0.00      $0.15
Idaho            0.172   0.254   0.333     $1.07      $1.67      $1.79
Illinois         0.293   0.369   0.392     $0.70      $0.77      $0.91
Indiana          0.332   0.442   0.566     $0.48      $0.45      $0.70
Iowa             0.322   0.347   0.351     $0.39      $0.43      $0.52
Kansas           0.239   0.326   0.358     $0.67      $0.81      $0.60
Kentucky         0.124   0.165   0.225     $0.41      $0.47      $0.31
Louisiana        0.196   0.278   0.340     $0.23      $0.15      $0.19
Maine            0.200   0.315   0.361     $0.18      $0.33      $0.27
Maryland         0.151   0.397   0.381     $0.44      $0.52      $0.62
Massachusetts    0.357   0.435   0.638     $0.77      $1.08      $1.69
Michigan         0.325   0.445   0.528     $0.48      $0.47      $0.35
Minnesota        0.347   0.416   0.539     $0.40      $1.12      $1.71
Mississippi      0.013   0.060   0.110     $0.00      $0.00      $0.15
Missouri         0.338   0.357   0.381     $0.60      $0.79      $0.68
Montana          0.355   0.441   0.454     $1.69      $2.11      $2.25
Nebraska         0.276   0.296   0.290     $0.32      $0.26      $0.33
Nevada           0.042   0.210   0.470     $0.00      $1.94      $2.64
New Hampshire    0.211   0.224   0.453     $0.13      $0.12      $0.29
New Jersey       0.467   0.306   0.407     $0.32      $0.40      $0.60
New Mexico       0.128   0.096   0.222     $0.69      $0.58      $0.57
New York         0.272   0.489   0.586     $0.43      $0.50      $1.99
North Carolina   0.095   0.142   0.217     $0.12      $0.10      $0.08
North Dakota     0.087   0.149   0.275     $1.03      $1.69      $1.96
Ohio             0.368   0.419   0.524     $0.80      $0.99      $1.93
Oklahoma         0.043   0.180   0.396     $0.42      $1.60      $1.93
Oregon           0.037   0.239   0.346     $0.19      $0.15      $0.43
Pennsylvania     0.417   0.300   0.483     $0.75      $0.81      $1.51
Rhode Island     0.209   0.304   0.312     $0.26      $0.32      $0.48
South Carolina   0.081   0.114   0.260     $0.00      $0.31      $0.24
South Dakota     0.103   0.131   0.160     $0.40      $0.35      $0.59
Tennessee        0.203   0.221   0.245     $0.31      $0.69      $0.65
                                                                            64


Texas               0.115    0.135   0.280     $0.00       $0.11    $0.56
Utah                0.249    0.274   0.469     $0.84       $0.58    $0.93
Vermont             0.067    0.103   0.270     $0.00       $0.00    $0.31
Virginia            0.141    0.189   0.209     $0.08       $0.19    $0.22
Washington          0.223    0.319   0.447     $0.27       $0.57    $2.55
West Virginia       0.149    0.266   0.284     $0.64       $1.03    $2.74
Wisconsin           0.303    0.398   0.514     $0.56       $0.66    $1.04
Wyoming             0.179    0.183   0.310     $1.37       $1.42    $1.00



Notes. See text for discussion of how the variables were created.
                                                                                        65


                           Appendix Table Three
 Labor Regulation COORDINATES ONE AND TWO and Number of Pages of Labor
                     Regulation by State in Various Years

                                                                             Pages   Pages
                 COORD     COORD     COORD     COORD     COORD     COORD       of      of
                   ONE       ONE       ONE       TWO       TWO       TWO     Laws    Laws
STATNAME           1899      1909      1919      1899      1909      1919     1907    1914
Alabama           -0.471    -0.211    -0.226     0.259    -0.022      0.17   14.47   28.33
Arizona           -0.577    -0.386    -0.064    -0.127     0.025     0.441    5.88   29.94
Arkansas          -0.589    -0.229    -0.117      0.28     0.214     0.447   13.77    24.20
California        -0.169     0.139     0.662     0.167     0.032     0.268   20.67   51.19
Colorado          -0.114    -0.114     0.385     0.429     0.429     0.543   34.48   61.56
Connecticut       -0.126     0.354     0.416    -0.356     -0.54    -0.562   17.47   24.03
Delaware          -0.458    -0.261     0.275    -0.193    -0.245      -0.3    9.66   19.35
Florida           -0.641    -0.187    -0.186    -0.125    -0.254    -0.253    6.99   11.81
Georgia           -0.477    -0.329    -0.195    -0.224    -0.348    -0.358   10.52   13.24
Idaho             -0.597     0.022     0.057     0.093     0.095     0.089   15.29   23.61
Illinois          -0.174     0.224     0.326     0.218     0.361     0.208   44.14   79.10
Indiana            -0.12     0.272     0.389     0.465     0.542     0.498   41.34   74.38
Iowa              -0.179      0.17     0.258     0.495     0.211     0.221   19.23   37.53
Kansas            -0.211     0.131     0.235     0.464     0.196     0.403   28.03   35.63
Kentucky          -0.289     0.063      0.05     0.161     0.028     0.037   16.03   22.14
Louisiana          0.028     0.276     0.271    -0.134      -0.3    -0.322   14.06   25.13
Maine             -0.288     0.151     0.205    -0.516    -0.623    -0.637    9.45   21.08
Maryland          -0.187    -0.118     0.414     0.483     0.474     0.377   34.19   40.48
Massachusetts      0.167     0.346     0.765    -0.333    -0.605    -0.606   44.06   83.40
Michigan           0.153     0.171     0.416    -0.097    -0.102     0.052   32.71   45.37
Minnesota          0.155     0.275     0.242    -0.119    -0.024      0.34   25.97   39.89
Mississippi       -0.584    -0.525    -0.288    -0.269     -0.38    -0.369    5.59    9.70
Missouri           0.287     0.407     0.447     0.287     0.051     0.046   44.38   52.11
Montana           -0.385     0.087     0.225     0.163     0.528     0.454   29.67   51.69
Nebraska          -0.217    -0.208      0.22    -0.409    -0.335    -0.418   14.84   33.98
Nevada            -0.557    -0.551     0.084    -0.135    -0.131     0.388    9.66   28.33
New Hampshire     -0.134    -0.104      0.28    -0.448    -0.427    -0.604   10.19   14.67
New Jersey         0.196      0.23     0.521    -0.116    -0.314    -0.024   32.55   50.60
New Mexico        -0.497    -0.485    -0.236    -0.008     0.057      0.32    5.84   15.26
New York           0.283     0.664     0.676    -0.027    -0.116    -0.128   59.51   92.34
North Carolina    -0.625    -0.226    -0.211     0.266     0.171    -0.022    9.12   16.28
North Dakota      -0.438    -0.433     0.048    -0.459    -0.276      0.01   12.41   15.60
Ohio                0.27      0.27     0.633     0.118     0.118     0.181   42.41   83.23
Oklahoma          -0.518    -0.284    0.291     -0.263      0.32     0.423    3.53   36.26
Oregon            -0.602    -0.209      0.37    -0.144    -0.393     0.016   21.62   29.22
Pennsylvania       0.498     0.507      0.67     0.129     0.082     0.041   99.62   130.96
Rhode Island      -0.029    -0.034     0.071    -0.592    -0.589    -0.621   15.04   18.93
South Carolina    -0.636    -0.379    -0.119    -0.103    -0.066    -0.106   10.11   15.18
South Dakota      -0.262    -0.244    -0.109     0.056     0.001      0.13    9.78   16.53
Tennessee         -0.215     0.189     0.129     0.205     0.189    -0.062   24.86    34.57
                                                                                         66


Texas               -0.602    -0.271     0.225    -0.261    0.207    0.487    19.60   27.95
Utah                -0.263    -0.275     0.106     0.501    0.569     0.387   18.74   24.83
Vermont              -0.42     -0.42     0.035    -0.476    -0.477   -0.505    4.48   12.90
Virginia            -0.502     0.025     0.099    -0.278    -0.149   -0.094    9.82   22.77
Washington          -0.213     0.083     0.113    0.313     0.309    0.368    28.60   41.57
West Virginia       -0.224    0.112      0.113     0.318    0.283     0.283   20.14   21.59
Wisconsin           -0.006     0.256     0.543    -0.174     -0.15   -0.238   33.78   59.58
Wyoming             -0.209      -0.2     0.084    0.527     0.523    0.452    16.36   21.46



Notes. See text for discussion of how variables were created.

*The page numbers for 1914 do not include pages of text devoted to Workers’ Compensation
Laws.
                                                                                                    67



                                          REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron and Robinson, James (2006). Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy. New
        York: Cambridge University Press.
Aldrich, M. (1997) Safety First: Technology, Labor, and Business in the Building of American Work
        Safety, 1870-1939. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Aldrich, M. (2006). Death Rode the Rails: American Railroad Accidents and Safety, 1828-1965.
        Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Barro, Robert and Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (2004). Economic Growth. Second Edition. Cambridge, MA:
        The MIT Press).
Berry, William, Ringquist, Evan, Fording, Richard, and Hanson, Russell (1998) “Measuring Citizen and
        Government Ideology in the States.” American Journal of Political Science 42: 327-48.
Botero, Juan, Djankov, Simon, La Porta, Rafel, Lpez-de-Silanes, Florencio, and Andrei Shleifer. (2004).
        “The Regulation of Labor.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (November): 1339-1382.
Boyer, George (1990). An Economic History of the English Poor Law, 1750-1850. New York:
        Cambridge University Press.
Brandeis, Elizabeth. (1966) “Labor Legislation.” in John R. Commons and Associates, History of Labor
        in the United States, 1896-1932, volume 3, reprint of material published between 1916 and 1935.
        New York: Augustus Kelley Publishers.
Brandes, Stuart. (1976). American Welfare Capitalism, 1880-1940. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.
Brody, David. (1980) Labor Embattled: History, Power, Rights. Champaign-Urbana IL: University of
        Illinois Press.

Brody, David. (1980) Workers in Industrial America: Essays on the 20th Century Struggles. New York:
         Oxford University Press.
Brown, M., Christiansen, J., and Phillips, P. (1992) “The Decline of Child Labor in the U.S. fruit and
         vegetable canning industry: Law or Economics?” Business History Review 66 (Winter): 723-
         770.
Buffum, David (1992) "Workmen's Compensation: Passage and Impact." Ph.D. diss., University of
         Pennsylvania.
Burns, Ric, James Sanders, and Lisa Ades (2003). New York: An Illustrated History. New York:
         Knopf.
Chelius, James R. (1976) "Liability for Industrial Accidents: A Comparison of Negligence and Strict
         Liability Systems," Journal of Legal Studies 5 (June): 293-309.
_____. (1977), Workplace Safety and Health: The Role of Workers' Compensation. Washington, DC:
         American Enterprise Institute.
Commons, John R. and Associates. (1966) History of Labor in the United States, 4 volumes, reprint of
         material published between 1916 and 1935. New York: Augustus Kelley Publishers.
Currie, Janet and Ferrie, Joseph (2000) “The Law and Labor Strife in the United States, 1881-1894.”
         Journal of Economic History 60 (March): 42-66.
Dubofsky, Melvyn (1994) The State and Labor in Modern America. Chapel Hill, NC: University of
         North Carolina Press.
Eyestone, Robert. “Confusion, Diffusion, and Innovation.” American Political Science Review 71 (June):
         441-447.
Feng, Yi. 2003. Democracy, Governance, and Economic Performance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fishback, Price V. (1986) "Workplace Safety during the Progressive Era: Fatal Accidents in
         Bituminous Coal Mining, 1912-1923," Explorations in Economic History 23 (July): 269-298.
_____. (1987) "Liability Rules and Accident Prevention in the Workplace: Empirical Evidence from the
         Early Twentieth Century," Journal of Legal Studies 16 (June): 305-328.
                                                                                                  68


____. (1992) Soft Coal, Hard Choices: The Economic Welfare of Bituminous Coal Miners, 1890 to
        1930. New York: Oxford University Press.
______. (1998) “Operations of “unfettered” labor markets: Exit and voice in American labor markets at
        the Turn of the Century. Journal of Economic Literature 36 (June): 722-65.
_____. (2006) “The Irony of Reform: Did Large Employers Subvert Workplace Safety Reform, 1869 to
        1930.” Corruption and Reform: Lessons from American Economic History. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
Fishback, Price V. and Kantor, Shawn.E. (2000) A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of
        Workers’ Compensation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fishback, Price, Higgs, Robert, Libecap, Gary, et. al. (2007) Government and the American Economy:
        A New History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Freeman, Richard and Casey Ichinowski, Editors. (1989). When Public Sector Workers Unionize.
        Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Friedman, Gerald (1998) State-Making and Labor Movements: France and the United States, 1876-1914.
        Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Friedman, Gerald (2000) “The Political Economy of Early Southern Unionism: Race, Politics, and Labor
        in the South, 1880-1953.” Journal of Economic History 60 (June): 384-413.
Glaeser, Edward. and Shleifer, Andrei. (2003) “The Rise of the Regulatory State.” Journal of Economic
        Literature 41 (June): 401-25.
Goldin, Claudia (1990) Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of Women. New York:
        Oxford University Press.
Haines, Michael (2006) Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social Data: The United States: 1790-
        2000. Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research. ICPSR 2896.
Holmes, Rebecca (2003) “The Impact of State Labor Regulations on Manufacturing Input Demand
        During the Progressive Era.” Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Arizona, 2003.
       . (2005) “The Impact of State Labor Regulations on Manufacturing Input Demand During the
        Progressive Era, Dissertation Summary.” Journal of Economic History 65 (June); 531-532.
Holmes, Rebecca and Fishback, Price (2005) “The Impact of State Labor Regulations on Manufacturing
        Input Demand During the Progressive Era.” Unpublished working paper. University of Arizona,
        2005.
Holmes, Rebecca, Fishback, Price, and Allen, Samuel. (2008). “Measuring the Intensity of State Labor
        Regulation During the Progressive Era” in Quantitative Economic History: The Good of
        Counting, edited by Joshua Rosenbloom. New York: Routledge, pp. 119-145.
Howell, Chris (2005) Trade Unions and the State: The Construction of Industrial Relations in Britain,
        1890-2000. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Howell, Chris. (1992) Regulating Labor: The State and Industrial Relations in Postwar France.
        Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Jacobs, David and Daniel Tope (2007). “The Politics of Resentment in the Post-Civil Rights Era:
        Minority Threat, Homicide, and Ideological Voting in Congress.” American Journal of Sociology
        (March): 1458-94.
Kaufman, Bruce. (1993) The Origins and Evolution of the Field of Industrial Relations in the United
        States. Cornell Studies in Industrial and Labor Relations Number 25. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.
Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer. (1995). “Institutions and Economic Performance, Cross-Country
        Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures.” Economics and Politics 7: 207-228.
Law, Marc T. & Kim, Sukkoo, (2005). "Specialization and Regulation: The Rise of Professionals and
        the Emergence of Occupational Licensing Regulation," The Journal of Economic History 65
        (August): 723-756.
Law, Marc and Mindy S. Marks (2009) "The Effects of Occupational Licensing Laws on
        Minorities: Evidence from the Progressive Era." Forthcoming at the Journal of Law and
        Economics 52 (May 2009).
                                                                                                  69


Lleras-Muney, Adriana (2002). “Were Compulsory Attendance and Labor Laws Effective? An
        Analysis from 1915 to 1939.” Journal of Law and Economics 45 (October): 401-435.
Lubove, Roy. (1967) “Workers’ Compensation and the Prerogatives of Voluntarism.” Labor History 8
        (Fall): 227-54.
Margo, Robert and Finegan, Aldrich. (1996) “Compulsory Schooling Legislation and School Attendance
        in Turn of the Century America: A “Natural Experiment’ Approach.” Economic Letters 53
        (October): 103-10.
McEvoy, Arthur. 1995. “The Triangle Shirtwaist Fire of 1911: Social Change, Industrial Accidents, and
        the Evolution of Common-Sense Causality.” Law and Social Inquiry 20 (Spring): 621-51.
Moehling, Carolyn (1999) "State Child Labor Laws and the Decline of Child Labor,” Explorations in
        Economic History 36 (January): 72-106.
Montgomery, David. (1987) The Fall of the House of Labor: The Workplace, the State, and American
        Labor Activism, 1865-1925. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Moss, David (1996) Socializing Security: Progressive-Era Economists And The Origins Of American
        Social Policy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mulligan, Casey and Shleifer. Andrei. (2004) “Population and Regulation.” NBER Working Paper No.
        10234. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, January.
Munck, Gerardo. 2003. “Measures of Democracy, Governance, and Rule of Law: An Overview of
        Cross-National Data Sets.” Paper prepared for World Bank workshop on “Understanding Growth
        and Freedom from the Bottom Up.” Available at
        http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMOVOUTPOV/Resources/2104215-
        1148063363276/071503_Munck.pdf
Nonnenmacher, Tomas (2002). Patterns of Reform and Regulation in the States: 1880-1940. Working
        Paper. Allegheny College. Presented in Poster Session at Economic History Association
        Meetings.
Orloff, Ann. (1983). “Labor and the State: Labor Legislation in America, 1897-1978: A Time-series
        Analysis.” Paper presented at the annual meetings of the American Sociological Association.
Orloff, Ann Shola and Skocpol, Theda. “Why Not Equal Protection? Explaining the Politics of Public
        Social Spending in Britain, 1900-1911, and the United States, 1880s-1920.” American
        Sociological Review 49 (December 1984): 726-750.
Pavalko, Eliza. (1989) “State Timing of Policy Adoption: Workmens’ compensation in the United
        States, 1909-1929.” American Journal of Sociology 95 (November): 592-615.
Phelan, Craig. (2007). Trade Union Revitalisation: Trends and Prospects in 34 Countries. New York:
        Peter Lang Publishing.
Poole, Keith T. "Non-Parametric Unfolding of Binary Choice Data." Political Analysis, 8:211-237,
        2000.
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call
        Voting. New York: Oxford University Press.
Poole, Keith T. and Howard Rosenthal. 1991. "Patterns in Congressional Voting." American Journal of
        Political Science. 35: 228-278.
Poole, Keith T. (2005) Spatial Models of Parliamentary Voting. New York: Cambridge University
        Press.
Provost, Colin. (2006). “The Politics of Consumer Protection: Explaining State Attorney General
        Participation in State Lawsuits.” Political Research Quarterly 59 (December): 609-618.
Rosenbloom, Joshua (2002). Looking for Work, Searching for Workers: American Labor Markets
        During Industrialization. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenbloom, Joshua. 1998. “Strikebreaking and the Labor Market in the United States, 1881-1894.
        Journal of Economic History 58 (March): 183-205.
Sanderson, A. (1974) “Child-Labor Legislation and the Labor Force Participation of Children,” Journal
        of Economic History, 34 ( March): 297-299.
                                                                                                     70


Simmons, Beth and Zachary Elkins. (2004). “The Globalization of Liberalization: Policy Diffusion in
         the International Political Economy.” The American Political Science Review 98 (February):
         171-189.
Stein, Leon (1962) The Triangle Fire. New York: J.B. Lippincott Company.
Tope, Daniel. “The Politics of Union Decline.” Ph.D. Dissertation. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State
         University.
Troy, Leo (1965) Trade Union Membership, 1897-1962, National Bureau of Economic Research
         Occasional Paper No. 92. New York: Columbia University Press.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1902). Twelfth Census of the United States: 1900, Manufactures, volume 7.
         Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
_____. (1903) Twelfth Census of the United States, 1900, Population Part 1, volume 1. Washington, DC:
         Government Printing Office.
_____. (1904) Twelfth Census of the United States, 1900, Special Report -- Occupations. Washington,
         DC: Government Printing Office.
        . (1913) Thirteenth Census of the United States: 1910, Population, volume 1; Occupations, volume
         4, Manufactures, volumes 8 and 9. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
       . (1917) Abstract of the Census of Manufactures, 1914. Washington, DC: Government Printing
         Office.
_____. (1923) Fourteenth Census of the United States: 1920, Population, volumes 1 and 4; Manufactures,
         volume 8. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
_____. (1928) Biennial Census of Manufactures, 1925. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
_____. (1933) Fifteenth Census of the United States: 1930, Manufactures, volumes 1 and 3; Population,
         volumes 2 and 5. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
        . (1975) Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970. Washington, DC:
         Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Commerce (1914) Statistical Abstract of The United States, 1913, Thirty-Six
         Number. Washington DC, Government Printing Office.
U.S. Department of Commerce, (1924) Statistical Abstract of The United States, 1923, Fourty-Sixth
         Number. Washington DC, Government Printing Office.
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1914) “Labor Laws of the United States, with Decisions of Courts
         Relating Thereto.” Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics No. 148. 2 parts.
         Washington: GPO.
 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (1925) “Labor Laws of the United States, with Decisions of Courts
         Relating Thereto.” Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics No. 370.
         Washington: GPO.
 U.S. Commissioner of Labor. (1986) “Labor Laws of the United States.” Second Special Report of
         the Commissioner of Labor . Washington: GPO.
 U.S. Commissioner of Labor. (1904). “Labor Laws of the United States with Decisions of Courts
         Relating Thereto.” Tenth Special Report of the Commissioner of Labor . Washington: GPO.
 U.S. Commissioner of Labor. (1908) “Labor Laws of the United States with Decisions of Courts
         Relating Thereto, 1907.” Twenty-Second Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor .
         Washington: GPO.
 U.S. Department of Labor. (1962) Growth of Labor Law in the United States. Washington DC, US
         Government Printing Office.
 U.S. Supreme Court. 1905. Lochner v. New York. 198 U.S. 45. Downloaded from
         http://straylight.law.cornell.edu/supct/cases/name.htm, on August 18, 2005.
Von Drehle, David. 2003. Triangle: The Fire that Changed America. New York: Atlantic Monthly
         Press.
Walker, Jack. 1969. “The Diffusion of Innovations Among the American States.” The American
         Political Science Review 63 (September ): 880-899.
                                                                                              71


Wallace, Michael, Rubin, Beth, and Smith, Brian (1988). “American Labor Law: Its Impact on
        Working-Class Militancy, 1901-1980.” Social Science History 12 (Spring): 1-29.
Weinstein, James. (1967) “Big Business and the Origins of Workmens’ Compensation.” Labor History
        8 (Spring): 156-74.
________. (1968). The Corporate Ideal in the Liberal State: 1900-1918. Boston: Beacon Press.
Whaples, Robert (1990a) "Winning the Eight-Hour Day, 1909-1919," Journal of Economic History 50
        (June): 393-406.
________. (1990b) "The Shortening of the American Work Week: An Economic and Historical Analysis
        of Its Context, Causes, and Consequences," PhD. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Wiebe, Robert (1962) Businessmen and Reform: A Study of the Progressive Movement. Cambridge,
        MA: Harvard University Press.
Witte, Edwin (1932) The Government in Labor Disputes. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Wolman, Leo (1936). The Ebb and Flow of Trade Unionism. New York, National Bureau of
        Economic Research.
Wright, Gavin (1986). Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the
        Civil War. New York: Basic Books.
                                                                                                                  72


                                                   ENDNOTES

            1
        For examples of recent political science articles that cite Walker and various other metrics for
measuring policy and attitudes in an empirical settings, see Provost (2006) and Simmons and Elkins
(2004). Among economic historians, Tomas Nonnenmacher (2002) has used Walker’s information to develop
alternative metrics.
            2
            For example, see the work of Jacobs and Tope (2005) on changes in crime and the influx of
minorities into areas and their influence on liberal voting records in Congress..
          3
            The Heritage Foundation posts the latest version of the Index of Economic Freedom at its
website, http://www.heritage.org/Index/. Freedom House posts historical listings of their scores in
excel files at http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=1. An overview of these measures was
reported in a World Bank working paper by Gerardo Munck (2003) at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMOVOUTPOV/Resources/2104215-
1148063363276/071503_Munck.pdf. For examples of empirical studies that use these measures see
Acemoglu and Robinson (2006), Knack and Kiefer (1995), Feng (2003), Barro and Sala-i-Martin
(2004, 526-9), and sources cited there.
          4
            For examples, see Friedman (1998, 2002) on the U.S. and France and the role of the South
within the United States, Rosenbloom (2002, 1998) on the development of U.S. regional and inter-
regional labor markets and strike activity. For discussions of the role of the state in U.S. labor relations
in the early twentieth century, see Brody (1980), Montgomery (1987), and Dubofsky (1994). Brody
(2005), and Tope (2007) discuss the interaction between government policies and the decline of
unionism in the United States. International comparisons illustrate the importance of the state. See
Howell (1992, 2005) on the role played by governments in industrial relations in France, and Britain
and the volume on 34 countries edited by Phelan (2007).
            5
         In the area of labor laws, Fishback and Kantor (2000 and 1995) and Allen (2005) developed summary
measures designed to capture the generosity of workers’ compensation benefits. In a similar fashion, Boyer
(1990) constructed a variety of measures of the nature of poor relief for children in Britain during the
Industrial Revolution. For other examples, see Currie and Ferrie, 2000; Eyestone 1977; Botero, et. al.
2004, and the papers in Freeman and Ichniowski (1989). Wallace, Rubin, and Smith (1988) used
information from an unpublished working paper by Ann Orloff (1983) to develop a labor law count of
“pro-labor laws,” but we have not been able to find a measure of that count as yet.
6
    See Brandeis (1966). For a discussion of the role played by institutional labor economists see Moss (1996).
            7
           This finding helps explain why many studies have found relatively small effects of several
forms of labor regulation. For example, see Moehling (1999), Sanderson (1974), Osterman (1979),
Brown Christiansen, and Phillips (1982), and Carter and Sutch (1996a) on child labor, Goldin (1990)
and Whaples (1990a, b) on women’s hours laws, Fishback and Kantor (2000), Buffum (1992), Chelius
(1976, 1977), Fishback (1986, 1987, 1990), and Aldrich (1997) on workers’ compensation and
employer liability laws, Fishback (1986, 1990) on coal mining regulations, and Aldrich (1997, 2006) on
safety regulations in manufacturing, mines, and railroads. Child labor legislation had little impact on
employment of children, but Margo and Finegan (1996) and Lleras-Muney (2002) find that school
attendance legislation did significantly raise the rate of school attendance. A number of regulations had
larger impact. Here we are citing findings of limited impact.
         8
           The exceptions were railroads, maritime workers and other workers who routinely travelled
across state boundaries when they worked. Yet, as will be seen below the states also adopted
regulations of railroads. For more detail on railroads, see Aldrich (1997, 2006).
         9
           For recent quantitative studies of occupational licensing see Law and Kim (2005) and Law and
Marks (2009).
         10
            A longer description of the ESWI with comparisons to the other methods for summing the
laws is provided in Holmes, Fishback, and Allen (2008).
                                                                                                            73



          11
               For the licensing categories we used the shares of people in the profession from that national
census.
          12
            We explored use of two other denominators, the total number of workers in gainful
employment in 1900 as the base and the number of workers gainfully employed in mining and
manufacturing. These two measures were correlated with the employment base in the text at levels
above 0.8 and we don’t believe they will change the conclusions much.
         13
            The 1905 Lochner v. New York Supreme Court decision that declared unconstitutional limits
on bakers’ hours in New York chilled efforts to establish wages and hours limits for male workers for
some time.
         14
            We also need to consider the issue of what weight to give to other hours laws for men in other
industries after the Lochner decision. We plan to work on this issue further.
         15
            The coverage of the general hours laws and industry-specific hours laws is extremely
confusing and we are still working on better ways to understand situations where there appears to be
overlap in coverage.
         16
            We do all of the weighting by employment share within the subcategory indexes, so we do not
need to weight again when summing across subcategories to develop the general index.
         17
            Recent popular media that oversell the role of the Triangle Shirtwaist Fire include von Drehle
(2003) and the widely seen PBS special on the history of New York and its companion volume by
Burns, Sanders, and Ade (2003). Stein (1962), McEvoy (1995), and Fishback 2006 offer discussions
that show more fully the extent of regulation before and after the fire.
         18
            We developed a rough count of the number of characters on a standard line for each volume
by measuring the word employer, which was 1.3 millimeters in length in all volumes and dividing into
the width of the page (11.1 millimeters in the 1896, and 9.2, 9.4, and 9.5 millimeters in the 1904, 1907,
and 1914 volumes). We then counted the lines on a full page of text (68 in 1896, 65 in 1904, 66 in
1907, and 67 in 1914. We adjusted for the amount of text for each state on the beginning and ending
pages of their sections in the book. This is still a rough measure because we did not adjust for spacing
in the pages caused by law titles or for footnotes, of which there were not many. The BLS also reported
on laws in 1925 but provided abbreviated descriptions of some laws when they had changed little from
the 1914 volume; therefore, we could not use the information effectively.
         19
            We are considering incorporating some type of H-index to capture diversity of industries
when trying to explain the indices, and also controlling for the diversity in regressions on productivity,
hours, and earnings.
         20
            The measure in the text is a summary measure that combines all aspects of labor
administration and enforcement. We have tried to separate out the specific appropriations for
inspections (even to the level of differences for mining and factory inspectors) as opposed to
administration for all of the states. We have succeeded so far in making this separation for only a
subset of the states. In several states the appropriations are not separated into specific categories. Since
our focus is on comparisons across all states we use the broadest measure of labor administration,
which is comparable across states.
         21
            The number employed in mining and manufacturing comes from the occupational information
reported in the population Censuses of 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1930 (U.S. Bureau of the Census,1902,
vol. 2, 508; 1913, vol. 4, 44-45; 1923, vol. 4, 48; 1933, vol 5, 54). To get values in the intervening
years we use a straight-line interpolation between census years. The number gainfully employed
includes agricultural workers and thus overstates the number of workers who were likely to be covered
by labor regulations. We have explored dividing by the number of gainfully employed workers, which
includes a larger number of workers in agriculture. It turns out that the cross-sectional correlations
between spending per mining and manufacturing workers and the spending per gainfully employed
worker are above .86 in 1903, 1909, and 1916. The cross-sectional correlations in the changes in the
two measures between 1903 and 1909, 1903 and 1916, and 1909 and 1916 are all above 0.88.
Therefore, we only report the measure divided by the mining and manufacturing workers in the text.
                                                                                                           74



        22
             We have computerized information on fines for many specific laws, but we have not yet
determined a way to incorporate them into the analysis. One reason we have not pursued this further is
that in situations where fines were high, enforcers appeared to be less willing to impose them.
          23
             Rebecca Holmes (2003, 2005) used principal component analysis to perform a similar data
mining exercise with the law data in her dissertation. We switched to the Optimal Classification
measure because factor analysis is better suited to settings where the variables analyzed are continuous,
while the procedures that create the COORDINATE measures are specifically designed for variables
that are zero-one in nature.
          24
             We estimated the COORDINATES using the Optimal Classification procedure used by Poole
and Rosenthal and described on Poole’s website at the University of California at San Diego:
http://voteview.com/. Sam Allen made adjustments to the program to fit our analysis. The procedure
takes multiple binary choices for numerous decision-makers and non-parametrically infers
"coordinates" for each decision-maker that yield the greatest number of correctly classified choices. In
Poole and Rosenthal’s example for Congress, the decision-makers are legislators and the choices are
roll call votes that take the form Yea or Nay. Each legislator has an ideal coordinate within a unit
hypersphere where the dimensions are arbitrarily chosen. These are not ever observed since only
Yes/No votes are recorded. In our instance, the decision-makers are states, the choices are yes or no on
enactment of 140 specific types of labor laws. The procedure will work with missing values, but
generally this does not happen as our 48 states either had the labor legislation or did not at any given
point in time.
          The number of law choices determines the number of "cutting planes" through the unit
hypersphere. As more laws are considered, the unit hypersphere can be divided into more 'regions' or
slices. Each decision-maker is assumed to have an ideal location within the hypersphere corresponding
to its ideal combination of yes/no choices. Each decision-maker is assumed to select the yes or no
choice closest to its ideal coordinate. The optimal classification program developed by Poole and
Rosenthal essentially 'moves' the cutting lines to create regions that minimize the number of
classification errors. In this context a classification error might mean placing states that voted against
mining laws with states that voted for mining laws. As the number of decisions increases, the ideal
coordinates for each decision maker are measured more precisely.
          Essentially, after choosing a pair of starting coordinates and two dimensions, the estimation
processes each decision in an iterative fashion and estimates the coordinates for each state that
minimize the number of classification errors. The number of decisions examined for each state-year
was 140. After the estimation was complete the program showed the number of decisions correctly
classified for each state year. The mean and median for the percentage correctly classified for the 1392
state-year observations were both 86.4 percent. The highest percentage was 97.1 (Oregon in 1901 and
Arizona in 1900) and the lowest 69.3 (Washington in 1921-1924).
          25
             The employment shares came from the occupational censuses of 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1930
with interpolations based on national employment totals between the census years.
          26
             The data come from the Workers’ Compensation data sets developed by Price Fishback and
Shawn Kantor and located at Price Fishback’s website at the University of Arizona Economics
Department. The excel files and descriptions of the construction of and the sources of the data are
provided there. The sources and data are also described in Fishback and Kantor (2000, 260-7)
          27
             For examples of discussions of the southern legacy of slavery and the impact on southern
labor markets, see Friedman (2000), Rosenbloom (2002), and Wright (1986). The south includes the
following slave state members of the confederacy: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana,
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia.
          28
             See Mulligan and Shleifer for one argument along these lines.
        29
           The gainfully employed in agriculture include farmers and anybody who describes themselves as
gainfully employed in a farming occupation.
                                                                                                                   75



         30
            We focus on the magnitude of the OSD effects in the tradition of “oomph” social science that
McCloskey and Ziliak (2004, 2008) are working to promote. We also talk about the precision of the fit with
respect to Type I error as a means of taking into the potential errors in inference that might arise when there are a
small number of observations. The small number contributes to a greater likelihood of Type II error.
         31
            For example, see Fishback (1998), Fishback and Kantor (2000), Lubove (1967), Moss (1996),
Weinstein (1967, 1968), Wiebe (1962),
         32
          The South was notable for having less unionization in industries where nation-wide unions
were relatively strong (Friedman (2000). We have tried estimating the regressions with interaction
terms between the South dummy and the Unionization index. The results changed very little and the
coefficients on the interaction terms were generally small and statistically insignificant.
