NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIGHT OR FLIGHT? PORTFOLIO REBALANCING BY INDIVIDUAL INVESTORS
Laurent E. Calvet
John Y. Campbell
Paolo Sodini
Working Paper 14177
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14177

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

We thank Statistics Sweden for providing the data. We received helpful comments from Markus Brunnermeier,
Ren? Garcia, David McCarthy, Stefan Nagel, Paolo Zaffaroni, three anonymous referees, and seminar
participants at Bergen, Boston University, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Financial
Services Authority of the UK, Harvard University, Imperial College, MIT, Oxford University, Pompeu
Fabra, SIFR, the Stockholm School of Economics, the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority, Universit?
Libre de Bruxelles, the University of Helsinki, the University of Venice, the Wharton School, the 2007
Brazilian Finance Society meeting in Sao Paulo, the 2007 Summer Finance Conference in Gerzensee,
the Fall 2007 NBER Asset Pricing Meeting, and the 2008 AFA meetings in New Orleans. The project
benefited from excellent research assistance by Daniel Sunesson and Sammy El-Ghazaly. This material
is based upon work supported by the Agence Nationale de la Recherche under a Chaire d?Excellence
to Calvet, BFI under a Research Grant to Sodini, the HEC Foundation, the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 0214061 to Campbell, Riksbank, and the Wallander and Hedelius Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Laurent E. Calvet, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Fight or Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing by Individual Investors
Laurent E. Calvet, John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini
NBER Working Paper No. 14177
July 2008
JEL No. D14,G11
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the dynamics of individual portfolios in a unique dataset containing the disaggregated
wealth of all households in Sweden. Between 1999 and 2002, we observe little aggregate rebalancing
in the financial portfolio of participants. These patterns conceal strong household-level evidence of
active rebalancing, which on average offsets about one half of idiosyncratic passive variations in the
risky asset share. Wealthy, educated investors with better diversified portfolios tend to rebalance more
actively. We find some evidence that households rebalance towards a higher risky share as they become
richer. We also study the decisions to trade individual assets. Households are more likely to fully sell
directly held stocks if those stocks have performed well, and more likely to exit direct stockholding
if their stock portfolios have performed well; but these relationships are much weaker for mutual funds,
a pattern which is consistent with previous research on the disposition effect among direct stockholders
and performance sensitivity among mutual fund investors. When households continue to hold individual
assets, however, they rebalance both stocks and mutual funds to offset about one sixth of the passive
variations in individual asset shares. Households rebalance primarily by adjusting purchases of risky
assets if their risky portfolios have performed poorly, and by adjusting both fund purchases and full
sales of stocks if their risky portfolios have performed well. Finally, the tendency for households to
fully sell winning stocks is weaker for wealthy investors with diversified portfolios of individual stocks.

Laurent E. Calvet
Department of Finance
Tanaka Business School
Imperial College London
London SW7 2AZ
United Kingdom
and NBER
l.calvet@imperial.ac.uk
John Y. Campbell
Morton L. and Carole S.
Olshan Professor of Economics
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 213
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
john_campbell@harvard.edu

Paolo Sodini
Department of Finance
Stockholm School of Economics
Sveavägen 65
Box 6501
SE-113 83 Stockholm
Sweden
Paolo.Sodini@hhs.se

1. Introduction
What drives time series variations in the asset allocation of individual investors? How
do households adjust their risk exposure in response to the portfolio returns that they
experience? Are household portfolios characterized by inertia or high turnover? Financial theory suggests a wide range of motives for active trading and rebalancing at
the household level. Realized returns on financial assets induce mechanical variations in
portfolio allocation to which an investor is passively exposed. An investor might fight
passive changes by actively rebalancing her portfolio when asset returns are expected to
be time-invariant. Changes in perceived investment opportunities, on the other hand,
might lead the investor to adopt a flight strategy that would amplify the decline in the
share of the worst-performing assets. Furthermore, trading decisions may reflect not
only asset allocation objectives, but also a disposition to hold losing and sell winning
securities (Shefrin and Statman 1985; Odean 1998).
Equilibrium considerations suggest that aggregate flows from the household sector provide limited and potentially misleading information on individual rebalancing.
Consider for instance an economy in which households own all financial assets. If the
aggregate value of risky securities falls, the average share of risky assets in household
portfolios must necessarily fall as well. Thus, the average individual investor cannot
fight aggregate variations in equity returns. When households have heterogeneous portfolios, however, there could still be substantial rebalancing at the individual level. For
instance, it is an open question whether households with higher passive losses tend to
buy or sell risky assets.
The empirical investigation of household rebalancing therefore requires high-quality
and comprehensive micro data. Traditional datasets do not meet these requirements and
have unsurprisingly led to conflicting answers on household behavior. Surveys, which
have been widely used in the household finance literature, only report the allocation
of household financial wealth into broad asset classes (e.g. Bilias, Georgarakos and
Haliassos 2005). They permit the analysis of changes in the share of risky assets in
the financial portfolio, but not the computation of active and passive changes. Thus,
surveys cannot tell us whether households attempt to oﬀset passive variations in their
risky share.
Account datasets, such as 401k and brokerage accounts, present a partial view of financial wealth and do not permit the computation of the risky share. Research based on
discount brokerage accounts finds evidence of intense trading activity (e.g. Odean 1999;
Barber and Odean 2000), while substantial inertia is observed in 401k accounts (e.g.
Agnew, Balduzzi and Sunden 2003; Ameriks and Zeldes 2004; Choi, Laibson, Madrian
and Metrick 2002, 2004; Madrian and Shea 2001). These seemingly contradictory results may result from a selection bias in account datasets. For example, households may

1

choose a discount broker precisely because they are (over)confident in their ability to
process information and intend to engage in high-frequency trading. And households
may trade less actively in retirement accounts than in other accounts that they control.
The Swedish dataset used in Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007, henceforth “CCS
2007”) allows us to overcome these issues. We assembled data supplied by Statistics
Sweden into a panel covering four years (1999-2002) and the entire country (about
4.8 million households). The information available on each resident is systematically
compiled by financial institutions and corporations, and includes demographic characteristics, wealth portfolio, and income. Our administrative dataset is therefore more
reliable than self-reported datasets, such as surveys. The wealth information is highly
disaggregated and provides the worldwide assets owned by the resident at the end of a
tax year. All financial assets held outside retirement accounts are reported, including
bank accounts, mutual funds and stocks. However the database does not report the
exact date of a sale nor information on asset purchases.
In CCS (2007) we found that household portfolios of risky assets have important
idiosyncratic exposure, accounting for just over half the variance of return for the median
household. While underdiversification causes only modest welfare losses for most of the
population ex ante, the realized returns on household portfolios are heterogeneous ex
post. In this paper we exploit this cross-sectional variation to analyze the determinants
of portfolio rebalancing. The Swedish dataset is well suited for such an investigation
because we can compute the risky share of every household and decompose its changes
into passive and active components.
Our main results are the following. First, we study the dynamics of the risky asset
share among participating households. The equal-weighted share of household financial
wealth invested in risky assets fell from 57% in 1999 to 45% in 2002, a decline that
implies very weak active rebalancing by the Swedish household sector as a whole in
response to the equity bear market of the early 2000’s. In striking contrast to this
aggregate result, individual households actively rebalanced their portfolios in response to
their own returns. Household-level regressions show that on average, active rebalancing
compensates about one half of idiosyncratic passive variations in the risky share.
We estimate a partial adjustment model for the risky share, with heterogeneous
adjustment speeds, and find that financially sophisticated households holding well diversified portfolios adjust more rapidly towards their target risky share. We also find
some evidence that the target risky share increases when households become richer,
consistent with theories of declining relative risk aversion, portfolio insurance, or habit
formation (Brennan and Schwartz 1988; Campbell and Cochrane 1999; Carroll 2000,
2002; Constantinides 1990; Dybvig 1995).
Second, we study patterns of entry to and exit from risky financial markets. The
overall stock market participation rate increased slightly between 1999 and 2002. At
2

the microeconomic level, household demographics influence entry and exit as one would
expect: financially sophisticated households, with greater income, wealth, and education, are more likely to enter, and less likely to exit. We are able to go beyond this
familiar result to see how portfolio characteristics influence exit decisions. We find that
households with initially more aggressive investment strategies are generally less likely
to exit, although poorly diversified households and those with extremely high initial
risky shares are slightly more likely to exit. If we consider mutual funds and directly
held stocks as separate asset classes, we find that households are slightly more likely
to exit mutual fund holding when their mutual funds have performed badly, but much
more likely to exit direct stockholding when their stocks have performed well.
Third, we explore decisions to adjust positions in individual stocks and mutual
funds. We begin by examining decisions to fully sell positions. We find that the
absolute value of the return on a stock or fund has a positive eﬀect on the probability
that a household will sell it. This eﬀect is much stronger for stocks with positive
returns (winners) than for stocks with negative returns (losers), but the asymmetry
is much weaker for mutual funds. We allow portfolio and household characteristics
to influence the strength of these return eﬀects, and find that wealthy investors with
diversified portfolios of individual stocks have a weaker propensity to dispose of winning
stocks and a stronger propensity to dispose of losers.
We also estimate a rebalancing model for positions that are not fully sold. We find
that the passive change in the share of a stock or mutual fund in the risky portfolio
does explain the active change, but the eﬀect is weaker than we found when we treated
all risky assets as a homogeneous asset class. Instead of a rebalancing coeﬃcient of
one half, we obtain coeﬃcients of about one sixth which are only slightly greater for
stocks than for mutual funds. Thus the diﬀerence in household decisionmaking with
respect to stocks and mutual funds shows up primarily in full sales rather than in partial
rebalancing decisions.
Finally, we investigate the relation between asset-level trading decisions and portfolio rebalancing. Households primarily rebalance by using a small number of trading
strategies. When a household is unlucky in the sense that its risky portfolio performs
worse than average, rebalancing is mostly driven by adjustments in purchases of risky
assets. Conversely, when the household is lucky in the sense that its risky portfolio performs better than average, the household rebalances primarily by adjusting full sales of
stocks and purchases of mutual funds.
Both our entry and exit results, and our results on asset-level trading decisions,
are consistent with two branches of the literature. The disposition eﬀect, that investors
hold losing stocks and sell winning stocks, has been documented using account data
on direct stockholdings by Odean (1998) and many others; Frazzini (2006), Goetzmann
and Massa (2008), and Grinblatt and Han (2005) present evidence that this behavior
3

may contribute to momentum in stock returns. The literature on mutual fund flows, on
the other hand, finds evidence of performance chasing by individual investors (Chevalier
and Ellison 1997; Frazzini and Lamont 2007; Gruber 1996; Ippolito 1992; Ivkovic and
Weisbenner 2007a; Sirri and Tufano 1998). We find similar patterns using diﬀerent data
and a diﬀerent approach for classifying stocks and funds as losers or winners. Dhar and
Zhu (2006) have recently found that households with higher self-reported income are
less prone to the disposition eﬀect in stock trading; our results are broadly consistent
with this, although we find that wealth and portfolio diversification are more relevant
than income in predicting the strength of the disposition eﬀect.
The organization of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we present some basic facts
about the evolution of risk-taking among Swedish households in the period 1999-2002.
In Section 3, we assess the magnitude of active rebalancing by decomposing householdlevel portfolio variations into their passive and active components. In Section 4, we
estimate a partial adjustment model of portfolio risk and use it to ask which types of
households adjust their portfolios more rapidly. This section also asks whether increases
in financial wealth increase households’ desired risk exposure. Section 5 explores entry
and exit decisions and asset-level rebalancing in relation to the disposition eﬀect. In
Section 6, we link households’ asset-level decisions to their rebalancing strategies. Section 7 concludes. An Appendix available online (Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini 2008)
presents details of data construction and estimation methodology.

2. How Has Risk-Taking Changed Over Time?
2.1. Data Description and Definitions
Swedish households pay taxes on both income and wealth. For this reason, the national
Statistics Central Bureau (SCB), also known as Statistics Sweden, has a parliamentary
mandate to collect highly detailed information on the finances of every household in
the country. We compiled the data supplied by SCB into a panel covering four years
(1999-2002) and the entire population of Sweden (about 4.8 million households). The
information available on each resident can be grouped into three main categories: demographic characteristics, income, and disaggregated wealth.
Demographic information includes age, gender, marital status, nationality, birthplace, education, and place of residence. The household head is defined as the individual with the highest income. The education variable includes high school and post-high
school dummies for the household head.
Income is reported by individual source. For capital income, the database reports the
income (interest, dividends) that has been earned on each bank account or each security.
For labor income, the database reports gross labor income and business sector.
The panel’s distinguishing feature is that it contains highly disaggregated wealth
4

information. We observe the worldwide assets owned by each resident on December
31 of each year, including bank accounts, mutual funds and stocks. The information
is provided for each individual account or each security referenced by its International
Security Identification Number (ISIN). The database also records contributions made
during the year to private pension savings, as well as debt outstanding at year end and
interest paid during the year.
We will refer to the following asset classes throughout the paper. Cash consists
of bank account balances and money market funds. Stocks refer to direct holdings
only. Risky mutual funds are classified as either bond funds or equity funds. The latter
category is broadly defined to include any fund that invests a fraction of its assets in
stocks; that is, balanced funds are counted as equity funds.1 Risky assets include stocks
and risky mutual funds.
Following CCS (2007), we measure a household’s total financial wealth as the sum of
its holdings in these asset classes, excluding from consideration illiquid assets such as real
estate or consumer durables, defined contribution retirement accounts, capital insurance
products that combine return guarantees with risky asset holdings, and directly held
bonds. Also, our measure of wealth is gross wealth and does not subtract mortgage
or other household debt. CCS (2007) summarize the relative magnitudes of all these
components of Swedish household balance sheets.
A participant is a household whose financial wealth includes risky assets. In Table
1A, we report summary statistics on the assets held by participating households. To
facilitate international comparisons, we convert all financial quantities into US dollars.
Specifically, the Swedish krona traded at $0.1127 at the end of 2002, and this fixed
conversion factor is used throughout the paper. The aggregate value of risky holdings
declined by about one half during the bear market. Between 1999 and 2002, household
stockholdings fell from $62 to $30 billion, and fund holdings from $53 to $29 billion.
Cash, on the other hand, increased from $49 to $57 billion over the same period.
In the same panel we also report aggregate statistics on stock and fund holdings compiled by the SCB and by the Swedish mutual fund association, Fondbolagens Förening
(FF).2 The oﬃcial statistics are incomplete because the SCB does not specifically report
the aggregate cash holdings of participants and the FF series only start in 2000. The
aggregate estimates obtained with our dataset closely match available oﬃcial statistics.
In the Appendix, we also match quite closely oﬃcial aggregate statistics on flows into
stocks and mutual funds. The aggregate flow into an asset class is generally quite modest and never exceeds a few percentage points of the total household wealth invested in
1

The managers of balanced funds periodically rebalance their holdings of cash and risky assets to
maintain a stable risky share. We do not try to measure this form of rebalancing, but treat balanced
funds like any other mutual funds, assuming that they have stable risk characteristics.
2
These statistics can be downloaded at www.scb.se and www.fondbolagen.se.

5

the class. Thus, the strong reduction in aggregate risky holdings reported in Table 1A
primarily results from price movements and not from large outflows from the household
sector.
Following CCS (2007), we define the following variables for each household h. The
complete portfolio contains all the stocks, mutual funds and cash owned by the household. The risky portfolio contains stocks and mutual funds but excludes cash. The
risky share wh,t at date t is the weight of the risky portfolio in the complete portfolio.
Since the risky share is model-free, we use it extensively throughout the paper. The
household’s risky portfolio is also characterized by its standard deviation σ h,t , and by
its systematic exposure β h,t and Sharpe ratio Sh,t relative to a global equity benchmark,
the MSCI World Index. The definition and estimation of these quantities are discussed
in the Appendix.
The results presented in this paper are based on households that exist throughout
the 1999-2002 period. We impose no constraint on the participation status of these
households, but require that they satisfy the following financial requirements at the
end of each year. First, disposable income must be strictly positive and the three-year
rolling average must be at least 1,000 Swedish kronor ($113). Second, financial wealth
must be no smaller than 3,000 kronor ($339). For computational convenience, we have
selected a random panel of 100,000 households from the filtered population. Unless
stated otherwise, all the results in the paper are based on this fixed subsample, and
unreported work confirms the strong robustness of the reported estimates to the choice
of alternative subsamples.
2.2. Cross-Sectional Dynamics of Participation and Risk-Taking
Household participation in risky asset markets increased from 61% to 65% between 1999
and 2002, as is reported in Table 1B. The inflow is equal to 20% of nonparticipating
households, or about 8% of the entire population. The outflow is 7% of participants,
or about 4% of the entire household population. These patterns are consistent with
the “participation turnover” documented for US data (Hurst, Luoh and Staﬀord 1998,
Vissing-Jorgensen 2002b). In Section 5, we will further investigate the microeconomic
and portfolio determinants of entry and exit.
In studying rebalancing in the next two sections, we focus in each year on the large
group of households that maintain participation in risky asset markets throughout the
year. Between 1999 and 2002, the equal-weighted average risky share wh,t of these
households fell from 57% to 45% (Table 1B). As illustrated in Figure 1A, this lower
mean reflects a downward shift in the cross-sectional distribution of wh,t , which is most
pronounced in the tails.
The downward shift in the risky share translates into a downward shift in complete

6

portfolio risk. We illustrate in Figure 1B how the standard deviation of the complete
portfolio, wh,t σh,t , varies with the risky share wh,t . The relation is almost linear and
has similar slopes in all years. Consistent with this finding, we verify in the Appendix
that the standard deviation of the risky portfolio, σh,t , has a stable cross-sectional
distribution over time and is almost a flat function of the risky share.3
These results imply that Swedish households adjust their overall risk exposure primarily by scaling up or down their risky portfolio, passively or actively, rather by altering
its composition. This justifies our emphasis on modelling wh,t in the next two sections.

3. Passive and Active Rebalancing of the Risky Share
3.1. Decomposition of the Risky Share
The change in a household’s risky share is partly determined by the household’s active
trades and partly by the returns on its risky securities. For instance, the risky share
tends to mechanically fall in a severe bear market. For this reason, we now decompose
the change in the risky share between year t and year t + 1, wh,t+1 − wh,t , into a passive
change, driven by the returns on risky assets, and an active change resulting from
household rebalancing decisions. This decomposition is empirically meaningful because
of the comprehensive individual asset information available in our dataset.
The passive risky return 1+rh,t+1 is the proportional change in value of a household’s
risky portfolio if the household does not trade risky assets during the year. It is easily
∗
computed from the initial risky portfolio and asset returns. Let wh,j,t
denote the share
of asset j (1 ≤ j ≤ J) in the risky portfolio. If the investor does not trade between date
t and date t + 1, the risky portfolio value at t + 1 is its value at t times its gross return
P
∗ (1 + r
1 + rh,t+1 = Jj=1 wh,j,t
j,t+1 ). We compute returns rj,t+1 excluding dividends, as is
appropriate if households consume dividends rather than reinvesting them, but we verify
in the Appendix that our empirical results are essentially unchanged when dividends
are included in returns.
The passive risky share is the risky share at the end of the year if the household
does not trade risky assets during the year. It is a function of the initial risky share
and the passive risky return:
p
wh,t+1
= ω p (wh,t ; rh,t+1 ),

where
ω p (w; r) ≡

w(1 + r)
.
w(1 + r) + (1 − w)(1 + rf )

3

Of course, the stability of average σ h,t across risky share bins does not imply that all households
own the same risky portfolio. We will indeed show in Section 3 that there is substantial heterogeneity
in individual portfolio returns.

7

The passive change is the change in the risky share during the year if the household
trades no risky assets during the year:
p
Ph,t+1 = wh,t+1
− wh,t .

It is equal to zero if the investor is initially invested exclusively in cash (wh,t = 0) or
exclusively in risky assets (wh,t = 1). The passive change is a hump-shaped function of
the initial share if r > rf , as investors presumably expect, but a U-shaped function of
the initial share if r < rf , as in our data from the bear market of 2000—2002.
p
The active change in the risky share, Ah,t+1 = wh,t+1 − wh,t+1
, is the movement in
the risky share that does not result mechanically from realized returns and thus reflects
portfolio rebalancing. The total change in the risky share can be written as the sum of
the active and passive changes:
wh,t+1 − wh,t = Ph,t+1 + Ah,t+1 .
We will also use the analogous decomposition in logs:
ln(wh,t+1 ) − ln(wh,t ) = ph,t+1 + ah,t+1 ,
p
p
where ph,t+1 = ln(wh,t+1
) − ln(wh,t ) and ah,t+1 = ln(wh,t+1 ) − ln(wh,t+1
) respectively
denote the active and passive changes in logs.
These decompositions treat changes in riskless asset holdings, caused by saving,
dissaving, or dividends received on risky assets, as active rebalancing. An alternative
approach would be to calculate the passive risky share that would result from household saving or dissaving, assumed to take place through accumulation or decumulation
of riskless assets, in the absence of any trades in risky assets. This alternative decomposition is attractive to the extent that households build up and run down their riskless
balances for liquidity reasons that are unrelated to their investment policies. We do
not pursue this alternative decomposition further here, but in our structural model of
active rebalancing we do allow for a white noise error that may capture high-frequency
savings eﬀects.

3.2. Rebalancing Regressions
Changes in a household’s risky share tend to be strongly aﬀected by the initial level of
the risky share. One reason for this is purely mechanical: the total change wh,t+1 − wh,t
is bounded between −wh,t and 1 − wh,t in the presence of short sales and leverage
constraints. In addition, there may be behavioral reasons, including sluggish rebalancing
and high-frequency variation in riskless balances, why the risky share may be subject
to transitory shocks and gradual reversion to a long-term mean.
8

The scatter plots in Figure 2 show the passive, active and total changes in levels
between 2001 and 2002 versus the initial risky share for a subsample of 10,000 households. In panel A, the passive change is a U-shaped function of the initial share, as
one expects in a bear market. Panel B reveals that the active change is close to zero
for a sizeable group of households, who trade very little or not at all during the year.
This observation is consistent with the inertia documented on other datasets. There
is, however, considerable heterogeneity, and substantially positive or negative values
of the active change are observed for many households. Moreover, the active change
appears to decrease with the initial share, which suggests that the risky share tends
to revert towards its cross-sectional mean. In panel C, the total change is contained
in the band defined by −wh,t and 1 − wh,t . The U-shaped influence of passive change
is apparent, consistent with the inertia of some households. Overall, the scatter plots
reveal substantial heterogeneity and strong dependence with respect to the initial risky
share wh,t .
The eﬀects of passive change and initial portfolio weight on active change are clearly
visible when we group households into bins according to their initial portfolio weight, and
plot the equal-weighted average within each bin of the total change, the passive change
and the active change. Figure 3 shows the results for the entire 2000-2002 period (Panel
A) and for each year separately (Panels B to D). Because of the bear market during
our sample period, the passive change is a U-shaped function of the initial exposure
wh,t . Active rebalancing is hump-shaped and overall decreasing with the initial share,
which is consistent with both mean reversion in the risky share and a tendency to oﬀset
passive changes.
In Table 2, we investigate the household-level relation between active and passive
changes by estimating a rebalancing regression. We compare results in levels and in
logs, but write the rebalancing regression here in logs:
ah,t+1 = γ 0,t+1 + γ 1 ph,t+1 + γ 2 (ln wh,t − ln wh,t ) + uh,t+1 ,

(3.1)

where ln wh,t denotes the equal-weighted average of the log risky share. The regressor
(ln wh,t − ln wh,t ) is included to capture the dependence of the active change on the
initial risky share that was illustrated in Figure 2. We estimate (3.1) by OLS, both for
pooled data, with year fixed eﬀects, and for each separate cross-section. We include in
the regression only households that participate both in year t and in year t + 1. This
allows us to disentangle inframarginal rebalancing from entry and exit decisions.
A fully passive household would be characterized by zero regression coeﬃcients:
γ 0,t+1 = γ 1 = γ 2 = 0. The estimates of γ 1 are in fact close to −0.5 in the pooled
regressions, and range between −0.8 and −0.4 in yearly cross-sections. Thus we find
that households oﬀset about one half of the passive change through active rebalancing.
We obtain negative estimates of γ 2 , implying that households with a large initial risky
9

share have reduced their risk exposure more aggressively than other investors.
To understand the parameter estimates in Table 2 we now examine a few numerical examples. Consider a household invested in the value-weighted average household
portfolio, with an initial share equal to the average equal-weighted share at the end of
2001: wh,t = 52.3%. In 2002, the average household portfolio yields −32.1%, and the
household’s corresponding passive share is 41.7%. We infer from the pooled regression
reported in Table 2A that the predicted active change equals 2.4%.
Now consider an unlucky household with the same initial share but with a realized
risky return of −55.1%. Among all participants, the household is in the 5th percentile
of the risky return distribution. The corresponding passive change is −20.0% and the
predicted active change then equals 7.1%. Alternatively, consider a lucky household with
the same initial share but a realized risky return in the 95th percentile (rh,t = −7.3%).
The active change is then −1.4%. Agents with returns below the cross-sectional average
buy risky assets from agents with higher returns. An agent with an average share and
an average return, on the other hand, makes fewer trades. The intuition that extreme
agents trade more than average agents is familiar in equilibrium models.4
The rebalancing regression also predicts the eﬀect of the initial share. For instance
a household that has an initial share in the 5th percentile (wh,t = 3.9%) and owns
the value-weighted average household portfolio would select an active change of 6.2%.
Similarly, a household with an initial share in the 95th percentile (wh,t = 95.5%) with
an average portfolio would select an active change of −10.8%. Thus, the initial share
and the realized return both have substantial quantitative eﬀects on the active change.
In the online appendix (CCS 2008), we verify the robustness of the rebalancing
regression by classifying households into initial risky share bins and regressing the active
change onto the passive change within each bin. The estimate of the slope coeﬃcient γ 1
is strongly and significantly negative in each risky share bin, so households with high
and low involvement in risky financial markets all appear to be rebalancing actively.
The rebalancing coeﬃcient is unusually large and negative in the lowest risky share
bin, particularly when we run the regression in levels. This likely results in part from
a boundary eﬀect. During the bear market, most households with low initial exposure
(wh,t ≈ 0) incur small passive losses in levels, which bring them closer to the short
sales constraint wh,t+1 ≥ 0. Such households may substantially increase their risky
shares, which will be associated with strongly positive active changes. Very negative
active changes, on the other hand, are infeasible in levels (but are still in principle
feasible in logs). The levels regression in the lowest risky share bin is therefore driven
by observations with small negative passive and large positive active changes, resulting
in a very negative slope coeﬃcient γ 1 . The coeﬃcient in the lowest risky share bin is
4
See Calvet, Gonzalez-Eiras and Sodini (2004) for an example based on idiosyncratic nontradable
risk.

10

somewhat less anomalous when we run the regression in logs, which encourages us to
use a log specification in our subsequent analysis.
3.3. Robustness Checks
Churning. One might worry that households do not deliberately rebalance the risky
share, but instead randomly buy and sell risky assets–that is, churn their portfolios.
Portfolio turnover causes measurement error in the passive share, so churning biases the
regression coeﬃcient of the active change on the passive change towards −1. In this case
our results tell us that there is active trading, but are not informative about deliberate
rebalancing. A simple robustness check consists of confining attention to households
that do not purchase new risky assets during the year. In other words, we exclude any
household that has strictly positive holdings in period t + 1 of a risky security that
it did not own at all in period t. In the Appendix, we report that the corresponding
rebalancing propensity is about −0.3, which is weaker than the estimates in Table 2 but
still substantial.5 These estimates are conservative, since they exclude households that
purchase new assets as part of an active rebalancing strategy. This analysis suggests
that churning alone cannot explain the strongly negative estimates of the passive change
coeﬃcient reported in our rebalancing regressions.
Automatic Investment Plans. Automatic investment plans are another source of
apparent rebalancing. Consider a household that invests a fixed monetary amount in
a basket of risky assets every year, and makes no other trades. The active change is
then a decreasing function of the risky portfolio’s performance, while the passive change
increases with performance. Automatic investment schemes can therefore generate a
negative correlation between active and passive changes.
Automatic investment plans typically imply the purchase of the same assets every
year. We have already found, in our robustness check for churning, that households that
purchase no new assets have a weaker rebalancing propensity, suggesting that automatic
investment plans cannot be driving our results. Further, a household that only trades
automatically will neither buy nor sell assets and will therefore own the same set of
assets at the end of years t and t + 1. We show in the Appendix that such households
also have rebalancing propensities that are slightly lower than those reported in Table
2. It is thus very unlikely that automatic investments account for our results.
We complement this analysis with a regression on a simulated dataset of automatic
savers. The automatic investment is assumed to be an exogenous percentage s of initial
financial wealth. We set s equal to the average ratio in each year of savings to financial
wealth for households purchasing no new assets during the year. In the Appendix,
5

The appendix also estimates the adjustment model of the next section for households that purchase
no new assets. The estimated adjustment speed is actually slightly higher for these households.

11

we regress the implied active change on the passive change and obtain only modest
rebalancing propensities. Results are similar when we set s equal to a constant 3%,
close to the time-series average of the yearly s ratios used in our main approach.
Cash Balances. Random fluctuations in cash balances are another concern. In the
next section we develop a partial adjustment model that allows high-frequency shocks
to aﬀect the target risky share. In the Appendix, we instead use a bootstrap simulation
to investigate this issue. Specifically, we assume that households do not rebalance or
trade risky assets during the year, and that their cash balances cbh,t follow the process:
cb
cb
cbh,t+1 = Rh,t+1
cbh,t . The shocks Rh,t+1
are i.i.d. across households, and sampled from
the empirical cross-sectional distribution of the growth rates of cash balances. The
simulation generates only modest rebalancing propensities, which shows that random
fluctuations in cash balances cannot explain the rebalancing results of this section.

4. An Adjustment Model of the Risky Share
4.1. Specification
The regressions of Section 3 have shown that rebalancing is influenced by both the initial
share and the passive change. This motivates us to specify a model in which households
d
sluggishly adjust their portfolios towards a desired risky share wh,t+1
. Our approach is
based on three main assumptions.
First, the natural log of the observed risky share wh,t+1 is a weighted average of the
p
d
and the log passive share wh,t+1
:
log desired share wh,t+1
p
d
) + (1 − φh ) ln(wh,t+1
) + εh,t+1 .
ln(wh,t+1 ) = φh ln(wh,t+1

(4.1)

The error εh,t+1 is assumed to be i.i.d., resulting from measurement error, high-frequency
variations in riskless balances, and any other idiosyncratic factors influencing portfolio
composition. The coeﬃcient φh controls the household’s speed of adjustment. It can
take any real value, but values between zero and one are economically most sensible.
If φh = 1, the household adjusts instantaneously, and the observed share is equal to
d
the desired share plus an error: ln(wh,t+1 ) = ln(wh,t+1
) + εh,t+1 . A sluggish household
(φh < 1), on the other hand, is also sensitive to the passive share.
Second, the speed of adjustment coeﬃcient φh is a linear function of observable
characteristics:
φh = ϕ0 + ϕ0 xh,t ,
(4.2)
where the vector xh,t is independent of the errors εh,t and εh,t+1 . This specification
captures the empirical relation between speed of adjustment and measures of financial
sophistication such as wealth and education.
12

Third, the level of the log desired risky share can vary in an arbitrary manner
across households, but the change in the log desired risky share is related to household
characteristics by
d
∆ ln(wh,t+1
) = δ 0,t+1 + δ 0t+1 xh,t .
(4.3)
This equation has a convenient interpretation when households have constant relative
risk aversion γ h and returns on the risky asset are i.i.d. The desired risky share of
d
household h is then wh,t+1
= Sh,t+1 /(γ h σh,t+1 ), and changes in the log of the desired
d
risky share, ∆ ln(wh,t+1 ) = ∆ ln(Sh,t+1 /σ h,t+1 ), are driven only by perceived variations
in investment opportunities and not by risk aversion. Equation (4.3) can then be viewed
as expressing changes in perceived investment opportunities as a time-specific function
of an intercept and household characteristics. This convenient property does not hold in
levels, which supports our choice of a log specification. In practice, many other factors
can of course alter the desired risky share, including changes in real estate holdings,
human capital, background risk, or wealth if the agent has decreasing relative risk
aversion.
4.2. Estimation
We now turn to the estimation of the adjustment model. In our specification, a housed
d
hold’s target share ln(wh,t+1
) is not observed but its change ∆ ln(wh,t+1
) is a parametric
function of characteristics (4.3). The first step is therefore to diﬀerence the portfolio
share (4.1):
p
d
) + (1 − φh )∆ ln(wh,t+1
) + εh,t+1 − εh,t .
∆ ln(wh,t+1 ) = φh ∆ ln(wh,t+1
d
We then substitute out φh and ∆ ln(wh,t+1
), using (4.2) and (4.3), and obtain the
reduced-form specification:
p
p
) + b0 xh,t ∆ ln(wh,t+1
)
∆ ln(wh,t+1 ) = at+1 + b0 ∆ ln(wh,t+1

+c0t+1 xh,t + x0h,t Dt+1 xh,t + εh,t+1 − εh,t .

(4.4)

The reduced-form coeﬃcients relate as follows to the structural parameters of the adjustment model: at+1 = ϕ0 δ 0,t+1 , b0 = 1 − ϕ0 , b = −ϕ, ct+1 = δ t+1 ϕ0 + δ 0,t+1 ϕ, and
Dt+1 = ϕδ 0t+1 .
The error term of the reduced-form specification (4.4), εh,t+1 − εh,t , follows a firstorder moving average process. A high realization of εh,t feeds into a high share wh,t and
p
a high passive share wh,t+1
, which implies that the error εh,t+1 − εh,t and the regressor
p
p
p
∆ ln(wh,t+1 ) = ln ω (wh,t ; rh,t+1 ) − ln(wh,t
) are negatively correlated. Because of this
problem, equation (4.4) cannot be consistently estimated by ordinary least squares
(OLS). We handle this by finding a set of instruments that are correlated with the
13

explanatory variables in (4.4) but uncorrelated with the error term. The period-t + 1
zero-rebalancing passive change
p
p
ln ω p (wh,t
; rh,t+1 ) − ln(wh,t
)

is the passive change that would be observed at t+1 if the household did not rebalance at
t. Because rebalancing is limited, this variable should be positively correlated with the
actual change in the passive share. At the same time, if the return rh,t+1 is independent
of the errors, the period-t + 1 zero-rebalancing passive change is uncorrelated with εh,t
and can therefore be used in a set of instruments.
In Table 3, we estimate the adjustment model for the special case where all households have the same adjustment speed and target change, which corresponds to the
restriction ϕ = δ = 0. The OLS regression of the total log change in the risky share on
the passive log change and a time fixed eﬀect,
p
∆ ln(wh,t+1 ) = at+1 + b0 ∆ ln(wh,t+1
) + uh,t+1 ,

gives an estimate for b0 of −0.12. This estimate is negatively biased, because the rep
gressor ∆ ln(wh,t+1
) and the residual uh,t+1 are negatively correlated. When we correct
the bias by running instrumental variables (IV) estimation with an intercept, the log
of the initial passive share, and the zero-rebalancing passive change as instruments, we
obtain a considerably higher b0 estimate of 0.36. The diﬀerence is economically meaningful. The OLS estimate implies an adjustment speed ϕ0 = 1 − b0 that is larger than
unity, while the IV estimate implies an adjustment speed ϕ0 = 0.64, which is broadly
consistent with the rebalancing regressions in Section 3.
The next step is to estimate the adjustment model allowing observable household
characteristics to aﬀect the adjustment speed and the change in the desired log risky
share. The set of characteristics includes demographic, financial, and portfolio characteristics. The first category includes age, household size, and dummies for households
that have high-school education, post-high-school education, missing education data
(most common among older and immigrant households), or are immigrants. The second category includes disposable income, contributions to private pension plans as a
fraction of a three-year average of disposable income, log financial wealth, log real estate wealth, log of total debt liabilities, and dummies for households that are retired,
unemployed, self-employed (“entrepreneurs”), and students. The third category, which
is unique to our dataset, includes the standard deviation of the risky portfolio and the
Sharpe ratio of the risky portfolio.
The inclusion of financial wealth Fht as a household characteristic creates a new
diﬃculty. Financial wealth depends on the random cash balance observed at the end of
year t, and is therefore correlated with the measurement error εh,t . A natural solution
c ), where 1 + r c ≡
is to use as an instrument passive financial wealth Fh,t−1 (1 + rh,t
h,t
14

wh,t−1 (1 + rh,t ) + (1 − wh,t−1 )(1 + rf ) denotes the gross passive return on the complete
portfolio. This leads us to define the following set of instruments: 1) an intercept, 2)
the period-t log passive share; 3) the period-t + 1 zero-rebalancing passive change; 4)
the period-t passive financial wealth; 5) a vector of characteristics uncorrelated with
the measurement error, and 6) the log passive share, zero-rebalancing passive change,
passive financial wealth and characteristics interacted with the vector of characteristics.
To simplify the estimation of the full model (4.4), given that we have a short panel
with only two years of data after diﬀerencing, we estimate the reduced form assuming
constant coeﬃcients over time on the household characteristics: ct+1 = c, and Dt+1 = D.
The structural restrictions of the model then imply that the time fixed eﬀects at+1 are
also constant, as are the structural coeﬃcients in the equation for the change in the
desired risky share, (4.3): δ 0,t+1 = δ0 and δt+1 = δ. We do not impose constant time
fixed eﬀects, but find them to be almost identical in 2001 and 2002.
IV estimates of this model are reported in the first set of columns of Table 4. Each
characteristic is standardized to have zero cross-sectional mean. We also normalize to
unity the cross-sectional standard deviation of each continuous characteristic, so the
reported regression coeﬃcient reveals the eﬀect of a one-standard-deviation change in
the characteristic. To keep the table at a manageable size, we only report the structural
vectors ϕ and δ of the full regression. The median value of the speed parameter is
0.73 and the average log target change is -0.18 in 2002. These numbers are consistent
with the rebalancing regressions in Section 3 and imply a modest revision in the target
share. The estimates of ϕ and δ are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of the nonlinear
interacted term x0h,t Dxh,t .
The most striking result in Table 4 is that the speed of adjustment tends to increase
with variables associated with financial sophistication, such as education, disposable
income, debt, and financial and real estate wealth. In addition, households with well
diversified portfolios (high Sharpe ratios) have higher adjustment speeds. Entrepreneurial activity, retirement, unemployment, and household size, on the other hand, reduce
the adjustment speed.
Changes in the target risky share are less consistently related to household characteristics. Households with greater financial wealth reduce their target less. Real
estate wealth, on the other hand, works in the opposite direction, perhaps because the
booming Swedish real estate market reduced the attractiveness of stocks to real-estateoriented investors in 2001 and 2002. Well diversified and aggressive households, with
higher Sharpe ratios and riskier portfolios, reduce their target share more; but so do
larger, older, and immigrant households that normally invest cautiously (CCS 2007).
The estimates in Table 4 can be used to compute the predicted speed parameter
and target change of every household. The cross-sectional distribution of the speed φh
has a median value of 0.73, a 5th percentile of 0.53, and a 95th percentile of 0.86,
15

d
numbers which seem quite reasonable. Similarly, the target change ∆ ln(wh,t+1
) has a
5th percentile of -29%, a median value of -18%, and a 95th percentile of 5%, which again
seem quite reasonable in a severe bear market.
In the appendix, we report the average characteristic values for households at different percentiles of the predicted adjustment speed and target change distributions.
The average household at the 5th percentile of adjustment speed has disposable income
of about $20,700 and wealth of $10,500, 47% of which is invested in risky assets with
a Sharpe ratio of 0.22. 35% of these slowly adjusting households have a high school
education, and 6% have a college education. At the 95th percentile of adjustment
speed, by contrast, the average household has disposable income of $42,800 and wealth
of $56,200, 70% of which is invested in risky assets with a Sharpe ratio of 0.31. 95%
of these rapidly adjusting households have a high school education, and 71% have a
college education. In short, rapidly adjusting households appear to be more financially
sophisticated than slowly adjusting households.
The appendix also reports results when we estimate the adjustment model separately
for the years 2001 and 2002, allowing both adjustment speeds and target changes to vary
across years. The results are qualitatively similar to those reported in Table 4, although
adjustment speeds appear to be faster in 2001 than in 2002, and some of the individual
characteristics have coeﬃcients that are unstable over time.

4.3. Impact of Wealth Changes on Risk-Taking
In the first set of columns of Table 4, we have used slowly evolving demographic
and financial variables as household characteristics that may influence portfolio adjustment. We now explore the possibility that portfolio decisions are also aﬀected by
high-frequency variation in financial wealth. Several branches of financial theory suggest that an increase in financial wealth might increase the propensity to take risk. In
the presence of borrowing constraints, individuals become less risk-averse as they become richer and thus less likely to face a binding constraint in the future. Even in the
absence of such frictions, investors with decreasing relative risk aversion tend to hold
a higher risky share as their wealth goes up. Carroll (2000, 2002) builds such a utility
function, and documents a positive empirical relation between household wealth and
the risky share. Models of portfolio insurance (Brennan and Schwartz 1988) and habit
formation (Constantinides 1990, Dybvig 1995, Campbell and Cochrane 1999) also imply
a positive relation between wealth and the risky share, because richer agents are more
willing to take risk as their wealth moves further above the minimum level required by
the portfolio insurance policy or the present value of the future habit.
In the second set of columns of Table 4, we reestimate the adjustment model using the
contemporaneous change in log financial wealth as an additional household characteristic

16

that can aﬀect the change in the target. We add one instrument to the previous set,
the zero-rebalancing return on the complete portfolio, that is, the return that each
household would earn at t + 1 if it did not rebalance at t. We find that an increase
in log financial wealth leads to a higher target risky share, while the impact of other
characteristics is largely unchanged.
In the Appendix, we show that results are similar when we estimate the model
separately for the years 2001 and 2002, although the eﬀect of the change in log financial wealth on the target risky share is stronger in 2002. The Appendix also reports
similar results when we allow the change in log financial wealth to aﬀect the adjustment speed as well as the desired risky share. We find little variation in the change
in log financial wealth across rapidly adjusting and slowly adjusting households, but
large variation across households with high and low predicted changes in the target
risky share. Households at the 5th percentile of the target change experience average
financial wealth declines of 44%, while households at the 95th percentile of the target
change experience average financial wealth increases of 31%.
In a recent study, Brunnermeier and Nagel (2007) assess the empirical relation between wealth and the risky share using US data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). They regress the change in the risky share (in levels) on the change in
financial wealth (in logs) and control variables, and obtain a small and slightly negative
wealth coeﬃcient. They attribute this result to inertia. When a household saves in the
form of cash during the year and only partially rebalances its financial portfolio, its
risky share tends to fall mechanically.
In the Appendix, we estimate the Brunnermeier-Nagel regression on our Swedish
dataset. The OLS estimate of the regression coeﬃcient is slightly negative, consistent
with Brunnermeier and Nagel’s finding; but it becomes positive when we estimate the
regression by instrumental variables. Similarly, we find a positive relation between the
change in the risky share and the lagged change in financial wealth. These results
are robust to separate estimation of the regression in the years 2001 and 2002. Thus,
controlling for endogeneity problems and household inertia, the Swedish data do show
some evidence for a positive link between wealth changes and risk-taking.
4.4. Connection with Rebalancing Regressions
The adjustment model of this section is intimately related to the rebalancing regressions
we estimated in section 3. When the adjustment speed and target changes are the same
for all households, the adjustment model implies:
d
ah,t+1 = φδ 0,t+1 − φph,t+1 − φ(ln wh,t − ln wh,t
) + εh,t+1 ,

(4.5)

which is analogous but not exactly identical to the rebalancing regression (3.1). The
similarity suggests that the adjustment speed should be close to the regression coeﬃ17

cients reported in Table 2B; this is indeed the case in our empirical results since the
median speed φh and the linear regression coeﬃcient −γ 1 are both about one half. The
d , represents the only diﬀerence between (3.1) and
distance to the target, ln wh,t − ln wh,t
(4.5). We can therefore view (3.1) as a reduced-form specification in which all housed ,
holds have the same speed of adjustment and the distance to the target, ln wh,t − ln wh,t
is proxied by a rescaled distance to the cross-sectional mean, λ(ln wh,t − ln wh,t ).
We show in the Appendix that the adjustment model with heterogeneous agents
leads to additional terms in the rebalancing regressions. Section 4 thus improves on
the specification in Section 3 by: (1) providing more precise micro foundations; (2)
correctly estimating the structural parameters even though the target is unobserved;
and (3) allowing for heterogeneity in the adjustment speed and the target change.
In the Appendix, we investigate the role of household characteristics in the rebalancing regression (3.1). The reduction in the risky share is in all years less pronounced for
households with higher financial wealth or debt. These households were more willing to
maintain their proportional investments in risky assets than were other Swedish households. We interact demographic variables with passive changes, and find that wealthier
and more sophisticated households tend to have more negative regression coeﬃcients of
active changes on passive changes; that is, they rebalance more actively. These findings
confirm the results of the adjustment model. They are limited, however, in that they
do not allow us to disentangle household inertia from changes in the target risky share,
as the adjustment model can do.

5. Asset-Class Participation, Asset-Level Rebalancing, and the Disposition Eﬀect
We now study household decisions to participate in asset classes (risky assets, mutual
funds, and direct stockholding) and to rebalance positions in individual assets. We
relate these decisions to the disposition eﬀect, the tendency to realize gains and hold
on to losses, where gains and losses are measured relative to the asset’s purchase price.
The disposition eﬀect was identified by Shefrin and Statman (1985) and has been widely
documented (e.g. Odean 1998).
The Swedish dataset unfortunately does not provide the date or price of individual
asset trades. For this reason, we use an asset’s return during the year as an alternative measure of performance. This implies that we are assessing the robustness of the
disposition eﬀect to this alternative benchmark. The Swedish dataset has an important compensating advantage: we can relate the disposition eﬀect to demographic and
financial characteristics of households, as well as the characteristics of the portfolios
they hold. This allows us to extend the recent finding of Dhar and Zhu (2006) that
households with higher self-reported income are less prone to the disposition eﬀect.
18

5.1. Entry and Exit at the Risky Portfolio and Asset Class Levels
We begin by investigating the probability that a household enters or exits risky asset
markets. In Table 5, we run pooled probit regressions of the form yh,t = Φ(x0h,t γ + γ 0,t ),
where yh,t denotes participation status, xh,t is the vector of characteristics, and γ 0,t is
a time-dependent intercept. The time interval is annual, and we pool data from 2000,
2001, and 2002. To facilitate comparison, we report in the last three rows the rates of
entry to and exit from risky asset markets in each year.
In the first set of three columns, we analyze the probability that a nonparticipant
in year t holds risky assets in year t + 1. The first two columns report coeﬃcients and
t-statistics, while the third column assesses the economic magnitude of the coeﬃcient
estimates by reporting the impact on the entry probability of increasing a non-dummy
regressor by one standard deviation, or setting a dummy variable equal to one. This
impact depends on the base rate of entry; we report it for the year 2001, in which the
overall entry rate was 5.7%, much lower than the rate in 2000 and slightly greater than
the rate in 2002.
The probability of entry increases with standard measures of financial sophistication
such as education, financial and real estate wealth, and the private pension savings
rate. Conversely, the exit probability decreases with variables associated with investor
sophistication, as shown in the middle three columns of Table 5. The entry and exit
regressions are thus remarkably symmetric and consistent with earlier research on crosssectional data. Household characteristics that predict participation in a cross-section
(e.g. Guiso, Haliassos, and Jappelli 2002, CCS 2007) also help to explain entry and exit
in the panel.
In the last three columns of Table 5, we investigate how the exit probability is aﬀected
by portfolio characteristics. The exit probability decreases with the initial risky share
and the standard deviation of the risky portfolio. More aggressive agents have higher
risk-tolerance and are less likely to entirely give up the benefits of financial risktaking.
A complementary explanation is that households sluggishly adjust their portfolios, as in
Section 4; more aggressive investors are then more reluctant to dispose of all their risky
assets. The exit probability, however, increases with extreme risk-taking, as measured
by a dummy equal to unity if the risky share exceeds ninety five percent. Extreme risktakers presumably have limited understanding of financial risk and may be prone to
panic selling in a bear market.
A household is also more likely to exit if it is undiversified (low Sharpe ratio Sh,t ). Finally, we consider the performance of the risky portfolio during the year, and distinguish
between positive returns (winning portfolios) and negative returns (losing portfolios).
Large absolute returns tend to increase the probability of exit, and the eﬀect is slightly
more pronounced for winners than losers.

19

We next investigate the separate roles of direct stock and mutual fund holdings. It
is useful to decompose the overall Sharpe ratio into its stock and fund components. Let
Dh,t denote the share of direct stockholdings in the risky portfolio, SD,h,t and SF,h,t
the Sharpe ratios of the stock and fund portfolios, and σ D,h,t and σF,h,t their standard
deviations. The Sharpe ratio of the risky portfolio satisfies:
Sh,t = CD,h,t + CF,h,t ,
where the components of the Sharpe ratio attributable to each asset class are given by
Dh,t σ D,h,t
,
σh,t
(1 − Dh,t )σ F,h,t
= SF,h,t
.
σ h,t

CD,h,t = SD,h,t
CF,h,t

The contribution of an asset class to the overall Sharpe ratio is large if the household
holds a diversified portfolio of assets in the class, which represents a large fraction of its
risk exposure.
In Table 6, we investigate exit decisions by asset class for a subset of households
that initially own both stocks and mutual funds. As in the previous tables, we include
financial and demographic variables and the risky portfolio’s standard deviation. We
also consider the contributions of stocks and funds to the overall Sharpe ratio and the
performance during the year of the household’s stocks and funds. These variables are
used to explain the probability that a participating household disposes of all its risky
assets (first three columns), all its directly held stocks (next three columns) or all its
mutual funds (last three columns).
Most of the patterns in Table 6 are consistent with those already shown in Table 5.
The striking new result in Table 6 is that the exit probability from risky asset markets
increases strongly with the performance of winning stock portfolios. Winning stock
portfolio performance has an even greater impact on the probability of exiting direct
stockholding, as shown in the second column of the table. These findings are consistent
with the disposition eﬀect on direct stockholdings: the owner of a winning stock portfolio
is more likely to sell it and leave financial markets. There is little evidence in the table of
a comparable disposition eﬀect for mutual funds. The owner of a winning mutual fund
portfolio is slightly more likely to liquidate it, but the eﬀect is small and statistically
insignificant; losses have a larger eﬀect on the mutual fund sales probability, consistent
with the literature on performance-sensitivity of mutual fund holdings (Chevalier and
Ellison 1997; Frazzini and Lamont 2007; Gruber 1996; Ippolito 1992; Sirri and Tufano
1998; Ivkovic and Weisbenner 2007a).

20

5.2. Dynamics of Individual Asset Shares
We now investigate how a household adjusts during year t + 1 the asset positions that
it holds at the end of year t. Since exit decisions have been addressed in Section 5.1, we
consider only households that own risky assets in both years. Also, we confine attention
to assets which are held at the end of year t and do not attempt to model household
decisions to purchase new assets.
A household owning a stock at the end of 2000 had, by the end of 2001, partially
sold it with probability 27%, fully sold it with probability 16%, held on to it with
probability 22%, and bought additional units of the same stock with probability 35%.
Partial sales and partial purchases are thus more frequent than full sales or continued
holdings. As reported in the Appendix, this property holds in all years and is even
more pronounced for mutual funds: the probability of a fund’s full sale is less than 10%
while the probability of a partial purchase is about 60%. The high probability of partial
purchases for funds is attributable in part to the dividend reinvestment plans oﬀered by
most investment companies. Even though full sales are a relatively limited phenomenon,
we begin by studying them separately given their importance in the disposition eﬀect
literature.
Full Sales. In Table 7, we analyze the probability that a household owning a risky
asset j at date t has fully disposed of it by the end of year t + 1. The regression distinguishes between stocks and funds, and between assets with positive returns (winners)
and negative returns (losers) during the year. We include household demographic and
financial characteristics, and portfolio characteristics, both directly and interacted with
the return on the asset during the year.6 The table reports the coeﬃcients on the characteristics interacted with return but omits the direct coeﬃcients; the full regression is
reported in the Appendix.
The probability of fully selling an asset increases with the absolute value of its
performance during the year. Households are more likely to fully sell extreme losers
or extreme winners than stocks and funds that have close to zero returns. For stocks,
this eﬀect is much more pronounced for winners than for losers, which seems consistent
with a disposition eﬀect on direct stockholdings. For funds, performance also impacts
the probability of a full sale, but there is substantially less asymmetry between losers
and winners. The tendency to sell losing funds is consistent with the literature on
performance sensitivity. For winning funds, however, household behavior is both driven
by the tendency to hold on to winners, for instance because they are run by skilled
managers, but also a tendency to sell winning assets in order to rebalance the risky
6

In Table 7, we assign a value of zero to the characteristic of an asset class if the household has no
investments in this class. A similar convention is used in the remainder of the section.

21

portfolio. The connection between asset trades and portfolio rebalancing will be further
investigated in section 6.
Financial and portfolio characteristics have a substantial impact on the probability
of a full sale of stock. Wealthier households with riskier overall portfolios and better
diversified stock portfolios are less likely to sell a winning stock but more likely to sell
a losing stock. These eﬀects reduce the asymmetry between winners and losers and
therefore weaken the disposition eﬀect on direct stockholdings. Losing funds are also
more likely to be sold by wealthier households, but we otherwise find little significance
of characteristics in the regressions that predict full sales of mutual funds.
Overall, the table reveals that more sophisticated and aggressive households, with
larger portfolios of directly held stocks, appear to be less prone to the disposition eﬀect.
Partial Sales, Continued Holdings and Partial Purchases. We have shown in
previous sections that households fight idiosyncratic passive variations in the risky share.
We now investigate whether they also rebalance individual security positions in the
risky portfolio. The analysis excludes full sales, but considers partial sales, continued
holdings and partial purchases. In the Appendix, we check that the evidence of assetlevel rebalancing is even stronger when we include full sales.
∗
For each household h, we define wh,j,t
as the share of asset j in the risky (not the
complete) portfolio at the end of period t, rh,t+1 as the net return on the risky portfolio
between t and t + 1, and rj,t+1 as the net return on asset j. If the household does not
trade risky assets in the next period, the asset’s passive share at the end of t + 1 is:
∗p
∗
wh,j,t+1
= wh,j,t

1 + rj,t+1
.
1 + rh,t+1

∗p
∗p
∗
∗
∗
−wh,j,t+1
and Ph,j,t+1
= wh,j,t+1
−wh,j,t
denote the corresponding
Let A∗h,j,t+1 = wh,j,t+1
∗
∗
active and passive changes in levels, and ah,j,t+1 and ph,j,t+1 their equivalents in logs.
We estimate a rebalancing model for individual assets. In Table 8, we report the
pooled and yearly regressions of the log active change a∗h,j,t+1 on the initial share and
the log passive change p∗h,j,t+1 , both for stocks (panel A) and funds (panel B). The
rebalancing coeﬃcient is only slightly more negative for stocks than for funds, and
approximately equal to one sixth. Thus, when we focus on partial sales, the rebalancing
coeﬃcient is roughly constant across funds and stocks. In the Appendix, we report the
rebalancing regressions in levels, and also find evidence of active rebalancing at the asset
level. The rebalancing coeﬃcients in levels are somewhat larger in absolute value, but
also more variable across regressions.
The interpretation of Table 8 is complicated by the ambiguous predictions of financial theory. In a mean-variance portfolio choice problem with constant investment
opportunities, the optimal weights of individual assets in the risky portfolio are time∗
invariant, which implies complete rebalancing with A∗h,j,t+1 = −Ph,j,t+1
; but partial

22

rebalancing might be justified by a variety of factors such as changes in risk and return
expectations, taxes, transactions costs, or Bayesian updating of beliefs about mutual
fund management. In the Appendix, we ask how the propensity to rebalance individual
assets varies with household and portfolio characteristics, but do not find any strong
eﬀects.
In this section we have shown that households are much more likely to fully sell a
stock when it has performed well, and slightly more likely to sell a losing fund. This finding is consistent with the literature on the disposition eﬀect. If a household continues
to own a stock or mutual fund, however, its behavior is well described by a rebalancing
model with a rebalancing coeﬃcient of about one sixth, and the rebalancing propensity
is almost the same for stocks and for mutual funds.

6. Trading Decisions and Risky Portfolio Rebalancing
We now investigate how rebalancing of the complete portfolio, which was documented
in Sections 3 and 4, relates to the dynamics of individual asset holdings discussed in
Section 5. We focus on the contribution of diﬀerent asset classes and transaction types
to the overall active change of the risky share.
The active change of the risky share between dates t and t + 1 can be decomposed
as
X
p
Ah,t+1 =
(wh,j,t+1 − wh,j,t+1
),
(6.1)
j

where wh,j,t+1 denotes the share of asset j in the complete portfolio at the end of year
p
t + 1, and wh,j,t+1
is the passive share of asset j in the complete portfolio if the agent
does not trade during the year:
p
wh,j,t+1
=

wh,j,t (1 + rj,t+1 )
.
wh,t (1 + rh,t ) + (1 − wh,t )(1 + rf )

The individual terms on the right hand side of (6.1) can be grouped into specific
asset classes c (fund or stock) and transaction types θ (purchase or sale):
X
Ah,t+1 =
Ah,c,θ,t+1 .
c,θ

We can also distinguish between partial sales, full sales, partial purchases (assets already
held by the household), and full purchases (new types of assets).
Each component of the active change Ah,c,θ,t+1 can be regressed on the passive
change of the risky portfolio Ph,t+1 , the demeaned initial risky share wh,t − w̄h,t , and
a time-dependent intercept. The corresponding rebalancing coeﬃcients γ 1,c,θ,t+1 add
P
θ
up to the overall rebalancing coeﬃcient:
θ,c γ 1,c,t+1 = γ 1 . This decomposition allows
23

us to identify how various asset classes and transaction types contribute to portfolio
rebalancing.
Given our findings in Section 4 on the disposition eﬀect, it is also useful to distinguish between transactions carried out by lucky and unlucky households. Specifically, a
household is classified as lucky if the return on its risky portfolio exceeds the population
average during the same year. In Table 9, we report the rebalancing coeﬃcients γ θ1,c,t+1
and their t-statistics, and refer the reader to the appendix for the full regression results. Lucky and unlucky households both have a rebalancing coeﬃcient of about −0.5,
which is slightly larger in absolute value for lucky households. Stocks and funds play
an important role in rebalancing for both groups of investors. We have verified that
our results are almost identical when the median return is used as an alternative cutoﬀ,
or when we consider households in the top third and bottom third of risky portfolio
performance.
When we disaggregate sales and purchases, however, we do see important diﬀerences
between lucky and unlucky households. Lucky households rebalance primarily by adjusting their stock sales and fund purchases. The rebalancing coeﬃcient of −0.58 is
almost entirely explained by the coeﬃcients of full sales (-0.29) and partial purchases
(-0.24). That is, lucky households, who need to reduce their holdings of risky assets,
achieve this objective by fully selling more stocks and buying less mutual funds than
they would otherwise.
Unlucky households, on the other hand, mainly rebalance by adjusting their purchases of new assets. The rebalancing coeﬃcient (equal to -0.50) is primarily driven by
stock purchases (-0.30) and fund purchases (-0.13). The impact of asset sales is marginal.
Households thus primarily rebalance by increasing their (full) stock sales and reducing their fund purchases when they are lucky, and increasing their purchases of risky
assets (primarily stocks) when they are unlucky. These common strategies minimize
transaction costs. The exception is the full sale of stocks by lucky households, which
may be caused by the disposition eﬀect.
In the Appendix, we investigate how these common rebalancing strategies are influenced by household characteristics. We find that wealthier households with more
diversified portfolios tend to rebalance more strongly through purchases of risky assets
but less through stock sales. Thus, it appears that more sophisticated households are
less prone to the disposition eﬀect and make greater use of rebalancing strategies that
minimize transaction costs. In addition, we find possible substitution eﬀects between
purchasing strategies. Households with substantial and diversified portfolios of funds
rebalance more strongly through fund purchases and less through stock purchases.

24

7. Conclusion
The burgeoning field of household finance asks how households manage their financial
aﬀairs, and whether they act in a way that is consistent with the normative literature
on portfolio choice. Our previous paper (CCS 2007) studied household diversification
at a point in time, while this paper looks at changes in household behavior over time,
specifically decisions to scale up or down the share of risky assets in the total portfolio,
to enter or exit risky financial markets, to fully sell individual risky assets, and to scale
up or down the share of individual assets in the risky portfolio. These decisions are
important in themselves, and are also particularly revealing because households rarely
delegate these decisions to financial intermediaries.
Although other papers have looked at the dynamics of household risk-taking, our
dataset gives us the unique ability to relate household decisions to the properties of
the initial portfolio. When studying movements in the risky asset share, we find that
households overall have a surprisingly large propensity to rebalance, oﬀsetting about
half the passive changes in the risky share with active changes.
We can identify the propensity to rebalance, distinguishing it from mean-reversion in
the risky share and aggregate shifts in the desired risky share, because households have
heterogeneous portfolios which generate cross-sectional variation in passive changes in
the risky share. This implies that households can rebalance actively even in a closed
economy general equilibrium; households with lower than average returns can buy stocks
from households with higher than average returns. The microeconomic nature of our
results means that we have little to say about rebalancing by the Swedish household
sector as a whole in response to aggregate shocks, but such rebalancing appears to be
quite limited in our short dataset.
We develop an adjustment model with diﬀerent target risky shares across households. We find that more educated and wealthier households, holding better diversified
portfolios, tend to rebalance more actively. Wealthier households also reduced their
target risky shares less during the bear market of the early 2000’s.
Some financial theories imply that as a household becomes richer, its target risky
share should increase. This will be the case, for example, if households have declining
risk aversion, follow portfolio insurance policies, or derive utility from consumption that
is surplus to a slowly evolving habit level. We find evidence consistent with this view
once we control for sluggish portfolio adjustment.
Our results on decisions to exit risky financial markets and to fully sell individual
risky positions are intriguingly consistent with previous research on the disposition eﬀect
among stockholders and performance sensitivity among mutual fund investors. We find
that high returns on directly held stock portfolios strongly increase the probability that
households will exit direct stockholding, while this eﬀect is almost absent for mutual

25

fund portfolios. At the level of individual assets, a household is considerably more
likely to fully sell a stock during a year if it is a “winner” that has performed well
during the year, but this tendency is again much weaker for mutual funds. One possible
explanation for these patterns is that individual investors buy stocks that they perceive
to be undervalued, and maintain fixed beliefs about fundamental value in the face of
market price movements; but they buy mutual funds that they perceive to be well
managed, and update their beliefs about manager skill in response to mutual fund
performance.
These asymmetries between winners and losers, and between stocks and mutual
funds, disappear when households adjust the shares of individual risky assets within
their risky portfolios, without fully selling them. Rebalancing for assets that households
continue to own is close to symmetric, and it actively oﬀsets about one sixth of the
passive changes in individual asset shares caused by individual asset performance.
We ask how households use partial and full sales and purchases of stocks and mutual
funds to alter their overall risky shares. We find that households primarily rebalance
by increasing their full sales of stock and reducing their fund purchases when they have
higher than average portfolio returns, and by increasing their purchases of risky assets
when they have lower than average returns.
Finally, we examine how household characteristics aﬀect decisions to trade individual
assets. We find that wealthy investors with high risky shares and diversified portfolios of
individual stocks are less likely to fully sell winning stocks, and more likely to fully sell
losing stocks. Dhar and Zhu (2006) have documented a similar pattern for US investors
with high self-reported income. Any model of the disposition eﬀect must explain this
finding that it is not uniform across the population.
Many papers in the household finance literature, including Campbell (2006) and
CCS (2007), have reported that educated, better oﬀ households conform more closely
to the predictions of standard finance theory. Rebalancing behavior and decisions to
fully sell stock positions are two more examples of this phenomenon.

26

References
[1] Agnew, J., P. Balduzzi and A. Sunden, 2003, Portfolio choice and trading in a large
401(k) plan, American Economic Review 93(1), 193—215.
[2] Ameriks, John, and Stephen Zeldes, 2004, How do household portfolio shares vary
with age?, working paper, Columbia University.
[3] Banks, James, Richard Blundell, and James P. Smith, 2005, Wealth portfolios in
the United Kingdom and the United States, in David A. Wise ed. Perspectives on
the Economics of Aging (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
[4] Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2000, Trading is hazardous to your wealth:
The common stock investment performance of individual investors, Journal of Finance 55, 773—806.
[5] Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2001, Boys will be boys: gender, overconfidence, and common stock investment, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116,
261—292.
[6] Barberis, Nicholas, and Richard Thaler, 2003, A survey of behavioral finance, in
George Constantinides, Milton Harris and René Stulz eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Elsevier.
[7] Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard Thaler, 2001, Naive diversification strategies in
defined contribution saving plans, American Economic Review 91, 79—98.
[8] Bergstresser, Daniel, and James Poterba, 2004, Asset allocation and asset location:
Household evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances, Journal of Public Economics 88, 1893—1915.
[9] Bertaut, Carol, and Martha Starr-McCluer, 2002, Household portfolios in the
United States, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household
Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[10] Bilias, Yannis, Dimitris Georgarakos and Michael Haliassos, 2005, Portfolio inertia
and stock market fluctuations, working paper.
[11] Black, Fischer (1972), Capital Market Equilibrium with Restricted Borrowing,
Journal of Business 45, 444-454.
[12] Blume, Marshall, and Irwin Friend, 1975, The asset structure of individual portfolios and some implications for utility functions, Journal of Finance 30, 585—603.

27

[13] Blume, Marshall, and Irwin Friend, 1978, The Changing Role of the Individual
Investor, John Wiley, New York, NY.
[14] Bodie, Zvi, and Dwight Crane, 1997, Personal investing: Advice, theory and evidence, Financial Analysts Journal 53 (6), 13—23.
[15] Brennan, Michael, and Eduardo Schwartz, 1988, Time invariant portfolio insurance
strategies, Journal of Finance 43, 283—299.
[16] Brunnermeier, Markus, and Stefan Nagel, 2007, Do wealth fluctuations generate
time-varying risk aversion? Micro-evidence on individuals’ asset allocation, forthcoming American Economic Review.
[17] Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell and Paolo Sodini, 2007, Down or out: Assessing the welfare costs of household investment mistakes, Journal of Political
Economy 115, 707-747.
[18] Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell and Paolo Sodini, 2008, Appendix to
Fight or flight? Portfolio rebalancing by individual investors, available online at
http://kuznets.fas.harvard.edu/~campbell/papers.html.
[19] Calvet, Laurent E., Martín Gonzalez-Eiras and Paolo Sodini, 2004, Financial innovation, market participation and asset prices, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 39, 431—459.
[20] Campbell, John Y., 2006, Household finance, Journal of Finance 61, 1553—1604.
[21] Campbell, John Y., and John Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption
based explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy
107, 205-251.
[22] Carroll, Christopher D., 2000, Why do the rich save so much?, in J.B. Slemrod
ed. Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
[23] Carroll, Christopher D., 2002, Portfolios of the rich, in Luigi Guiso, Michael Haliassos and Tullio Jappelli eds. Household Portfolios, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
[24] Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a
response to incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167-2000.
[25] Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2002, Defined contribution pensions: Plan rules, participant decisions, and the path of least
resistance, in James Poterba ed. Tax Policy and the Economy 16, 67—113.
28

[26] Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, 2004, For
better or for worse: Default eﬀects and 401(k) savings behavior, in David Wise ed.
Perspectives on the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago Press.
[27] Constantinides, George M., Habit formation: A resolution of the equity premium
puzzle, Journal of Political Economy 98, 519—543.
[28] Dhar, Ravi, and Ning Zhu, 2006, Up close and personal: investor sophistication
and the disposition eﬀect, Management Science 52, 726-740.
[29] Dybvig, Philip H., 1995, Duesenberry’s ratcheting of consumption: Optimal dynamic consumption and investment policies given intolerance for any decline in
standard of living, Review of Economic Studies 62, 287—313.
[30] Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on
stocks and bonds, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3—56.
[31] Flavin, Marjorie, and Takashi Yamashita, 2002, Owner-occupied housing and the
composition of the household portfolio, American Economic Review 92 (1), 345362.
[32] Frazzini, Andrea, 2006, The disposition eﬀect and underreaction to news, Journal
of Finance 61, 2017—2046.
[33] Frazzini, Andrea, and Owen Lamont, 2007, Dumb money: Mutual fund flows and
the cross-section of stock returns, forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.
[34] Goetzmann, William N., and Alok Kumar, 2004, Why do individual investors
hold under-diversified portfolios?, working paper, Yale University and University
of Texas.
[35] Goetzmann, William N. and Massimo Massa, 2008, Disposition matters: Volume,
volatility, and price impact of a behavioral bias, forthcoming Journal of Portfolio
Management.
[36] Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, and Hai Huang, 2006, Investor competence,
trading frequency, and home bias, NBER working paper 11426.
[37] Grinblatt, Mark and Bing Han, 2005, Prospect theory, mental accounting, and
momentum, Journal of Financial Economics 78, 311—339.
[38] Gruber, Martin, 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual
funds, Journal of Finance 51, 783-810.

29

[39] Guiso, Luigi, Michael Haliassos, and Tullio Japelli, 2002, Household Portfolios,
MIT Press.
[40] Haliassos, Michael, and Carol Bertaut, 1995, Why do so few hold stocks?, Economic
Journal, 105, 1110-1129.
[41] Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio choice and asset prices: The
importance of entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance 55, 1163-1198.
[42] Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies
14, 659-680.
[43] Hurst, Erik, Ming Ching Luoh, and Frank Staﬀord, 1998, The wealth dynamics
of American families, 1984-94, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1998 (1),
267-329.
[44] Ippolito, Richard, 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: Evidence
from the mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics 35, 45-70.
[45] Ivković, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2005, Local does as local is: information content of the geography of individual investors’ common stock investments, Journal
of Finance 60, 267-306.
[46] Ivković, Zoran, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007a, “Old” money matters: the sensitivity of mutual fund redemption decisions to past performance, working paper,
University of Illinois.
[47] Ivković, Zoran, Clemens Sialm, and Scott Weisbenner, 2007b, Portfolio concentration and the performance of individual investors, forthcoming Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis.
[48] Juster, Thomas, James Smith, and Frank Staﬀord, 1999, The measurement and
structure of household wealth, Labor Economics 6, 253–275.
[49] Kelly, Morgan, 1995, All their eggs in one basket: Portfolio diversification of US
households, Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 27, 87—96.
[50] King, Mervyn A., and Jonathan I. Leape, 1987, Asset accumulation, information
and the life cycle, NBER Working Paper 2392.
[51] King, Mervyn A., and Jonathan I. Leape, 1998, Wealth and portfolio composition:
Theory and evidence, Journal of Public Economics 69, 155—193.
[52] Kopczuk, Wojciech, and Emmanuel Saez, 2004, Top wealth shares in the United
States, 1916—2000: evidence from estate tax returns, NBER working paper 10399.
30

[53] Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis Shea, 2001, The power of suggestion: Inertia in
401(k) participation and savings behavior, Quarterly Journal of Economics 66,
1149—1188.
[54] Massa, Massimo, and Andrei Simonov, 2006, Hedging, familiarity and portfolio
choice, Review of Financial Studies 19, 633-685.
[55] Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses?, Journal of
Finance 53, 1775—1798.
[56] Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much?, American Economic Review
89, 1279—1298.
[57] Poterba, James, and Andrew Samwick, 2001, Portfolio allocation over the life cycle,
in Seiritsu Ogura, Toshiaki Tachibanaki, and David Wise eds. Aging Issues in the
United States and Japan, University of Chicago Press.
[58] Schlarbaum, Gary G., Ronald C. Lease, and Wilbur G. Lewellen, 1978, The
common-stock-portfolio performance record of individual investors: 1964—1970,
Journal of Finance 33, 429—441.
[59] Shefrin, Hersh, and Meir Statman, 1985, The disposition to sell winners too early
and ride losers too long: Theory and evidence, Journal of Finance 40, 777—782.
[60] Shiller, Robert, 2000, Human behavior and the eﬃciency of the financial system, in
John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, NorthHolland.
[61] Sinai, Todd and Nicholas Souleles, 2005, Owner-occupied housing as a hedge against
rent risk, Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 763—789.
[62] Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal
of Finance 53, 1589-1622.
[63] Swedish Tax Agency, Taxes in Sweden 2004. Available from the Agency’s website,
www.skatteverket.se.
[64] Tracy, Joseph, Henry Schneider, and Sewin Chan, 1999, Are stocks overtaking
real estate in household portfolios?, Current Issues in Economics and Finance 5:5,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
[65] Tracy, Joseph, and Henry Schneider, 2001, Stocks in the household portfolio: A
look back at the 1990s, Current Issues in Economics and Finance 7:4, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York.
31

[66] Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002a, Limited asset market participation and the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution, Journal of Political Economy 100, 825—
853.
[67] Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002b, Towards an explanation of household portfolio
choice heterogeneity: Nonfinancial income and participation cost structures, NBER
Working Paper 8884.
[68] Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2003, Perspectives on behavioral finance: does “irrationality” disappear with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions, in
Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoﬀ eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003 (MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA).
[69] Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition into
stock-picking talent, style, transactions costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55,
1655—1695.
[70] Zhu, Ning, 2002, The local bias of individual investors, unpublished paper, Yale
University.

32

TABLE 1. SUMMARY STATISTICS
A. Aggregate Holdings of Participants (Billion Dollars)

Stocks
Risky mutual funds:
° Equity funds
° Bond funds
Cash
Total financial wealth

1999
Micro
Official
Data Statistics
61.7
64.3
53.4
49.5
3.9
48.7
163.9

2000
Micro
Official
Data Statistics
54.6
54.6
50.4
52.7
46.6
48.8
3.8
3.9
47.5
152.5

2001
Micro
Official
Data Statistics
45.3
47.1
44.0
45.4
39.7
40.9
4.3
4.5
54.3
143.7

2002
Micro
Official
Data Statistics
29.8
32.2
29.4
29.5
24.8
25.2
4.5
4.3
56.7
115.9

B. Participation and Average Risky Share
Fraction of households holding:
- risky assets
- individual stocks
- risky mutual funds
- both individual stocks and risky funds
Average risky share (equal-weighted)
Average risky share (wealth-weighted)

1999

2000

2001

2002

61.6%
30.0%
54.6%
23.0%
56.5%
74.9%

66.4%
37.2%
58.7%
29.5%
56.6%
73.7%

66.0%
37.3%
58.2%
29.5%
52.3%
66.1%

64.9%
38.5%
56.4%
29.9%
45.2%
54.7%

2000
3.9%
-18.0%
-4.3%
-6.1%
-7.1%
-18.5%

2001
4.1%
-26.8%
-11.1%
-11.6%
-11.3%
-20.7%

2002
4.1%
-48.6%
-32.1%
-32.2%
-37.9%
-22.4%

C. Asset Returns
Interest rate
MSCI Sweden index
Pooled index (equal-weighted)
Pooled index (value-weighted)
MSCI world index (in Swedish kronor)
MSCI World index (in U.S. dollars)

1999
3.1%
79.2%
NA
NA
27.2%
19.0%

Notes: The table reports summary statistics of aggregate holdings (panel A), participation rates and the risky share (panel B) and asset
returns (panel C). Panel A also includes the official statistics reported by Statistics Sweden (stocks) and Fondbolagens Förening (funds)
when they are available. The participation rates in panel B are computed on the random subsample of 100,000 households considered
throughout the text, while the average risky share (panel B) and pooled index (panel C) are based on the subset of participants at the end
of each year in the random subsample.

TABLE 2. REGRESSION OF ACTIVE CHANGE ON PASSIVE CHANGE

A. In Levels

Passive change
Initial risky share (demeaned)
Intercept
1999 dummy
2000 dummy
2001 dummy
2
Adjusted R
Number of observations

All years
Estimate
t-stat
-0.504
-53.10
-0.186
-144.00
0.028
-0.027
-0.027
0.12
187,780

2000
Estimate
-0.640
-0.194
0.026

t-stat
-27.90
-88.10
33.40

2001
Estimate
-0.608
-0.176
-0.030

t-stat
-28.70
-82.40
-34.10

2002
Estimate
-0.443
-0.189
-0.022

t-stat
-35.50
-78.70
-18.20

40.40
-38.10
-26.70
0.12
60,341

0.10
64,119

0.10
63,320

B. In Logs

Passive change in logs
Log initial risky share (demeaned)
Intercept
1999 dummy
2000 dummy
2001 dummy
2
Adjusted R
Number of observations

All years
Estimate
t-stat
-0.442
-45.40
-0.199
-137.00
0.112
-0.060
-0.071
0.14
187,780

2000
Estimate
t-stat
-0.745
-35.80
-0.275
-123.00
0.098
37.50

2001
Estimate
-0.534
-0.152
-0.067

t-stat
-24.30
-62.90
-22.50

2002
Estimate
-0.423
-0.161
-0.066

t-stat
-30.40
-56.40
-15.00

42.80
-22.70
-20.30
0.24
60,341

0.09
64,119

0.10
63,320

Notes: This table reports the pooled and yearly regressions of the active change on the passive change, both in levels (panel A) and in logs (panel B). Year t regressions
include households that participate in risky asset markets both at the end of year t-1 and at the end of year t. Pooled regressions are based on all the data points used in
the yearly regressions, that is on households that participate in two consecutive years.

TABLE 3. ADJUSTMENT MODEL WITHOUT CHARACTERISTICS

OLS
Estimate

t-stat

-0.121
-0.111
-0.246

-44.20
-42.00
-92.10

0.363
-0.139
-0.119

39.30
-46.30
-31.50

1.121

410.00

0.637

68.90

Target change δ0,2001

-0.099

-41.50

-0.219

-35.60

Target change δ0,2002

-0.219

-95.60

-0.186

-39.90

Reduced-Form Parameters
Change in log passive share
Intercept 2001
Intercept 2002
Structural Parameters
Adjustment speed ϕ0

2

Adjusted R
Number of observations

0.08
120,067

IV
Estimate

t-stat

120,067

Notes: This table reports the IV and OLS estimates of the adjustment model without characteristics.
The estimation is based on households that participate in risky asset markets at the end of two
consecutive years.

TABLE 4. ADJUSTMENT MODEL WITH CHARACTERISTICS
A. Parameter Estimates
Intercepts
Adjustment speed ϕ0
Target change δ0,2001
Target change δ0,2002
Portfolio Characteristics
Standard deviation of risky portfolio
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio
Financial Characteristics
Disposable income
Private pension premia/income
Log financial wealth
Change in log financial wealth
Log real estate wealth
Log total liability
Retired dummy
Unemployment dummy
Entrepreneur dummy
Student dummy
Demographic Characteristics
Age
Household size
High school dummy
Post-high school dummy
Dummy for unavailable education data
Immigration dummy

Speed
Estimate

t-stat

0.716

69.30

Target change
Estimate
t-stat

-0.154
-0.160

-8.27
-8.57

Speed
Estimate

t-stat

0.739

68.00

Target change
Estimate
t-stat

-0.121
-0.136

-6.15
-6.91

0.061
1.137

1.84
9.14

-0.384
-0.536

-8.94
-6.14

0.072
1.206

2.04
9.15

-0.258
-0.508

-5.21
-5.71

0.011
-0.002
0.037

2.38
-0.42
3.14

0.014
-0.007
0.051

0.77
-1.27
10.70

0.008
-0.002
0.048

1.58
-0.41
3.79

0.007
0.032
-0.073
-0.056
-0.083
-0.051

0.82
2.72
-2.03
-2.05
-2.18
-0.97

-0.082
0.022
0.022
0.046
-0.001
0.070

-6.42
2.33
0.48
0.89
-0.03
0.55

0.010
0.032
-0.083
-0.068
-0.092
-0.045

1.00
2.63
-2.19
-2.32
-2.28
-0.80

-0.020
-0.011
0.093
0.285
-0.127
0.040
0.020
0.054
-0.006
0.049

-1.07
-1.88
10.60
5.93
-8.21
3.93
0.43
1.03
-0.28
0.37

0.001
-0.014
0.085
0.043
0.087
0.000

1.72
-2.33
3.75
2.54
1.84
0.01

-0.002
-0.017
-0.003
-0.003
0.103
-0.022

-4.60
-3.59
-0.31
-0.30
1.69
-2.14

0.002
-0.017
0.087
0.049
0.100
0.002

2.23
-2.63
3.63
2.74
2.02
0.07

-0.002
-0.013
-0.009
-0.008
0.108
-0.024

-4.09
-2.79
-0.99
-0.97
1.73
-2.37

B. Cross-Sectional Distribution (2001)
5th Percentile
25th Percentile
50th Percentile
75th Percentile
95th Percentile

Speed
0.529
0.660
0.726
0.786
0.862

Target Change
-0.286
-0.225
-0.178
-0.094
0.045

Speed
0.536
0.677
0.750
0.815
0.901

Target change
-0.370
-0.230
-0.144
-0.024
0.199

Notes: This table reports the estimates of the adjustment model (panel A) and the implied cross-sectional distribution of the speed parameter and target change in 2001 (panel
B). The estimation is based on households that participate in risky asset markets at the end of two consecutive years and for which the immigration dummy is available.
Disposable income is averaged over the previous three years. All characteristics are demeaned year by year, and continuous financial characteristics other than the change in
financial wealth are normalized to have unit standard deviation in each cross-section. Portfolio characteristics are in natural units.

TABLE 5. ENTRY AND EXIT PROBABILITIES

Entry
Estimate
Portfolio Characteristics
Initial risky share
Standard deviation of risky portfolio
Dummy for risky share>95 %
Sharpe ratio of risky portfolio
Gain of risky portfolio
Loss of risky portfolio
Financial Characteristics
Disposable income
Private pension premia/income
Log financial wealth
Log real estate wealth
Log total liability
Retirement dummy
Unemployment dummy
Entrepreneur dummy
Student dummy
Demographic Characteristics
Age
Household size
High school dummy
Post-high school dummy
Dummy for unavailable education data
Immigration dummy
Rate of entry/exit in 2000
Rate of entry/exit in 2001
Rate of entry/exit in 2002

t-stat

Exit
Change Estimate

t-stat

Change Estimate

t-stat

Change

-0.571
-0.278
0.065
-0.461
0.477
0.396

-24.70
-5.21
1.81
-4.64
6.28
6.40

-0.81%
-0.21%
0.09%
-0.16%
0.16%
0.37%

0.093
0.031
0.220
0.104
0.071
0.001
-0.039
0.035
-0.130

13.70
6.11
29.40
15.70
8.48
0.02
-2.31
0.95
-4.36

0.88%
0.27%
2.33%
1.00%
0.66%
0.01%
-0.33%
0.31%
-1.01%

0.015
-0.084
-0.356
-0.069
-0.026
0.018
0.093
-0.030
0.164

3.33
-6.59
-46.60
-10.70
-3.10
0.69
4.69
-0.85
4.71

0.09%
-0.46%
-1.48%
-0.38%
-0.15%
0.11%
0.60%
-0.17%
1.13%

0.014
-0.076
-0.290
-0.074
-0.017
0.013
0.087
-0.065
0.181

3.04
-5.96
-36.00
-11.40
-2.03
0.48
4.31
-1.80
5.16

0.08%
-0.39%
-1.22%
-0.38%
-0.10%
0.07%
0.53%
-0.34%
1.21%

-0.018
-0.054
0.115
0.138
-0.089
-0.095

-28.50
-9.23
7.26
8.89
-3.12
-6.03

-2.19%
-0.52%
1.11%
1.36%
-0.72%
-0.76%
15.8%
5.7%
4.4%

0.005
0.015
-0.058
-0.062
-0.001
0.201

7.56
2.72
-3.47
-4.01
-0.04
11.80

0.52%
0.12%
-0.32%
-0.34%
-0.01%
1.44%
1.9%
3.4%
3.9%

0.005
-0.012
-0.049
-0.050
0.001
0.197

7.02
-2.06
-2.89
-3.16
0.03
11.40

0.46%
-0.08%
-0.26%
-0.26%
0.00%
1.33%
1.9%
3.4%
3.9%

Notes: The table reports the pooled probit regression of a household’s entry to and exit from risky asset markets. Explanatory variables include yearly fixed effects and
portfolio, financial, and demographic characteristics. Disposable income is averaged over the previous three years. For each regression, we report the linear coefficient, tstatistic, and marginal effect of each predicting variable. All characteristics are demeaned year by year, and continuous financial characteristics are normalized to have unit
standard deviation in each cross-section. Portfolio characteristics are in natural units. The marginal effect is assessed by computing the impact on the dependent variable (in
levels) of increasing a non-dummy regressor by one standard deviation, or setting a dummy variable equal to one, in year 2001. We exclude households for which the
immigration dummy is unavailable.

TABLE 6. IMPACT OF STOCK AND MUTUAL FUND HOLDINGS ON EXIT PROBABILITY

Risky Assets
Portfolio Characteristics
Initial risky share
Standard deviation of risky portfolio
Stock component of Sharpe ratio
Fund component of Sharpe ratio
Gain of stock portfolio
Loss of stock portfolio
Gain of mutual fund portfolio
Loss of mutual fund portfolio
Financial Characteristics
Disposable income
Private pension premia/income
Log financial wealth
Log real estate wealth
Log total liability
Retirement dummy
Unemployment dummy
Entrepreneur dummy
Student dummy
Demographic Characteristics
Age
Household size
High school dummy
Post-high school dummy
Dummy for unavailable education data
Immigration dummy
Rate of exit in 2000
Rate of exit in 2001
Rate of exit in 2002

Stocks
Change Estimate

t-stat

Mutual Funds

Estimate

t-stat

Change Estimate

t-stat

Change

-0.292
0.169
-1.277
-1.192
0.269
0.081
0.165
0.439

-4.11
1.14
-2.88
-3.43
2.57
0.81
0.28
1.85

-0.08%
0.02%
-0.10%
-0.12%
0.04%
0.02%
0.01%
0.07%

-0.179
0.373
-3.302
-0.762
0.694
0.016
-0.338
-0.090

-4.71
4.62
-13.40
-4.08
13.20
0.29
-0.85
-0.66

-0.25%
0.26%
-1.17%
-0.43%
0.56%
0.02%
-0.05%
-0.07%

-0.368
0.381
-0.279
-1.755
-0.105
-0.045
0.443
0.264

-10.20
4.82
-1.23
-9.53
-1.19
-0.83
1.67
2.25

-0.48%
0.25%
-0.12%
-0.86%
-0.07%
-0.05%
0.07%
0.20%

0.014
-0.137
-0.169
-0.060
-0.026
0.044
0.196
-0.033
0.156

1.79
-3.55
-7.79
-3.31
-1.02
0.57
3.05
-0.33
1.34

0.02%
-0.13%
-0.16%
-0.06%
-0.03%
0.05%
0.30%
-0.04%
0.22%

0.012
-0.031
-0.209
-0.033
0.017
0.132
0.003
-0.106
0.077

1.63
-2.20
-17.90
-3.28
1.30
3.34
0.07
-2.08
1.16

0.07%
-0.17%
-0.98%
-0.19%
0.10%
0.87%
0.02%
-0.55%
0.48%

-0.045
0.443
0.264
0.014
-0.076
-0.158
-0.044
-0.008
0.028

-0.83
1.67
2.25
2.31
-5.03
-14.60
-4.62
-0.61
0.78

0.08%
-0.39%
-0.76%
-0.24%
-0.04%
0.16%
0.77%
-0.02%
1.78%

0.002
0.027
-0.013
0.014
0.121
0.149

0.96
1.58
-0.23
0.30
1.52
2.76

0.04%
0.04%
-0.01%
0.02%
0.17%
0.21%
0.3%
0.5%
0.6%

-0.003
0.040
0.005
0.005
0.144
0.112

-2.62
4.74
0.17
0.23
3.25
3.73

-0.24%
0.31%
0.03%
0.03%
0.96%
0.72%
2.9%
3.2%
2.6%

0.122
-0.003
0.249
0.003
-0.066
-0.037

3.39
-0.07
3.96
2.86
-7.27
-1.32

0.27%
-0.43%
-0.20%
-0.26%
-0.22%
0.91%
2.2%
3.0%
3.3%

Notes: The table reports a pooled probit regression that a household sells all its risky assets (first set of three columns), all its stocks (middle set of three columns), and all its risky
mutual funds (last set of three columns). We include yearly fixed effects, and average out disposable income over the previous three years. For each regression we report the
linear coefficient, t-statistic, and marginal effect of each predicting variable. All characteristics are demeaned year by year, and continuous financial characteristics are normalized
to have unit standard deviation in each cross-section. Portfolio characteristics are in natural units. The marginal effect is assessed by computing the impact on the dependent
variable (in levels) of increasing a non-dummy regressor by one standard deviation, or setting a dummy variable equal to one, in year 2001. The regressions are based on the set
of households that hold both stocks and funds. We exclude households for which the immigration dummy is unavailable.

TABLE 7. PROBABILITY OF FULLY SELLING AN ASSET

Gain/loss of asset j
Portfolio Characteristics
Initial risky share
Standard deviation of risky portfolio
Stock component of Sharpe ratio
Fund component of Sharpe ratio
Financial Characteristics
Disposable income
Private pension premia/income
Log financial wealth
Log real estate wealth
Log total liability
Retirement dummy
Unemployment dummy
Entrepreneur dummy
Student dummy
Demographic Characteristics
Age
Household size
High school dummy
Post-high school dummy
Dummy for unavailable education data
Immigration dummy
Share of asset j in risky portfolio
Number of observations

Stocks
Funds
Winners
Losers
Winners
Losers
Estimate
t-stat Estimate
t-stat Estimate
t-stat Estimate
t-stat
0.928
46.80
0.112
7.00
0.359
8.86
0.364
13.70
Characteristics interacted with return
-0.395
-0.657
-1.689
0.362

-4.12
-4.14
-3.39
0.78

-0.053
0.241
1.687
0.841

-0.84
1.89
4.28
2.32

-0.320
0.062
-1.700
-1.493

-1.98
0.14
-1.41
-1.46

-0.160
0.645
-1.280
0.388

-1.77
2.49
-1.82
0.68

-0.008
0.000
-0.082
-0.038
-0.093
-0.061
0.069
0.031
0.147

-0.53
0.03
-3.54
-1.80
-4.12
-0.85
1.02
0.41
1.12

-0.024
-0.025
0.072
-0.007
0.046
0.010
-0.020
0.011
0.055

-2.82
-1.50
4.08
-0.41
2.56
0.18
-0.34
0.17
0.52

-0.017
0.067
0.096
-0.029
-0.015
0.103
0.016
-0.122
-0.571

-0.30
1.30
1.86
-0.72
-0.30
0.62
0.11
-0.68
-2.35

-0.066
0.004
0.151
0.012
-0.021
0.202
0.003
0.264
-0.194

-2.49
0.08
4.64
0.51
-0.69
2.15
0.03
2.31
-1.27

0.011
0.005
-0.014
0.016
0.039
-0.116
-0.816
139,155

5.36
0.32
-0.22
0.36
0.38
-1.74
-39.20

0.002
0.003
0.044
-0.048
0.126
0.010

1.59
0.22
0.94
-1.53
1.57
0.22

-0.008
0.054
-0.148
-0.097
-0.099
0.042
-0.847
67,623

-1.98
1.75
-1.28
-1.15
-0.43
0.38
-57.40

0.014
-0.045
-0.160
-0.029
-0.170
-0.105

5.37
-2.23
-2.40
-0.57
-1.53
-1.43

285,223

478,659

Notes: This table reports a pooled probit regression that a household fully sells an asset. We distinguish between stocks and funds, and classify a security as a winner
(loser) if it yields a positive (negative) return during the year. Each regression includes the following set of explanatory variables: yearly fixed effects (unreported),
gain/loss of asset j, non-interacted characteristics (unreported), and interacted characteristics. The gain/loss of asset j is the absolute value of the asset’s performance
during the year, and disposable income is averaged over the previous three years. The estimation is based on households that participate in risky asset markets at
the end of two consecutive years and for which the immigration dummy is available. All characteristics are demeaned year by year, and continuous financial
characteristics are normalized to have unit standard deviation in each cross-section. Portfolio characteristics are in natural units. Standard errors are robust and
clustered by household.

TABLE 8. ASSET-LEVEL ACTIVE CHANGE
A. Stocks

Passive change of asset j in logs
Log initial share of asset j
Intercept
2000 dummy
2001 dummy
2002 dummy
2
Adjusted R
Number of observations

All years
Estimate
t-stat
-0.179
-61.10
-0.038
-46.10
-0.204
-0.118
-0.117
0.05
354,294

2000
Estimate
-0.069
-0.058
-0.271

t-stat
-9.87
-34.60
-44.60

2001
Estimate
-0.162
-0.041
-0.127

t-stat
-32.20
-26.40
-25.70

2002
Estimate
-0.220
-0.023
-0.068

t-stat
-56.70
-16.70
-15.20

-49.10
-35.60
-36.00
0.03
90,951

0.04
126,769

0.06
136,574

B. Risky Mutual Funds

Passive change of asset j in logs
Log initial risky share of j
Intercept
2000 dummy
2001 dummy
2002 dummy
2
Adjusted R
Number of observations

All years
Estimate
t-stat
-0.165
-22.70
-0.091
-93.90
-0.230
-0.155
-0.191
0.07
498,502

2000
Estimate
-0.189
-0.109
-0.268

t-stat
-10.40
-64.50
-82.70

2001
Estimate
-0.153
-0.104
-0.183

t-stat
-11.50
-71.00
-66.80

2002
Estimate
-0.162
-0.062
-0.126

t-stat
-18.60
-49.10
-50.50

-95.60
-69.40
-83.90
0.08
147,930

0.08
175,692

0.04
174,880

Notes: This table reports the regression of asset j’s active change in logs on the asset’s passive change and initial share in the risky portfolio, both for stocks (panel A) and
risky mutual funds (panel B). We include partial sales, continued holdings and partial purchases, but exclude full sales and purchases of securities that are not held at all at
the beginning of the period. The estimation is based on households that participate in risky asset markets at the end of two consecutive years. Standard errors are robust
and clustered by household.

TABLE 9. CONTRIBUTION OF SALES AND PURCHASES TO PORTFOLIO REBALANCING

-0.349
-27.5

Sales
Rebalancing
coefficient

-32.2

-0.581
-29.6

Purchases
FUNDS

-16.7

-13.1

Purchases
STOCKS

-0.254

-0.231
Sales

0.023
1.8

-0.304
-49.2

-0.334
-54.4

Sales
Rebalancing
coefficient

-0.350

-0.030
-5.8

-0.504
-53.1

Purchases
FUNDS

-0.127
-17.2

-0.170
-19.9

Sales

-0.043
-6.7

Full Purchases
Partial Sales
Full Sales
Partial Purchases
Full Purchases
Partial Sales
Full Sales

Partial Purchases
Full Purchases
Partial Sales
Full Sales
Partial Purchases
Full Purchases
Partial Sales
Full Sales

-0.045
-6.9

0.046
4.2

-0.059
-10.2

-0.291
-31.3

-0.240
-18.7

-0.014
-1.5

Lucky Households

STOCKS

0.1

Partial Purchases

-0.032
-3.7

0.055
5.3

-0.143
-45.3

-0.160
-30.0

0.009
3.2

-0.039
-8.7

-0.076
-12.3

-0.051
-10.9

Unlucky Households

Purchases

0.001

-0.034
-7.9

-0.009
-1.9

Notes: The table decomposes the portfolio rebalancing coefficient into its various components: (partial or full) purchases or sales of stocks and funds by lucky and
unlucky households. For each transaction type and household group, we report the rebalancing coefficient and t-statistic of the corresponding rebalancing
regression in levels, with yearly fixed effects and the risky share included as controls. A household is defined as lucky (unlucky) if the passive return on its risky
portfolio during the year is higher (lower) than the cross-sectional average.

FIGURE 1. PORTFOLIO CHARACTERISTICS OF PARTICIPANTS

A. Cross-sectional Distribution of Risky Share

B. Standard Deviation of Complete Portfolio
30

1999
2000
2001
2002

7

Standard Deviation (%)

Fraction of participants (%)

8

6
5

4

3

2

25

20

15

10

5

1

0

0

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

Risky Share (%)

75

85

95

5

15

25

35

45

55

65

75

85

95

Risky Share (%)

Notes: Panel A illustrates the cross-sectional distribution of the risky share wh,t at the end of years 1999 to 2002. Panel B reports the relation between the standard
deviation of the complete portfolio wh,t σh,t and the risky share wh,t.

FIGURE 2. SCATTER PLOTS OF RISKY SHARE
B. Active Change

A. Passive Change
0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

-0.1

-0.1

-0.2

-0.2

-0.3

-0.3

-0.4

-0.4

-0.5

-0.5
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

C. Total Change
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4
-0.5
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1

Notes: The scatter plot illustrates the passive change (panel A), active change (panel B), and total change (panel C) versus the initial risky share for a random sample of
10,000 households. All changes are computed in levels between 2001 and 2002.

FIGURE 3. RISKY SHARE DECOMPOSITION
A. Entire Period ( 1999 to 2002 )

B. 1999 to 2000

20

15
Total Change

Total Change

Active Change
Passive Change

Active Change

10

Passive Change

10
5

0

0
5

20

35

50

65

80

5

95

20

35

50

65

80

95

-5
-10
-10

-15

-20

Risky share at end of 1999 (%)

Risky share at end of 1999 (%)

C. 2000 to 2001

D. 2001 to 2002

15

15
Total Change

Total Change
Active Change

10

Active Change

10

Passive Change

Passive Change
5

5

0

0
5

20

35

50

65

80

95

5

-5

-5

-10

-10

-15

20

35

50

65

80

95

-15

Risky share at end of 2000 (%)

Risky share at end of 2001 (%)

Notes: The figure illustrates the equal-weighted average of the total change, active change and passive change in bins of the initial risky share. The changes are
reported in percentages and computed in levels over the entire period (panel A) and over each year of the sample (panels B to D).

