                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   SAVING YOUR HOME IN CHAPTER 13 BANKRUPTCY

                                          Michelle J. White
                                             Ning Zhu

                                        Working Paper 14179
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14179


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




We are grateful to an anonymous referee and to Richard Hynes for very helpful comments. We also
benefitted from comments by participants at presentations at the University of Virginia Law School,
NYU Law School, and the Richmond Federal Reserve Bank. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Michelle J. White and Ning Zhu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Saving Your Home in Chapter 13 Bankruptcy
Michelle J. White and Ning Zhu
NBER Working Paper No. 14179
July 2008, Revised April 2009
JEL No. G33,G38,K35,R31

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper examines how filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 helps financially distressed debtors
save their homes. We develop a model of debtors’ decisions to default on their mortgages and file
for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 and evaluate the model using new data on Chapter 13 bankruptcy
filers. We also examine the effect of allowing bankruptcy judges to reduce debtors’ mortgage payments,
i.e., introducing “cram-down” of mortgages in Chapter 13.

We find that 96% of Chapter 13 filers are homeowners and 79% of filers repay mortgage debt in their
repayment plans; while just 9% of filers repay only unsecured debt in their plans. These results suggest
that filers use Chapter 13 almost exclusively as a “save-your-home” procedure. But under current
law, only about 1% Chapter 13 filers save their homes when they would otherwise have defaulted.
If cram-down were introduced, we predict that this fraction would increase to 10%. The cost to
lenders of introducing cram-down is estimated to be $264,000 per home saved and $30 billion in total.


Michelle J. White
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
miwhite@ucsd.edu

Ning Zhu
Graduate School of Management
UC, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616-8609
nzhu@ucdavis.edu
                                       INTRODUCTION


    This paper has three goals. First, it examines how filing for bankruptcy under Chapter 13
helps financially distressed debtors save their homes. Chapter 13 helps debtors save their homes
by stopping foreclosure, giving debtors extra time to repay mortgage arrears, and increasing their
ability-to-repay their mortgages by discharging some or all of their unsecured debt. Second, the
paper presents new evidence that nearly all debtors who use Chapter 13 are homeowners who
wish to save their homes. This is despite the fact that a major bankruptcy reform adopted in
2005 was intended to force bankruptcy filers with higher incomes to repay some of their
unsecured debt in Chapter 13.2
    Third, the paper investigates how bankruptcy can be used to address the foreclosure crisis by
allowing bankruptcy judges to “cram-down” (partially forgive) mortgage debt in Chapter 13
when debtors’ mortgages exceed the value of their homes. The mortgage crisis has caused and
continues to cause many homeowners to lose their homes. Housing pundits estimate that 2 to 3
million homeowners have lost their homes to foreclosure since 2007 and an additional 2 million
are in default. In addition, fourteen million homeowners are current on their mortgage payments
but might default because their mortgages are underwater.3 Foreclosures are very costly to both
borrowers and lenders. Borrowers must bear the cost of relocating—their children must change
schools, they lose their neighborhood ties, and some become homeless. Lenders lose because the
transactions costs of foreclosure are high and homes fall in value while waiting to be resold.


2
  The 2005 bankruptcy reform (the “Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection
Act”) instituted a means test that prevents higher-income debtors from filing under Chapter 7,
where their unsecured debts would be discharged. See below for discussion. Ronald J. Mann,
“Bankruptcy Reform and the ‘Sweat Box’ of Credit Card Debt.” Univ. of Illinois Law Review,
vol. 2007:1, 375-404 (2007), discusses the role of credit card lenders in writing and lobbying for
the 2005 reform and Michelle J. White, “Bankruptcy Reform and Credit Cards,” J. of Economic
Perspectives, vol. 21, 175-199 (2007), discusses its economic effects.
3
  See Mark Zandi, “The Homeownership Vesting Plan,” December 22, 2008,
www.economy.com/dismal/article_free.asp?cid=111220&src; Center for Responsible Lending,
“Updated Projections of Subprime Foreclosures in the United States and Their Impact on Home
Values and Communities,” August 2008,
http://www.responsiblelending.org/issues/mortgage/research/updated-projections-of-subprime-
foreclosures-in-the-united-states-and-their-impact-on-home-values-and-communities.html, and
Sheryl Stolberg and Edmund Andrews, “$275 Billion Plan Seeks to Address Housing Crisis,”
New York Times, February 18, 2009.
                                                 2
Foreclosures also harm neighborhoods because foreclosed homes cause blight and they harm
localities by reducing property tax payments and squeezing local governments’ budgets.4
Foreclosures also lead to yet more foreclosures by pushing down home prices, making it more
difficult for homeowners to refinance and encouraging additional defaults.
    Because foreclosure is costly to both borrowers and lenders, it would be in their joint interest
to deal with the mortgage crisis by renegotiating mortgages rather than opting for default or
foreclosure. But very few renegotiations have in fact occurred—reports from Moody’s indicate
that, of subprime loans coming up for interest rate increases, only 1% were renegotiated in 2007
and 3.5% in 2008.5 This is in part because most mortgages have been repackaged into
mortgage-backed securities, where ownership is divided among multiple security-holders who
have divergent interests. As a result, lenders are unlikely to agree on changes in the payment
terms.6 In addition, all mortgages have a servicer who acts on owners’ behalf, but mortgage
servicing contracts compensate servicers only for the costs of foreclosing, not for the costs of
renegotiating. These contracts also limit or prohibit servicers from changing the terms of the
underlying mortgages.7 Another problem is that many homes in default have second mortgages,
and second mortgage-holders can prevent modification or refinancing of first mortgages unless
the second mortgage is paid off. Because many second mortgages are now worthless, lenders’
best strategy is block modifications and refinancings unless they are paid for giving up their
claims.


4
  Pew Charitable Trusts, “Defaulting on the Dream: States Respond to America’s Foreclosure
Crisis,” 2008, www.pewtrusts.org/uploadedFiles/
wwwpewtrustsorg/Reports/Subprime_mortgages/defaulting_on_the_dream.pdf, estimates that
foreclosures have caused the aggregate value of nearby homes to fall by around $350 billion.
5
  Even when renegotiation occurs, lenders often just add the arrears to the mortgage, so that
debtors’ payments rise rather than fall. See Michael P. Drucker and William Fricke, “Moody’s
Subprime Mortgage Servicer Survey on Loan Modifications,” Moody’s Investors Service,
September 2007, and Zandi, supra note 3.
6
  Mortgage-backed securities divide mortgages among multiple owners whose claims have
different priorities. This means that any change in terms is likely to make one group of security-
holders better off and others worse off.
7
  Servicers also keep late fees and penalties imposed on debtors in default, which means that they
gain from foreclosing if they can collect the fees and they have little incentive to renegotiate if
doing so means that the fees are dropped. See Katherine Porter, “Misbehavior and Mistake in
Bankruptcy Mortgage Claims,” Texas Law Review, vol. 87 (2008), for a study of fees imposed
by mortgage lenders on debtors in bankruptcy.
                                                  3
     The Bush Administration initiated a number of programs intended to encourage
renegotiation of mortgages. These included a program to encourage voluntary renegotiations
(“Hope Now”) and a program in which the Federal government would provide new, fixed-rate,
30-year mortgages to replace subprime mortgages (“Hope for Homeowners”) if the lender agreed
to accept 85% of the current market value of the house. But virtually no renegotiations occurred
under these programs.8 The Obama Administration recently proposed a new program, called
“Home Affordable Modification,” to address problems of debtors who are at risk of losing their
homes. Under the program, if lenders reduce debtors’ mortgage payments to 38% of debtors’
income, the Federal government will match additional reductions dollar-for-dollar to bring the
mortgage payment down to 31% of debtors’ income. To encourage servicers to modify
mortgages, the program gives servicers $1,000 for each mortgage modification plus additional
payments up to $3,000 if the debtor does not re-default on the modified mortgage. The program
also pays lenders $1,500 for each mortgage modification.9
     A major stumbling block for both the Bush and Obama Administration programs is getting
servicers and lenders to participate. The Bush Administration programs were unsuccessful
because they allowed these groups to block any mortgage modifications or refinancing. The
Obama administration program encourages both groups to participate by paying them, although
the payments to lenders are small. But the program may still fail because it does not address the
preference of first mortgage-holders for foreclosure over renegotiation or the blocking power of
second mortgage-holders. First mortgage-holders generally do not favor modifying mortgages,
because they predict that doing so will encourage many homeowners to demand modifications
when they otherwise would repay their mortgages in full. Lenders face a mix of debtors who
apply for mortgage modification because they cannot afford their mortgage payments and a
larger number of debtors who apply strategically but would otherwise repay in full. Because

8
  Associated Press, “HUD Secretary Says Programs Are Ineffective,” New York Times,
November 20, 2008, page B3.
9
  Another Obama Administration program offers new, low-interest mortgages to homeowners, as
long as their current mortgages are no more than 5% underwater and are held by Fannie Mae or
Freddie Mac. See Edmund I. Andrews, “Treasury Begins to Release Details of Loan Plan,” New
York Times, March 4, 2009, and Department of the Treasury, “Making Home Affordable:
Updated Detailed Program Description,” 2009,
http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/housing_fact_sheet.pdf, for discussion.

                                                4
lenders cannot perfectly identify individual debtors’ types, they gain from adopting a tough
bargaining stance in which they never (or rarely) modify mortgages in order to discourage
strategic behavior by debtors who would otherwise repay in full. But when lenders adopt a
tough bargaining stance, the result is that debtors who cannot afford to repay end up in
foreclosure.10
      In contrast, changing bankruptcy law so that bankruptcy judges could “cram-down”
mortgages in Chapter 13 would prevent foreclosures even when servicers or lenders refuse to
modify mortgages. It would therefore complement the new government programs to address the
housing crisis. The Obama Administration has endorsed cram-down in bankruptcy for debtors
who “have run out of options.”11
     In the paper, we first discuss the treatment of homeowners in Chapter 13 bankruptcy under
current law. Then we develop a combined model of debtors’ decisions to default on their
mortgages and to file for bankruptcy under Chapter 13. The model is first used to examine the
effect of a new (and probably unintended) subsidy to homeowners from unsecured creditors that
was a result of the 2005 bankruptcy reforms. This subsidy reduces debtors’ obligation to repay
credit card and other unsecured debt by a dollar for each additional dollar of mortgage debt. We
refer to it as the “credit card subsidy,” since most unsecured debt is credit card debt. The model
is then used to examine the effect of introducing mortgage cram-down in bankruptcy. We
evaluate the model’s predictions using a new dataset of debtors who filed for bankruptcy under
Chapter 13 in 2006. The final section of the paper discusses policy implications.
     The most important result of the paper is that Chapter 13 functions as a “save your home”
bankruptcy procedure. This is evidenced by the fact that 96% of Chapter 13 filers are
homeowners and 77% of debtors file under Chapter 13 voluntarily, rather than being forced to do


10
   See Christopher L. Foote, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S. Willen, “Negative Equity and
Foreclosure: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Urban Economics, 64(2), 2008, 234-245 for a
study of Massachusetts housing markets during the downturn of the early 1990s. The authors
found that less than 10% of debtors with underwater mortgages actually defaulted, presumably
because lenders refused to modify their mortgages. See Michelle J. White, “Why Don’t More
Households File for Bankruptcy?” J. of Law, Econ. and Org. 14, Oct. 1998, 205-231, for a model
of this type applied to bankruptcy.
11
   See Department of the Treasury, “Making Home Affordable: Summary of Guidelines,” March
4, 2009, http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/reports/guidelines_summary.pdf.

                                                 5
so. Of those that file Chapter 13 repayment plans, 79% repay mortgage arrears and 45% repay
car loans (some repay both), while just 9% repay only unsecured debt. Although nearly all
debtors who file under Chapter 13 do so in order to save their homes, our model suggests that the
credit card subsidy causes less than 1% of them to save their homes when they would otherwise
have defaulted. However introducing cram-down of mortgages in Chapter 13 would cause a 10-
fold increase in the number of Chapter 13 filers who save their homes. This is because the
average cram-down subsidy is $134,000 in present value terms—much higher than the average
credit card subsidy of $10,000.


      I. TREATMENT OF HOMEOWNERS IN BANKRUPTCY—CURRENT LAW AND
                            PROPOSED REFORMS

     How does filing for bankruptcy help financially distressed homeowners save their homes?
Filing for bankruptcy does not help homeowners directly, since under current law they must
either repay their mortgages in full or give up their homes, regardless of whether they file or
not.12 Nonetheless bankruptcy helps homeowners in several ways. First, when debtors file
under Chapter 13, mortgage lenders are stayed (prevented) from foreclosing during the
bankruptcy procedure. Debtors can retain their homes by repaying the arrears on their
mortgages—including past due interest, principle, and penalty payments—as part of a repayment
plan that usually lasts for 5 years. They must also pay interest on the arrears and make all the
normal mortgage payments that are due during the plan. Once the arrears are paid, the original
mortgage contract is reinstated. Thus Chapter 13 gives financially-stressed debtors breathing
space to save their homes. Car loans are treated the same way in Chapter 13, so that debtors can

12
   Prior to 1993, bankruptcy judges had the power to cram-down mortgage loans. The
prohibition on cram-down of mortgages in bankruptcy is based on the Supreme Court’s decision
in Nobleman v. American Savings Bank, 508 US 324 (1993) and on 11 U.S.C. § 1322(b)(2),
which prevents bankruptcy judges from discharging any mortgage debt secured only by a
primary residence, even if the value of the house is below the mortgage principle. 11 U.S.C. §
1322(c)(1) allows debtors to cure defaults on their mortgages in Chapter 13, as long as the
residence has not been sold in foreclosure. For discussion, see George Bourguignon,
“Interpretation of Bankruptcy Code 1322(c)(1): Arguing for a Bright-Line Approach to the
Debtor’s Statutory Right to Cure a Residential Mortgage Default. 7 U.C. Davis Bus. L.J. 461
(2007), pp. 461-496, and Adam J. Levitin and Joshua Goodman, “Mortgage Market Sensitivity
to Bankruptcy Modification,” paper presented at the 2008 ALEA Conference, New York,
law.bepress.com/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2485&context=alea.
                                                 6
also use Chapter 13 to save their cars.13 Second, the bankruptcy trustee may help debtors
challenge excessive fees and penalties imposed by lenders.14 Third, the credit card subsidy
increases Chapter 13 filers’ ability to repay their mortgages and/or car loans by discharging some
or all of their unsecured debt. For each additional dollar that debtors owe on their mortgages and
car loans, an additional dollar of unsecured debt is discharged in Chapter 13.15
      In contrast, debtors who file for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 receive little help in saving
their homes, because they are obliged to repay the entire mortgage immediately in order to
prevent foreclosure. The same applies to car loans. But Chapter 7 is attractive to debtors who do
not wish to save their homes or their cars, because their unsecured debt is discharged and they
are not required to repay anything from their future incomes.
     These rules imply that distressed homeowners who wish to save their homes are likely to file
for bankruptcy under Chapter 13, while debtors who do not own homes are likely to file under
Chapter 7. Previous evidence is consistent with this prediction. Eraslan, Li and Sarte (2007)
found that over 80% of a sample of Chapter 13 filers in 2001-2002 were homeowners and Zhu
(2007) found that 86% of a sample of Chapter 13 filers in 2003 were homeowners. In contrast,
homeowning is much less important among Chapter 7 bankruptcy filers--Zhu (2007) found that
only 47% of his sample of Chapter 7 bankruptcy filers in 2003 were homeowners.16
     Prior to the 2005 bankruptcy reform, all debtors had the right to choose between Chapters 7
and 13. But the 2005 bankruptcy reform changed this by requiring some higher-income debtors
to file under Chapter 13 and repay part of their unsecured debt from future income, if they file
for bankruptcy at all. This change implies that, in theory, post-2005 Chapter 13 filers will

13
   Debtors must repay the entire car loan in full during their repayment plans. See William C.
Whitford, “A History of the Automobile Lender Provisions of BAPCPA,” Univ. of Illinois Law
Review, vol. 2007:1, 143-194 (2007).
14
   Porter, supra note 7, found that mortgage lenders add questionable or excessive fees in half of
all foreclosures.
15
   Some states allow debtors to prevent foreclosure outside of bankruptcy by curing defaults on
their mortgages, but these programs usually require repayment of arrears more quickly than in
Chapter 13. See Melissa Jacoby, “Homeownership Risk Beyond a Subprime Crisis: The Role of
Delinquency Management,” Fordham Law Review 76, (2008).
16
   See Hulya Eraslan, Wenli Li, and Pierre-Daniel Sarte, “The Anatomy of U.S. Personal
Bankruptcy Under Chapter 13,” working paper 07-31, Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank, Sept.
2007, and Ning Zhu, “Household Consumption and Personal Bankruptcy,” (2007), forthcoming,
Journal of Legal Studies.

                                                 7
consist of a mixture of financially distressed homeowners who file to save their homes and
higher-income debtors who file because Chapter 13 is the only bankruptcy procedure open to
them. We examine this issue in the empirical section below.
     We also investigate the effects of introducing mortgage cram-down in Chapter 13. The legal
theory of cram-down is that underwater mortgages can be divided into two parts: a secured part
equal to the current market value of the house and an unsecured part equal to the mortgage
principle minus current market value. Under cram-down, the unsecured part of the mortgage
would be treated like any other unsecured loan and would be partly or fully discharged in
Chapter 13. Adopting cram-down would equalize the treatment in bankruptcy of mortgages on
debtors’ principle residences and other secured debts, since bankruptcy law already allows for
cram-down of mortgages on rental properties and vacation homes.17


                                              II. MODEL
      In this section, we model debtors’ decisions to file for bankruptcy and to default on their
mortgages under current bankruptcy law. Suppose in period 0 debtors borrow an amount P in
the form of unsecured debt (such as credit card or medical debt), an amount M in the form of a
mortgage, and an amount A in the form of an automobile loan. In period 1, debtors owe P ′ ,
M ′ , and A′ on the three loans, respectively. P ′ , M ′ , and A′ include the discounted present
value of principle and interest payments, plus arrears, late fees, and penalties owed. In addition,
M ′ and A′ also include interest on the arrears and M ′ may include additional interest owed
because the mortgage had a low initial “teaser” rate, but a higher rate thereafter. To keep the
theory simple, we assume that debtors always repay their car loans in full. But in the empirical
section below, we take account of the fact that debtors may give up their cars rather than
repaying their car loans in bankruptcy.
      Both housing value and debtors’ incomes in period 1 are assumed to be uncertain. At the
beginning of period 1, the value of the house is drawn from a distribution and income is drawn
from an independent distribution. The realized value of the house is denoted V and realized
income per year is denoted Y. To keep the model simple, housing value and income are



17
 However, cram-down of car loans was prohibited under the 2005 bankruptcy reform. See
Whitford, supra note 13, and Levitin and Goodman, supra note 11.
                                             8
assumed to remain constant thereafter.18 Automobile value, in contrast, is known with certainty
and is assumed to remain constant over time.
     After learning V and Y, debtors decide whether to default on their mortgages and whether
to file for bankruptcy. Although most debtors are already behind on their mortgage payments at
the time they file for bankruptcy, we use the term “default” to refer to debtors’ decisions to
abandon their homes and move to rental housing. If debtors default but do not file for
bankruptcy, then mortgage lenders are assumed to foreclose on the house. If debtors default and
file for bankruptcy under Chapter 13, mortgage lenders cannot foreclose during the bankruptcy
procedure and debtors are allowed to remain in their homes while they repay mortgage arrears as
part of their repayment plans.
     If foreclosure occurs, the mortgage lender sells the house and the proceeds are used to pay,
first, the cost of foreclosure, denoted C f ; second, the mortgage (first mortgage, then second

mortgage); third, an amount up to the state’s homestead exemption, denoted X h , goes to the

homeowner; and fourth, unsecured debt.19 All claims are paid in full until the proceeds of sale
are exhausted. If anything remains after unsecured debt is repaid in full, it goes to the
homeowner.
     Debtors who file for bankruptcy must also pay bankruptcy costs of Cb , where Cb includes

lawyers’ fees, filing fees, trustees’ fees, and the cost of taking required credit counseling and
debt management courses. We assume that debtors pay Cb in full at the time of filing.20 Cb is
assumed to be less than P ′ , since otherwise debtors would never file for bankruptcy.
     Now consider how debtors’ obligation to repay in Chapter 13 is determined. Consider the
mortgage first and suppose the payments are divided into two parts. The first part consists of

18
   The model here is intentionally simplified because of the nature of the data on Chapter 13
bankruptcy filings. For dynamic models of bankruptcy, see Igor Livshits, James MacGee, and
Michele Tertilt, “Consumer Bankruptcy: A Fresh Start,” American Economic Review, 97(1),
402-18, March 2007, and Eraslan, Li, and Sarte, supra note 16.
19
   If the house sells for less than the amount owed, then the mortgage lender may have an
unsecured claim for the remainder. See Karen Pence, “Foreclosing on Opportunity: State Laws
and Mortgage Credit,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 88 (February 2006), pp. 177-
182, for discussion of which states prohibit mortgage lenders from making unsecured claims
against debtors.
20
   Some bankruptcy costs are paid over the course of the repayment plan, rather than at the time
of filing. We take account of this in the empirical section.
                                                  9
arrears and interest on arrears, plus normal interest and principle payments owed during the 5-
year repayment period. The discounted present value of these payments is denoted M 1′ . The
second part consists of normal interest and principle payments due from year 6 until the end of
the mortgage contract. Assume that the mortgage contract has N years remaining. The
discounted present value of debtors’ future mortgage payments from year 6 until year N is
denoted M 2′ . The present value of mortgage payments during and after the repayment plan sum

to the present value of debtors’ total mortgage payments, or M 1′ + M 2′ = M ′ .
     As an example, suppose the debtor has a 30-year mortgage with normal mortgage
payments of $750 per month or $9,000 per year. As of the beginning of year 2, the debtor owes
arrears equal to four months of payments, or $3,000, plus late fees, penalties, and interest on
these payments that total $1,000. She files for bankruptcy under Chapter 13. During the 5-year
repayment period, she owes a total (undiscounted) of 5($45,000) + $1,000 = $49,000. M 1′ equals
the discounted present value of these payments, or approximately $45,000 at a discount rate of 3
percent. From year 6 to year 28 (when the mortgage ends), the debtor owes $9,000 per year.
M 2′ equals the discounted present value of these payments or approximately $139,000 at the

same interest rate. M ′ therefore equals $184,000.

      The discounted present value of debtors’ car payments during the repayment plan is A′ .
We assume that debtors repay their car loans in full during the plan.
     Now turn to debtors’ obligation to repay unsecured debt in bankruptcy, which is the most
complicated. Since the bankruptcy reform of 2005, debtors in bankruptcy have been subject to a
“means test” that determines both whether they are allowed to file under Chapter 7 and, if not,
their obligation to repay unsecured debt if they file for bankruptcy under Chapter 13. Under the
means test, debtors first compute their yearly income, which equals their average monthly
income during the six months prior to filing, multiplied by 12. Then they determine their yearly
income exemption, denoted X y , which is the amount of income they are allowed to keep for

their living expenses each year while they are in Chapter 13. Finally, they compute their
disposable income, which equals income minus the income exemption. If debtors’ disposable
income is below $1,200 per year, then they are allowed to file under Chapter 7 and, if they
choose to file under Chapter 13, then they are not required to repay any of their unsecured debt.
If their disposable income is above $2,000 per year, then they must file under Chapter 13 if they
                                                10
file for bankruptcy at all and they must use all of their disposable income for 5 years to repay
debt.21
     Now consider how the income exemption X y is calculated. The minimum value of the

income exemption equals the median family income level in the debtor’s state of residence,
adjusted for family size. This means that debtors whose income is below the state median
income level plus $1,200 are allowed to file for bankruptcy under Chapter 7. But debtors whose
income is above the state median level must calculate their income exemption by adding up
various allowances for living expenses. There is an allowance for rent, an allowance for
transportation, and an allowance for personal expenditures. 22 There are also additional
allowances for some or all of debtors’ actual expenditures on taxes, mandatory payroll
contributions, insurance, telecommunications costs, childcare, child support, children’s
educational expenses, care of elderly or disabled relatives, and home security costs. Finally,
debtors also add their secured debt payments during the plan to the income exemption.
      In our notation, a particular debtor’s disposable income during the 5-year Chapter 13
repayment period equals 5(Y − X y ) if she has no secured debt, and 5(Y − X y ) − A′ − M 1′ if she

has a mortgage or a car loan or both.23 Thus when debtors have mortgages or car loans, the
amount of unsecured debt they must repay falls. For each additional dollar of secured debt
payments, a dollar of additional unsecured debt payments is discharged, until debtors’ obligation
to repay unsecured debt falls to zero. The procedure of increasing the income exemption by the
amount of secured debt payments increases debtors’ ability to repay their mortgages, thus
making it easier for them save their homes. It also increases debtors’ ability to save their cars.
We refer to the increase in the income exemption due to secured debt obligations as the credit



21
   If debtors’ disposable income is between $1,200 and $2,000 per year, they are allowed to file
under Chapter 7 if their unsecured debt is more than four times their disposable income per year.
22
   The procedure for determining the income exemption is based on Internal Revenue Service
procedures for collecting from delinquent taxpayers, but is more generous to debtors. See
Michelle J. White, “Abuse or Protection: The Economics of Bankruptcy Reform Under
BAPCPA,” Univ. of Illinois Law Review, 2007, pp. 275-304, for discussion of the means test.
Entrepreneurs are not subject to the means test and can file under Chapter 7 regardless of their
incomes.
23
   For simplicity, we do not discount Y or X y . This is equivalent to assuming that Y and X y
increase each year at a rate equal to the discount rate.
                                                 11
card subsidy.24 The subsidy equals max[min[5(Y − X y ), P ′],0] -

max[min[5(Y − X y ) − M 1′ − A′, P ′],0] . It is more valuable when debtors have more unsecured

debt and higher mortgages or car loans.25
     In addition to their obligation to use their disposable income to repay, some Chapter 13 filers
are also obliged to use their home equity to repay. Suppose a debtor has income below the state
median level, so that all of her future income is exempt. But suppose the value of her house V
exceeds M ′ + X h + C f , which means that selling the house would generate enough money to

repay at least some of her unsecured debt. The “best interest of creditors” test requires that
unsecured creditors receive at least as much in Chapter 13 as they would in Chapter 7. 26
Therefore since unsecured creditors would receive V − M ′ − X h − C f if the debtor filed under

Chapter 7, she must repay at least this amount in Chapter 13. The “best interest of creditors”
test means that even low-income debtors will avoid filing under Chapter 13 if the value of their
homes is sufficiently high that they would have to repay all of their unsecured debt in
bankruptcy, or if V − M ′ − X h − C f + Cb ≥ P ′ .

     Debtors’ alternate housing cost is denoted R ′ . It equals the present value of the cost of
moving to rental housing in period 1 and paying rent for the next N years.


                       A. Default and Bankruptcy Decisions under Current Law
      Now consider debtors’ bankruptcy and default decisions in period 1. Debtors are assumed
to make these decisions so as to maximize the discounted present value of their wealth defined
over the next N years, i.e., until the end of the mortgage contract. However, debtors are assumed
to have no financial wealth other than their home equity and, as a result, they may be subject to
liquidity constraints that prevent them from making wealth-maximizing choices.27 Debtors

24
   Prior to 2005, there was no credit card subsidy because there was no means test to determine
how much debtors were obliged to repay in Chapter 13.
25
   Jeremy Berkowitz and Richard Hynes, “Bankruptcy Exemptions and the Market for Mortgage
Loans,” J. of Law & Economics, 42, 809-830 (1999) first suggested that filing for bankruptcy
increases debtors’ ability to repay their mortgages by reducing their unsecured debt obligations.
26
   11 U.S.C. § 1307 (2000).
27
   The assumption that debtors maximize their wealth in making their default and bankruptcy
decisions is referred to as the “ruthless” decision model. There is empirical evidence supporting
ruthless decision models of both default and bankruptcy, although these models also suggest that
                                                  12
choose among four alternatives: default on their mortgages and file for bankruptcy (abbreviated
D/B), default but do not file for bankruptcy (D/NB), do not default but file for bankruptcy
(ND/B), and neither default nor file for bankruptcy (ND/NB). We consider debtors’ decisions
under current law first. Then we modify the model to consider how their decisions would
change if mortgage cram-down were introduced in Chapter 13.
     Figure 1 shows debtors’ decisions. Income Y is shown on the horizontal axis and housing
value V on the vertical axis. The figure is divided into four regions that correspond to the four
choices. In this section, we describe each of the four regions intuitively; details are given in the
theoretical appendix.
     Consider the default decision first. The basic condition for debtors to default is that the
present value of the cost of owning M ′ − V exceeds the present value of the cost of renting, R′ ,
or V < M ′ − R′ .28 However if debtors receive the credit card subsidy, then their cost of owning
falls from M ′ − V to as low as M 2′ − V . As a result, they may keep their homes even when V is

below M ′ − R ′ . On the other hand, debtors who are liquidity-constrained may default when V
exceeds M ′ − R ′ . We assume that debtors are willing to devote up to half of their incomes to

pay the cost of their Chapter 13 repayment plans, which during the first year is
Cb + ( M 1′ + A′) / 5 . Debtors are assumed to be liquidity-constrained and forced to default if their

incomes are below this amount. The income level at which debtors are indifferent between

defaulting versus not defaulting is denoted Y D . Figure 1 shows that Y D varies depending on
the value of debtors’ homes and their incomes.




many debtors do not behave ruthlessly. For empirical models of bankruptcy and default, see
Scott Fay, Erik Hurst, and Michelle J. White, “The Household Bankruptcy Decision,” American
Economic Rev., 92, June 2002, 708-718, John M. Quigley and Robert Van Order, “Explicit
Tests of Contingent Claims Models of Mortgage Default,” Journal of Real Estate Finance and
Economics, 11: 99-117 (1995), and Foote et al, supra note 10.
28
   Note that this default condition is quite different from the usual assumption that debtors
default when their mortgages are underwater, which means that V < M . In addition to V and M,
the default decision also depends on interest and discount rates, which are incorporated in M ′ ,
and on the present value of the cost of rental housing. If future housing values and/or rental
costs are uncertain, then there is also an option value to delaying the default and bankruptcy
decisions.
                                                  13
     Now turn to debtors’ decisions to file for bankruptcy. Debtors prefer to file for bankruptcy
if their gain from filing exceeds bankruptcy costs Cb . For debtors who default on their homes

and whose incomes are below the state median level, the gain from filing is the value of
unsecured debt P′ , since all of it is discharged in bankruptcy. But debtors’ gain from filing is
higher if they receive the credit card subsidy and is lower if the best interest of creditors test
forces them to repay more of their unsecured debt. The income level at which debtors are

indifferent between filing versus not filing for bankruptcy is denoted Y B . Figure 1 shows that

Y B also depends on both the value of debtors’ homes and on their incomes.
     In figure 1, the default/bankruptcy region D/B is outlined in heavy black lines and is divided
into two parts by a dashed line. Below the dashed line, housing value and income are both low.
Debtors default because the cost of owning exceeds the cost of renting (so that V < M ′ − R ′ ) and
they file for bankruptcy because the gain from having their unsecured debt discharged exceeds
bankruptcy costs ( P′ > Cb ). Above the dashed line, debtors still gain from filing for bankruptcy
because income is low, but they wish to save their homes because housing value is higher.
Debtors are liquidity-constrained if housing value is between M ′ − R and M ′ + X h + C f and if

they cannot afford their repayment plans during the first year even if they spend half of their
incomes on housing (so that .5Y < Cb + ( M 1′ + A′) / 5 ). Since liquidity-constraints are important
to our analysis, this portion of the D/B region is labeled as “Group I.”
     The default/no bankruptcy region D/NB occurs where housing values are less than M ′ − R′ ,
so that debtors prefer to default rather than save their homes. But they do not file for bankruptcy
because their incomes are above Y B .
     The no default/no bankruptcy region ND/NB occurs where both housing value and income
are high. Debtors prefer to save their homes because the cost of renting exceeds the cost of
owning ( V > M ′ − R ′ ) and they prefer to avoid bankruptcy because their incomes are
sufficiently high that the gain from filing is less than the cost.29



29
  The ND/NB region is assumed to include the area where V is very high, but Y is low. In this
area, debtors are liquidity-constrained and unable to pay their mortgages, but the value of their
homes is so high that they would not gain from filing under Chapter 13. We assume that they
sell their homes outside of bankruptcy.
                                                14
      Finally, the no default/bankruptcy region ND/B occurs where housing value and income
both have intermediate values. All debtors in this region file for bankruptcy and keep their
homes, so that they receive the credit card subsidy. The ND/B region is also divided in two
parts by a dashed line. Below the dashed line, housing value is less than M ′ − R′ and debtors
would therefore default, but the credit card subsidy causes them to save their homes. If we view
the credit card subsidy as a policy to encourage debtors to save their homes, then the lower part
of the ND/B region is the area where the policy succeeds; it is labeled “group II.” In the upper
part of the ND/B region, housing value exceeds M ′ − R′ . Here housing value is sufficiently
high that debtors would save their homes even without the subsidy. This area, labeled “group
III,” is where debtors receive the subsidy, but it does not change their behavior.30
       Overall, the credit card subsidy reduces default, but at the cost of encouraging more debtors
to file for bankruptcy and subsidizing some debtors who would have saved their homes anyway.
In the empirical section below, we estimate the size of groups I, II and III.


                     B. Default and Bankruptcy Decisions Under Cram-down
     Now consider how changing bankruptcy law to allow cram-down of mortgages in Chapter 13
would affect debtors’ default and bankruptcy decisions. In particular, suppose bankruptcy judges
reduce debtors’ mortgage payments by multiplying payments times V / M whenever the
mortgages are underwater, i.e., when V / M < 1 . The reduction is assumed to apply to mortgage
payments both during and after the Chapter 13 repayment plan, so that M 1′ is replaced by

(V / M ) M 1′ and M 2′ is replaced by (V / M ) M 2′ .31 All other aspects of bankruptcy law are
assumed to remain the same and debtors are assumed to make their default and bankruptcy
decisions in the same way. Note that while the cost of the credit card subsidy is borne by
unsecured lenders, the cost of cram-down is borne by mortgage lenders.
     The main changes caused by cram-down are as follows. First, fewer debtors are liquidity
constrained, because Chapter 13 repayment plans become less costly. In figure 1, this means that

30
   Not all debtors have an ND/B region. If the credit card subsidy is small because debtors have
little unsecured debt or small mortgages, then Y D may exceed Y B .
31
   To discourage debtors from presenting biased assessments of the decline in home value, the
reduction in the mortgage principle could be based on an objective measure, such as the decline
in the S&P/Case-Schiller housing value index for the relevant metropolitan area over the period
since the mortgage was issued.
                                                15
the right-hand boundary of the D/B group I region shifts to the left, making the region smaller.
Second, debtors’ gain from filing for bankruptcy increases, because cram-down reduces their

mortgage payments. As a result, Y B increases, more debtors file for bankruptcy and the right-
hand boundary of the ND/B region shifts to the right. This increases the number of debtors in
the ND/B groups II and III. Third, the lower boundary of the ND/B region shifts downward.
This is because cram-down reduces the cost of owning, while leaving the cost of renting
unaffected. As a result, debtors who own low-value houses are less likely to default. The overall
effect of these changes is that fewer debtors default.
     Now consider how the introduction of cram-down affects the size of groups I, II and III.
Group I—debtors who default because they are liquidity-constrained—becomes smaller. Group
II—composed of debtors who save their homes under cram-down but would otherwise have
defaulted—now includes two sets of debtors. One is those in the lower part of the ND/B region,
while the other consists of debtors who previously were liquidity-constrained, but now save their
homes because of cram-down. Group III—composed of debtors who receive cram-down and/or
the credit card subsidy but would have saved their homes anyway—includes all debtors in the
upper part of the ND/B region.


            III.   CHARACTERISTICS OF CHAPTER 13 BANKRUPTCY FILERS


      We collected a new dataset of all Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings in Delaware in 2006—there
were 586 filings in total. The data are taken from both the forms that debtors submit at the time
of filing and from their repayment plans, which are filed later. We used filings in Delaware
because the Delaware bankruptcy court has been a leader in making bankruptcy filings publicly
available and because Delaware filers are fairly representative of bankruptcy filers nationally.32
      The importance of Chapter 13 as a save-your-home bankruptcy procedure is illustrated by
the facts that 96% of Chapter 13 filers in our sample are homeowners and 77% pass the means


32
   Debtors’ filing forms and repayment plans are available through the Bankruptcy Courts’
online PACER system. For bankruptcy forms, see
http://www.uscourts.gov/rules/Revised_Rules_and_Forms/BK_Form_B22C_101105.pdf. Zhu,
supra note 16, presents evidence that Delaware filers are representative of bankruptcy filers
nationally.
                                              16
test, which means that they filed under Chapter 13 voluntarily.33 (See table 1.) The average
home value is $197,000 for homeowners and the average level of mortgage debt for those who
list mortgages at filing is $154,000. Average home equity for all homeowners is nearly $40,000
and equity is positive for 71% of homeowners. Because average home equity is positive, most
debtors in the sample have an incentive to save their homes, although liquidity constraints may
limit their ability to do so.
      Turning to other debts, 57% of debtors list car loans at filing and the average car loan is
$18,400; 52% list priority debt (taxes owed) at filing and the average debt is $8,500; 89% of
debtors list unsecured loans and the average unsecured debt is $29,800; while 16% list student
loans and the student loan is $15,000.
      Now turn to debtors’ Chapter 13 repayment plans. We located repayment plans for 90% of
Chapter 13 filers. Among the remainder, some may have abandoned their efforts to save their
homes and shifted their bankruptcy filings to Chapter 7, while others may have repaid their
mortgage arrears without filing a repayment plan—perhaps after successfully renegotiating their
mortgages with lenders. Among plan filers, 79% propose to repay mortgages, 45% propose to
repay car loans, 9% propose to repay priority debt, 42% propose to repay unsecured loans, and
only 0.6% propose to repay student loans.34
      Around 9% of Chapter 13 filers propose to repay only unsecured debt in their repayment
plans and these plans raise the issue of why debtors filed under Chapter 13 in the first place.
Nearly two-thirds of debtors in this group passed the means test and could have filed under
Chapter 7, so that high incomes did not force them to file under Chapter 13. But 82% were
homeowners and their average home equity was $56,000. Of these debtors, more than one-third
had home equity that exceeded the Delaware homestead exemption of $50,000. Thus some


33
   We categorize debtors as homeowners if they give the value of their homes or the amount of
the mortgage on their filing forms or, because this data is sometimes missing, if they repay a
mortgage in their repayment plans. Because mobile home loans are listed as mortgages on
bankruptcy forms, owners of mobile homes are categorized as homeowners.
34
   Student loans cannot be discharged in Chapter 13 unless the judge decides that repaying them
would constitute an “undue hardship” (11 U.S.C. § 523 (a)(8)). Some filers in our sample
presumably obtained hardship discharges. Those who did not probably avoided putting their
student loans into their repayment plans, since they are not required to do so and paying student
loans as part of a plan subjects them to the trustee’s 10% fee. These factors explain why few
repayment plans include student loans.
                                                  17
debtors who repaid only unsecured debt in Chapter 13 probably did so because if they filed under
Chapter 7, they would have been obliged to sell their homes in bankruptcy.
      The average lawyer’s fee in our sample is around $2,800. In addition, debtors must pay a
bankruptcy court filing fee of $274 and they must take both credit counseling and debt
management courses at a minimum cost of $100. Bankruptcy trustees also impose a fee of 10%
of the amount paid under the repayment plan; the average trustee’s fee in the sample—assuming
that debtors complete their repayment plans—is $2,900. Our evidence thus suggests that filing
under Chapter 13 costs the average debtor over $3,000 and costs rise to $6,000 for debtors who
complete repayment plans.35
      Do higher-income debtors file under Chapter 13 because the means test prevents them from
filing under Chapter 7, rather than to save their homes? We found little difference in our sample
between higher-income debtors (those who have too much disposable income to file under
Chapter 7) versus lower-income debtors in the rate of homeowning. But we found that higher-
income debtors are more likely to repay mortgage debt and less likely to repay only unsecured
debt in their plans. These results suggest that higher-income debtors, like lower-income debtors,
file under Chapter 13 in order to save their homes.


                                    IV.      SIMULATION RESULTS
       Now turn to the simulation of the model in figure 1. We collected or constructed data for
the variables Y , X y , V , M , M ′, M 1′ , M 2′ , P ′, A′ and Cb . For the homestead exemption X h , we use

the Delaware value of $50,000. We assume that the cost of foreclosure C f equals 30% of

housing value. The number of years in the future that debtors take into account in making their
decisions, N, is assumed to be 28—equal to the length of a 30-year mortgage obtained two years
previously. To construct the present value of future mortgage payments, we assume the
mortgage interest rate to be .06 and debtors’ discount rate to be .03. To construct the cost of
alternate rental housing R ′ , we assume that debtors spend 25% of their incomes on rent36 and we
assume a one-time moving cost, payable immediately, of $2,000. We then convert rent

35
   If debtors do not complete their repayment plans, they do not receive a discharge and creditors
may resume their collection efforts.
36
   This is the median rent-to-income ratio in Delaware. See U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical
Abstract of the United States 2004-2005, 124th edition (2005), table 958.
                                                18
payments into present value assuming that the rate of increase in rent equals the discount rate. In
constructing A′ , we include priority debts and lawyers’ fees as well as automobile loans,
because these debts are repaid before other unsecured debts and they therefore increase the credit
card subsidy.37 We exclude observations that have no repayment plan, where the debtor is not a
homeowner, or where information about mortgage payments under the plan is missing. With
these exclusions, the sample size falls to 436. The data appendix gives details concerning how
we constructed the variables and table 2 shows summary statistics for debtors who file
repayment plans in Chapter 13.
      Then for each debtor, we calculate the boundaries of each of the regions in figure 1 and
determine in which region the debtor is predicted to locate. Column (1) of table 3 gives the
results in the base case. 92% of debtors are predicted to file for bankruptcy, which is close to the
100% that actually file. 57% of debtors are predicted to default, even though only 15% of
debtors have underwater mortgages. We attempted to check the accuracy of the model’s
predictions of default by examining whether, as of the fall of 2008, debtors were still listed in
online telephone directories at the same address as shown in their bankruptcy filings. Otherwise
we classified them as defaulting. This procedure is likely to overestimate default, since some
debtors have unlisted telephone numbers and others may have sold their homes and moved
without defaulting. Of those who are predicted to default, 58% actually defaulted; while of those
who are predicted to save their homes, 46% defaulted. The fact that debtors are more likely to
default if they are predicted to do so supports the model. But the fact that many debtors do the
opposite of what the model predicts suggests that debtors often do not act in their own financial
interest.38


37
   Priority debts are non-dischargeable in bankruptcy and Chapter 13 filers must pay them in full
as part of their repayment plans, unless debtors’ disposable income is exhausted by repaying
secured debt (11 U.S.C. § 1322(a)). The same treatment applies to lawyers’ fees that are not
paid in advance.
38
   Sarah Carroll and Wenli Li, The Homeownership Experience of Households in Bankruptcy,”
Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank, working paper 08-14, August 2008, find that among
homeowners who file for bankruptcy, 30 to 40 percent experience foreclosure. Their study does
not distinguish between homeowners according to whether they gain financially from saving
their homes versus defaulting.



                                                 19
      Now consider the results for groups I, II and III in the base case. About one-third of
debtors are in group I, i.e., they default because they are liquidity-constrained. Compared to all
debtors in the sample, they have above-average home equity levels and mortgage payments, but
below-average incomes. Their credit card subsidies if they saved their homes would be only
$2,900 on average, which does not loosen the liquidity constraint enough to allow them to save
their homes. Now turn to group II debtors, who save their homes due to the credit card subsidy
when they otherwise would have defaulted. Less than 1% of debtors are in this group. Their
average credit card subsidy in present value terms is $44,900, or around 7% of the present value
of future mortgage payments. These debtors are unusual because their unsecured debt and their
mortgage payments are both extremely high and this makes their credit card subsidies high.
They also have unusually high incomes--$71,400—compared to an average income level of
$42,600. Finally, group III debtors receive the credit card subsidy, but would have kept their
homes anyway. 37% of debtors fall in this group and their average credit card subsidy is $4,500,
or 1.2% of the present value of future mortgage payments. These debtors can afford to save their
homes because they have above-average incomes and below-average mortgage payments
compared to bankruptcy filers generally.
     Thus even though 96% of debtors in Chapter 13 are homeowners, the credit card subsidy
causes very few of them to save their homes when they otherwise would have defaulted. Those
who do save their homes receive unusually high credit card subsidies. The credit card subsidy
also goes to many debtors who would have saved their homes anyway. Because very few
debtors change their default decisions, 85% of subsidy dollars go to debtors who would have
saved their homes anyway. Overall, the credit card subsidy is not an effective program for
reducing foreclosures.
      In column (2) of table 3, we rerun the simulation assuming that all debtors’ homes have
fallen in value by 25%. This represents the current situation in which housing have fallen
sharply, but bankruptcy law remains unchanged.39 With lower housing values, the percent of
debtors in the sample whose mortgages are underwater increases from .15 to .56 and the average
level of home equity falls from $45,000 to -$3,200. But the proportion of debtors who are


39
  The 25% figure equals the decline in the S&P/Case-Schiller index of home values for 20 U.S.
metropolitan areas from July 2006 to November 2008. See http://www2.standardandpoors.com
/portal/site/sp/en/us/page.topic/indices_csmahp/0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0.html.
                                               20
predicted to file for bankruptcy increases only slightly, from .92 to .94, and the proportion who
are predicted to default increases only slightly, from .57 to .59. The fraction of debtors who are
liquidity-constrained (group I) falls sharply from .32 to .18. This is because, with lower housing
values, many debtors who previously defaulted because they were liquidity-constrained now
default because the cost of owning (which rises when housing values fall) now exceeds the cost
of renting. The fraction of debtors in group II, who save their homes because of the credit card
subsidy, falls even further and the proportion of debtors in group III, who receive the credit card
subsidy but would have saved their homes anyway, remains about the same. These results
suggest that the credit card subsidy is no more effective as a policy for dealing with the mortgage
crisis when housing values fall.
      Now turn to the results when we introduce cram-down of mortgages in bankruptcy, shown
in column (3) of table 3. Everything else is assumed to remain the same, so that debtors may
receive the credit card subsidy as well as cram-down. As discussed above, we assume that cram-
down reduces debtors’ mortgage payments by the ratio of house value (reduced by 25%) to the
mortgage principle, so that M 1′ and M 2′ are both multiplied by .75V / M , if this ratio is less
than one. The average value of .75V / M is .89, so that cram-down reduces the average debtor’s
future mortgage payments by 11%. The introduction of cram-down sharply reduces debtors’
probability of default, from .59 to .50, but it has no effect on their probability of filing for
bankruptcy.
      Now consider how cram-down affects the three groups of debtors. Group I falls from .18
to .14 of all debtors, because cram-down loosens liquidity constraints by reducing debtors’
mortgage payments. If those debtors who remain liquidity-constrained instead saved their
homes, they would receive mortgage subsidies averaging $3,000 and cram-down subsidies
averaging $2,900. But these subsidies are too small to allow them to avoid default.
     Group II now includes two separate sets of debtors who would otherwise have defaulted—
those in the lower part of the ND/B region and those who previously were liquidity-constrained,
but save their homes once cram-down is introduced. A combined total of 10.2% of all debtors
now save their homes when they would otherwise have defaulted. But the cost of cram-down is
high. Cram-down cuts the mortgage payments of group II debtors by $134,000 in present value
terms, for an average reduction of 27%. In addition, these debtors receive credit card subsidies
averaging $10,000, for a combined total subsidy of $144,000 in present value terms. Debtors in
                                                  21
group II have above-average incomes--$65,000 compared to an overall average of $42,600.
Thus debtors who save their homes as a result of cram-down are well-off compared to all debtors
in Chapter 13 and they receive very large subsidies. But only large subsidies would cause them
to save their homes, since their average home equity is -$74,000.40
     Finally, the proportion of debtors in group III rises from .38 to .42 when cram-down is
introduced. These debtors would have saved their homes anyway, but they receive an average
cram-down subsidy of $31,600 and an average credit card subsidy of $4,500. They have above-
average incomes and slightly negative home equity of -$3,400.
      These simulations suggest several results. First, the credit card subsidy by itself has little
effect on whether debtors save their homes: less than one percent of Chapter 13 filers save their
homes when they would otherwise have defaulted. Second, cram-down is much more effective
as a save-your-home policy—the proportion of Chapter 13 filers who save their homes rather
than defaulting rises from less than 1% to more than 10% when cram-down is introduced. But
cram-down is costly to mortgage lenders: on average, each debtor who saves his/her home rather
than defaulting receives a transfer of $134,000 in present value terms and, for each debtor who
saves his/her home, 4.1 additional debtors who would have saved their homes anyway receive
transfers of $31,600. Thus the total cost of cram-down per home saved is $264,000 in present
value terms.
     The final step in the analysis would normally be to project how many homes would be
saved if cram-down were introduced in Chapter 13 and the total cost to both mortgage and
unsecured lenders. But our dataset is not suitable for projecting the number of additional homes
saved, since it covers only debtors who filed for bankruptcy when cram-down was not in effect.
If cram-down were introduced, the large subsidies are likely to result in many additional
bankruptcy filings by debtors whose characteristics may be quite different from those in our
sample. However the Congressional Budget Office recently estimated that 350,000 additional
bankruptcy filings would occur over the next several years if cram-down of mortgages in




40
  Within group II, debtors with higher incomes receive larger subsidies. The average combined
cram-down plus credit card subsidy is $77,000 for those in the lowest quartile, $117,000 in the
two middle quartiles, and $252,000 in the highest quartile. A similar pattern applies to group III
debtors.
                                               22
bankruptcy were adopted.41 We can use this figure to estimate the cost of cram-down and the
credit card subsidy. Suppose we assume that all of the additional bankruptcy filings would be by
debtors in groups II and III, that the relative proportions of group II versus group III filers would
be the same as in our sample, and that filers in each group would receive the same average
subsidies as in our sample. Then the aggregate cost of introducing cram-down in present value
terms would be $18 billion to mortgage lenders plus $2 billion to unsecured lenders. In addition,
359,000 Chapter 13 bankruptcy filings occurred in 2008, and these debtors are also eligible to
receive the cram-down subsidy. Assume that they have the same likelihood of receiving cram-
down as debtors in our sample. Then the cost of providing the cram-down subsidy to debtors
who would have filed for bankruptcy anyway is an additional $10 billion per year. This suggests
that the total cost of introducing cram-down over the next several years would be around $28
billion to mortgage lenders, plus an additional $2 billion to unsecured lenders.42


                                          V. CONCLUSION


     The most important result of the paper is that Chapter 13 functions as a “save your home”
bankruptcy procedure. This is evidenced by the fact that 96% of Chapter 13 filers are
homeowners and 77% of debtors file under Chapter 13 voluntarily, rather than being forced to do
so. Although nearly all debtors who file under Chapter 13 do so in order to save their homes,
our model suggests that the credit card subsidy causes less than 1% of them to save their homes
when they would otherwise have defaulted. However if cram-down of mortgages in Chapter 13
were introduced, the proportion of Chapter 13 filers who save their homes rather than defaulting
41
   The version of cram-down in the proposed legislation is similar to the assumptions in our
model. The proposed legislation is H.R. 200: Helping Families Save Their Homes in
Bankruptcy Act of 2009. It allows bankruptcy judges to reduce underwater mortgages to the
current market value of the house. The bill requires that debtors first attempt to have their
mortgages modified through the new non-bankruptcy foreclosure-prevention programs. See
Congressional Budget Office, Cost Estimate: H.R. 200, February 23, 2009,
www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/100xx/doc10007/hr200.pdf.
42
   The figures for the cost of cram-down are 350,000((.42/.52)$31,600+(.10/.52)$134,000) for
additional filings and 359,000(.42*$31,600+.10*$134,000) for bankruptcy filings that would
have occurred anyway. The figure for the cost of providing the credit card subsidy to additional
filers is 350,000((.42/.52)$4,500+(.10/.52)$10,000). Debtors who would have filed anyway
already receive the credit card subsidy, so that there is no additional cost from adopting cram-
down.
                                                  23
would increase ten-fold. For these debtors, cram-down reduces future mortgage payments by an
average of $134,000, while for debtors who receive the subsidy but would have saved their
homes anyway, cram-down reduces future mortgage payments by $31,600 (both figures are in
present value terms). We estimate that the aggregate cost to mortgage and unsecured lenders of
introducing cram-down would be around $30 billion.
     Two caveats should be emphasized. First, although we argued that foreclosures are socially
costly and preventing them is efficient, this does not mean that preventing every foreclosure is
necessarily efficient. Some debtors may have bought homes that they cannot afford or may have
experienced permanent income losses that make their current homes unaffordable. These homes
would be more highly valued by alternative occupants and it would be economically efficient to
transfer them. The analysis in this paper does not address the normative questions of how many
homes should be saved and whether introducing cram-down would mainly save homes that
should or should not be saved.
   A second point is that the cost of cram-down and the number of additional bankruptcy filings
that would occur if cram-down were adopted both depend heavily on the new non-bankruptcy
foreclosure-prevention programs that are just starting to operate. The recently-announced
“Home Affordable Modification” program to avoid foreclosures requires that mortgage lenders
bear the full cost of reducing debtors’ mortgage payments to 38% of their incomes, plus half of
the additional cost of reducing debtors’ mortgage payments to 31% of their incomes. For many
debtors, this program is likely to be more attractive than filing under Chapter 13 and receiving
the cram-down subsidy. If so, then the number of additional bankruptcy filings will be small.
But if lenders refuse to modify mortgages outside of bankruptcy—as they have under previous
government programs—then the number of additional bankruptcy filings could be much higher.




                                                24
                                           Data Appendix:
                        Explanation of Variables Used in the Simulation

   V: house value. This is the debtor’s figure for the market value of the house, taken from
Schedule A, “Real Property.” When house value is missing, we assume it equals the value of
assets (from the Summary of Schedules, bottom figure) minus the amount of the debtor’s
automobile loan (from Schedule D).
  Y: debtor’s income per year. The income figure is taken from Schedule I, “Current Income
of Individual Debtor(s).” If this figure is missing, we use the income figure given on Form
B22C, line 15, which is based on debtors’ average monthly income during the six months prior
to filing.
  X y : income exemption per year. This is given on Form B22C, line 16 or line 57, depending

on whether debtors have below-median income or not. For debtors with below-median income,
the exemption equals the median income level in Delaware, adjusted for family size. For debtors
with above-median income, it equals the sum of the rent, transport, personal care, and other
allowances, as described in the text.
   M 1′ : mortgage and other payment during the repayment plan. We use two sources of data
to construct this variable: the debtor’s monthly payment under the Chapter 13 plan (taken from
the plan filing) and the debtor’s normal monthly mortgage payment (taken from Schedule J,
questions Q1, Q3, and Q13). Payments under the plan include the cost of repaying mortgage
arrears and interest on arrears, but normally do not include regular mortgage payments. The
debtor’s normal monthly mortgage payment includes first and second mortgage payments,
property taxes, insurance, and maintenance cost.
     We add the two monthly payments and convert them to present value using a discount rate
of 3% per year. This gives us a multiplier of 56 that converts monthly payments to present
value, assuming a 5-year plan. Since we have data on the length of the repayment plan, we
adjust the calculation if the plan is less than 5 years.
    M 2′ : normal mortgage payment from the end of the repayment plan to the end of the
mortgage. We start with data on the monthly normal mortgage payment (taken from Schedule
J, questions Q1, Q3, and Q13). Since we don’t know the remaining term of the mortgage, we

                                                   25
assume that it is 28 years from the date of filing. We convert the monthly normal mortgage
payment to present value using a 3% discount rate. Then we add the payments from years 6
through 28 to get the present value of mortgage payments from the end of the repayment plan
through the end of the mortgage. This gives us a multiplier of 165 that converts normal monthly
payments to present value, assuming a 5-year plan. If the repayment plan is less than five years,
then we adjust the multiplier.
   M ′ : total mortgage payments during and after the repayment plan. This equals M 1′ + M 2′ .
    A′ : automobile loans and priority debt: Debt figures are taken from the Summary of
Schedules. We add automobile loans and priority debt, since both are paid before unsecured
debt and both therefore increase the mortgage subsidy. These debts must be repaid in full
during the repayment plan. Debt is converted to present value without discounting, which means
that the interest rate is assumed to be the same as the discount rate.
   P ′ : unsecured debt. The principle amount of unsecured debt equals the sum of credit card
debt, bank debt, medical bills and student loans. Figures are taken from the Summary of
Schedules. We assume that whatever unsecured debt is repaid will be paid in full during the
repayment plan. Because the debt is unsecured, there is no interest during the plan. Future
payments are discounted at the rate of 3%, giving a multiplier of 0.92 that converts dollars of
debt to present value of future payments.
  X v : homestead exemption. $50,000 in Delaware.

  Cb : bankruptcy cost. This is the sum of debtors’ lawyers’ fees paid at the time of filing plus

the Chapter 13 filing fee of $274. We take the lawyer’s fee from the “Statement of
Compensation of Attorney for Debtor” or from the repayment plan, front page. Where this
figure is missing, we substitute the average value. Trustees’ fees and lawyers’ fees not paid at
filing are included in M 1′ ; see the discussion above.
   R ′ : alternate housing cost. We assume that the cost of renting alternate housing equals 25%
of debtors’ income. Rent is assumed to increase at a rate of 2% per year and is discounted to
present value at a rate of 3% per year. The resulting multiplier per dollar of annual rent is 18.9.
Renters are also assumed to incur a one-time moving cost in the first year of $2,000. Data on the
distribution of rent payments to income in Delaware is taken from U.S. Census Bureau (2004),
table 958.

                                                  26
  C f : cost of foreclosure. Based on Pence (2003), we assume that the cost of foreclosure

equals 30% of house value.
 M: original mortgage principle. Taken from Schedule D.




                                              27
                                        Theoretical Appendix


   This appendix gives derivations of the boundaries of the four default/bankruptcy regions
shown in figure 1. Debtors’ decisions to default on the mortgage and file for bankruptcy are
considered separately for five ranges of housing values, starting from the lowest.


Case (i): V < M 2′ − R ′ . Here, the value of the debtors’ homes in period 1 is so low that the
cost of alternate rental housing in present value terms, R ′ , is less than the cost of owning
M 2′ − V , even if debtors make no mortgage payments during the repayment period.
       First consider debtors’ bankruptcy decision when their incomes are below the state
median income level. Because all of their income is exempt in bankruptcy, they receive no
mortgage subsidy. They therefore prefer to default on the mortgage, regardless of whether they
file for bankruptcy. Now consider their bankruptcy decisions. If they file under Chapter 13, the
present discounted value of their net wealth is NY + Va − A′ − Cb − R ′ ; while if they do not file,

it is NY + Va − A′ − P ′ − R ′ . Va denotes the value of debtors’ cars. Because P ′ > Cb , they
prefer bankruptcy.
     Now consider debtors’ bankruptcy decision when their incomes are above the state median
income level. If they file for bankruptcy, they receive the mortgage subsidy, which reduces the
cost of owning from M ′ − V to as low as M 2′ − V . However even with this subsidy, they are
better off defaulting on the mortgage because the cost of renting is lower than the cost of owning,
i.e., R ′ < M 2′ − V . They therefore choose between default/bankruptcy and default/no
bankruptcy. The present discounted value of their net wealth if they choose the former is
( N − 5)Y + [5 X y + A′] + Va − A′ − C b − R ′ ; while if they choose the latter it is

NY + Va − A′ − P ′ − R ′ . Y1B denotes the income level where debtors in case (i) are indifferent

between filing versus not filing for bankruptcy or, 5Y1B − (5 X y + A′) − C b = P ′ Here, debtors’

gain from having their unsecured debt discharged in bankruptcy P ′ is just offset by the present



                                                   28
value of their disposable income plus bankruptcy costs, 5Y1B − (5 X y + A′) + Cb , or their costs of

filing. Debtors file if their income is below Y1B , but not otherwise.43
        Figure 1 shows debtors’ period 1 income Y on the horizontal axis and their period 1 housing
value V on the vertical axis. Case (i) is the lowest horizontal band. Debtors always default on
their mortgages, but they file for bankruptcy if income is below Y1B and do not file otherwise.


Case (ii): M 2′ − R ′ < V < M ′ − R ′ . Here, housing value is higher, but the cost of rental housing
R ′ is still less than the cost of owning, M ′ − V . In this range of values, the mortgage subsidy in
Chapter 13 causes some debtors to change from defaulting on their mortgages to saving their
homes.
        Debtors whose incomes are below the income exemption face the same choice as those in
case (i) and they still default and file for bankruptcy. However those whose incomes are above
the exemption receive the mortgage subsidy if they keep their homes in bankruptcy and, in this
case, their income during the repayment period becomes min[5Y ,5 X y + A′ + M 1′ ] . Consider

debtors’ choice whether to default. The discounted present value of their wealth if they choose
default/bankruptcy is ( ( N − 5)Y + min[5Y ,5 X y + A′] + Va − A′ − R ′ − Cb ; while if they choose

no default/bankruptcy it is ( N − 5)Y + min[5Y ,5 X y + A′ + M 1′ ] + Va − A′ + V − M ′ − Cb . When

income during the repayment period is 5 X y + A′ or less, they prefer to default, and when it is

5 X y + ( M 1′ + A′) or more, they prefer to keep their homes. The income level Y2B where case (2)

debtors are indifferent between defaulting and not defaulting satisfies the condition
5YiiB − [5 X y + A′] = M ′ − V − R ′ . Here the extra cost to debtors of keeping their houses rather

than defaulting (the right-hand side) just equals the amount of income they must use to repay
unsecured debt in bankruptcy (the left-hand side). Debtors default if their income is less than
YiiB and they keep their homes otherwise.

        Debtors may also be forced to default because they are liquidity-constrained, even when it is
financially advantageous for them to keep their homes. The first year’s cost of the repayment

43
     This applied if   5Y > 5 X y + A′ . But the result remains the same if 5 X y < 5Y < 5 X y + A′ .
                                                            29
plan is Cb + ( M 1′ + A′) / 5 and we make the assumption that debtors are willing to use half of

their income to repay the mortgage if it is financially worthwhile to do so. Debtors in case (ii)
thus default if either they are liquidity-constrained or if their incomes are below the condition
discussed above, so that 5YiiD = max[5 X y + A′ + M − V − R,5Cb + M 1′ + A′] .

    Now consider debtors’ bankruptcy decision when their incomes exceed the income
exemption, or 5Y > 5 X y + A′ + M 1′ . At a sufficiently high income level, debtors prefer not to

file for bankruptcy. But if they do not file, they receive no mortgage subsidy and this means that
they prefer to default rather than keep their homes. Therefore high-income debtors choose
between the alternatives of default/no-bankruptcy and no-default/bankruptcy. The discounted
present value of their wealth in the former situation is NY + Va − A′ − P ′ − R ′ ; while in the latter

it is ( N − 5)Y + [5 X y + M 1′ + A′] + Va − A′ + V − M ′ − C b . Debtors are indifferent between these

alternatives at the income level Y2B that satisfies the condition

5Y2B − [5 X y + M 1′ + A′] + ( M ′ − V ) − R ′ + Cb = P ′ . Here, their net gain from debt discharge in

bankruptcy (the right-hand side) is just offset by the cost of giving up their non-exempt income
during the repayment period plus the extra cost of keeping their homes rather than renting (the
left-hand side) plus the cost of filing. They choose no-default/bankruptcy if their incomes are
below Y < YiiB and they choose default/no-bankruptcy otherwise. Note that YiiB increases as V

rises, because debtors gain more from keeping their homes when home value is higher and this
induces them to file for bankruptcy at higher income levels.
     Assuming that YiiD < YiiB , debtors in case (ii) default and file for bankruptcy in the lowest
income range, default but avoid bankruptcy in the highest income range, and save their homes in
bankruptcy in the middle income range. However for some debtors, there is no middle income
range where their save their homes (i.e., YiiB ≥ YiiD ). This is because they have little unsecured
debt, so that the mortgage subsidy is too small to change their default decisions.
     The second-lowest horizontal bar in Figure 1 shows the results in case (ii) when the middle
sub-region exists.




                                                   30
Case (iii). M ′ − R ′ < V < M ′ + X h + C f . In case (iii), the cost of owned housing M ′ − V is less

than the cost of rental housing R ′ and debtors therefore prefer to keep their homes. Their
homes are not valuable enough to force them to repay any unsecured debt in bankruptcy.
          Consider debtors whose incomes are below the state median level first. While they prefer
to keep their homes, they may be liquidity-constrained. We assume that debtors are liquidity-
constrained if 5YiiiD < 5Cb + ( M 1′ + A′) . Debtors who default because they are liquidity-

constrained also file for bankruptcy, since P ′ > Cb .44

        Next consider debtors’ decisions if they are not liquidity-constrained but have incomes
below the income exemption. They still prefer to file for bankruptcy, so consider whether they
default. The present value of their wealth if they choose default/bankruptcy is
NY + Va − A′ − R ′ − Cb ; while the present value of their wealth if they choose no-

default/bankruptcy is NY + Va − A′ + V − M ′ − C b . They prefer not to default since

V > M ′ − R′ .
       Finally consider debtors’ bankruptcy decisions when their incomes exceed the income
exemption including the mortgage subsidy. Since they do not default, the present value of their
wealth if they choose no-default/bankruptcy is
( N − 5)Y + [5 X y + M 1′ + A′] + Va − A′ + V − M ′ − C b ; while the present value of their wealth if

they choose no-default/no-bankruptcy is NY + Va − A′ + V − M ′ − P ′ . They are indifferent

between the two choices at the income level 5YiiiB = 5 X y + M 1′ + A′ + P ′ − Cb .

        Figure 1 shows the results for case (iii) in the middle horizontal band. Debtors default
because they are liquidity-constrained and file for bankruptcy in the lowest income region and
they do neither in the highest income region. In-between, they receive the mortgage subsidy and
save their homes, but they would have kept their homes anyway. Compared to case (ii), fewer
debtors default but more file for bankruptcy.




44
     These debtors may file under Chapter 7 if they have already given up their homes. Or they might file under
Chapter 13, but give up their homes when they realize that they cannot afford a repayment plan.
                                                          31
Case (iv). M ′ + X h + C f < V ≤ M ′ + X h + C f + P ′ − C b . Here home equity V − M ′ exceeds

the cost of foreclosure plus the homestead exemption. Therefore in a foreclosure, the house
would sell for enough to pay V − M ′ − X h − C f > 0 to unsecured creditors. Case (iv) is unlikely

to occur in states with high homestead exemptions, but may occur in states with low homestead
exemptions. We abbreviate V − M ′ − X h − C f as NEHE, for “non-exempt home equity.”

     Consider debtors whose incomes are below the income exemption. Even though they have
no disposable income, the “best interests of creditors” test requires that they repay unsecured
creditors NEHE. And because they have no wealth other than their home equity, they must pay
this amount from income even though their incomes would otherwise be exempt. Debtors are
assumed to be liquidity-constrained if the first year’s cost of the repayment plan exceeds half of
their incomes. The maximum income level at which debtors default because they are liquidity
constrained is 5YivD = 5Cb + ( M 1′ + A′ + NEHE ) . Liquidity-constrained debtors also file for

bankruptcy.
       Now consider debtors who are not liquidity-constrained. They do not default, so consider
their bankruptcy decisions. Their wealth if they do not file is NY + Va − A′ + V − M ′ − P ′ .

Their wealth if they file is ( N − 5)Y + min[5Y ,5 X y + A′ + M 1′ ] + Va − A′ + V − M ′ − NEHE − Cb ,

depending on whether their incomes are below or above the income exemption. In the former
case, debtors prefer to file for bankruptcy as long as unsecured debt exceeds Cb + NEHE . In the

latter case, debtors are indifferent between filing and not filing at an income level
5YivB = 5YiiiB − NEHE . They file if their incomes are below Y4B and not otherwise.
     Figure 1 shows debtors’ choices in case (iv) as the second-highest horizontal band.
Debtors in case (iv) are more likely to be liquidity-constrained than those in case (iii), because
case (iv) debtors must repay some of their unsecured debt in addition to repaying their
mortgages. Debtors in case (iv) are less likely to file for bankruptcy as the value of their homes
rises, because they must repay more to unsecured creditors in bankruptcy.


Case (v). V > M ′ + X h + C f + P ′ − C b . In case (v), the value of the house is so high that selling

it would generate enough to repay unsecured creditors in full. This means that debtors in case
(v) never file for bankruptcy. They also never default on their mortgages. If they are liquidity-
                                               32
constrained, they prefer to sell their homes outside of bankruptcy and repay both the mortgage
and their unsecured debt in full. The top horizontal bar in figure 1 shows the results in case (v).




                                                 33
    Table 1: Summary Statistics for All Chapter 13 Filers and for Repayment Plans
                                                     Mean        Std. deviation


If homeowner                                          .96             .20
If debtor passes the means test                       .77             .42
Income                                              $39,900         $23,400
House value (if positive)                           $197,000       $122,000
If home equity positive (for homeowners)              .71             .46
Home equity (for all homeowners)                    $39,800         $70,000
If mortgage listed at filing                          .83             .38
Mortgage principle (if positive)                    $154,000       $109,000
If auto loan listed at filing                         .57             .50
Auto loan (if positive)                             $18,400         $17,300
If priority debt listed at filing                     .52             .50

Priority debt (if positive)                          $8,500         $18,600
If unsecured debt listed at filing                    .89             .32
Unsecured debt (if positive)                        $29,800         $37,500
If student loans listed at filing                     .16             .37
Student loans (if positive)                         $15,000         $23,800
Lawyers’ fee                                         $2,800          $940


If repayment plan                                     .90             .30
If mortgage debt in plan (plan filers only)           .79             .41
If auto debt in plan (plan filers only)               .45             .50
If priority debt in plan (plan filers only)           .09             .29
If unsecured debt in plan (plan filers only)          .42             .49
If student loans in plan (plan filers only)           .006           .077
If only unsecured debt in plan (plan filers only)     .09             .29
Trustee’s fee (plan filers only)                     $2,900         $2,500


                                               34
         Table 2: Summary Statistics for Chapter 13 Filers with Repayment Plans

                                                               Mean            S.D.
Income ( Y )                                                  $42,600        $21,900
Income exemption ( X y )                                      $56,500        $17,500

Homestead exemption ( X h )                                   $50,000           0

House value ( V )                                             $197,000       $119,000
Home equity                                                   $45,000        $73,300
Bankruptcy cost ( Cb )                                         $2,900          $800

Mortgage principle ( M )                                      $150,000       $105,000
Present value of future mortgage payments during and after    $525,000       $132,000
the repayment plan, including arrears ( M ′ )
Present value of future unsecured debt payments ( P ′ )       $26,500        $35,000
Present value of future payments on auto loans, including     $19,700        $32,200
payments on priority debt and student loans ( A′ )
Present value of the cost of alternate rental housing,        $203,000       $103,000
including moving costs ( R ′ )

Note: See Data Appendix for discussion of how the present value of future loan payments other
costs is calculated.




                                               35
                                   Table 3: Simulation Results
                                                 Base Case     25% Lower   Cramdown
                                                    (1)         Housing     and 25%
                                                                 Value       Lower
                                                                  (2)       Housing
                                                                             Value
                                                                              (3)
All Chapter 13 filers:
 if bankruptcy predicted                              .92        .94          .94
 if default predicted                                 .57        .59          .50
 if house value < mortgage                            .15        .56          .56




Group I: Filers who default because they are
liquidity-constrained:
   Proportion of Chapter 13 filers                    .32        .18          .14
  Income                                            $38,700    $37,600      $34,500
 Unsecured debt                                     $26,600    $31,400      $32,000
 Future mortgage payments in present value          $333,000   $294,000    $270,000
 Home equity                                        $54,100    $22,800      $43,400
 Credit card subsidy (if filers received it)         $2,900     $3,000      $3,000
 Cram-down subsidy (if filers received it)             --         --        $2,900




Group II: Filers who save their homes due to
the mortgage subsidy and/or cram-down:*
  Proportion of Chapter 13 filers                     .009       .005        .102
 Income                                             $71,400    $93,700      $65,000
 Unsecured debt                                     $93,500    $40,300      $35,000
 Future mortgage payments in present value          $732,000   $742,000    $356,000
 Home equity                                        $45,700    -$40,000    -$74,000
 Credit card subsidy                                $44,900    $40,300      $10,000


                                               36
 Cram-down subsidy                                     --            --           $134,000


Group III: Filers who receive the mortgage
subsidy/cramdown, but would have kept their
homes anyway:
  Proportion of all Chapter 13 filers                 .37           .38              .42
 Income                                             $48,100       $47,600         $48,300
 Unsecured debt                                     $30,300       $30,100         $30,200
 Future mortgage payments in present value          $257,000     $250,000         $232,000
 Home equity                                        $40,000        $1,500         -$3,400
 Credit card subsidy                                 $4,500        $4,800          $4,500
 Cram-down subsidy                                     --            --           $31,600

Notes: All figures except proportions are average values.
        *Group II includes only debtors in the lower part of the ND/B region if there is no cram-
down (columns (1) and (2)). If cram-down is in effect (column (3)), group II also includes
debtors who were liquidity-constrained before cram-down, but save their homes once cram-down
is introduced.




                                               37
                             Figure 1: Homeowners’ Predicted Bankruptcy and Default Decisions




                 V
                                                               ND/NB
M ′ + X h + C f + P ′ − Cb
                              D/B              ND/B
                              (group        (group III)
                              I)

                 M ′ − R′
                                            ND/B (group II)
                              D/B                                   D/NB


                                                                                           Y

                                       YD                 YB




             Notes: D indicates default on the mortgage, ND indicates no default, B indicates that debtors file
             for bankruptcy, and NB indicates no bankruptcy. Y denotes debtors’ income and V denotes home
             value. Other notation is described in the text.




                                                               38
