                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                OPTIMAL POLICY WITH HETEROGENEOUS PREFERENCES

                                             Louis Kaplow

                                         Working Paper 14170
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14170


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2008




I am grateful to Don Fullerton, the editor, the referees, and workshop participants at the NBER--especially
Iv?n Werning--for comments, and to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business at
Harvard University for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Louis Kaplow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Optimal Policy with Heterogeneous Preferences
Louis Kaplow
NBER Working Paper No. 14170
July 2008
JEL No. D61,D62,D63,H21,H23,H24,H43,K34

                                             ABSTRACT

Optimal policy rules--including those regarding income taxation, commodity taxation, public goods,
and externalities--are typically derived in models with homogeneous preferences. This article reconsiders
many central results for the case in which preferences for commodities, public goods, and externalities
are heterogeneous. When preference differences are observable, standard second-best results in basic
settings are unaffected, except those for the optimal income tax. Optimal levels of income taxation
may be higher, the same, or lower on types who derive more utility from various goods, depending
on the nature of preference differences and the concavity of the social welfare function. When preference
differences are unobservable, all policy rules may change. The determinants of even the direction
of optimal rule adjustments are many and subtle.


Louis Kaplow
Harvard University
Hauser 322
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
moverholt@law.harvard.edu
1. Introduction

        Most analytical work in public economics that derives rules for optimal policy assumes
that preferences are homogeneous. This characterization applies, for example, to most of the
literature on optimal income taxation, commodity taxation, public goods provision, and the
control of externalities. The reason for this simplification is tractability; indeed, the second-best
problems are complex even when preferences are stipulated to be homogeneous.

        It is natural to explore whether and how standard results are modified when preferences
are heterogeneous. There may be ordinary differences in tastes: Some individuals may prefer
chocolate, others vanilla; some may love nature and thus highly value improvements to national
parks or pollution regulations that restore wilderness habitats, whereas others may desire city life
and accordingly prefer enhancements to urban amenities. Differences may also arise on account
of physical and mental disabilities.

        These possibilities raise a number of questions. Do Atkinson and Stiglitz’s (1976) result
on uniform commodity taxation, the Samuelson rule for public goods, and the Pigouvian dictum
that corrective taxes and subsidies should equal the marginal harms and benefits (respectively)
from externalities survive the introduction of heterogeneity, and, if not, how do the results
change? Likewise, how are standard first-order conditions for optimal income taxation affected?
How do the answers to such questions depend on whether differences in preferences are
observable? Finally, how do they depend on the manner in which preferences differ? In other
words, in what respects is the problem of preference heterogeneity itself a heterogeneous
phenomenon?

         A related, more focused set of questions may be directed at a particular set of results in
public economics. Certain policy rules have been demonstrated to be optimal because following
them generates Pareto improvements, one consequence of which is that the optimal rules are
independent of the particular choice of social welfare function (SWF). This approach is featured
in generalizations of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) on commodity taxation as well as, in work on
public goods and on externalities. See, for example, Kaplow (1996, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c, 2008),
Konishi (1995), and Laroque (2005). Yet when preferences are heterogeneous, Pareto
improvements are highly unlikely. Virtually any policy reform, no matter how desirable, is
likely to generate some losers because certain individuals will have idiosyncratic preferences
that are better served by the inefficient status quo. For example, even substantial reductions of a
highly damaging pollutant at minimal cost may disfavor some whose bodies are insensitive to
the pollutant and who especially enjoy polluting activities that need to be curtailed. Ng (1984b)
has suggested that, as a consequence of heterogeneity, we might instead ask whether policies
offer a “quasi-Pareto” improvement, by which he means a gain, on average, to individuals at
every level of income (thereby addressing standard distributive concerns). Nevertheless, it is
appropriate to explore formally and systematically how, if at all, the derivations and results in
this literature need to be adjusted in light of preference heterogeneity.

      This article undertakes a preliminary exploration of these questions. Section 2 presents a
model with a nonlinear income tax and commodity taxes where individuals’ preferences for
commodities are heterogeneous. In section 3, the model is analyzed for the case in which


                                                -1-
preference differences are observable. This case is of interest because it is more tractable and
transparent, facilitates examination of the case with unobservable heterogeneity, and has some
elements of realism (for example, certain physical disabilities, with associated differences in
preferences, are observable). It is straightforward to show that the Atkinson-Stiglitz result
concerning the optimality of uniform commodity taxation and a variety of extensions are
preserved. Accordingly, the bulk of the analysis in this section focuses on optimal income
taxation results, which do differ. For individuals with preferences that yield higher utility for a
given level of disposable income, optimal levels of income taxation may be higher, the same, or
lower, depending on the nature of preference differences and on the concavity of utility functions
and of the SWF. An implication is that some results in prior literature attributed to preference
heterogeneity are in fact a product of the choice to model heterogeneity in one particular way;
other choices would have yielded different, even opposite, conclusions.

        Section 4 considers the case in which preference differences are unobservable. It is
demonstrated that uniform commodity taxation is no longer desirable. However, determinants of
the direction and magnitude of deviations are complex and subtle. The basic explanation for the
results is that differentials in commodity taxation are optimal because (and to the extent that)
they have effects similar to those of the adjustments to the income tax (characterized in section
3) that would have been optimal if preference differences were observable.

        Section 5 extends the results to policy rules for public goods and externalities, for which
many of the conclusions are analogous to those for commodity taxation: When preference
differences are observable, benchmark results on first-best policy rules (the Samuelson rule for
public goods and the Pigouvian prescription for complete internalization of externalities)
continue to hold. When preference differences are not observable, deviations depend on some
(but not all) of the same sorts of factors as with commodity taxation and serve the same purpose
of indirectly substituting for the redistributive adjustments to the income tax that would have
been optimal in the case of observability.

        Section 6 briefly considers pertinent issues in welfare economics, namely, concerning the
concavity of the SWF and interpersonal comparisons of utility. The motivation is that many of
the results concerning heterogeneity—including the signs of the optimal adjustments as well as
the magnitudes—depend on these aspects of welfare aggregation. Moreover, when preferences
and thus commodity demands are heterogeneous, the approach toward interpersonal comparisons
of simply treating everyone as if they had the same utility function is unavailable. Concluding
remarks are offered in section 7.

       Prior work on heterogeneity is of a number of types. Saez (2002) introduces
heterogeneity regarding previously established deviations from the Atkinson-Stiglitz uniform
commodity tax result: Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) had shown that relaxing labor separability
favors nonuniformity and Mirrlees (1976) had shown that relaxing the assumption that
preferences are independent of earning ability favors nonuniformity. Saez (2002) demonstrates
that when these relationships are not deterministic but rather reflect mere correlations, similar




                                                -2-
results obtain.1 By contrast, the present article abstracts from these two considerations and
examines instead effects of heterogeneity that pertain more directly to the marginal social value
of redistribution than to the labor-leisure distortion caused by income taxation.

         Some discussion of these other sorts of heterogeneity appears in prior
literature—especially on public goods, e.g., Hylland and Zeckhauser (1979), Ng (1984b),
Boadway and Keen (1993), and Kaplow (1996)—but does not suggest or demonstrate the results
derived here. Other papers have examined certain technical aspects of the nonlinear income tax
problem when additional dimensions are introduced. See Ebert (1988) and Tarkiainen and
Tuomala (1999), and also Armstrong and Rochet (1999) on multidimensional screening more
generally. Tarkiainen and Tuomala (1999) also present some simulations, but their example has
special features and the means of the parameters in their two-dimensional case differ (often
significantly) from the values in the one-dimensional case, so it is hard to interpret the simulation
results regarding differences in optimal redistribution in the presence of heterogeneity. Boadway
et al. (2002) focus on which self-selection constraints are binding in a model in which
preferences are of two types, and Cremer et al. (2001) discuss modifications to the Atkinson and
Stiglitz (1976) result when individuals differ in unobservable endowments.

         Finally, some additional papers introduce specific forms of heterogeneity in certain
variations of the income or commodity tax problem. Blackorby and Donaldson (1988) find that
in-kind provision of medical care—or, if not feasible, differential taxation of medical care and
other goods—may be optimal when there are unobservable differences in medical needs.
Sandmo (1993) explores some optimal income tax implications of heterogeneous tastes for work
in a model in which there are no differences in earning abilities and only one type of
consumption. Marchand, Pestieau, and Racionero (2003) consider differences in the source of
disutility to labor that are unobservable, are relevant to social welfare (a form of nonwelfarist
SWF), and are related differently to demands for particular commodities. Hellwig (2004)
addresses optimal pricing by a public monopolist with heterogenous consumers. And Fleurbaey
(2006) introduces preference heterogeneity along with a nonwelfarist SWF that features a
laissez-faire criterion that favors noninterference with consumption choices.

       As a whole, prior work does not address most of the questions examined here or how the
answers depend on observability or on the policy context (commodity taxation, public goods,
externalities, or pure income taxation). Of particular note, past inquiries (including by this
author) typically speak of heterogeneity as if it were a unitary phenomenon when making general
conjectures about how results may change with heterogeneity or when examining particular
models. By contrast, the present analysis allows preferences among commodities (or public
goods or external effects) to differ in various ways and finds that whether results change and,
when they do, in what direction depends on the nature of the heterogeneity that is introduced.




         1
         Saez (2002) notes the existence of other forms of preference heterogeneity but does not analyze the relationship
between different specifications of preferences and the resulting social welfare weights, which is the focus here.



                                                         -3-
2. Framework

2.1. Model

        There are n commodities, indexed by i; a particular commodity is denoted xi. Individuals
choose labor effort, l, and commodity vectors, x, to maximize utility u(x, l, 2), where 2 is a
vector of preference parameters. The consumer price vector is q, taken to be the sum of fixed
producer prices p and a commodity tax vector J (commodity taxes may be negative, i.e.,
subsidies). The nonlinear income tax T(wl) is a function of individuals’ income, wl, the product
of their unobservable wage rate (ability level) w and labor effort. The budget constraint is

(2.1) qx = wl − T ( wl ).



       The government chooses the commodity tax vector J (equivalently, the consumer price
vector q) and the nonlinear income tax T to maximize social welfare, given by

(2.2) SW = ∫ W (v ( w, θ , τ , T ))dF ( w, θ ),

where W is a weakly concave function, v is an individual’s indirect utility function—indicating
the maximized value of u for ability level w and preference parameters 2 when the tax regime
(J, T ) is taken as given—and F is the distribution function. There is a revenue
constraint—commodity tax plus income tax revenue must meet a fixed target R—that does not
need to be examined explicitly here.

       Much of the analysis will focus on the case in which the preference parameters 2 are
observable. Accordingly, the pertinent nonlinear income tax schedules are T(wl, 2); that is, for
each preference type 2, there is a separate income tax schedule. It will be assumed that
commodity taxes, J, cannot be type-specific because of the possibility of resale. This restriction
often will not matter (comments in a footnote will discuss implications when it does).

        Taking commodity taxes as given, the optimal nonlinear income tax is characterized by a
first-order condition derived, for example, in Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980), who make various
simplifications (notably, that utility is separable between consumption and labor effort) and offer
other caveats that will not be examined further here. Their condition can be expressed as:

                               ∞
                                   v c ( w, θ ) ⎛    W ′ (v (ω , θ ))v c (ω , θ ) ⎞
          T ′ ( wl , θ )
                               ∫ v (ω , θ ) ⎜⎝ 1 −
                                    c                            λ
                                                                                  ⎟ f (ω , θ )dω
                                                                                  ⎠
                           =
                               w
(2.3)                                                                                            .
        1 − T ′ ( wl , θ )                               ε wf ( w, θ )

Primes denote derivatives; vc is the marginal utility of consumption; T is the variable of
integration, indexing types with ability above w; f is the density function derived from F; 8 is


                                                         -4-
the marginal social value of a dollar (i.e., the shadow price on the government’s revenue
constraint); and g (implicitly a function of w and 2) is related to the labor supply elasticity. (In
stating expression (2.3), the fact that indirect utility, v, depends on J, which is taken as given,
and on T is suppressed.)

        The left side of expression (2.3) indicates the marginal income tax rate as a fraction of
the untaxed proportion of marginal earnings. On the right side, the denominator indicates the
marginal distortionary cost of a higher marginal income tax rate. It is the product of three
components: g (as noted, a term related to the labor supply elasticity); w, which measures the
productivity lost by each unit reduction in labor supply (and likewise indicates the marginal
revenue loss); and f (w, 2), which is the portion of the population that is distorted at the margin.

        The integral in the numerator is related to the benefit from higher marginal income tax
rates in terms of revenue raised on those earning more than wl, for whom a marginal income tax
rate increase at income wl is inframarginal. (This integral is from the marginal type, w, who
faces the marginal rate increase, to the upper limit of the distribution of ability types, taken here
to be unbounded.) The key term for present purposes is that in the large parentheses in the
integrand. The numerator of the latter component, WNvc , is the marginal contribution to social
welfare caused by a unit increase in utility of the pertinent type multiplied by that type’s
marginal utility of consumption—i.e., net-of-income-tax income or disposable income. This
term is divided by 8, which converts units of social welfare into dollars. Accordingly, as the
overall marginal contribution of individuals’ consumption to social welfare is greater (ceteris
paribus), the term in parentheses will be smaller, the value of the integral will be lower, and thus
the optimal marginal tax rate will be lower.

        A significant caveat to this analysis is that this first-order condition (2.3) characterizes
optimal marginal tax rates but does not tell us the intercept of the schedule, T(0), which typically
is negative (a uniform grant). Suppose, for example, that there is a higher welfare weight on all
individuals in some group, 2. This weight will tend to favor a lower intercept (a larger transfer),
which will tend to offset the aforementioned effect on optimal marginal tax rates. Accordingly,
the discussion that follows will usually refer, for example, to a factor favoring a lower level of
income taxation on a group, not disentangling the extent to which this result will optimally be
effectuated through a lower intercept and lower marginal tax rates.

        It is also important to keep in mind that, for the case in which 2 is observable, the first-
order condition is separately stated for each 2. These separate conditions are linked to the single
social optimization problem by the common shadow price 8. When comparing groups with
different values of 2, it will be true, ceteris paribus, that those with higher marginal social
valuations of consumption should be subject to lower levels of income taxation. This “ceteris
paribus” statement is, however, highly problematic because 2 will affect other components in
expression (2.3) as well. (Notably, a given ability type w with a different 2 may choose to
supply a different level of labor effort, l, and thus earn a different level of income, wl.)
Nevertheless, the standard practice of interpreting this sort of first-order condition term by term
provides some valuable insight into this highly complicated problem.




                                                 -5-
         The analysis will focus on utility functions that are at least weakly separable in labor.
Specifically, attention will be confined to forms of u(x, l, 2) that can be written as
u(u1(x, 2), l, 2). This restriction is meaningful because x is a vector. The weak separability
assumption means that, in allocating resources among the xi’s, it is immaterial how much labor
effort, l, was required to produce the individual’s level of disposable income. Likewise, the
allocation among the xi’s will not directly influence the choice of labor effort, l; all that will
matter is the level of subutility, u1(x, 2), that is obtained.

2.2. Types of Preference Heterogeneity

         As suggested in the introduction, individuals’ preferences can vary in a number of
qualitatively different ways. Before stating possibilities in terms of the functional form of the
utility function and analyzing them formally, it is useful to articulate intuitively the sorts of
heterogeneity that will be examined. Because heterogeneity may well be good-specific, the
discussion throughout will be in terms of specific commodities rather than utility as a whole.
Although some of the depictions may be somewhat elusive due to the informality, each type of
heterogeneity corresponds to specific preference parameters that will be introduced momentarily
and subsequently analyzed, at which point any residual ambiguity should be eliminated.

         First (corresponding to ", just below), individuals may vary in their sensitivity to a
good’s contribution to utility. For example, two individuals may enjoy ice cream and find that
its consumption is subject to diminishing returns in the same manner, but one may have a higher
overall sensitivity; perhaps ice cream, consumed at any given level, delivers twice as much
utility to this individual. The individual with greater sensitivity will be shown to have a higher
marginal utility of disposable income, ceteris paribus, as a result.

         Second ($), individuals may differ in their ability to convert raw commodities into utility.
The difference may be physical (one is able to make use of the product with less waste),
physiological, or psychological. For example, individuals with a greater body mass or rate of
metabolism may convert calories to resulting states of being at different rates. Some readers
may find this type of heterogeneity to be similar to the first, but, as will be seen, it is importantly
different, specifically in terms of how this difference interacts with diminishing returns in
consumption; see the discussion of parameter D below. As will be demonstrated, those who are
more efficient converters of commodities into utility may have a higher or a lower marginal
utility of income, ceteris paribus, depending on this curvature parameter.

         Third ((), individuals may in essence start their consumption at different points along a
utility curve. For example, one may need eyeglasses or corrective surgery to possess the same
vision or other attribute that others come by naturally. Individuals who are relatively blessed in
this regard will be shown to have a lower marginal utility of income, ceteris paribus, because
their situation is equivalent to being endowed with greater initial income.

        Fourth (*), some individuals’ utilities may have different base points. Perhaps due to a
different psychological constitution, some may achieve higher or lower well-being for any given
level of consumption. Individuals better off in this respect have higher utility level but the same
marginal utility of income as others do, ceteris paribus.


                                                 -6-
       These types of heterogeneity are distinguished here because, due to their different effects
on individuals’ marginal utility of income, they have qualitatively different effects on behavior
and on optimal policies. In order to understand these distinctions among types of heterogeneity
more concretely and to derive their consequences, it is useful to explore a simple, specific utility
function that embodies all four types in a transparent fashion. The functional form to be
considered will be a five-parameter (by n) function, 2 = (", $, (, *, D), where each of these
parameters may take on a different value for each commodity. This utility function is2

                                         n
                                            ⎛ (β i xi + γ i ) 1− ρi       ⎞
(2.4) u( x , l , α , β , γ , δ , ρ ) = ∑ ⎜ α i                      + δ i ⎟ − z(l ).
                                       i =1 ⎝       1− ρ i                ⎠

It is assumed that "i > 0, $i > 0, Di > 0 (each for all i), zN > 0, and zO > 0. (For the case in which
the concavity parameter, Di, equals 1, the fractional expression is replaced by ln ($i xi + (i); it will
be apparent below that using this alternative will yield the same first-order conditions, so none of
the analysis is affected.) It is helpful for most discussion to think of a base case in which, for
any commodity xi, "i = $i = 1 and (i = *i = 0. Relative to that case, a higher "i magnifies the
contribution of xi to utility without being subject to the curvature effect through Di; a higher $i
magnifies the contribution of xi to utility but is subject to the curvature effect through Di; (i adds
to utility in a manner that is subject to the curvature effect through Di, and *i adds to utility
without being subject to the curvature effect through Di. (The *i’s are interchangeable—only
their summation matters—but this notation is employed to maintain symmetry.) It is obvious
that raising any of these four parameters raises utility; however, as will be explored, they have a
qualitatively different effect on marginal utility and thus may have a different effect on optimal
income taxation.


3. Analysis with Observable Types

3.1. Optimal Commodity Taxation

        For the case in which individuals’ preference parameters are observable, the existence of
preference heterogeneity has no significant impact on results concerning optimal commodity
taxation in the presence of a nonlinear income tax. Specifically, weak separability of labor is
sufficient to generate the result that no differentiation is optimal, which implies that optimal
commodity taxes may be taken to be zero. This result does not require that the income tax be


         2
           Readers will note a resemblance between the functional form in expression (2.4) and a number of standard
utility functions. A CES (constant elasticity of substitution) utility function has $, (, and * equal to zero, the "’s are
typically weights that sum to one and do not vary across individuals, D varies neither across commodities nor individuals,
and the entire summation would be raised to the power 1/1!D, which is an immaterial difference for present purposes.
Cobb-Douglas utility is equivalent to the special case described in the text following expression (2.4) in which D = 1.
Finally, the parameter ( is suggestive of a Stone-Geary utility function, where it is typical to take each (i to be negative
and to replace the summation with a product, so that the (i represent subsistence levels of each commodity (in that, if
such level is not exceeded, total utility is zero regardless of how high is consumption of other commodities).



                                                           -7-
optimal, and it can be extended to show the optimality of various partial commodity tax reforms,
such as moving differentiated commodity taxes proportionally toward uniformity.

        Upon reflection, this conclusion should not be surprising. The reason that results in the
homogeneous case carry over in the presence of heterogeneity when preference differences are
observable is that, as will now be elaborated, one can decompose the latter problem into a
number of cases of the former. Furthermore, because the proof technique employed in certain
papers in the relevant literature does not depend on the optimality of the income tax (which is
affected by heterogeneity) or on any global properties of the system, the fact that these features
may change in the presence of preference heterogeneity will not affect these results regarding
optimal commodity taxation.

       To see that this is indeed the case, begin by observing that the proof of all of the results
on commodity taxation—including that no differentiation is optimal and that partial reforms
moving proportionately toward neutrality are desirable—in Kaplow (2006a) (and in some other
work, e.g., Laroque (2005)) requires only weak separability of labor and that the subutility
function of commodities, u1 in the above formulation, be common. Regarding the latter, when
preference parameters are observable, the problem can be analyzed as if preferences are identical
because the nonlinear income tax can be preference-type-specific.

        Rather than reconstructing the pertinent proofs, it should be sufficient to review their two
key steps. The first step—the one that depends on homogeneous preferences—involves
constructing an adjustment to the preexisting (arbitrary, i.e., not necessarily optimal) nonlinear
income tax so that, when combined with the commodity tax reform (say, a move toward
uniformity), everyone’s utility is held constant. Specifically, this intermediate tax schedule,
T°(wl ), is defined such that V(J, T, wl ) = V(J*, T°, wl ) for all wl—where V is an indirect
subutility function indicating the maximized value of what is here denoted u1. For this
construction to be feasible—i.e., for the same tax schedule to preserve subutility for all
individuals—it is necessary that the underlying subutility functions be identical (but
homogeneity in other respects is not required).3 Here, u1 depends on 2. However, when 2 is
observable, a separate income tax schedule is applied for each 2; hence, a separate income tax
adjustment may be employed as well. Thus, for each 2, one can define T°(wl, 2) as the
adjustment to T(wl, 2) such that V(J, T, wl, 2) = V(J*, T°, wl, 2) for all wl.

        At this point, the remainder of the proofs in Kaplow (2006a) and in other pertinent papers
goes through. In particular, it was shown there that this tax adjustment, which holds utility
constant for each level of labor supply, will in fact induce individuals to choose the same level of
labor supply. (The reasoning is, in essence, that the tax adjustment, when combined with the
contemplated commodity tax adjustment, produces the same mapping from l to total utility as
was produced initially, so whatever l maximized utility initially will continue to do so.) To
complete the proofs, it was demonstrated that commodity tax reforms that were efficient in the


         3
          For further discussion, consider Boadway and Keen’s (1993) examination of preference heterogeneity in the
public goods context (in an analysis that employs first-order conditions for social welfare maximization rather than
constructing Pareto improvements).



                                                         -8-
narrow, conventional sense—including moves toward uniformity—produce a revenue surplus.
(The intuition is that, since the income tax adjustment holds utility constant, yet there is an
efficiency gain, it must be that the income tax adjustment is absorbing the dollar equivalent to
that underlying efficiency gain.) This surplus, in turn, could be rebated pro rata, generating a
Pareto improvement.4

3.2. Optimal Income Taxation

         With observable differences in preferences, it is optimal to employ different nonlinear
income tax schedules. For the present analysis, commodity taxes can be put to the side;
specifically, they will be taken to be zero. The focus will be on how the marginal social
contribution of disposable income to social welfare, WNvc, depends on 2 when preferences have
the form given by expression (2.4).5 As already noted, it is obvious that utility levels rise with ",
$, (, and *. To confirm this, note that the partial derivative of u is clearly positive for each of
these parameters, and the total derivative will be the same (the envelope theorem). If the SWF is
utilitarian, which means that WN is constant, this feature is of no consequence. If instead the
SWF is strictly concave, i.e., WO < 0, then a group with a higher value of any of the parameters
should, ceteris paribus, face higher levels of income taxation because the marginal contribution
of their utility to social welfare is lower on account of their already being better off.

        Next, consider how raising any of these four parameters affects the marginal utility of
consumption, vc, which will be relevant to the marginal social welfare gain from additional
disposable income regardless of the concavity of W (short of maximin, wherein the welfare
weight on everyone but the least-well-off individual is zero). The key concept here is that
parameters associated with a higher marginal utility of consumption will call for lower levels of
taxation. (As mentioned in subsection 2.1, such lower taxation might be reflected in a more
generous grant at zero income or lower marginal tax rates.)

       Effects on marginal utility from the different types of heterogeneity are, as suggested in
subsection 2.2, quite varied. To analyze them, begin with individuals’ first-order conditions.
When expression (2.4) is maximized subject to the budget constraint, we have, for each xi,


         4
             Note that the requirement that commodity taxes be anonymous (i.e., not type-specific) is not restrictive because
all types should face the same (zero) tax vector. If one relaxed the labor separability assumption, however, the optimal
commodity tax problem would be complicated by the fact that the optimal differentiation, which reflects the degree to
which various commodities are complements to or substitutes for labor, could depend on individuals’ specific
preferences. (Suppose, for example, that xi was a complement and xj was a substitute for type 21 but the opposite was
true for type 22.) Ideally, each type would be subject to distinctive commodity taxes and subsidies, but if this is
infeasible the optimum would (put crudely) reflect a weighted average of what would be optimal for different types
considered separately. When the optimum for each type is the same, which is true with separability, this complication
does not arise.
           5
             Analyzing policies’ effects on different individuals by focusing on the marginal contribution to social welfare
of a dollar distributed to different types of individuals is associated with Diamond (1975). Note further that the path of
analysis articulated in the text is incomplete because of other aspects of the social first-order condition for optimal
marginal income tax rates (2.3) that may differ, other standard caveats in interpreting first-order conditions to make
conjectures about the optimum, and difficulties of comparing optimal income tax schedules across groups because
individuals of a given earning ability w may choose to exert different labor effort l and thus earn different income wl if
their preferences differ.



                                                            -9-
  . ) α i β i (β i xi + γ i ) − ρi = μ qi ,
(31

where : is the marginal utility of disposable income (the shadow price on the budget constraint;
also equal to vc, employing the notation of the indirect utility function from expressions (2.2) and
(2.3)). It is useful to restate these conditions as

                             1/ ρ i
           ⎛ α iβ i ⎞
           ⎜        ⎟                     − γi
           ⎝ μ qi ⎠
(3.2) xi =                                       .
                    βi

Expression (3.2) indicates how each of the xi’s is a function of the preference parameters for the
corresponding good, the good’s consumer price (which is taken here to be constant), and the
marginal utility of consumption, :. The first-order condition for labor effort is

(3.3) z ′ (l ) = w(1 − T ′ ( wl ))μ .

       The task is to determine how : changes with each of the preference parameters. Let a
generic preference parameter (aside from D) for good k be denoted Nk. Differentiating the budget
constraint (2.1) with respect to Nk yields

         ∂x            n
                             ⎛            ∂ xi dμ ⎞                dl dμ
(3.4) q k k +
         ∂φ k
                     ∑ ⎜⎝ q
                      i =1
                                      i            ⎟ = w(1 − T ′ )
                                          ∂ μ dφ k ⎠               dμ dφ k
                                                                           .


Rearranging terms allows us to state

                                                 ∂ xk
                                          qk
        dμ                                       ∂φ k
(35
  .)         =                                                             .
        dφ k                 dl                       n
                                                            ⎛ ∂x ⎞
                 w(1 − T ′ )
                             dμ
                                −                    ∑i =1 ⎜⎝ qi ∂ μi ⎟⎠
         To determine the sign of expression (3.5), begin with the denominator. Differentiating
the first-order condition for labor effort, l, expression (3.3), with respect to :, and rearranging
terms, produces

        dl   w(1 − T ′ )
(3.6)      =                 > 0.
        dμ z ′′ + μ w 2 T ′′



                                                                       - 10 -
The inequality in expression (3.6) follows because the denominator must be positive according
to the second-order condition for the choice of l (the denominator is the negative of the second
derivative of the individual’s Lagrangian with respect to l). Differentiating expression (3.2) with
respect to : yields

                                       1− ρ i
        ∂ xi         α i ⎛ α iβ i ⎞     ρi
(3.7)        = −            ⎜      ⎟            < 0.
        ∂μ       ρ i qi μ 2 ⎝ μ qi ⎠

Expressions (3.6) and (3.7) together imply that the denominator of expression (3.5) is positive.
Accordingly, the sign of d:/dNk is the same as the sign of Mxk /MNk.

        This result is in accord with intuition. Suppose, for example, that Mxk /MNk > 0. In this
case, the direct effect of raising Nk is to induce the individual to purchase more of xk, which
through the budget constraint requires some combination of reductions in expenditures on the
other xi’s (i … k) and an increase in l, both of which imply a higher :, which is apparent from
expressions (3.2) and (3.3). (The same logic holds, mutatis mutandis, if Mxk /MNk < 0.)

        To sign the d:/dNk’s, therefore, all that remains is to sign the Mxk /MNk’s, which is
straightforward from expression (3.2).

        ∂ xi   β i xi + γ i
(38
  . )        =              > 0.
        ∂α i    ρ i α iβ i

        ∂ xi   xi 1 − ρ i     γi
(3.9)        =            +          .
        ∂β i β i ρ i        ρ iβ i 2

         ∂ xi     1
(310
  . )         = −    < 0.
         ∂γ i     βi

         ∂ xi
(311
  . )         = 0.
         ∂δ i

         Expression (3.8) implies that M:/M"i > 0. Because vc = :, it follows that the overall effect
on the social marginal value of consumption, WNvc, of raising "i is ambiguous: utility rises, so WN
falls if W is strictly concave; however, marginal utility rises, so vc rises. Those with a higher "i
get more out of consuming xi, which has these two competing effects.

        Although one might have expected the effect of $i to be qualitatively similar, this is not
the case. Expression (3.9) indicates that the sign of M:/M$i is ambiguous. For convenience,
interpretation will be confined to the benchmark case in which (i = 0. (When this is not so, the



                                                       - 11 -
critical value of Di for which the sign of the expression reverses would be adjusted accordingly.)
If Di < 1, then M:/M$i > 0, and the results are indeed like those in the prior case. However, if
Di > 1, then M:/M$i < 0, and the marginal utility effect combines with the effect on WN to reduce
the social marginal valuation of consumption. The difference arises because the $i coefficient in
expression (2.4) directly multiplies xi and thus is subject to the concavity of the subutility
function, and when that concavity is sufficiently high (Di > 1), the diminishing returns effect
dominates the efficiency effect in determining how marginal utility changes. (When Di = 1,
marginal utility is unchanged.)

         Combining these two results, it can be seen that there are two senses in which an
individual might be seen to get “more” out of a good xi than do others. In the former case, the
contribution to utility of good xi is multiplied by the factor "i. In the latter case, there is a sense
in which the effective quantity of good xi is multiplied by the factor $i. As mentioned in
subsection 2.2, one might interpret the former as an individual enjoying a good more and the
latter as an individual being able to use a good more effectively. These notions are similar, but
as just indicated they are not the same.

         Expression (3.10) indicates that M:/M(i < 0. A higher (i is thus associated with higher
utility and lower marginal utility, which unambiguously reduces the marginal social welfare
weight WNvc. As suggested previously, a higher (i may be interpreted as it being as if the
individual is naturally endowed with some of the good before purchasing any on the market. Or,
put another way, a low (i—say, a negative value, relative to a benchmark value of 0—would be
a type of disability, wherein the individual needs to purchase some amount of xi to reach the
same starting point as others. Clearly, an individual with such a low (i will have both lower total
utility and higher marginal utility, which unambiguously implies a higher social welfare weight.

        Finally, as expression (3.11) indicates (and is obvious), M:/M*i = 0. A higher *i implies a
higher utility level but no difference in marginal utility, and thus decreases the social welfare
weight WNvc if and only if the SWF is strictly concave. Indeed, as is apparent from expression
(2.4) and as noted previously, the parameter *i, despite its subscript, is not commodity-specific.
All of the *i’s might be aggregated into a single parameter * for present purposes.

         To summarize, the analysis in this subsection reveals that preference differences that all
imply higher utility levels can nevertheless have qualitatively different implications for
individuals’ marginal utility of consumption. Moreover, marginal utility is directly relevant to
the marginal social welfare weight and thus to determining how preference differences should
affect optimal nonlinear income taxation. Indeed, with a utilitarian SWF, it is only the effect on
marginal utility that matters. With strictly concave welfare functions, the utility level matters as
well, and, depending on the type of difference in preference, its strength, and the concavity of
utility and of the SWF, individuals who have preferences that generate greater utility for a given
level of disposable income may receive higher or lower marginal social welfare weights on their




                                                 - 12 -
disposable income and thus optimally be subject to lower or higher levels of income taxation.6


4. Optimal Commodity Taxation with Unobservable Types

        The analysis in section 3 takes preferences to be observable, whereas here preference
differences will be assumed to be entirely unobservable.7 As a consequence, it will no longer be
possible to redistribute across preference types through the income tax. When 2 is not observed,
the income tax schedule T in expression (2.3) must be the same for all types. The terms on the
right side in this first-order condition will accordingly represent weighted averages of sorts.
Notably, WNvc will be the product of the social welfare weight and marginal utility of
consumption, averaged for all types at each pertinent level of earnings, wl.8

        This limitation on across-preference-type redistribution through type-specific T schedules
means that (even with weak labor separability) there is a potential role for differential
commodity taxation to improve social welfare. Specifically, if individuals who have above-
average demands for some commodity xi would ideally (i.e., if types were observable) be subject
to higher (lower) income taxation, then to some extent it will be optimal to tax (subsidize) that
commodity relative to others. Favorable redistribution would result, and starting from the point
of uniform commodity taxation there would be no first-order loss from consumption distortion.
The optimal level of commodity taxes and subsidies would reflect a redistribution-distortion
tradeoff, where here the redistribution is “horizontal” (across preference types) and the distortion
is of commodity demands (rather than of the labor-leisure choice).

        To explore which commodities should be taxed or subsidized, it is necessary first to
ascertain the relationship between commodity demands and the preference parameters. Once
again, it is helpful to refer to Nk, a generic preference parameter for good k. Differentiating the
commodity demands (3.2) with respect to Nk yields



         6
            There is some ambiguity in interpreting any conclusion about how heterogeneity influences the level of optimal
marginal income tax rates because there are different possible benchmarks for comparison. Ceteris paribus, a higher
welfare weight on marginal dollars does favor lower income taxation, as discussed in the text. But, as note 5 mentions,
heterogeneity has other effects, including on labor effort. Taking, for example, a case in which the marginal utility of
consumption is higher, the analysis in the text indicates that labor effort will also be higher. Hence, for a given observed
income level wl, the higher l implies a lower w. Moreover, w is in the denominator of the first-order condition (2.3) for
optimal marginal income tax rates, so the lower w favors higher marginal income tax rates, the opposite implication of the
higher marginal utility. Accordingly, if labor supply is highly elastic, the effects on optimal tax rates attributable to
marginal utility differences could be offset or even reversed.
          7
            Realistically, preferences are partially observable, in that age, physical disabilities, family status, or other
factors signal preference differences. To an extent, one can interpret the present analysis as applicable to residual
heterogeneity within an identifiable class of individuals, although there may be limits on the ability to employ different
commodity taxes for different classes. Also note that, in addition to limitations due to feasibility and administrative cost,
one can also imagine political constraints, for example, on the use of certain factors such as race that might correlate with
preferences.
          8
            In addition, in the denominator one would have an integral over types of the product gwf. Regarding w, note
that different 2’s may induce individuals of a given w to supply different l’s, so all those at a given income level wl need
not be of the same earning ability w.



                                                           - 13 -
        dx k   ∂ x k ∂ x k dμ
(4.1)        =      +          .
        dφ k ∂ φ k    ∂ μ dφ k

(In stating the derivative in expression (4.1), note that the first partial derivative term on the right
side holds the marginal utility of income constant, which effect is taken into account in the
second term.) Using expression (3.5) for d:/dNk, expression (4.1) can be restated as

                  ⎛                   ∂ xk            ⎞
                  ⎜                qk                 ⎟
      dx k   ∂ xk ⎜                   ∂μ              ⎟
(4.2)      =      ⎜ 1+                                  .
      dφ k ∂ φ k                   dl      n
                                             ⎛ ∂ xi ⎞ ⎟
                  ⎜    w(1 − T ′ )    − ∑ ⎜q        ⎟⎟
                  ⎝                dμ i =1 ⎝ i ∂ μ ⎠ ⎠

The denominator of the fractional term in large parentheses on the right side of expression (4.2)
is the same as the denominator on the right side of expression (3.5) for d:/dNk, and this was
previously shown to be positive. Specifically, the first term of the denominator is positive and
each term in the summation is negative. From the latter, it follows that the numerator in the
fractional term is negative. Moreover, this numerator is equal to the kth term in the summation in
the denominator. Taken together, these features imply that the value of the term in large
parentheses is in the interval (0, 1). Therefore, expression (4.2) indicates that the total derivative
dxk /dNk has the same sign as the partial derivative Mxk /MNk but is smaller in magnitude. This
result is in accord with intuition: The total effect on demand is given by starting with the effect
when :, the marginal utility of consumption, is taken to be constant and then dampening it by the
resulting adjustment in :. (For example, if the partial derivative indicates that demand would
rise, this rise in demand is financed partly by reducing demands for other goods and partly by
increasing labor supply, both of which imply a higher :, and the higher : reduces the magnitude
of the increase in demand, but not below zero.)

         Because each of the partial derivatives Mxk /MNk is signed in subsection 3.2, in expressions
(3.8) through (3.11), we can now consider how preference heterogeneity bears on optimal
differentiation of commodity taxes. Suppose initially that the only heterogeneity involves
parameter "i for some good xi. From expressions (3.8) and (4.2), it follows that individuals who
have a higher "i will have a higher demand for xi, ceteris paribus. Furthermore, the analysis in
subsection 3.2 indicates that the direction of the ideal redistributive adjustment (i.e., the
adjustment to T if 2 were observable) depends on the SWF since a higher "i implies a higher
marginal utility vc but also a higher utility level and thus a lower WN if the SWF is strictly
concave.9 For concreteness, suppose that the SWF is utilitarian, in which case WN is constant, so
it is optimal to redistribute toward high-"i individuals. Since they have higher demands for xi,



         9
            Here and throughout this section, one should keep in mind the qualification in note 6 regarding the direction
and magnitude of optimal adjustments to income taxation when those adjustments derive from differences in marginal
utilities of consumption.



                                                          - 14 -
some degree of subsidy would be optimal.10 Note that the use of the term subsidy here refers to a
relative subsidy (and likewise for later uses of the term tax); instead of subsidizing good xi, one
could instead (equivalently) tax all other goods and adjust T accordingly.

        As one generalizes to cases involving preference heterogeneity relating to many
commodities, the problem becomes more complex. For example, suppose that there was
heterogeneity involving all of the "i’s. The preceding analysis suggests that one would like to
relatively subsidize all goods, which is impossible—i.e., the effects of the different subsidies
would be offsetting. Taking a more concrete example, suppose that some types have uniformly
higher "i’s than do others. Under the utilitarian SWF, it would be ideal to redistribute income to
them; however, this cannot be done through commodity taxation because, in this case, relative
demands would be unaffected.

        Combining the preceding points, it appears that it would be optimal to subsidize goods
relatively preferred by types whose overall or average levels of the "i’s are higher. To illustrate,
assume that individuals with generally higher "i’s have an "j that is relatively low for them. The
prescription would be to relatively subsidize all goods except good xj—i.e., to relatively tax good
xj, even if these individuals’ "j’s are above the population average (although lower than the
average of their own, other "i’s).

        Alternatively, suppose that each of the "i’s is independently distributed. In that case, it
would seem advantageous under a utilitarian SWF to relatively subsidize the goods with the
greatest variance in the distribution of the "i’s, whereas a tax may be optimal if the SWF is
sufficiently concave. This point is most easily seen in the limiting case in which the variance for
one of the "i’s is large and that for all of the others approaches zero, which presents the original
case in which there is heterogeneity with respect to only one of the "i’s.11

        Similar analysis applies to the other parameters. For example, higher (i’s imply both
lower marginal utility (see expression 3.10) and higher utility, so we would ideally like to
redistribute away from individuals with atypically high (i’s. Furthermore, high-(i individuals
will have lower demands for corresponding goods xi, so it would be ideal to subsidize goods for
which some individuals have unusually high (i’s. (With the "i’s, commodity subsidies favored
individuals with high values of the parameter; with the (i’s, subsidies favor individuals with low
values.) But, as with the "i’s, one cannot relatively subsidize all goods, so one must consider
relative differences in parameter values.

       For the parameter *, higher values indicate no difference in marginal utility (see
expression 3.11) but higher utility and thus a lower WN if the SWF is strictly concave. However,
because the value of * has no influence on commodity demands, commodity taxes cannot be


         10
             Observe that any effects of such a subsidy across income levels (for example, with a normal good, higher-
ability individuals who will earn higher incomes will spend more on the good and thus benefit more from the subsidy,
even if they have the same "i as others) can be offset through the T schedule.
          11
             The magnitude of the corresponding Di’s would also matter, for Di affects the magnitude of the utility level and
marginal utility effects and also the magnitude of demand effects, including the demand elasticity, which is related to the
distortionary cost being traded off against the redistributive benefit.



                                                           - 15 -
employed directly to accomplish any desired redistribution.

         For the parameter $, the situation is more complicated. From expression (3.9), the sign
of the marginal utility effect—and, accordingly, from expression (4.2), the sign of the demand
effect—depends on the magnitude of the pertinent Di (abstracting from the further adjustment
required when the corresponding (i does not equal zero). For example, if heterogeneity concerns
a particular $i, and we consider the case in which Di < 1, then high-$i individuals have higher
marginal utilities, ceteris paribus, and under a utilitarian SWF it would be optimal to redistribute
toward them. In this case, such individuals also have higher demands, so a subsidy would be
optimal. If instead Di > 1, then high-$i individuals have lower marginal utilities, so it would be
optimal to redistribute away from them. In this alternative case, however, such individuals have
lower demands, so again a subsidy (which would favor low-$i, high-demand individuals) would
be optimal. In both instances, note that the ability to use commodity taxation to redistribute is
limited the closer that Di is to 1; when Di = 1, there is no demand effect, so across-preference-type
redistribution through commodity taxes is infeasible (and also would not be optimal with a
utilitarian SWF, although it would be if the SWF was strictly concave).12

         The optimal use of differential commodity taxation actually depends on the combination
of all of the parameters. As a group, they determine whether it would be optimal to redistribute
toward or away from an individual of a given overall preference type 2. Furthermore, as a group
they determine the direction of any differences in demand. Even for a specified SWF, such as a
utilitarian one, the ideal direction of redistribution sometimes is in the same direction and
sometimes is in the opposite direction of the corresponding demand effect. Accordingly, broad
generalizations about preference heterogeneity and the signs of optimal deviations from uniform
commodity taxation cannot be offered.

        It may be possible, however, to identify some particular effects. It seems plausible that
some individuals toward whom it would be optimal to redistribute do systematically demand
more of certain commodities. This might include those with physical limitations (the goods
might be types of medical care or disability accommodations such as wheelchairs) or mental
infirmities (the goods might be certain drugs or psychiatric care). To some degree, the analysis
of section 3 may be applicable because some of these differences in preferences correspond to
observable differences, in which case heterogeneity-motivated redistribution should (in the
benchmark case with separable labor) be accomplished entirely through the income tax. But
some physical and mental infirmities may be more difficult to observe, so differential commodity
taxation may play a useful role. In this regard, it should be noted that optimal differential
taxation may be appropriate for more than the obvious goods, such as those already noted. For
example, individuals with more hidden physical disabilities might engage less in physically
strenuous activities (skiing) and more in gentler activities; those with certain psychological
difficulties likewise may have atypically high demand for some commodities and low demand
for others. What matters, it should be recalled, is various individuals’ relative demands. Thus,
some impaired individuals might have an unusually low "i for some commodity but that


         12
            The existence of little or no demand effect due to differences in $i’s does not, however, imply that there is no
distortion in commodity demands from differential taxation.



                                                           - 16 -
parameter value may still be relatively high for them, and this parameter value may in turn imply
higher demand, which would favor a subsidy.

5. Public Goods and Externalities

5.1. Public Goods

       To introduce public goods, one can modify the initial utility function to be u(x, g, l, 2),
where g is a vector of m !n public goods. Likewise, the specific utility function (2.4) can be
amended as follows:

                                        n
                                            ⎛ (β i xi + γ i ) 1− ρi     ⎞
  . ) u( x , l , α , β , γ , δ , ρ ) = ∑ ⎜ α i
(51                                                                 + δi⎟
                                       i =1 ⎝       1− ρ i              ⎠
                                        m
                                              ⎛ (β i gi + γ i ) 1− ρi       ⎞
                                   + ∑ ⎜αi                            + δ i ⎟ − z(l ).
                                     i = n + 1⎝       1− ρ i                ⎠

(As before, for the case in which Di = 1, the fractional expressions are replaced by ln ($i xi + (i)
and ln ($igi + (i) respectively.)

        Consider first the case in which 2 is observable. With weak labor separability, which
expression (5.1) exhibits, the proofs in Kaplow (1996, 2006c) on the optimality of the Samuelson
rule for public goods provision—without adjustments for distribution or labor supply
distortion—go through. (The reasoning is analogous to that in subsection 3.1, as the proofs in
Kaplow (1996, 2006c) in relevant respects are analogous to that in Kaplow (2006a) for uniform
commodity taxation.) Thus, in summing (integrating) individuals’ marginal benefits (measured
in dollars) from more of a public good, each individual’s possibly idiosyncratic valuation would
be employed; this sum, whatever it may be, would be compared with the marginal cost of
increased provision, just as in the case with homogeneous preferences.13

        Accordingly, the effect of preference heterogeneity regarding public goods on optimal
policy is entirely through the income tax schedules T(wl, 2), which are customized for each
preference type. These effects, however, are qualitatively different from those deriving from
heterogeneous preferences for commodities. The reason is that, although differences in the Nk’s,
for k > n (i.e., for the public goods) affect utility levels analogously (utility is increasing in each
of ", $, (, and *), differences in these Nk’s do not affect individuals’ marginal utilities of
consumption. Accordingly, for a utilitarian SWF, there would be no adjustment to the optimal
income tax schedule, and for a strictly concave SWF, higher values of these parameters imply
higher utility and thus a lower WN, so optimal levels of income taxation would be higher.



         13
            This sum, to be sure, may be influenced by heterogeneity itself. As it turns out, greater heterogeneity (with a
constant mean) can raise or lower the sum of marginal benefits, depending on the preference parameter that varies (and
the level of the corresponding Di).



                                                           - 17 -
        This irrelevance result concerning marginal utilities is due to the separability between
public and private goods embodied in the utility function (5.1). More generally, there could be
marginal utility effects in either direction. For example, better roads may make automobiles
more valuable, and one could imagine this arising in a manner that increased individuals’
marginal utilities of consumption more for individuals who had a stronger preference for driving.
Suppose further that this greater preference operated through the corresponding "i (perhaps "jgj
for roads multiplies this "i). Then high-"j individuals would have a higher “effective” "i, which,
ceteris paribus, implies a higher marginal utility of consumption, so under a utilitarian SWF their
optimal level of income taxation would be lower on this account.

         Now consider the case in which 2 is unobservable. The analysis of the optimal income
tax would be analogous to that described in section 4 on unobservable heterogeneity in
preferences for commodities. It might appear that there is no implication corresponding to the
nonuniform commodity tax results since all individuals necessarily receive the same amount of
each public good—i.e., differences in consumption patterns do not exist and thus may seem to
render differential treatment infeasible. But this supposition is incorrect. By providing more or
less of the public good than the amount indicated by the Samuelson rule, different preference
types can be favored and disfavored: Raising (lowering) the level of the public good
disproportionately benefits those with a higher (lower) marginal utility for that good (assuming
distribution-neutral finance of the sort described in subsection 3.1).

         The remaining question is which goods should thus be over- or under-provided relative to
the level that satisfies the Samuelson rule. Once again, with preferences separable between
public and private goods and a utilitarian SWF, there is no basis for deviation since
heterogeneity in preferences for public goods does not influence individuals’ marginal utilities of
consumption. If the SWF is strictly concave or if there are cross-effects, then the previous
comments for the case of observable preferences would become relevant.14 For example, with a
strictly concave W, if individuals with overall detrimental preference parameters (i.e., those
whose preference parameters generate less utility from public and private goods at a given
income level) tend to derive atypically high marginal utility from public good j, then more of
that public good should be provided. To be concrete, suppose that individuals who are unusually
vulnerable to being mugged also tend to be worse off in other respects (which cannot readily be
observed). In this case, greater police protection would have a favorable distributive effect. By
contrast, if national parks are most enjoyed by more robust individuals, who otherwise tend to be
better off on average, then lower provision would be distributively beneficial.

5.2. Externalities

         To examine externalities instead of public goods (considering the two together would be
straightforward), one can modify the initial utility function to be u(x, e, l, 2), where e is a vector
of m !n externalities. For concreteness, one might take m = 2n and suppose that each externality
is measured by the total consumption of the corresponding commodity. Analogous to expression
(5.1), the specific utility function (2.4) becomes:


       14
            When there are public goods, optimal commodity taxation may also be influenced in related ways.



                                                         - 18 -
                                        n
                                            ⎛ (β i xi + γ i ) 1− ρi     ⎞
(5.2) u( x , l , α , β , γ , δ , ρ ) = ∑ ⎜ α i                      + δi⎟
                                       i =1 ⎝       1− ρ i              ⎠
                                        m
                                               ⎛ (β i ei + γ i ) 1− ρi       ⎞
                                    + ∑ ⎜αi                            + δ i ⎟ − z (l ).
                                      i = n + 1⎝       1− ρ i                ⎠

(The modification for the case in which Di = 1 is analogous as well.) For a negative externality
ei, the corresponding "i would be negative. Observe that, in this formulation, externalities have a
public good character: Each individual is exposed to the same levels of the ei’s, although
different preference types will be affected differently by any particular ei. Thus, the sum
(integral) of marginal external benefits or harms for purposes of applying the Pigouvian rule of
setting commodity taxes and subsidies equal to marginal harm and benefit, respectively, is
directly analogous to the sum of marginal benefits in the public goods case.

        At this point it should be unsurprising that the analysis closely parallels that for public
goods. When 2 is observable and there is weak labor separability, as in expression (5.2), the
proof in Kaplow (2006b) indicating that there should be no adjustment on account of distribution
or labor supply distortion to the Pigouvian rule goes through. (So do extensions for partial
reforms that are analogous to those considered for commodity taxation.) Once again,
heterogeneous preferences would only be relevant in setting the income tax schedules T(wl, 2),
and the pertinent adjustments would follow the same sort of reasoning applicable for public
goods. For example, in expression (5.2) in which private goods and externalities have separable
effects, externalities—and thus differences in preference parameters regarding
externalities—affect utility levels but not the marginal utility of consumption, so heterogeneous
preferences regarding externalities would only be relevant to optimal income taxation to the
extent that the SWF is strictly concave. Relaxing this separability assumption would allow for
interactions.

        When 2 is not observable, it may be optimal to depart from the pure Pigouvian rule.
Although individuals all experience the same levels of the externalities, by regulating
externalities more or less than indicated by the Pigouvian rule one can favor or disfavor different
types of individuals.15 For example, if some pollutant imposes greater marginal harm on more
infirm individuals who also tend to be worse off in other (unobservable) respects, greater control
of that pollutant would tend to be optimal under a strictly concave SWF. Likewise, just as it may
have been optimal to reduce expenditures on national parks that disproportionately benefit more
robust individuals who are otherwise better off on average, so it may be optimal to reduce
(relative to the Pigouvian optimum) the control of pollution that primarily interferes with the
enjoyment of wilderness areas.




         15
           Since the regulation of externalities is taken here to be implemented through commodity tax adjustments,
differences in preferences for commodities are also relevant to across-preference-type redistribution, but that is already
captured by the analysis in section 4.



                                                           - 19 -
6. Welfare Economic Considerations

        Analysis of optimal taxation, public goods provision, and control of externalities, like
most policy analysis conducted by economists, is grounded in the welfare economic
tradition—and, if the SWF is taken to be linear, utilitarianism in particular—all of which is
controversial.16 Certain issues are brought to the fore when heterogeneous preferences are
introduced.

         Problems of interpersonal comparisons of utility are often circumvented by treating all
individuals as if they are identical. But when heterogeneity involves aspects of utility that give
rise to different demands, this approach is no longer available, even if it could otherwise be
defended. Furthermore, the formal meaning of ignoring differences is ambiguous and
incomplete because the outcome will depend on what preferences are deemed normal; moreover,
when taste differences are associated with, say, disabilities, many would find the case for
recognizing rather than ignoring differences to be particularly compelling. It may well be that
many taste differences can neither be observed nor well estimated, in which case it would be
difficult for policies to reflect them, but when differences are observed or the nature of
underlying heterogeneity can be determined to some extent, optimality does in principle require
taking such differences into account.17

         If preference differences are granted, the necessary interpersonal comparisons raise
issues of cardinalization, which has been noted, for example, by Boadway et al. (2002) and
Sandmo (1993). For example, if individuals are observed to have a certain disability, say
blindness, it is necessary to determine how much this affects their utility level (if the SWF is
strictly concave) and their marginal utility of consumption.18 If there is to be a social
response—and if it is to be based on how the disability actually affects individuals (rather than
on some criteria that is independent of well-being)—such questions must somehow be answered,
at least approximately.

        Finally, unlike most analyses (other than of the optimal income tax itself), there is a need
to specify the SWF in terms of the degree of concavity. Indeed, for setting commodity taxes (in
the case in which preference differences are unobservable), even the sign of the optimal
deviations from uniformity depend on the curvature of the SWF. Although notable economists,
like Harsanyi (1953, 1955), and others, such as Rawls (1971) have famously staked out positions
on this question, debate has hardly subsided.


         16
              For differing perspectives, see Hare (1981), Sen and Williams (1982), and Kaplow and Shavell (2002).
         17
              An alternative approach is arguably implicit in Rawls (1971) and Sen (1985), who would determine
allocations, respectively, based on conceptions of primary goods or of functionings and capabilities, rather than based on
individuals’ utilities, even if they could reliably be determined. But as Kaplow (2007) shows, these approaches conflict
with the Pareto principle (as do deviations from welfarism more generally, on which see Kaplow and Shavell 2001).
           18
              A utilitarian SWF requires what is referred to as cardinal unit comparability (von Neumann -Morgenstern
utility functions are cardinal, due to rationality axioms; unit comparability requires the ability to relate the cardinal units
of one person’s utility to those of another), whereas a strictly concave utility function also requires level comparability,
which together amounts to cardinal full comparability. Sen (1977). (A maximin SWF only requires level comparability
since only the utility of the least-well-off individual matters; however, Ng (1984a) has shown that, with the axioms of
individual rationality, this implies unit and thus full comparability in any event.)



                                                            - 20 -
        Some have reacted to prior drafts and presentations of this paper by suggesting that
explicit analysis of optimal policy with heterogeneity bolsters the case against utilitarianism and
perhaps welfare economics more broadly. I disagree. Having presented my views on these and
related questions at length in Kaplow and Shavell (2001) and Kaplow (2008, chapters 13-15), I
will offer no further elaboration here. What does seem apparent, however, is that analysis of
heterogeneity—whether in the setting of physical and mental disabilities or otherwise—does
prompt reflection on these fundamental normative questions.

7. Conclusion

        Heterogeneous preferences undoubtedly exist and in some instances may be important.
Accordingly, it is useful to revisit optimal policy rules that have been derived in models in which
preferences are taken to be homogeneous. The results depend greatly on whether preference
differences are observable and on the nature of those differences.

        With observability, a number of first-best policy prescriptions in benchmark cases
(notably, with weak labor separability) continue to hold. This conclusion is true of the Atkinson-
Stiglitz (1976) rule favoring uniform commodity taxation as well as generalizations that do not
require the income tax to be optimal and that encompass partial reforms, such as proportional
moves toward uniformity. Likewise, results regarding the Pareto optimality of moving public
goods provision in the direction indicated by the Samuelson rule and Pigouvian taxes and
subsidies toward full internalization of externalities—without regard to concerns for distribution
and labor supply distortion—also extend to the present setting.

        The characterization of optimal nonlinear income taxation, however, changes in
important ways. Preference parameters indicating higher utility levels favor, ceteris paribus,
higher levels of income taxation to the extent that the SWF is strictly concave. But different
sorts of preference parameters have different effects on individuals’ marginal utilities of
consumption and thus parameters producing higher utility levels may favor higher or lower
income taxation.

        When differences in preferences are unobservable, a single income tax schedule must be
applied to everyone, and optimal marginal income tax rates are determined similarly to the
manner applicable with homogeneous preferences. (Roughly, weighted averages substitute for
specific values, but the basic formula is the same.) In this case, it is the more specific policy
rules that may differ qualitatively from what arises with homogeneous preferences. Differential
commodity taxation, public goods provision that deviates from the levels implied by the
Samuelson rule, and corrective taxes that over- or under-internalize externalities will be optimal
to some degree in cases in which such deviations can indirectly accomplish some of the across-
preference-type redistribution that would have been implemented through differentiated income
tax schedules if preference differences were observable. Examples were offered that involve
some possible manifestations of physical and mental disabilities.

        Overall, departures from results in models with homogeneous preferences depend on a
variety of factors. Different ways in which preferences might vary have qualitatively different
effects, even in opposite directions. Furthermore, preference differences interact with each other


                                               - 21 -
and with the various policy instruments in complex and subtle ways. The problem of
heterogeneous preferences is indeed heterogeneous.

        Accordingly, conjectures and results in existing literature on heterogeneity need to be
interpreted as special cases in ways that have not previously been recognized; indeed, somewhat
different specifications of preference differences can reverse results. Nevertheless, some
plausible conjectures can be offered when it is possible to ascertain the character of preference
differences, even if they cannot be observed for each individual. These findings may have direct
policy relevance, and they indicate the value of empirical research on preference heterogeneity.




                                              - 22 -
References

Armstrong, Mark, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 1999. “Multi-dimensional Screening: A User’s
   Guide.” European Economic Review 43: 959-979.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1976. “The Design of Tax Structure: Direct
   versus Indirect Taxation.” Journal of Public Economics 6: 55-75.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1980. Lectures on Public Economics. New York:
   McGraw-Hill.
Blackorby, Charles, and David Donaldson. 1988. “Cash versus Kind, Self-Selection, and
   Efficient Transfers.” American Economic Review 78: 691-700.
Boadway, Robin, and Michael Keen. 1993. “Public Goods, Self-Selection and Optimal Income
   Taxation.” International Economic Review 34: 463-478
Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand, Pierre Pestieau, and Maria del Mar Racionero. 2002.
   “Optimal Redistribution with Heterogeneous Preferences for Leisure.” Journal of Public
   Economic Theory 4: 475-498.
Cremer, Helmuth, Pierre Pestieau, and Jean-Charles Rochet. 2001. “Direct versus Indirect
   Taxation: The Design of the Tax Structure Revisited.” International Economic Review 42:
   781-800.
Diamond, Peter. 1975. “A Many-Person Ramsey Tax Rule.” Journal of Public Economics 4:
   335–342.
Ebert, Udo. 1988. “Optimal Income Taxation: On the Case of Two-Dimensional Populations.”
   University of Bonn, Graduate School of Economics Discussion Paper No. A-169.
Fleurbaey, Marc. 2006. “Is Commodity Taxation Unfair?” Journal of Public Economics 90:
   1765-1787.
Hare, Richard M. 1981. Moral Thinking: Its Levels, Method, and Point. New York: Oxford
   University Press.
Harsanyi, John C. 1953. “Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-
   Taking.” Journal of Political Economy 61: 434-435.
Harsanyi, John C. 1955. “Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal
   Comparisons of Utility.” Journal of Political Economy 63: 309-321.
Hellwig, Martin F. 2004. “Optimal Income Taxation, Public-Goods Provision and Public-
   Sector Pricing: A Contribution to the Foundations of Public Economics.” Max Planck
   Institute for Research on Collective Goods Working Paper 2004/14.
Hylland, Aanund, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1979. “Distributional Objectives Should Affect
   Taxes But Not Program Choice or Design.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 81: 264-
   284.
Kaplow, Louis. 1996. “The Optimal Supply of Public Goods and the Distortionary Cost of
   Taxation.” National Tax Journal 49: 513-533.
Kaplow, Louis. 2006a. “On the Undesirability of Commodity Taxation Even When Income
   Taxation Is Not Optimal.” Journal of Public Economics 90: 1235-1250.
Kaplow, Louis. 2006b. “Optimal Control of Externalities in the Presence of Income Taxation.”
   NBER Working Paper 12339.
Kaplow, Louis. 2006c. “Public Goods and the Distribution of Income.” European Economic
   Review 50: 1627-1660.
Kaplow, Louis. 2007. “Primary Goods, Capabilities, . . . or Well-Being?” Philosophical
   Review 116: 603-632.


                                           - 23 -
Kaplow, Louis. 2008. The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics. Princeton: Princeton
  University Press.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell. 2001. “Any Non-welfarist Method of Policy Assessment
  Violates the Pareto Principle.” Journal of Political Economy 109: 281-286.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell. 2002. Fairness versus Welfare. Cambridge, Mass.:
  Harvard University Press.
Konishi, Hideo. 1995. “A Pareto-Improving Commodity Tax Reform under a Smooth
  Nonlinear Income Tax.” Journal of Public Economics 56: 413-446.
Laroque, Guy. 2005. “Indirect Taxation Is Superfluous under Separability and Taste
  Homogeneity: A Simple Proof.” Economics Letters 87: 141-144.
Marchand, Maurice, Pierre Pestieau, and Maria Racionero. 2003. “Optimal Redistribution
  When Different Workers Are Indistinguishable.” Canadian Journal of Economics 36: 911-
  922.
Mirrlees, James A. 1976. “Optimal Tax Theory: A Synthesis.” Journal of Public Economics 6:
  327-358.
Ng, Yew-Kwang. 1984a. “Interpersonal Level Comparability Implies Comparability of Utility
  Differences.” Theory and Decision 17: 141-147.
Ng, Yew-Kwang. 1984b. “Quasi-Pareto Social Improvements.” American Economic Review
  74: 1033-1050.
Rawls, John. 1971. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2002. “The Desirability of Commodity Taxation under Non-linear Income
  Taxation and Heterogeneous Tastes.” Journal of Public Economics 83: 217-230.
Sandmo, Agnar. 1993. “Optimal Redistribution When Tastes Differ.” Finanz Archiv 50: 149-
  163.
Sen, Amartya. 1977. “On Weights and Measures: Informational Constraints in Social Welfare
  Analysis.” Econometrica 45: 1539-1572.
Sen, Amartya. 1985. Commodities and Capabilities. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Sen, Amartya, and Bernard Williams, eds. 1982. Utilitarianism and Beyond. Cambridge:
  Cambridge University Press.
Tarkiainen, Ritva, and Matti Tuomala. 1999. “Optimal Nonlinear Income Taxation with a Two-
  Dimensional Population: A Computational Approach.” Computational Economics 13: 1-16.




                                          - 24 -
