NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FACTOR UTILIZATION IN INDIAN MANUFACTURING:
A LOOK AT THE WORLD BANK INVESTMENT CLIMATE SURVEYS DATA
Ana M. Fernandes
Ariel Pakes
Working Paper 14178
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14178

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

This paper builds on a chapter by the same authors entitled "Evidence of Underemployment of Labor
and Capital in Indian Manufacturing" included in the World Bank South Asia Region report Accelerating
Growth and Job Creation in South Asia. The findings expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Ana M. Fernandes and Ariel Pakes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Factor Utilization in Indian Manufacturing: A Look at the World Bank Investment Climate
Surveys Data
Ana M. Fernandes and Ariel Pakes
NBER Working Paper No. 14178
July 2008
JEL No. L11,L5,O4,O53
ABSTRACT
We use the World Bank Investment Climate Surveys data to analyze the employment of both labor
and capital in Indian manufacturing. We focus on disparities among states in manufacturing employment
patterns, and provide reduced form evidence of their relationship to both (i) institutional constraints,
and (ii) productivity.

Ana M. Fernandes
Development Research Group
The World Bank
1818 H Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433
afernandes@worldbank.org
Ariel Pakes
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Room 117
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ariel@ariel.fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction.

There has been some concern with the lack of growth, particularly of employment growth,
in Indian manufacturing, and its relationship to various institutional constraints. Partly
this is a result of the fact that the Indian manufacturing sector is much smaller than that
sector in other economies of similar size. Table 1 illustrates this fact. It indicates that
the manufacturing share of value added in India is smaller than that share in other large
developing economies, though it is similar to that share in smaller countries with GDP per
capita similar to that of India (Pakistan and Vietnam). However as Table 2 shows, the
growth rate of value added in manufacturing in India is noticeably lower than that in these
smaller similar income countries. Indeed the sectoral growth rate comparisons in Table 2 are
rather striking. The growth rate of value added in services in India is comparable to that in
China, and about 10 percentage points higher than that in any other country in our list. In
rather stark contrast the growth rate of value added in manufacturing in India is only about
a half that in China and Vietnam, and quite a bit lower than that in Pakistan.
Why is the relative performance of the Indian manufacturing sector, relative both to the
service sector and to the manufacturing sectors in other comparable countries, so poor and
what are its implications for employment and income distribution in India? This paper uses
the World Bank Investment Climate Surveys to examine a component of this question. In
particular we analyze the labor and capital employment rates of Indian manufacturing firms
and their relationship to productivity and various institutional constraints.
Several researchers have argued that the restrictiveness of labor market regulations in
India is one of the most important constraints on the performance of its manufacturing
sector. Our analysis focuses exclusively on the formal (organized) manufacturing sector in
India for which data is available and to which labor market regulations are applicable.1
1

Indeed recent data from the ILO and OECD (2007) suggest that overall employment growth in India

between 2000 and 3005 was a quite rapid 2.8% per annum (compared to only 1% in China). However the
OECD (2007) also reports that close to 90% of the population employed in India work in the informal sector
(versus only 50% in China), and there is some indication that the recent strong job creation in India has

2

Labor market regulations are described in detail in Ahsan and Pages (2005) and in World
Bank (2006). Here we only point out the most controversial of those regulations: the 1982
amendment to the Industrial Disputes Act (IDA) of 1947 which made the firing of workers
illegal for firms employing more than 100 workers except with previous permission from the
appropriate state government.
The evidence indicates that the permission to fire workers is rarely granted (see Ahsan
and Pages, 2005). Early work by Fallon and Lucas (1991) found that the introduction of
employment laws restricting the firing of workers in India led to a substantial decline in
the demand for labor by manufacturing industries. Hence, the objective of the regulations
- to protect jobs - resulted in fewer jobs being created. More recently, Besley and Burgess
(2004) find that Indian states which amended labor market regulations to make them more
restrictive (i.e., to give greater protection to workers) experience lower output, lower employment, lower investment, and lower productivity in the manufacturing sector. Ahsan and
Pages (2005) also find important employment losses in Indian manufacturing as a result of
restrictive regulations on the firing of workers, particularly in labor-intensive industries such
as textiles.
In this paper we ask whether factor employment in manufacturing firms in India is “abnormally” low or “abnormally” high conditional on: (i) firm productivity, (ii) the amount
of other factors employed by firms, and (iii) the factor costs faced by firms. With respect
to labor our measure of “abnormal” is constructed as the ratio of (1) the labor employment
that would be optimal for the firm if there were no hiring and firing costs (or constraints),
and (2) the firm’s actual employment of labor. That is, if our measure, which we will call
“underutilization of labor”, for a firm equals x then a firm without hiring and firing costs
that had the same productivity, capital and factor costs as the given firm would increase its
demand for labor relative to the given firm by a factor of x. To get a diﬀerent perspective
been mostly ”bad” jobs i.e., those in the informal sector. For example the OECD (2007) report estimates
that growth in formal employment in urban China is much higher than growth in formal employment in
urban India in the same period (3.1% versus 1.7%).

3

on the implications of the empirical magnitudes obtained we also compute the percentage
diﬀerence between the actual cost of labor and the cost of labor that would make a firm
without hiring and firing costs just satisfied with its current labor employment.
We then look at diﬀerences in our underutilization of labor measure across Indian states,
and at the relationship between our underutilization of labor measures and measures of productivity, underutilization of capital (described below), and data on institutional constraints
to doing business collected by the World Bank Investment Climate Surveys. We find very
large diﬀerences in the extent of underutilization of labor across Indian states. Although
it is probably impossible to eliminate all the employment constraints faced by Indian manufacturing firms, we might think it is possible that the states with “poorly functioning”
labor markets, that is states with large underutilization of labor, could, with institutional
improvements, approach the figures for underutilization of labor in those states with better
functioning markets. We delve deeper into the meaning of the expression “poorly functioning” in the last part of the paper where we summarize the relationship between our
underutilization figures and other characteristics of the firm and the states it operates in.
We want to be clear at the outset that our underutilization figures should not be taken
as literal predictions of what would happen to the manufacturing demand for labor were
policy-makers to eliminate all hiring and firing costs in a given state. This because were
policy-makers to eliminate these costs and constraints for all firms in a state and the firms
began to respond by employing more labor, the cost of labor would likely rise, and the output
price would likely fall below what our current estimates predict (the current estimates do
not account for the impact of an increase of a firm’s competitors quantities on the firm’s own
sales). These two processes would decrease the firm’s marginal revenue product for labor and
hence their incentive to hire more workers. For precise predictions of what would happen
to employment patterns in a state where labor market institutions would be improved, we
would need to analyze a general equilibrium model which endogenized both the wage rate
and the output prices of firms in the manufacturing sector. Developing such a model is left
for future research.
This paper also considers an analogous measure of “underutilization” of capital. This
4

measure is constructed as the ratio of: (1) the optimal capital for the firm if there were
perfect rental markets for capital goods, and (2) the firm’s actual capital stock. The perfect
rental markets concept is quite abstract; it assumes that firms could rent each diﬀerent kind
of capital good at an annual rental cost equal to the sum of the current rate of interest
on loans to manufacturing firms plus the depreciation rate on those capital goods. Still our
results on capital are both comforting in that they correspond to our intuitions on the capital
market, and surprising in how diﬀerent they are from our labor underutilization patterns.
In particular there is evidence that capital markets are much better at arbitraging differences across states than labor markets. First, the diﬀerences in both the cost of capital
and the underutilization of capital across states are noticeably smaller than the diﬀerences
in both labor costs and the underutilization of labor across states and the magnitudes are
striking. The interstate variance in the percentage underutilization of labor is about three
and a half times the interstate variance in the percentage underutilization of capital. Second, though we obtain large positive numbers for the underutilization of labor, that is labor
is “underutilized” compared to what would happen if there were no hiring and firing costs
or constraints, the numbers for the underutilization of capital are negative. That is, given
the amount of labor employed by firms, firm productivity, and cost of capital, firms are
employing more capital than they would employ if they were facing perfect rental markets
for capital goods.
Of course the overutilization of capital may just be a response to the fact that firms are
underutilizing labor. That is, firms which face many constraints in the hiring and firing
of workers may respond by increasing their use of capital relative to labor. Indeed, as
we show below, firms which underutilize labor disproportionately tend to overutilize capital
disproportionately. Moreover it is clear that if labor employment were to rise, say in response
to an improvement in labor market institutions, the marginal revenue product of the capital
in place would rise, and our measure of the overutilization of capital would fall. Moreover
the overutilization of capital figures that we obtain are much smaller in magnitude than the
underutilization of labor figures. Consequently, improvements in labor market regulations
that may be feasible may well also eliminate the overutilization of capital. Unfortunately to
5

answer whether this is likely to be true we would require a more detailed general equilibrium
model alluded to above.
The last section of this paper investigates the reduced form relationships (i) among our
measures of underutilization of labor, underutilization of capital, and productivity, and (ii)
between these three measures and answers to questions posed on the investment climate
survey. Perhaps the most striking finding of this analysis is that the extent of underutilization
of labor by a firm is strongly and positively related to the firm’s productivity. The more
productive firms also tend to overutilize capital somewhat more than the average, though not
to the same extent that they underutilize labor. The results in prior sections indicated that
liberalizing the labor market in states where there is high underutilization of labor is likely
to result in significant increases in both labor demand and wages in those states. The results
in the last section give us reason to believe that a lowering of labor market constraints would
also increase productivity, and it would do so without significant increases in the demand for
capital. We should expect an increase in productivity both because the more productive firms
are likely to increase their output disproportionately, and because each firm’s productivity
should increase as labor and capital employment move towards their eﬃcient levels.
Other relevant reduced form findings include the following: (i) firms which suﬀer more
production losses due to electricity outages are less productive than the average firm in their
states, and firms in states in which the average production losses due to outages are high
underutilize labor and capital more than firms in states with less frequent outages, (ii) firms
reporting more problems with corruption are the more productive firms in the state and
they have relatively high underutilization of both factors of production, (ii) within states,
it is the relatively more productive firms that are more likely to receive loans, suggesting
that the loan-granting institutions are able to select out the more productive firms, and (iv)
states in which a disproportionate number of firms received loans are the states with less
underutilization of both factors of production, particularly of capital.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data and Section
3 describes the computation of the underutilization measures. Sections 4 and 5 analyze the
underutilization of labor and capital, respectively. Section 6 analyzes productivity. Section
6

7 discusses the relationships between underutilization of labor and capital, productivity, and
investment climate variables. Section 8 concludes.

2

Data.

Our analysis requires the use of data on factors of production and sales for manufacturing
firms in India. Our data is taken from the Investment Climate Surveys conducted in India
jointly by the World Bank and the Confederation of Indian Industry in two rounds: 2002 and
2005. The surveys cover formal manufacturing firms across 12 Indian states and 7 industries
based on a random sample designed to be representative of the population of firms according
to their industry and location.2 The surveys provide information on firm characteristics,
investment climate variables, and accounting variables. Accounting variables were collected
for the two years immediately preceding the administration of the two survey rounds (2001
and 2004) as well as for prior years through retrospective questions. To avoid measurement
problems associated with retrospective data, we use only the accounting variables for 2001
and 2004. The 2005 survey round covered all firms from the 2002 survey round that were
still in business and willing to respond to the questionnaire as well as additional firms not
covered in the 2002 survey round. Appendix A provides more details on the data and shows
some descriptive statistics for the sample.

3

Ingredients for the Underutilization Measures:
Production Functions and Factor Costs.

In order to obtain our measures of the underutilization of labor (capital) we need to know
what labor (capital) employment would be for a firm facing no hiring and firing costs or
constraints (perfect rental markets for capital goods). For this purpose we use:
2

For simplicity, we refer to the units in our analysis as firms, but the surveys cover establishments.

7

• estimates of a production function, or more precisely of a “sales generating” function,
• estimates of the cost of employing labor (capital).
The availability of a sales generating function enables the calculation of the increment in
sales for a unit increase of employment at diﬀerent employment levels for each firm. The labor
that the firm would employ if there were no hiring and firing costs or constraints is obtained as
the labor employment level that would set the firm’s increment in sales due to a new worker
exactly equal to the cost of employing that worker. An increment in labor employment
above this “statically optimal” level would generate more labor costs than sales, and a labor
employment level below this static optimum would mean that the firm would increase sales
more than costs if it increased its number of workers. Our estimates of underutilization of
capital are obtained analogously based on the cost of capital.

3.1

Sales Generating Functions.

The term “sales generating” function was introduced by Olley and Pakes (1996) to emphasize
that the fact that they were analyzing the relationship between sales (deflated by a producer
price index) and the inputs that went into producing those sales, rather than the relationship between physical quantities of outputs and inputs as in a production function. When
working with sales data from homogenous product industries, we can insure that we are analyzing the determinants of the physical quantity of output by allowing for industry specific
multiplicative constant terms, which account for inter-industry price diﬀerences. Though in
our analysis we allow for a separate multiplicative constant for the 7 diﬀerent industries,
the homogenous product paradigm is a stretch for our data. In fact, the dependent variable
used in our analysis is the sales generated by a firm operating in a diﬀerentiated product
industry.
This leaves us with the question of whether the relationship that we are estimating
has a natural interpretation, and if that interpretation has consequences for the choice of
estimation procedure or for subsequent use of the estimates. We will assume that each
8

firm’s demand curve has a constant elasticity conditional on the output (or prices) of the
other firms, and that the production function is Cobb-Douglas. Then there is a log-log
relationship between sales and inputs, just as there is a log-log relationship between output
and inputs in the Cobb-Douglas production function case, but now the objects in that log-log
relationship have a slightly diﬀerent interpretation. Diﬀerences in productivity in generating
sales will reflect the sum of diﬀerences in the location of demand curves and diﬀerences
in the ability to transform inputs into physical output. The input coeﬃcients estimated
from the sales generating function will reflect the physical production function coeﬃcients
divided by one minus the inverse elasticity of demand. As a result, (i) whenever we consider
counterfactuals which change the output of competing firms, we should expect each firm’s
“sales productivity” to change, and (ii) we should be careful not to interpret our estimates
of returns to scale as scale eﬀects in the production of physical output.
We will use our sales generating function estimates in two ways: (1) to construct the
distribution of firm productivity in producing sales, and (2) to measure the excess demand
(supply) for labor and/or capital at the going wage (rental) rate. The measure of firm
productivity is sales divided by an index of inputs. We need the sales generating function
estimates to obtain the weights used to construct the index of inputs. Our measure of excess
demand (supply) is the number of units of labor (capital) that a firm would have to hire
before the marginal revenue product of labor (capital) would equal the going wage (rental)
rate. The marginal revenue product schedule is the derivative of the sales generating function
with respect to the input, and hence also requires estimates of the sales generating function.
Subsequent sections of the paper address the substantive implications of our productivity
and excess demand measures.
The correct way to obtain sales generating function estimates depends on the appropriate
model for input demand and for firm exit. This because the residual in the sales equation
is productivity, and firms’ input and exit decisions will depend on their productivity. As a
result both an endogeneity and a selection issue must be accounted for before one can obtain
reliable estimates. The endogeneity issue is that the residual in the equation of interest
is correlated with the variables (the inputs) on the right hand side of that equation. The
9

selection issue is that small firms (firms with a low capital stock or other sunk investments)
continue (do not exit) only if their productivity is quite large, while large firms will continue
even with lower productivity. As a result, the distribution of productivity of the firms that
survive, and hence are included in the data on transitions in productivity, is not independent
of the quantity of capital.
The next subsection describes our estimation procedure. The reader who is not interested
in the technical details of how the estimates are obtained should be able to skip this section
and still understand the remainder of the paper.

3.1.1

Estimation Procedure.

We now describe how we obtained the sales generating function estimates. The basic framework for estimation is taken from Olley and Pakes (1996), but we modified their estimation
techniques to account for special features of the institutional setting in Indian manufacturing,
as explained below.3
Let (yj,t , lj,t , kj,t , ij,t , zj,t ) be value added (sales minus material inputs), labor, capital,
investment, and temporary labor for firm j in year t. All of these variables, except investment,
are in logs. Temporary labor is defined as all (paid) short-term (i.e., for less than a year)
employees with no guarantee of renewal of employment contract, while permanent labor is
defined as all paid workers that are not temporary. Our sales generating function is given
by:

yj,t = β l lj,t + β k kj,t + β z zj,t + ω j,t + η j,t ,
where we have written the disturbance as a sum of ω j,t and η j,t . ω j,t is defined to be the
productivity that the firm expects for the period given its information at the time when
investment decisions are made (which we take to be the beginning of the period). ηj,t is
defined to be the diﬀerence between the actual realization of the productivity term and the
3

See part 2 of Ackerberg, Benkard, Berry, and Pakes (2007) for a more in-depth discussion of why and

how one might want to modify the framework in Olley and Pakes (1996).

10

firm’s expectation. If there is measurement error in sales it will also be included in η j,t .
Our goal is to obtain estimates of the coeﬃcients (β l , β k , β z ) with desirable properties.
The problem is that due to the selection and endogeneity problems, standard estimators for
those coeﬃcients — including OLS, fixed eﬀects, and instrumental variables — will produce
inconsistent estimates of these parameters. In particular, (i) the distribution of the ω j,t which
we observe has been truncated by an exit decision whose truncation point depends on the
right-hand side variables, and (ii) since the productivities in the truncated distribution are
known to the firm at the beginning of the period and correlated over time, any reasonable
model for input choice will result in those productivities being correlated with the firm’s
labor and capital inputs.
Since ω j,t is defined to be the expected productivity at the time when the investment
decision is made, Olley and Pakes (1996) show that the investment function (ij,t ) can be
written as a function of ω j,t and other “dynamic factors”. Dynamic factors are the factors
of production which the firm finds costly to adjust over the period between investment
decisions, so that past levels of one of those factors aﬀect the current employment of that
factor independently of current cost and demand conditions. In Industrial Organization
terminology, dynamic factors are “state” variables in the dynamic problem that leads to the
firm’s investment choices. Olley and Pakes assume that labor is not a dynamic factor (i.e.,
labor can be adjusted optimally in every period). However, given the structure of the labor
laws in India, we shall also try specifications where labor is considered a dynamic factor.
Since we try diﬀerent specifications where the set of factors which are dynamic varies, we
change our notation slightly here and let xd denote the list of dynamic factors and xs be a
list of the static factors (i.e., those factors of production which can be adjusted optimally in
every period).
Our investment function then becomes:
ij,t = it (ω j,t , xdj,t ),
where xdj,t is a vector of dynamic factors. The function it (·) diﬀers across periods because it
depends on the state variables of competing firms, and the list of state variables in a given
11

industry varies over time. Provided that ij,t > 0, this function has an inverse which is given
by:
d
d
ω j,t = i−1
t (ij,t ; xj,t ) ≡ ht (ij,t ; xj,t ).

(1)

Substituting equation (1) into the sales generating function, using the new notation for the
inputs, and rearranging we have:
yj,t = β sx xsj,t + φt (ij,t ; xdj,t ) + η j,t

(2)

where
φt (ij,t ; xdj,t ) ≡ β dx xdj,t + ht (ij,t ; xdj,t ),
and (β sx , β dx ) are the coeﬃcients of the static and dynamic inputs, respectively.
If (xdj,t , xsj,t ) cannot respond to movements in η j,t , that is if those factors of production
cannot respond to changes in productivity that occur between the time when investment is
made and the time when production occurs, then equation (??) can be estimated by ordinary least squares (OLS) using a polynomial (or any other suﬃciently rich non-parametric
function) to approximate φ(ij,t ; xdj,t ). If not, then equation (??) can be estimated by instrumental variables using lagged values of the production factors that are correlated with ηj,t as
instruments. Olley and Pakes (1996) assume that none of the production factors can adjust
s

to realizations of ηj,t , but we will try alternative possibilities, as shown below. Let (β̂ x , φ̂j,t )
be the estimates obtained in this manner.
We still require estimates of β dx . To obtain these estimates, we need to account for
selection bias and this, in turn, requires a model for the exit decision. We let χt+1 = 1
indicate the firm continues and χt+1 = 0 indicate exit. Olley and Pakes show that provided
{ωj,t } evolves as a Markov Process, the exit decision can be written as:4
4

More precisely, we treat {ωj,t } as a univariate Markov Process. This is where our assumptions are likely

at odds with our model of a sales generating function from a diﬀerentiated product market. If ωj,t includes
a term which reflects the location of the individual firm’s demand curve (as well as a term that reflects its
physical productivity), then the assumption that the firm’s own physical productivity evolves as a Markov
process does not guarantee that ωj,t evolves as a Markov process. For now, we simply treat the Markov

12

χt+1 = 1 ⇔ ω j,t+1 ≥ ωt+1 (xdj,t ).
So the probability of survival conditional on information available at time t is given by:




P r χj,t+1 = 1|ω t+1 (xdj,t ), ω j,t = F ω t+1 (xdj,t ), ω j,t

(3)

where F (·) is a distribution function. Note that, for any given ω, the function F (·) is
monotone decreasing in ω(·), so for fixed ω we can invert this equation and write:




−1
ω t+1 (·) = F
F ω t+1 (·); ω .

We will use this fact below.

From equation (1), ω j,t = ht (ij,t , xdj,t ). Substituting this into equation (3) shows that our
survival equation can be estimated as:






P r χj,t+1 = 1|ω t+1 (xdj,t ), ω j,t = F ω t+1 (xdj,t ), ht (ij,t , xdj,t ) ≡ F̃ xdj,t , ij,t



using a suﬃciently rich functional form for F̃ (·). Letting Fj,t ≡ F̃ xdj,t , ij,t , we have:
 
ω t+1 (·) = F̃ −1 Fj,t .

(4)

We can now return to the issue of estimating β dx . Consider period t + 1. We only observe
ωj,t+1 if the firm survives and our expectation for ωj,t+1 conditional on survival is given by:

E[ω j,t+1 |ω j,t , χt+1 = 1] =
=g

#

]

ωj,t+1 (xdj,t+1 )

φt (ij,t , xdj,t )

−



p(ω j,t+1 |ω j,t ) ≡ g ω j,t+1 (xdj,t+1 ), ωj,t

β dx xdj,t , F̃ −1

#

 
Fj,t

≡ g̃ φt (ij,t , xdj,t ) − β dx xdj,t , Fj,t

$

$

+ ξ j,t+1

+ ξ j,t+1 ,

where the first equality uses equations (1) and (4), the last equation defines g̃(·), and
ξ j,t+1 ≡ ω j,t+1 − E[ω j,t+1 |ω j,t , χt+1 = 1].
assumption as a convenient approximation to a more complicated process, an approximation which has done
well in past uses of the technique.

13

Consequently,

#

yj,t+1 − β sx xj,t+1 = β d xdj,t+1 + g̃ φt (ij,t , xdj,t ) − β dx xdj,t , Fj,t

$

+ ξ j,t+1 + η j,t+1 .

(5)

This equation can be consistently estimated by substituting our consistent estimates of
(β sx, Fj,t , φt (·)) for their true values and approximating g̃(·) with a suﬃciently rich nonparametric function. If any of the xd can respond to realizations of ξ or η then lagged values
of those variables must be used in forming the moments to be used in the estimation.

3.1.2

Estimation Results.

The sales generating function estimates we report combine survey data for Indian manufacturing firms in all 7 industries (listed in Appendix A) but allow for industry specific average
levels of (the log of) productivity. While we attempted to estimate a sales generating function
for each industry separately, the data was not rich enough to determine industry diﬀerences
in input coeﬃcients in a reliable way. Table 3 presents a selection of our results in two panels.
Panel A does not allow the sales generating function coeﬃcients to diﬀer by firm size, while
Panel B allows small firms, defined as those with less than 50 employees, to have diﬀerent
coeﬃcients relative to large firms. Since we will investigate later in the paper diﬀerences
in productivity by firm size, we wanted to ensure that any diﬀerences we find then were
not simply a result of firms below a certain size cutoﬀ being engaged in activities that were
diﬀerent enough to warrant diﬀerent sales generating function coeﬃcients. The estimation of
diﬀerent coeﬃcients across firm size also accommodates a special feature of the Indian manufacturing sector which is its inclusion of a much larger share of relatively small firms than
the manufacturing sectors in other economies. This is illustrated in Figure 1 which compares
the size distribution of firms in India to that in China, Brazil, and Indonesia, based on data
from Investment Climate Surveys. When examining whether there were diﬀerences in sales
generating function coeﬃcients by firm size, we found that the largest diﬀerences occurred
for the 50 employee cutoﬀ reported in Table 3.
We will focus on the estimates that allow for diﬀerent coeﬃcients across small and large
firms (Panel B) as Table 3 provides some evidence that such diﬀerences exist, particularly
14

in the labor and temporary labor coeﬃcients. Columns 1 and 2 show the OLS estimates
for the full sample and for the subsample of observations for which investment diﬀers from
zero, respectively. As discussed in the previous subsection, to obtain our sales generating
function estimates we can only use observations with positive investment, as it is only then
that the investment can be used to help control for prior values of productivity which must
be controlled for in order to get unbiased estimates of the coeﬃcients of interest.
Columns 3 and 4 show the standard Olley and Pakes estimators. Column 3 shows estimates that control only for the endogeneity of input choices, while the estimates in column
4 control also for the selection bias induced by exit. In moving from Column 2 to column
3, we are controlling for the fact that the capital and labor inputs are likely to be positively
correlated with the residual (which, recall, includes productivity). Thus, we expect to see a
fall in input coeﬃcients, which we do, and a fall in the estimate of “returns to scale”, in this
case one which is reasonably dramatic. As explained earlier, the fact that larger firms will
continue in operation with lower values of productivity than smaller firms induces a negative
correlation between capital and the residual in the estimates in column 3. Therefore, when
we move from column 3 to column 4 we expect to see an increase in the capital coeﬃcients,
which again is reasonably dramatic. These results are similar to those found in Olley and
Pakes (1996).
Columns 5 and 6 diﬀer from prior results, including those in columns 3 and 4, by allowing
labor to not be fully adjustable in the short run. These specifications accommodate a special
feature of the Indian manufacturing sector which are the stringent labor market regulations
it faces. Thus, hiring and firing costs for labor cannot be taken to be negligible as in the
earlier production function estimation literature which assumed that labor can be optimized
in the short-run. If labor is partially fixed, then the results in columns 3 and 4 combine the
impact of the quantity of labor in place on investment for a given capital stock — an eﬀect
that we would expect to be positive — with the eﬀect of labor on output conditional on capital
(with the sales generating function coeﬃcient of interest). Accordingly, we would expect the
labor coeﬃcient estimates in columns 5 and 6 to be smaller than those in columns 3 and
4. Again we get quite a striking eﬀect providing evidence that in Indian manufacturing we
15

should think of labor as not being freely adjustable in the short run. Note also that allowing
labor to be partially fixed brings down the estimates of the “returns to scale” noticeably.
We note that none of these estimates allow either temporary or permanent labor to adjust
to the shocks in productivity that occur during the period. We did some investigation of
this possibility, but the specifications in columns 5 and 6 seem to be as rich a specification
as our data can support. That is, further refinements resulted in large increases in standard
errors, and no significant diﬀerences in coeﬃcients from those reported above.

3.2

Factor Costs: Labor.

We begin by discussing labor costs. The immobility of labor across states could enable
interstate diﬀerences in labor costs to develop. Also, our analysis treats permanent labor
as a homogenous product. Unfortunately, information on schooling that would allow us to
diﬀerentiate workers in our analysis was not consistently available. As a result our underutilization of labor estimates should probably be interpreted as underutilization of labor
for the same mix of workers as the firms are currently employing. However if some types
of workers contribute more to the firm’s output than others, and there are systematically
diﬀerent fractions of diﬀerent types of workers in diﬀerent industries, then this would imply
that we should allow for diﬀerent costs of labor in diﬀerent industries.
To determine whether we should allow the costs of labor to vary by industry or by state
we estimated a regression of average wages from our survey on industry and state dummies.
The industry dummies were neither jointly nor individually significant, whereas many of
the state dummies were significant. Consequently, we allowed for diﬀerences in labor costs
across states but not across industries. Table 3 provides the state level average wages from
the Indian Annual Survey of Industries (ASI) using the most inclusive definition of wage
in that survey, and compares them to the average wages in our survey. We use the ASI
wages in what follows since the ASI sample is more representative than our sample, and
because for the vast majority of states ASI wages are higher than the average wages from
our survey. Hence, by using the ASI wages we will, if anything, underestimate the extent of
16

labor underutilization.

3.3

Factor Costs: Capital.

Table 4 shows the state level averages of our measures of the components of the cost of
capital. The Indian ASI contains measures of average interest rates on loans and average
depreciation rates of capital. Our cost of capital measure is the sum of these two averages.
Our surveys provide a measure of the interest rate on loans. The mean and median of this
measure for each state are shown in the last two columns of the table, and they are quite
similar to the interest rates from the Indian ASI.
Note that there is much less variance in the cost of capital across states than there is
in the cost of labor. The coeﬃcient of variation of the cost of capital across states is only
half that of wages (15 and 14% in 2001 and 2004, versus 28 and 30%, respectively). We also
regressed the average interest rate of loans from our survey on industry and state dummies.
The industry nor the state dummies were neither jointly nor individually significant. Recall
that the state dummies were significant in the wage regression. This diﬀerence suggests that
capital markets in India are able to arbitrage interstate diﬀerences in the returns to capital
reasonably eﬀectively while labor markets and labor flows are much less able to arbitrage
interstate diﬀerences in the returns to labor. Still for consistency with the labor results we
use the cost of capital from the ASI and allow it to vary across states in the calculations
that follow.

4

Underutilization of Labor.

The most striking result that we obtain is the extent of underutilization of labor across
manufacturing firms in India. Overall we estimate underutilization of 5.8 times current
manufacturing employment in 2001, and 3.4 times in 2004. Further underutilization is
estimated to be large and positive for every size group of firms (see Figure 2) and every
state (see Table 5) in India.
17

The extent of underutilization of labor varies dramatically across states. Higher GDP per
capita states have less underutilization. A similar correlation is evident in the time series
dimension. Table 6 and Figure 3 compare the changes in underutilization of labor by state
to the changes in GDP per capita by state between 2001 and 2004 across states. Again there
is a striking negative correlation. Indeed if we omit one outlier, West Bengal (which exhibits
a very large decline in the underutilization of labor), the data look like they were generated
by a simple linear model. That is high GDP per capita states exhibit less underutilization of
labor, and states where underutilization is falling are states whose per capita GDP is rising.
Uttar Pradesh has the lowest GDP per capita and the second lowest growth rate in GDP
per capita, and hence is considered a “lagging region”. It has both the highest percentage
underutilization of labor and the highest growth rate in that percentage (indeed it is one of
the few states where underutilization is in fact growing).
To put these figures in a diﬀerent light we calculated what the wage would have had
to be for the firm’s current employment to be “statically optimal” (i.e., the wage equal
to the firm’s marginal revenue product of labor at its current employment level). Across
manufacturing firms this wage averaged 6.8 times the current wage rates in 2001 and 4.6 times
the current wage rates in 2004. Moreover in the three states with highest underutilization
of labor - Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, and West Bengal - this wage averaged about
9 times the actual wage in the state, a number which is probably larger than the average
tenure of a manufacturing worker. In contrast in Delhi, which was the state with the lowest
underutilization of labor, the wage averaged about 20% of a worker’s year’s wages. If nothing
more the large divergence in these numbers across states suggest a role for the impact of
diﬀerential labor market regulations across states.
The extent of underutilization of labor did decrease significantly between 2001 and 2004.
The decrease in underutilization occurred in all size groups of firms, but it was most pronounced among firms with 50 to 100 workers (see Figure 2). The size cutoﬀ at which firms
must start abiding with restrictive employment regulations in most Indian states is 100
workers, so there is some indication that institutional changes have moderated the impact
of those regulations during this period. We note that this occurred at the same time as the
18

fraction of the manufacturing labor force employed by firms in the 50 to 100 worker group
increased, so the fall in underutilization of labor in this group was not a result of this size
group discarding a disproportionate number of workers. A related fact is that there was a
distinct tendency over this period for manufacturing employment to shift from large firms
(with more than 250 workers) to moderately sized firms (with 50 to 250 workers).5

5

Underutilization of Capital.

The diﬀerences between our estimates of the underutilization of capital and that of labor are
striking. In particular there is overutilization of capital; i.e., the marginal revenue product of
the capital employed at firms tends to be less than the cost of capital. As Table 7 and Figure
4 show, this is true for all size classes of firms and all states in 2001 and in 2004. Indeed the
overutilization of capital is, on average, equal to about three quarters of the capital stock.
This magnitude is much smaller than the corresponding magnitudes for the underutilization of labor. To see this in a more intuitive way we calculated what the cost of capital
would have had to be for the firm’s current capital to be ”statically optimal” (i.e., the cost
of capital equal to the firm’s marginal revenue product of capital at its current capital level).
On average this “statically optimal” cost of capital was 58% of the current cost of capital in
2001 and 64% in 2004. These numbers are diﬀerent from one, but only by about 40% (recall
that the underutilization of labor resulted in ratios of wage rates to marginal productivity of
labor of about 600%). Moreover, unlike the figures on underutilization of labor, the extent
of overutilization of capital did not change much between 2001 and 2004, it does not vary
much across states or size groups, and it is not correlated with diﬀerences in GDP per capita
across states.6
5

See Appendix Tables 1 and 2.

6

Interestingly, we also find evidence of important underutilization of labor and overutilization of capital in

another South Asian country with restrictive labor regulations: Sri Lanka. See Appendix B for a discussion
of those results.

19

6

Manufacturing Productivity.

While the focus of this paper is not on the determinants of total factor productivity in the
Indian manufacturing sector, we are interested in the relationship between our underutilization measures and productivity. Therefore we now discuss one finding on manufacturing
productivity that is of interest to the subsequent results. It is presented in Table 8 and the
accompanying Figure 5 and Figure 6.
The table and figures show that interstate diﬀerences in average manufacturing productivity are not positively correlated with interstate diﬀerences in GDP per capita. The precise
nature of the relationship between manufacturing productivity and GDP per capita diﬀers
depending on whether we consider a sales share weighted average of firm productivity, or an
unweighted average of firm productivity. However it is clear that among all states except
the very high GDP per capita states there is a negative relationship between manufacturing
productivity and GDP per capita, though the relationship flattens out and may turn positive
among the highest GDP per capita states. If states with higher GDP per capita are states in
which overall productivity is higher, the higher productivity levels are coming from sectors
other than manufacturing (e.g., services).

7

The Relationships Between Our Underutilization Measures, Our Productivity Measures, and Responses to
the Investment Climate Survey.

In this section we discuss the findings from a reduced form analysis of the relationships
between our firm-level underutilization measures and firm-level productivity, and the relationships between these three variables and the responses to questions in the investment
climate survey. To facilitate the analysis we estimated a three-equation system using our
measures of the underutilization of labor, the underutilization of capital, and productivity,
20

as dependent variables. The “explanatory” variables are the same in all equations, and they
are all based on information from the investment climate surveys. We put the word “explanatory” in quotation marks because we want to emphasize that we make no attempt to
infer cause and eﬀect from the estimates. We present them only as correlations that a causal
model would have to rationalize. The estimates were obtained using seemingly unrelated
regression techniques and are shown in Table 9.
The variables from the investment climate survey included were the fraction of the firm’s
workforce that is unionized, whether the firm had a loan, production losses at the firm due
to electricity outages, an indicator of corruption in inspections, the state-year level averages
of these variables among the firms in our data set, and the average share of temporary labor
in total employment in the state-year (as an indicator of flexibility of local labor markets).
Since for each included firm level variable we include also the state-year level averages of these
variables, the eﬀects of the firm level variables should be interpreted as within coeﬃcients;
i.e., they provide the impact on the dependent variable of the diﬀerence between the right
hand side variable and the average of that right hand side variable in the given state-year.7
We begin with the coeﬃcients from the equation which has productivity as the left hand
side variable, i.e. column 3 in Table 9. All four of the firm level variables have significant
coeﬃcients in this equation. The estimated positive coeﬃcient on the firm level unionization
variable indicates that firms with a larger fraction of their labor force unionized are more
productive than the average firm in their state. This finding could either be a result of it being
easier to unionize in more productive firms, or of unionization increasing productivity. All the
coeﬃcients on the state-year level variables are more diﬃcult to interpret as the link between
a change in the value of the covariate they are attached to and the firm level outcomes of
interest is indirect. Still if there are regional economies to organizing union activities, the fact
7

The ”explanatory” variables are described in detail in Appendix Table 5. For the within intepretation

see Mundlak (1978) who shows that one can allow for group specific fixed eﬀects in linear equations by
including, as additional right hand side variables, the group specific averages of all included right hand side
variables.

21

that the average level of unionization in the state-year is positively related to productivity
would reinforce the possibility that unions find it easier to unionize where manufacturing
productivity is higher. Note that the results in Table 9 also indicate that states with a higher
degree of unionization tend to be states with relatively high underutilization of both capital
and labor. Of course this need not be causal; it may be that there are omitted variables that
cause underutilization and are correlated with state level unionization.
The relationships between productivity and the other firm specific variables are somewhat
easier to interpret. Since our productivity estimates take direct account of the impact of capital on sales, the most obvious interpretation of the positive interaction between productivity
and the firm level loan variable is that loan-granting institutions are able to select out the
higher productivity firms in a region. In contrast, the corresponding state-year level variable
indicates that the states in which a disproportionately high number of firms received loans
were states with lower manufacturing productivity. About three quarters of loans granted
in India are granted by governmental institutions, so the regional pattern of loans might
reflect the goals of those institutions. The states in which a disproportionate share of firms
has loans are states in which firms have significantly less underutilization of both labor and
capital. We note that this finding is not a result of states with a higher fraction of firms
having loans being states which are more developed, at least if we measure development by
GDP per capita. We tried adding GDP per capita as a right hand side variable to all equations. None of the results presented in Table 9 changed notably, and the GDP per capita
coeﬃcients were all insignificant.
Provided not all production losses due to electricity outages were planned for we would
expect the firms within a region that experience a higher fraction of their output lost due
to electrical outages to have lower productivity, and this is what the results in Table 9
indeed show. Also provided that average production losses across a state influence a firm’s
perceptions about its own likely future production losses, we should expect a relationship
between the state-year level measure of electricity outages and the employment of inputs
that have a sunk component to their cost, and recall that we have found both labor and
capital should be treated as inputs with sunk costs in India. As a result the strong positive
22

relationship between the state-year level measure of production losses due to outages and
both our underutilization measures should not be a surprise either. Interestingly, there is a
positive relationship between productivity and the average production losses due to outages
across state-years. This finding suggests that states where manufacturing is productive are
the states which are pushing the boundaries of current electricity generating capacity.
The firm level corruption variable has a positive coeﬃcient in the productivity equation,
a finding that might reflect the possibility that it is the more productive firms that are most
averse to corruption and therefore most likely to complain about it. The firm and state
level coeﬃcients on corruption in the utilization equations are opposite in sign. Firms which
complain about corruption tend to employ less labor and capital, ceteris paribus, than other
firms in the region. On the other hand the average number of complaints about corruption
is higher in states with less underutilization of labor and capital.
None of the other firm level variables exhibit a significant relationship to either underutilization variable. Indeed the most striking information on the underutilization variables is
contained in the residuals. Note first that the residual variance in both the underutilization
regressions is about 98% of the total variance, and about 97% of that variance is within state
variance. Given this, the residual covariances imply that the variable most closely related to
underutilization of labor in our data is firm level productivity. That is the more productive
firms in a region are holding back on hiring relatively more than less productive firms in the
same region. Consequently if we were able to institute changes in labor regulations which
resulted in all firms hiring labor up to the point where the marginal revenue product of labor
equaled the wage we would not only increase employment, we would likely also redistribute
output in a way that would increase overall productivity.
Interestingly the residuals also indicate that the more productive firms do not hold back
on investment more than less productive firms; if anything they utilize relatively more capital.
This finding, taken together with the negative correlation between the underutilization of
labor and capital residuals, suggests that one eﬀect of the labor regulations in India might
be to induce firms, especially more productive firms, to substitute capital for labor.

23

8

Conclusion

This paper uses the World Bank Investment Climate Surveys to examine the labor and
capital employment rates of Indian formal manufacturing firms and their relationship to
productivity and investment climate variables. We are motivated by our desire to understand
the factors underlying the relatively weak performance of the Indian formal manufacturing
sector; relative to either the Indian services sector or to manufacturing sectors in similarly
countries (e.g., China). We define measures of underutilization of labor for Indian firms as
the ratio of (1) the labor employment that firms would optimally choose if there were no
hiring and firing costs at current wage costs, and (2) firms’ actual employment of labor.
Analogously, we construct measures of underutilization of capital for Indian firms.
We find that labor is underutilized in manufacturing firms operating in all states. That
is, given the amount of capital used by firms, their productivity, and the cost of labor,
firms are employing less labor than they would employ if they faced no hiring and firing
costs. The extent of underutilization of labor diﬀers substantially across Indian states. In
particular, states with higher GDP per capita exhibit much less underutilization of labor.
In contrast, our results show overutilization of capital in Indian firms, though the extent of
overutilization of capital is much smaller than the extent of underutilization of labor and
does not vary a great deal across states. The overutilization of capital may be a response to
the underutilization of labor as firms and states which underutilize labor disproportionately
also overutilize capital disproportionately.
The most striking finding from our analysis of the relationships between the underutilization of labor, the underutilization of capital, and productivity, and between these three
variables and investment climate variables, is that the extent of underutilization of labor by
firms is strongly and positively related to firm productivity. Also, the more productive firms
tend to overutilize capital more than the average, though not to the same extent that they
underutilize labor.
Overall, our findings suggest that if labor market restrictions in states with “poorly
functioning” labor markets were liberalized to the level of restrictions in states with better

24

functioning labor markets, labor demand and wages would likely increase significantly in
those states. Also such liberalization would likely increase productivity without significant
increases in the demand for capital. This would occur both because our results suggest that
an improvement in the functioning of labor markets would cause the more productive firms
to increase their output disproportionately, and because firm productivity should increase
as labor and capital employment move towards their eﬃcient levels.
We also obtained a number of other more detailed findings. Firms which suﬀer more
production losses due to electricity outages are less productive within their states and underutilize both labor and capital more than firms in states with less production losses due
to electricity outages. Firms reporting more problems with corruption are shown to be the
more productive firms in their state and they also exhibit relatively high underutilization
of both factors of production. The relatively more productive firms within states are more
likely to receive loans, suggesting that loan-granting institutions are able to select out the
more productive firms. Finally, we find that states in which a disproportionate number of
firms received loans are the states with less underutilization of both factors of production,
particularly of capital.

25

References
Ackerberg, D., Benkard, L., Berry, S., and Pakes, A. (2007) ‘Econometric Tools for
Analyzing Market Outcomes,’ Handbook of Econometrics, Volume 6 Part 15.
Ahsan, A. and Pages, C. (2005). ‘Helping or Hurting Workers? Assessing the Eﬀects of
De Jure and De Facto Labor Regulation in India,’ mimeo, The World Bank.
Besley, T. and Burgess, R. (2004). ‘Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance?
Evidence from India,’ Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 91-134.
Fallon, P. and R. Lucas (1991). ‘The Impact of Changes in Job Security Regulations in
India and Zimbabwe,’ World Bank Economic Review 5, 395-413.
Mengistae, T., Xu, C. and Yeung, B. (2006). ‘China vs. India: A Microeconomic Look
at Comparative Macroeconomic Performance,’ mimeo, The World Bank.
Mundlak, Y. (1978). ‘On The Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data,’ Econometrica, 46, pp.69-85.
OECD (2007). OECD Employment Outlook.
Olley, G. and Pakes, A. (1996). ‘The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry,’ Econometrica 64, 1263-1297.
The World Bank (2004) Improving the Investment Climate in India.
The World Bank (2006) India’s Employment Challenge: Creating Jobs, Helping Workers.
The World Bank (2007) Doing Business in South Asia.

26

Table 1. Industry and Manufacturing Share of Employment and GDP across
Countries
Employment in
Industry as %
Total
Employment in
2000

Value Added in
Value Added in
Manufacturing as
Industry as %
% of GDP in
of GDP in 2000
2000

India
Brazil
China
Indonesia
Pakistan
Vietnam

18.2
19.3
23.0
17.3
18.0
12.4

26.3
28.0
45.9
45.9
22.6
36.7

15.6
17.1
34.7
27.7
14.8
18.6

Low-Income Countries
Lower-Middle Income Countries

12.3
18.5

26.6
38.3

14.1
24.2

2002 GDP per
capita (in 2000
USD)
480
3473
1106
844
532
444

Source: World Development Indicators 2005.
Notes: Industry includes manufacturing, but also mining and quarrying (including oil production), construction,
and public utilities (electricity, gas, and water). Lower-income countries and lower-middle income countries are
defined based on the World Bank classification.

Table 2. Growth in Sectoral Value-Added across Countries

India
Brazil
China
Indonesia
Pakistan
Vietnam

Growth in Value Added in
Manufacturing

Growth in Value Added in
Agriculture

Growth in Value Added in
Services

1995-2000
28.1%
5.7%
57.6%
14.6%
17.1%
70.3%

1995-2000
13.7%
17.3%
18.5%
7.0%
26.5%
24.2%

1995-2000
48.4%
26.5%
57.3%
-2.4%
20.9%
31.9%

2000-2005
38.4%
5.6%
67.4%
27.5%
56.6%
73.8%

2000-2005
14.9%
23.7%
21.2%
17.3%
12.0%
20.7%

2000-2005
50.3%
31.8%
61.2%
35.7%
29.9%
40.0%

Source: World Development Indicators 2005.
Note: The table shows for each sector growth rates in total value-added (in constant local currency units) between
year t and year t+5.

27

Table 3. Sales Generating Function Estimates
OLS

Olley and Pakes

Olley and Pakes

L Static

L Dynamic

All Obs.

No Obs. With
Investment = 0

No Adjustment
for Firm Exit

Adjustment for
Firm Exit

No Adjustment
for Firm Exit

Adjustment for
Firm Exit

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Panel A: Coefficients Same for All Firm Size Groups
L

0.710
[0.034]***
0.343
[0.026]***
0.148
[0.024]***

0.740
[0.046]***
0.289
[0.033]***
0.147
[0.030]***

0.669
[0.049]***
0.330
[0.110]***
0.137
[0.030]***

0.669
[0.049]***
0.203
[0.114]*
0.137
[0.030]***

0.293
[0.095]***
0.316
[0.098]***
0.129
[0.031]***

0.387
[0.105]***
0.295
[0.120]***
0.129
[0.034]***

1.201

1.176

1.136
[0.115]***

1.009
[0.121]***

0.738
[0.145]***

0.810
[0.147]***

0.697
[0.045]***
0.335
[0.028]***
0.196
[0.031]***
0.714
[0.085]***
0.346
[0.043]***
0.086
[0.037]**

0.654
[0.073]***
0.296
[0.037]***
0.191
[0.044]***
0.777
[0.090]***
0.269
[0.045]***
0.103
[0.040]**

0.556
[0.076]***
0.281
[0.154]*
0.146
[0.044]***
0.658
[0.100]***
0.204
[0.128]
0.092
[0.039]***

0.556
[0.076]***
0.414
[0.144]***
0.146
[0.044]***
0.658
[0.100]***
0.347
[0.125]***
0.092
[0.039]***

0.474
[0.224]**
0.270
[0.124]**
0.152
[0.048***]
0.534
[0.172]***
0.221
[0.108]**
0.089
[0.042]**

0.473
[0.229]**
0.270
[0.129]**
0.152
[0.052]**
0.623
[0.243]***
0.182
[0.153]
0.089
[0.046]*

Returns to Scale (L<=50)

1.228

1.141

Returns to Scale (L>50)

1.146

1.149

Number of Observations

1799

752

0.983
[0.165]***
0.953
[0.168]***
752

1.116
[0.159]***
1.096
[0.160]***
752

0.896
[0.211]***
0.843
[0.185]***
752

0.894
[0.226]***
0.894
[0.193]***
752

K
Temporary L
Returns to Scale

Panel B: Coefficients Differ by Firm Size Group
L (L<=50)
K (L<=50)
Temporary L (L<=50)
L (L>50)
K (L>50)
Temporary L (L>50)

Notes: Bootstrapped standard errors in parentheses. ***. **, and * indicate statistical significance at a 1%, 5%,
and 10% confidence levels, respectively. The sample includes all firms with replacement capital and investment
data in the initial survey (covering 2001). When labor is dynamic, it is treated as another state variable (like capital
in the Olley and Pakes framework), otherwise it is assumed to be optimized out in each period. All specifications
control for industry dummies and period dummies at all estimation stages.

28

Table 4. Average Cost of Labor
Average Wages and Benefits per Worker

Andra Pradesh
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Karnakata
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharastra
Punjab
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal

Year

From Annual Survey
of Industries

From Investment
Climate Surveys

2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004

47.6
55.8
90.7
109.0
87.6
108.1
99.3
122.9
87.1
104.4
55.9
57.9
89.8
95.9
129.9
151.9
59.9
71.2
63.0
70.8
77.8
85.3
84.6
92.6

60.2
59.4
45.6
91.7
53.5
48.0
56.1
106.1
70.8
29.7
35.7
33.8
51.0
16.9
80.9
29.8
47.6
64.2
62.0
57.4
49.3
65.4
50.1
80.1

Sources: Annual Survey of Industries and Investment Climate Surveys for India.
Note: Average wages and benefits are expressed in thousands of rupees per year.

29

Table 5. Average Cost of Capital
Average Cost of Capital
From Annual Survey of Industries

Andra Pradesh
Delhi
Gujarat
Haryana
Karnakata
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharastra
Punjab
Tamil Nadu
Uttar Pradesh
West Bengal

Year

Average Interest
Rate

2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004
2001
2004

15.4%
14.0%
17.1%
11.5%
16.4%
10.7%
19.2%
16.5%
12.3%
11.0%
15.3%
13.8%
14.9%
13.3%
18.4%
13.0%
21.8%
13.7%
19.9%
12.2%
16.0%
12.0%
15.6%
8.9%

Average
Depreciation
Rate
8.3%
9.4%
13.3%
15.0%
8.5%
9.4%
11.0%
13.5%
7.3%
9.0%
9.2%
9.9%
8.6%
9.5%
9.5%
9.1%
11.3%
11.8%
10.0%
10.2%
8.1%
10.0%
8.2%
8.6%

From Investment Climate Surveys
Average Interest
Rate

Median Interest
Rate

13.4%
9.0%
11.1%
17.9%
13.8%
16.8%
13.0%
12.2%
12.9%
12.2%
17.0%
11.1%
13.4%
10.1%
13.6%
10.2%
13.3%
22.1%
11.8%
10.9%
13.0%
18.4%
13.3%
9.9%

14.0%
9.3%
10.0%
14.0%
14.0%
10.0%
14.0%
12.3%
12.5%
11.8%
13.5%
10.5%
12.5%
10.0%
14.0%
10.0%
14.0%
14.0%
12.0%
11.0%
14.0%
12.0%
14.0%
10.0%

Sources: Annual Survey of Industries and Investment Climate Surveys for India.

Table 6. Underutilization of Labor and GDP per Capita by State
Underutilization
of Labor

Level of GDP
per Capita

Average over 2001 and 2004
Uttar Pradesh
Madhya Pradesh
West Bengal
Andra Pradesh
Kerala
Karnakata
Tamil Nadu
Gujarat
Haryana
Maharastra
Punjab
Delhi

8.60
0.37
8.10
6.47
1.77
1.47
3.35
1.58
0.51
1.30
0.45
0.22

6721
8694
11825
12290
13157
13793
14798
17211
17063
17698
17697
27864

Sources: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India and indiastat.com.
Note: Per capita GDP is expressed in billions of constant 1993-1994 rupees.

30

Table 7. Change in Underutilization of Labor and in GDP per Capita by State
Change in Level
Change in
of GDP per
Underutilization
of Labor between Capita between
2001 and 2004
2001 and 2004
Uttar Pradesh
Madhya Pradesh
West Bengal
Andra Pradesh
Kerala
Karnakata
Tamil Nadu
Gujarat
Haryana
Maharastra
Punjab
Delhi

304.2%
-57.5%
-1182.7%
-187.2%
-270.3%
-69.9%
80.1%
-298.0%
58.2%
8.3%
-13.6%
43.8%

6.8%
11.3%
20.1%
14.8%
19.1%
7.0%
1.3%
27.1%
13.3%
17.1%
7.8%
10.3%

Sources: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India and indiastat.com.

Table 8. Overutilization of Capital and GDP per Capita by State
Overutilization
of Capital

Level of GDP
per Capita

Average over 2001 and 2004
Uttar Pradesh
Madhya Pradesh
West Bengal
Andra Pradesh
Kerala
Karnakata
Tamil Nadu
Gujarat
Haryana
Maharastra
Punjab
Delhi

-0.40
-0.80
-0.72
-0.88
-0.63
-0.92
-0.66
-0.86
-0.67
-0.66
-0.69
-0.59

6721
8694
11825
12290
13157
13793
14798
17211
17063
17698
17697
27864

Sources: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India and indiastat.com.

31

Table 9. Average TFP and GDP per Capita by State
Weighted
Average TFP

Unweighted
Average TFP

Level of GDP
per Capita

Average over 2001 and 2004
Uttar Pradesh
Madhya Pradesh
West Bengal
Andra Pradesh
Kerala
Karnakata
Tamil Nadu
Gujarat
Haryana
Maharastra
Punjab
Delhi

139.41
207.37
518.40
66.75
74.83
41.30
81.45
127.08
68.98
78.88
32.23
33.41

47.98
63.06
81.68
45.72
36.35
33.08
61.26
40.71
63.62
40.39
32.11
29.41

6721
8694
11825
12290
13157
13793
14798
17211
17063
17698
17697
27864

Sources: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India and indiastat.com.
Note: In calculating weighted average TFP, the weights are given by each firm’s share in total sales for its state.

Table 10. Underutilization of Labor, Underutilization of Capital, and
Productivity
Dependent Variable is:

Share of Temporary Labor in Total Labor - Avg. State Year
Share of Workforce Unionized
Share of Workforce Unionized - Avg. State Year
Dummy for Firm with Loan
Share of Firms with Loan - Avg. State Year
Production Losses Due to Outages
Production Losses Due to Outages - Avg. State Year
Corruption in Inspections
Corruption in inspections - Avg. State Year
Number of Observations
"R-squared"

32

Under
Under
utilization of utilization of
Labor
Capital

TFP

(1)
(2)
6.649
15.814
[17.428]
[30.086]
23.276
-23.746
[21.952]
[37.897]
280.012
688.058
[129.199]** [223.043]***
15.236
-7.157
[8.883]*
[15.335]
-77.554
-181.481
[34.608]** [59.746]***
-14.469
12.919
[45.466]
[78.490]
343.424
961.361
[200.498]* [346.130]***
18.387
35.186
[11.099]*
[19.160]*
-57.94
-125.275
[34.661]*
[59.837]**
1500
1500
0.0136
0.0181

(3)
0.109
[0.129]
1.275
[0.162]***
4.249
[0.956]***
0.292
[0.066]***
-1.353
[0.256]***
-0.6
[0.336]*
3.68
[1.483]**
0.231
[0.082]***
0.492
[0.256]*
1500
0.0966

Total
Within
Between

Underut.
of Labor

Variance of:
Underut.
of Capital

25351.1
24953.7
635.4

75899.4
75261.5
604.8

TFP
1.51
1.47
0.05

Variance of Residuals of
Equation for:
Underut. Underut.
TFP
of Labor of Capital
Total
Within
Between

25005.8
24862.6
283.4

Covariance between
Residuals of Equation for:

74524.4
74321.1
214.2

Underut.
of Capital

1.37
1.36
0.01

TFP

Underut. of Labor
Total
Within
Between
Underut. of Capital

-846037
-802619
-43418

Total
Within
Between

69433
70143
-710
-24250
-24311
61

Correlation between
Residuals of Equation for:

Underut.
of Capital

TFP

Underut. of Labor
Total
Within
Between
Underut. of Capital

-0.0131 0.250***
-0.0124 0.253***
-0.0007 -0.002561

Total
Within
Between

-0.051*
-0.051*
0.0001

Notes: Seemingly unrelated regressions estimation used. Standard errors in parentheses. ***. **, and * indicate
statistical significance at a 1%, 5%, and 10% confidence levels, respectively. The regressions include year fixed
effects.

33

Figure 1. Percentage of Firms by Size Group across Countries
1-25 L
25-50 L
50-100 L
Brazil
100-250 L
250 or more L
1-25 L
25-50 L
China
50-100 L
100-250 L
250 or more L
1-25 L
25-50 L
50-100 L
India
100-250 L
250 or more L
1-25 L
25-50 L
50-100 L
Indonesia
100-250 L
250 or more L
0

20
40
Percentage of Firms

60

Source: Investment Climate Surveys for Brazil, China, India, and Indonesia.

Figure 2. Underutilization of Labor by Size Group

50 or less L

50-100 L

100-250 L

250 or more L

0

2
4
6
At Going Average Wages in State
2001

8

2004

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India.
Notes: In the Y-axis L stands for employees. The figure shows for each year the weighted sum of the
measured underutilization of labor across firms, where weights are given by each firm’s share in total
employment for its size group.

34

Figure 3. Change in Underutilization of Labor and in GDP Per Capita across
States
Change in Underutilization of Labor

400%
200%
0%
0%
-200%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

-400%
-600%
-800%
-1000%
-1200%
-1400%
Change in GDP per capita

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India.
Note: Each dot in the figure represents one Indian state and shows the change between 2001 and 2004 in GDP
per capita and in the underutilization of labor.

Figure 4. Overutilization of Capital by Size Group

50 or less L

50-100 L

100-250 L

250 or more L

-1

-.8
-.6
-.4
-.2
At Going Average Cost of Capital in State
2001

0

2004

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India.
Notes: In the Y-axis L stands for employees. The figure shows for each year the weighted sum of the
measured overutilization of capital across firms, where weights are given by each firm’s share in total capital
for its size group.

35

Figure 5. Weighted Average TFP and GDP Per Capita across States
30000

Weighted Average TFP

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0
0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

7000

GDP per capita

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India.
Note: Each dot in the figure represents one Indian state and shows the average across 2001 and 2004 of GDP
per capita and of weighted average TFP, where weights are given by each firm’s share in total sales for its
state.

Figure 6. Unweighted Average TFP and GDP Per Capita across States
30000

Unweighted Average TFP

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

GDP per capita

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the Investment Climate Surveys for India.
Note: Each dot in the figure represents one Indian state and shows the average across 2001 and 2004 of GDP
per capita and of unweighted average TFP.

36

Appendix
A. Investment Climate Surveys Data and ASI Data
The sample used for the Investment Climate Survey (also known as Firm Analysis
and Competitiveness Survey) of India in the 2002 round was designed to cover firms in
the top 40 industrial cities in India (located in 12 states) that account for more than 90%
of India’s industrial GDP. In the 2005 round, the survey covered some additional states
but we exclude them from our analysis that requires information in both 2001 and 2004.
See World Bank (2004) and Mengistae, Xu, and Yeung (2006) for more details on the
survey and the data.
The measure of output used in our production function estimation is firm value
added defined as total sales minus purchases of raw materials minus consumption of
energy minus other costs (e.g. overhead expenses, selling and general administration
expenses, design department). The measure of capital for 2001 is the sum of the firm
reported value of (i) replacing all machinery and equipment at the end of 2001 and (ii)
replacing all business premises or leasehold at the end of 2001. Since data on
replacement cost for capital was not collected in the 2005 survey round, we constructed
the measure of capital for 2004 based on replacement value in 2001 and on the change in
book value of fixed assets (machinery and equipment plus land, buildings and leasehold
improvement) between 2001 and 2004. As mentioned in the main text, our measure of
labor is the number of permanent workers (all paid workers that are not temporary) and
we also consider a measure of temporary labor to equal consisting of all (paid) short term
(i.e. for less than a year) workers with no guarantee of renewal of employment contract.
Appendix Tables 1 and 3-4 show the distribution of sample firms considered for
our analysis of the underutilization of factors across size groups, states, and industries.
In Table 3 we show a measure of compensation to workers from the Investment
Climate Surveys calculated as the average in each state of firms’ total compensation paid
to workers (including wages, salaries, and benefits) divided by the firms’ number of
permanent workers. In order to compute underutilization of labor across firms, we use
the average wage and benefits across Indian states shown in Table 3 taken from the
Annual Survey of Industries. This survey is conducted annually and covers all
manufacturing factories employing 10 or more workers using power and those employing
20 or more workers without using power across all Indian states (more information can
be found at www.mospi.nic.in). Our measure of average wages and benefits is total
emoluments obtained as the sum of the items i) ii) and iii) below, divided by the total
number of manufacturing workers in each state and year.
i) Wages and salaries: defined to include all remuneration in monetary terms and
also payable more or less regularly in each pay period to workers as compensation for
work done during the accounting year. This includes (a) direct wages and salary (i.e.,
basic wages/salaries, payment of overtime, dearness, compensatory allowance, house rent
and other allowances), (b) remuneration for the period not worked (i.e., basic wages,
salaries and allowances payable for leave period, paid holiday, lay-off payments and
compensation for unemployment, if not paid from sources other than employers), (c)
bonuses and ex-gratia payment paid both at regular and less frequent intervals (i.e.,
incentive bonuses, good attendance bonuses, productive bonuses, profit sharing bonuses,

37

festival or year-end bonuses, etc.). The wages are expressed in terms of gross value i.e.,
before deduction for fines, damages, taxes, provident fund, employee's state insurance
contribution.
ii) Employers’ contribution to provident fund and other funds: include old age
benefits like provident fund, pension, gratuity, etc. and employers contribution towards
other social security charges such as employees state insurance, compensation for work
injuries and occupational diseases, provident fund-linked insurance, retrenchment and
lay-off benefits.
iii) Workmen and staff welfare expenses: include group benefits like direct
expenditure on maternity, day-care, canteen facilities, educational, cultural and
recreational facilities, and grants to trade unions, co-operative stores meant for
employees.
In Table 4 we show a measure of cost of capital from the Investment Climate
Surveys calculated as the average in each state of the interest rate on loans taken up by
firms since 1992. In order to compute underutilization of capital across firms, we use the
average cost of capital across Indian states shown in Table 4 taken from the Annual
Survey of Industries.
Our measure of the average cost of capital is obtained as the sum of the average
interest rate obtained as the ratio of the items i) to ii) below and the average depreciation
rate obtained as the ratio of the items iii) to iv) below.
i) Interest paid
ii) Outstanding loans: represent all loans (short term or long term, interest bearing
or not) outstanding according to the books of the factory as on the closing day of the
accounting year.
iii) Depreciation: is consumption of fixed capital due to wear & tear and
obsolescence during the accounting year and is taken as provided by the factory owner or
is estimated on the basis of cost of installation and working life of the fixed assets.
iv) Fixed capital: represents the depreciated value of fixed assets owned by the
factory as on the closing day of the accounting year. Fixed assets are those that have a
normal productive life of more than one year. Fixed capital includes land including leasehold land, buildings, plant & machinery, furniture and fixtures, transport equipment,
water system and roadways and other fixed assets such as hospitals, schools, etc. used for
the benefit of the factory personnel.
Appendix B. Underutilization of Labor and Capital in Sri Lanka
This appendix briefly examines the underutilization of labor and capital in Sri
Lanka, another country characterized by restrictive labor market regulations, as discussed
in World Bank (2007). Note an important difference in the restrictiveness of labor market
regulations in India versus Sri Lanka. In India, the restrictiveness lies in the difficulty of
firing workers. However, Indian workers that are fired are entitled to low severance
payments by international standards (see Ahsan and Pages, 2005). In Sri Lanka, the
restrictiveness lies in the very high severance payments that fired workers are entitled to.
Our approach is similar to that used for India: i.e., we construct underutilization
of labor at current wage rates and underutilization of capital at current capital costs.
However, we modify the approach given Sri Lanka's much smaller size and different

38

regulatory environment. Sri Lanka is a unitary state and its provinces do not have
legislative power on labor market regulations as the Indian states do. Thus, we consider
Sri Lanka as a single labor market and a single capital market, not examining differences
across provinces. Our analysis uses data from the World Bank Investment Climate
Survey conducted in Sri Lanka in 2004. This dataset suffers from some caveats relative to
India' s dataset. First, the Sri Lanka data is from a single survey round rather than two
survey rounds. Thus, we are forced to use retrospective data for the accounting variables
which as we mentioned in Section 2, can suffer from measurement problems. Second, the
measure of capital used for firms in Sri Lanka is book value of capital, since replacement
value information was not collected. Third, since we do not have data from a Sri Lanka
census source such as the Indian ASI, we use measures of average compensation per
worker from the Investment Climate Survey, which may under- or over-estimate the true
labor costs faced by firms in the manufacturing sector. Fourth, some numerical problems
constrain us to estimate the production function using the standard Olley and Pakes
(1996) technique i.e., allowing labor to be adjustable in the short-run, in contrast to India
where labor was assumed to be fixed in the short-run. However, our production function
estimation allows for different coefficients for firms employing more than 50 workers
and for firms employing less than 50 workers, as in the case of India. These caveats
imply that the numbers below needs to be taken with a lot of caution, as they are only
broadly indicative of the patterns of underutilization of factors. In particular, one should
not compare the magnitudes of underutilization of factors across India and Sri Lanka
since they are based on different data and on production function coefficients estimated
using different techniques.
Our main finding is strong evidence of underutilization of labor across
manufacturing firms in Sri Lanka. Overall we estimate underutilization of 1.1 times
current manufacturing employment in 2003. Underutilization of labor is estimated to be
positive for every size group of firms. We also calculated what the wage would have to
be for firms' current employment to be "statically optimal" (i.e. the wage equal to a firm’s
marginal revenue product of labor at its current employment level). This wage averaged
2.1 times the current wage rates in 2003. As mentioned in Section 3, one has to be careful
with the interpretation of these magnitudes. These figures do not imply that if there were
no hiring and firing costs and constraints in Sri Lanka and firms were maximizing profits
they would increase their employment by 110%. If firms started increasing their
employment, wages would rise, output would rise and the prices of the firms' outputs
would fall (beyond what we are allowing for here). These two factors would moderate the
actual equilibrium employment implications of reducing hiring and firing costs and
constraints.
For manufacturing firms in Sri Lanka we also find evidence of overutilization
of capital. Specifically, the overutilization of capital is on average equal to about a third
of the capital stock in 2003. As in the case of India, this magnitude is much smaller than
the corresponding magnitudes for the underutilization of labor. We also calculated what
the cost of capital would have to be for the firm’s current capital to be "statically optimal"
(i.e. the cost of capital equal to the firm' s marginal revenue product of capital at its
current capital level). On average across manufacturing firms this "statically optimal"
cost of capital was 58% of the current cost of capital in 2003. While this number is not

39

too far from 100% recall that the underutilization of labor resulted in a ratio of current
wage rates to marginal productivity of labor of about 210%.

Appendix Table 1: Distribution of Sample Firms across Size Groups
50 or less Employees
50-100 Employees
100-250 Employees
250 or more Employees

2001
81.4%
7.2%
5.6%
5.8%

2004
78.4%
9.4%
6.7%
5.6%

Number of Observations

1296

721

Appendix Table 2: Share of Total Employment across Size Groups
Distribution of Total
Employment across Firm Size
Groups
2001
16.9%
7.3%
12.3%
63.5%

50 or less Employees
50-100 Employees
100-250 Employees
250 or more Employees

2004
16.6%
8.8%
15.4%
59.1%

Appendix Table 3: Distribution of Sample Firms across States
Gujarat
Karnakata
West Bengal
Punjab
Tamil Nadu
Kerala
Delhi
Andra Pradesh
Uttar Pradesh
Maharastra
Haryana
Madhya Pradesh

2001
9.7%
11.1%
9.2%
9.0%
9.0%
3.6%
5.9%
7.6%
10.0%
10.8%
6.3%
7.7%

2004
15.0%
3.5%
4.3%
10.8%
9.2%
2.1%
6.4%
6.7%
11.4%
12.3%
6.9%
11.5%

Number of Observations

1296

721

40

Appendix Table 4: Distribution of Sample Firms across Industries
Textiles
Garments and Leather
Metals and Machinery
Electronics
Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals
Transport Equipment
Food
Number of Observations

2001
12.2%
18.7%
8.8%
16.4%
18.6%
15.7%
9.7%

2004
8.5%
11.9%
9.2%
16.6%
21.2%
21.5%
11.1%

1296

721

Appendix Table 5: Definition of Variables Used in System of Equations
Variable
Share of Workforce Unionized
Dummy for Firm with Loan
Production Losses Due to Outages

'Corruption in Inspections

Definition
Percentage of the firm's workforce that is unionized.
Dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm has a bank loan or overdraft from a financial
institution.
Percentage of sales lost due to electricity interruptions including lost production time
from the outage, time needed to reset machines, and production and sales lost due to
processes being interrupted.
Dummy variable equal to 1 if the firm reports that a gift or an informal payment was
expected or requested during inspections from the tax inspectorate, labor, fire and
building safety, sanitation/epidemiology, police, environmental agencies.

41

