NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BOARD INTERLOCKS AND THE PROPENSITY TO BE TARGETED IN PRIVATE
EQUITY TRANSACTIONS
Toby Stuart
Soojin Yim
Working Paper 14189
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14189

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

The authors would like to thank Rakesh Khurana for some initial, provocative discussions on this project;
Tracy Li for helpful research assistance; Guido Imbens, Bill Kerr, Josh Lerner, Steve Kaplan, Ramana
Nanda, Bill Simpson, Jeremy Stein, David Robinson, David Scharfstein, Julie Wulf, Matthew Rhodes-Kropf,
Mitchell Petersen, Scott Stern, and Yael Hochberg for helpful comments. In addition, we acknowledge
Erika McCaffery’s assistance in locating data for this project. Direct correspondence to yim@fas.harvard.edu
or tstuart@hbs.edu. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Toby Stuart and Soojin Yim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Board Interlocks and the Propensity to be Targeted in Private Equity Transactions
Toby Stuart and Soojin Yim
NBER Working Paper No. 14189
July 2008
JEL No. G34
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we examine the propensity for U.S. public companies to become targets for private equity-backed,
take-private transactions. We consider the characteristics of 483 private equity-backed deals in the
2000-2007 period relative to public companies, and find that, in addition to the financial drivers studied
in previous works, board characteristics and director networks are also associated with deal generation.
We find that a company that has a director who has had LBO experience through prior board service
is ~40% more likely to receive a private equity offer, and that the strength of this effect varies with
the influence of the director and the quality of the prior LBO experience. This effect is robust to the
most likely alternative explanations and supports the idea that directors and social networks play an
influential role in change-of-control transactions.

Toby Stuart
Harvard Business School
Rock 211
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
tstuart@hbs.edu
Soojin Yim
Harvard Business School
Baker 220
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
yim@fas.harvard.edu

Social networks among the agents in a market can affect the nature of financial
transactions and their outcomes. When information is privately held, the specific links
among market participants in the social network often determine who acquires
information, when they obtain it, how to interpret its significance, and how to effectively
deploy it. Here, we examine the vast network that selectively interconnects tens of
thousands of members of boards of directors of domestic, publicly held corporations. The
director “interlock” network arises because many company officers and directors serve
on multiple boards, thus creating information pathways between specific pairs of
corporate boards. This is exactly the type of network that we would anticipate will
influence corporate governance-related outcomes; it connects important decision makers
who often operate in an environment characterized by incomplete information.
In this paper, we associate board “interlocks” with firms’ propensities to become
targets in private-equity-backed, take-private transactions. The private equity industry has
expanded rapidly in recent years. In 2006 and 2007 alone, $700B was invested in takeprivate transactions of US public firms. Notwithstanding the market’s abrupt collapse in
August 2007, the industry’s recent upsurge has been called a new wave of private equity,
characterized by cheap debt, large inflows of capital, frequent auctions, the emergence of
club deals, and a preponderance of friendly takeovers. However, despite the
unprecedented scale of recent deals and their marked differences from those of the 1980s,
the drivers of take-private activity have not been systematically examined in a broad
sample of U.S. firms since research on the hostile takeover wave of the 1980s. In addition
to presenting estimates of the effects of basic firm-level characteristics of private equity
transactions, the recent backdrop of friendly deals offers a favorable context in which to

3

study the influence of boards and the role of board interlocks, which we believe yield
interesting insights into the role of social networks in corporate transactions.
Corporate directors are key agents in all potential change of control transactions.
With respect to private equity offers, boards may influence transaction probabilities
through a number of mechanisms. First, because most recent private equity deals have
been friendly, if directors oppose a private equity offer, behind-the-scenes discussions of
a potential bid may never become public. Thus, a board’s opposition may cause the takeprivate process to shutdown before public disclosure occurs. Second, directors may
actively participate in off-the-record discussions that convey to private equity firms the
openness of the companies they represent to take-private offers. Similarly, directors may
be more or less open to the idea of management-initiated discussion about the possibility
of a private equity deal. Third, viewed from the private equity side of the transaction,
firms with certain director characteristics may, ceteris paribus, represent more appealing
targets because the takeover process would be anticipated to occur efficiently or under
more favorable terms. 1 Any or all of these factors would be sufficient to create an
association between board characteristics and the probability that a firm becomes a target
in a PE transaction.
The most novel contribution of this paper is the examination of board interlocks
in driving a firm’s hazard rate of receiving a PE-backed take-private offer (hereafter, “PE
Tx”), presumably by influencing a director’s disposition toward adopting a pro-PE
stance. Two firms are said to be interlocked if, either concurrently or at different points in
time, their boards share a common director. In 2007, approximately 85% of public firms
1

In conversations with partners at private equity firms, we were explicitly told that potential transactions
with experienced, knowledgeable, and “professional” directors were viewed more favorably than the
alternative.

4

were interlocked with at least one other company. Within the complete set of director
interlocks, we take a subset of linkages and create a dummy variable “PE Link” at the
firm/board level, which equals one when a given firm has one or more directors with
links to past take-private experience. For example, Eugene Davis sat on the board of
Metals USA in 2005 when it received a take private offer from Apollo Management. Mr.
Davis also served on the board of Knology Inc from 2004-2007. In 2006 and 2007,
Knology would have PE Link=1, due to the relationship it has with the Metals USA
buyout via Mr. Davis.
Following a large literature in sociology and a growing one in finance and
economics, we believe that director interlocks create information pathways between
firms. These links may lower the cost of acquiring information pertinent to the take
private process. For instance, PE-linked directors of an at-risk firm will have existing
relationships with attorneys, bankers, members of private equity firms, and other
individuals whose services may be required in the take private process. Depending on
their previous experiences, PE-linked directors also may be well positioned to assess the
terms of a potential transaction, the reputation of the private equity firm, the chance that
an initiated transaction will be completed successfully, and so on. Moreover, interlocked
directors may be particularly influential on their respective boards. The relevance of this
influence is that interlocked directors’ views on whether to consider a change of control
transaction and what alternative would be most favorable may garner the greatest weight
in boardroom deliberations. In other words, insofar as board-level decisions emerge from
an intra-board influence process, we anticipate that interlocked directors with private

5

equity experience will exert the strongest “peer effects” in boardroom deliberations about
these transactions.
Our results support the core hypothesis about linkages to past take private deals.
We find that firms with one or more directors who have experienced a private equity
transaction at another firm at which they were a director or officer are, depending upon
the specification, 30-40% more likely to become take-private targets.
We conduct an array of supplemental analyses to address alternative explanations.
Two salient stories for PE Link immediately come to mind. First, the result may reflect a
reverse causal process by which management teams that favor a private equity transaction
recruit directors with PE experience to their boards. Second, it is undoubtedly the case
that directors and firms match to each other on many characteristics, which raises the
possibility that an unobserved variable may drive both PE Link and PE Tx. Regarding the
first concern, we find that PE Link holds for long-seated directors who are unlikely to be
placed on the board by management for the purpose of facilitating a private equity deal.
Similarly, we find that the PE Link holds when we consider only the influence of
directors who held positions on the board of a given at-risk firm since a date that
preceded the time when they gained PE experience through a second directorship. With
respect to possible omitted variables, we find that PE Link holds after controlling for
numerous characteristics that could induce the observed matching between firms and
directors; that the timing of PE Link activation within a firm matters; and that having a
PE-experienced director matters most when the individual director that creates the
interlock is influential and has had a positive prior PE experience. The latter results
suggest that the interlocked director himself has an influence on the outcome, rather than

6

the effect being driven solely by an omitted characteristic. Considered collectively, we
believe these findings support the view that boards play an important role in PE
transactions, and that in particular, the board network serves as a conduit for the
transmission of experience and influence that meaningfully affects financial transactions.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 reviews the related streams of
literature and provides some background on the private equity process. Section 2
describes the data and summary statistics. Section 3 provides baseline results on the
drivers of PE offers and provides estimates of the interlock effect. Section 4 addresses
potential alternative explanations in interpreting the interlock effect. Section 5 presents
additional analysis, and Section 6 concludes.

1. Background and Literature Review

The Private Equity Process. In the typical, friendly private equity deal,
representatives from the private equity firm and target management engage in informal
talks to assess mutual interest in the deal. Participants on both sides of these transactions
describe an active role of social networks in generating leads for potential PE deals. For
instance, conversations with industry veterans revealed that important sources of deal
leads were specific contacts at region- and industry-specialized investment banks (in
addition to the large Wall Street banks), as well as executives with whom they had prior
(professional or social) relationships.
In the early stages of negotiations between management and PE principals, the
board (in cases in which it is not involved from the beginning) is informed of talks and is

7

updated on negotiation proceedings. The board will often then hire its own financial and
legal counsel and form a special committee comprised of independent directors to
evaluate the deal. The merger agreement then will require board approval before it can be
sent out to shareholders via proxy; the actual vote then takes place at a special
shareholder meeting called for the purpose. Thus, although shareholders have the final
vote and management is often the initial contact for negotiations, board approval is a
critical step in the completion of a private equity transaction. The alternative to a friendly
deal for an acquirer is to go directly to the shareholders via a tender offer, but this is
costly due to legal filing fees, mailing costs, defensive tactics by the board, and the risk
of attracting competing bidders. 2

Propensity to Become a PE Target. Hostile takeovers were the norm in the deals
of the 1980s, which have been the main focus of the existing literature on the drivers of
private equity transactions. The papers on 1980s LBOs primarily examined the free cash
flow and undervaluation hypotheses of take private transactions (Lehn and Poulsen 1988;
Opler and Titman 1993; Kieschnick 1998; Halpern, Kieschnick, and Rotenberg 1999).
The handful of papers focusing on more recent deals have added ownership structure and
firm visibility (i.e. analyst coverage, share liquidity) as potential determinants of going
private activity. In a sample with 95 UK deals in 1998-2000, Weir, Laing, and Wright
(2005) find that CEO and institutional ownership positively related to the likelihood of
going private. Fidrmuc, Roosenboom, and van Dijk (2007) use a multinomial logit

2

In addition to the higher cost of completing a hostile bid, members of three of the largest PE firms told us
that their private placement memoranda specifically prohibit the partnership from pursuing hostile buyout
offers. Thus anecdotal result is consistent with the fact that only 2% of the transactions in the data were
hostile deals.

8

framework in a sample of 212 UK deals, 1997-2003, to study the comparative drivers of
MBOs versus PE-backed deals. They find that both MBOs and PE deals are undervalued;
low analyst coverage predicts only MBOs; and that executive ownership drives both
MBOs and PE deals but that institutional ownership only drives PE deals.
The more recent papers have focused on UK deals (primarily due to the
availability of comprehensive UK transaction data from the Centre for Management
Buyout Research), and none have studied the very recent period of private equity activity,
which only peaked in 2006 to 2007. In contrast, our analysis focuses on US deals in the
post-2000 period. Given that the nature of private equity activity has undergone
substantial changes since the 1980s and the area of US deals has not been recently
revisited, we expect a set of baseline estimates that provide a more relevant and timely
picture of the drivers of US private equity activity. We also contribute to this literature by
examining the role of social networks as a correlate of PE activity.

Networks in Markets. The study of board interlocks in particular and social
networks more generally has been pioneered by sociologists. Since the late 1970s,
sociologists have studied the interfirm connections that are created when the same
individual director either simultaneously or sequentially serves on the boards of multiple
companies (e.g., Useem 1984; Mizruchi 1992). For example, Davis (1991) shows that the
decision to adopt poison pills is correlated with director interlocks—anti-takeover
defenses appear to have diffused across director-interlocked boards in a predictable
pattern. In a qualitative study, Khurana (2001) shows that directors search across the
interlock network when identifying and doing diligence on potential CEO candidates.

9

Financial economists recently have adopted some of the ideas and techniques of
social network analysis to study the consequences of director connections for different
market outcomes. Larcker, Richardson, Seary, and Tuna (2005) argue that personal
relationships between CEOs and “independent” directors reduce the independence of
boards. They employ a measure of path distances (the minimum number of
intermediaries that are required to connect two agents) in the director network to assess
the relational proximity between inside and outside directors on boards. Larcker et al.
find that CEO compensation is higher in firms with relationally “cozy” boards. In an
analysis of social networks in the boardroom of a large sample of French companies,
Kramarz and Thesmar (2006) find that CEOs who were former civil servants were more
likely to accumulate directorships (thus creating multiple firm-to-firm interlocks), but
were also more likely to run less profitable firms and were less likely to be replaced for
poor performance. Fich and Shivdasani (2006) find that independent directors that sit on
multiple boards—so-called “busy directors—are associated with weak corporate
governance, and boards dominated by such directors exhibit governance characteristics
similar to that of insider-dominated boards.
Beyond inter-firm board connections, Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2007) study
educational networks shared by mutual fund managers and the directors of the companies
in their portfolio. They find that mutual fund managers perform better on investments
when directors of their portfolio companies are members of their networks. They
interpret their results as showing that network connections confer information advantages
to fund managers. Other recent papers have shown that social networks affect investment
choices and fund returns in venture capital (Sorenson and Stuart 2001; Hochberg,

10

Ljungqvist, and Lu 2007), the availability of financing for real estate transactions
(Garmaise and Moskowitz, 2003), and the governance structure of strategic alliance
contracts (Robinson and Stuart 2007). Thus, social networks are known to influence
transaction patterns and impact real financial outcomes in an array of settings.
We contribute to the work on social networks in finance by examining one of the
most important corporate outcomes: change of control decisions. Not only are board-level
decisions critical in this process, we believe that inter-board relationships also have
meaningful effects. In the remainder of the paper, our objectives are twofold: first, for a
broad sample of firms, we present updated baseline estimates of the probability that a
firm is targeted in a PE Tx; second, we connect the PE Tx propensity to the growing
literature on social networks in financial markets.

2. Data and Summary Statistics

Sample of going private transactions. Our sample consists of 657 deals
announced from January 1, 2000 to December 31, 2007 and identified as “Going Private”
transactions in Thomson’s SDC Platinum M&A database and Capital IQ. 3 We collected
all transactions from both databases and deleted duplicate observations. These are US
targets, which we could verify traded on the New York, American, or Nasdaq stock
exchanges on the announcement date. Deals are categorized as “PE” if a private equity
firm is part of the acquiring party, “MBO” if the deal is a management-led buyout
without private equity involvement, or “Other,” which includes financial buyers such as

3

This includes 21 transactions from SDC flagged as “LBO” but appropriately considered “Going Private”
upon reading descriptions of the deal.

11

wealthy individuals investors (e.g., Carl Icahn) or other unaffiliated investor groups.
Table 1 shows that PE deals comprise 483 of the 657 deals, and constitute $800B of
$850B of value in going private activity in 2000-2007. The MBO category is much
smaller in total deal value and average deal size, and as PE activity has expanded in
recent years the share of going private activity in the MBO category has fallen—
especially as management itself increasingly turns to private equity firms to help finance
deals it originates. PE deals are approximately 8 times (mean) and 12.5 times (median)
the size of take private transactions that are management-led. The 483 PE deals involve
454 firm-years and 435 distinct firms, as competing bids and withdrawn bids are possible
in our sample of announced transactions. These 454 firm-year observations on PE-backed
deal announcements comprise our dependent variable of interest, i.e. PE Tx=1.

Comparison of PE target versus all public firm characteristics . To explain
the propensity of firms to be targeted in PE-backed going private offers, we compare
firms that received a PE Tx offer to the population of all US public firms from which the
take private transactions are drawn. We collected firm characteristics broadly relating to
financial situation, ownership and governance structure, and network characteristics. Data
on stock prices and company financials came from CRSP and Compustat. Institutional
ownership data comes from the Thomson Financial CDA/Spectrum 13F database,
compiled from SEC filings of institutional money managers who control over $100M of
13F securities. Data on ownership by insiders (officers and directors of the firm) come
from Compact Disclosure. 4 We obtained information on corporate directors from the
4

One important limitation of the insider ownership data is that Compact Disclosure does not distinguish
directors’ from executives’ holdings. We know only the total of insider holdings in the firm.

12

Directors Database, which provides board composition data for public firms trading on
the New York, American, and Nasdaq stock exchanges in 2000-2007. 5 In addition to
directors’ identities, the database includes characteristics such as insider/outsider status,
each director’s primary company affiliation and primary job title. Using this database, we
construct variables such as board size, fraction of inside directors, CEO-chairman duality,
and other board characteristics related to director attributes. The database also contains
information on public firms’ top executives, 6 which we use to determine other positions
held by directors.
Table 2 shows differences in means and medians of basic attributes of the
companies in the data broken out by whether or not firms have received a PE-backed take
private offer. Differences between the PE and Public groups are significant for most of
the financial variables, but the differences in measures of size become much less
pronounced using median comparisons (i.e. for total capitalization and assets); this
reflects the greater right skew of the size of public firms. Also, it appears that although
PE firms are smaller, they have larger EBITDA and free cash flow, defined as (EBITDAinterest-taxes-dividends). The PE and public samples also show very strong differences in
ownership and board structure, with PE firms having higher institutional ownership,
smaller boards, and a lower proportion of inside directors.

Network measures. The Directors Database provides data on all public board
memberships held by a director over the period 2000-2007. We are able to use this data

5

The Directors Database is the most comprehensive dataset on corporate directors, but it dates back only to
the year 2000. Data availability rather than substantive considerations led to our choice of time period.
6
Coverage of executives is somewhat inconsistent across firms, however, with no satisfactory answer from
the data vendor on which executives get reported.

13

to track directors across firms and over time to construct measures of director experience
and of interlocking relationships between boards. We say a focal firm i is interlocked
with firm j at time t (Int itj = 1) if there exists a director x on firm i at time t who either
serves on the board of j or is an executive officer of j at time t’, for some t’ ≤ t . This
interlock measure is intended to capture connections a firm has with other companies via
its board of directors. As we have constructed it, this is an asymmetric measure of
interlock (different papers have used different definitions) because it is possible that
Int itj = 1 but Int ijt ≠ 1 if linked director x is on the board of i but is a non-board executive

of j. We do not limit interlocks to board-to-board relationships because we believe board
members can derive sources of influence and information from other companies, either as
directors or executives.
Note as well that our definition of an interlock link leads to a stock variable, in
that connections in the network need not be contemporaneous. We believe that this is the
appropriate way to measure links because directors serving on boards in the present carry
their previous learning, experience, and contacts with them to the boards on which they
currently and subsequently serve.
A firm’s Board Interlock measure is the firm’s total interlock count with other
public firms, or

∑ Int
j ≠i

j
it

. Table 2 shows that the median public company is interlocked

with five other firms. In comparison, the median firm receiving a PE-backed going
private offer has eight interlocks. Table 3 Panel A shows the distribution of Board
Interlock in 2007, and we see that only 10% of firms are “isolates”; all members of such
firms’ boards appear only once in the Director’s Database. All other companies are

14

connected to at least one other firm via its board interlock network. For future analysis,
we also define an Interlock Dummy that equals 1 if Board Interlock>0, and 0 otherwise.
We also consider network measures at the director (rather than firm) level. In the
social networks literature the simplest measure of centrality is an agent’s degree score,
which is the number of links involving the agent. In our case, a link is a director on firm i
holding a director or executive position on firm j. Thus, analogous to our definition of
board interlock, we define a director’s centrality to be the number of firms on which he
has held a director or executive position, currently or in the past. Table 3 Panel B shows
the distribution of Director Centrality among directors serving on boards in 2007. We can
see that 58% of directors serve only one board; the remaining 42% create all of the
linkages in the data. At the firm level, we can construct an average centrality measure
from the centralities of the individual directors on each board. Table 2 shows that at the
median public firm, the average director serves on the boards of 0.7 other firms.
The variable of primary interest in our paper is “PE Link”—whether an “at risk”
firm is interlocked through a shared director with another firm that in the past received a
going private offer; we are interested in whether this relationship makes the firm more
likely to itself receive a PE-backed take private offer. Formally, PELink it = 1 if
Int itj = 1 for some firm j and j received a going private offer in t’<t. Here, there are two

things of note: the past transaction must strictly precede the year “at risk,” and we
consider the broader sample of going private transactions (rather than only PE-backed
ones) where the linked director could have acquired the prior transaction experience.
Although we are specifically interested in the realization of PE-backed offers as the
outcome variable (PE Tx), we believe general take private experience is valuable to

15

directors and can influence their attitude toward future take-private transactions, PEbacked or otherwise.
Table 4 shows the number of public firms that have identified interlock
relationships with take-private targets in prior years, that is, have PE Link=1. However, a
data truncation problem arises if we rely on the 2000-2007 Directors Database to
construct our PE Link variable. Because PE Link=1 only if we are able to match one or
more of a firm’s directors to a second firm that experienced a take-private offer in a
preceding year, the PE Link variable in the earlier years of our sample is severely
truncated. For example, for a public firm “at risk” in 2003, we identify the directors that
sit on the board of the firm in 2003, and consider the other boards that they served on in
2000, 2001, and 2002. If any of the firms that these directors served on in those years had
received a going private proposal, then PE Link=1. This naturally means that firms at risk
in the year 2000—the first in our dataset—cannot have identified links to going private
deals, since we do not have data on director composition prior to that year.
To alleviate this problem, we hand-collected data on all take-private transactions
from 1995-1999 and obtained the directors that served on the boards of these companies
in the year of the transaction using Compact Disclosure. Then we matched these directors
to those in the Directors Database to identify all instances of interlocks between earlier
(1995-1999) period going private transactions and active directors in the 2000-2007
period. Table 4 shows that this addition makes a substantial difference in the earlier years
of the sample, with 10% interlocks among all firms and 25% interlocks among firms
receiving PE offers in 2000, which otherwise would be 0%. However, the monotonic
increase in the proportion of interlocks from 2000-2007 still remains, and likely indicates

16

that the truncation problem has been attenuated but not eliminated. As all specifications
include year fixed effects, the major implication of this data truncation is that the effect of
PE Link on propensity to receive private equity-backed going private proposals is less
precisely estimated in the earlier years of the sample. However, it is also clear that the
sample interlock average of 18% for all public firms and 34% for all firms receiving
private equity-backed offers understates the true interlock rate for boards of directors. By
2007, these percentages grow to 29% and 49%, respectively.
Table 5 also gives additional characteristics of the PE Link variable. A firm-year
can have PE Link=1 through the presence of one or more director who have experienced
the same or multiple different prior deals. Panel A shows that 78% of PE Link=1 firmyears are generated by a single link between the focal firm-year and a prior going private
experience. Panel B shows that 94% of directors who “induce” PE Link=1 have only
experienced a single deal; with a maximum of 3 deals experienced by 1% of involved
directors, there are no directors who are disproportionately responsible for collecting and
propagating PE experiences. This will become important later, as it does not appear that
there exists a coterie of directors who are recruited to public firm boards because they are
known to be friendly to PE-led take private transactions.

3. Baseline Results

Table 6 shows logit regression results of the probability of a firm becoming a PEbacked target. Columns (2)-(4) of the table incorporate financial ratios and measures of
equity ownership that have commonly been considered in the literature. In (2) we

17

consider market-based variables such as market capitalization, market-to-book, and
liquidity (share turnover), and find that, consistent with the literature, smaller, more
undervalued, and less liquid firms are more likely to be PE targets. For a sense of
economic magnitudes 7 : a one standard deviation increase in the following covariates
results in a (parentheses) decrease in the probability of becoming a target: size (23%),
market-to-book (60%), and liquidity (25%). Column (3) includes measures of leverage
and cash flow, but it is interesting to note that despite the prevalent practitioner concern
over cash flow and debt capacity in private equity transactions, neither the debt to total
capitalization ratio nor free cash flow consistently predict the likelihood of receiving a
take private offer. This finding is consistent with prior research, and with the idea that ex
ante leverage is not as relevant as post-deal leverage capacity.
In (4) we add covariates related to firms’ equity ownership structure. We find that
a 10 pt increase in institutional ownership raises the probability of a deal by 17%, while a
10 pt increase in insider shareholdings raises the probability by 9%. The positive effects
of these ownership variables could arise for a number of reasons. First, PE firms may be
most attracted to firms with concentrated shareholder bases because mobilizing support
for transactions involving firms with concentrated ownership is comparatively simple.
Second, because executives of the company are typically bought out at a premium to the
current market price and then (assuming their continued involvement with the firm) are
reloaded with equity in the private company, insiders with large ownerships stakes may

7

Estimates of effects on outcome probability are based on coefficients in column (6), which will constitute
our baseline specification. Estimates of effects are calculated as follows: define odds(X) as p/(1-p) where
p is the outcome success probability evaluated at the vector of covariate values X. Then for a dxk change in
covariate Xk with coefficient estimate bk, exp(bk*dxk)=odds(X+ bk*dxk)/odds(X). Because in our sample 1p ≈ 1, exp(bk*dxk) approximately gives the ratio of p evaluated at (X+ bk*dxk ) to p evaluated at X; or
equivalently, the percent increase in the outcome success probability relative to baseline due to dxk.

18

have a particularly strong incentive to secure PE-led bids. Third, large institutional
owners—particularly those that are unsatisfied with a company’s management team and
share price performance—often pressure directors and managers of the firm to consider a
change of control transaction.
Column (5) extends the baseline results to include board-level covariates. We find
that a large board is negatively related to receiving a PE offer, possibly due to
coordination costs that may deter a PE offer or hinder decision-making. We also include
an Interlock Dummy set equal to 1 if the at-risk firm has any interlocks, past or present,
with other companies. We find that being connected to other firms increases the
likelihood of PE offer by 61%. There are a number of possible interpretations of this
result. First, by definition, interlocked directors have more public board experiences than
do non-interlocked directors. Thus, they are likely to be perceived as professional by
potential PE bidders. Transaction costs with experience boards in the take-private process
are likely to be lowered, and members of the board itself may perceive a more
straightforward process when experienced directors are on hand. Second, boards that are
interlocked are privy to a greater amount of the information flow across the broader board
network. We surmise that these interlocks increase the likelihood that a focal company
will be directly networked to potential bidders. These factors are likely to positively
stimulate PE interest in a company, and vice versa.
Columns (6) includes basic controls for industry-level effects in the form of
industry fixed effects defined at the Fama-French 48 level. Column (6) will constitute the
baseline specification for analysis going forward.

19

Turning to the PE Link measure, we find based on the column (6) point estimate
that a company is 42 percent more likely to become a PE target when it has one or more
directors that previously served on the board of a company that has attracted a takeprivate offer. Based on the pattern of attenuation in the coefficient on PE Link across
Columns (1)-(6) in the table, it is clear that the ownership structure covariates, general
board characteristics, and industry effects do drive a meaningful amount of covariation
between board interlocks to prior going private transactions and the probability of being
targeted in a PE Tx. However, the PE Link effect remains statistically robust. Thus, if we
view the Interlock Dummy as capturing the effect on PE Tx of generic connectedness to
other firms, we can see that there is an additional effect of specific connectedness to take
private offer-receiving firms on PE Tx, as captured by PE Link. 8

4. Endogeneity Concerns

Although the PE link is statistically robust, the question remains whether the
effect should be interpreted as causal. We know from the sociology literature (e.g., Kono,
Palmer, Friedland, and Zafonte 1998) that directors are not randomly placed onto boards.
The presence of a PE deal-experienced director may be picking up correlation with
predictors of PE deals not captured in the model. In the absence of a persuasive
instrument for the presence of a PE-experienced director, there are two broad sources of
8

PE Link is not technically an interaction effect on Interlock Dummy, because construction of the PE Link
variable uses supplemental data from 1995-1999 (as described in text). Thus, it is possible that Interlock
Dummy (which is based only on 2000-07 directorships) =0 while PE Link=1 (if the link is with a prior
transaction in, say, 1997). This, however, is the case in <1% of PE Link=1 observations; for the remaining
observations PE Link=1 implies Interlock Dummy=1. If we do interpret PE Link as an interaction on
Interlock Dummy, we estimate that PE Link, when considered jointly with the Interlock Dummy, actually
then has an effect of increasing the likelihood of offer by ~130% relative to baseline.

20

endogeneity we most worry about: 1) reverse causation, as board composition is
manipulated by a management team eager to do a PE deal, and 2) director-firm matching
on an omitted characteristic that determines board service and predicts PE Tx.
First, there is the concern that because most of the recent private equity deals have
been friendly, management is not only a willing participant but an active instigator.
Management retained in the deal often are awarded generous option packages and large
ownership stakes in the newly capitalized firm. Given these incentives, it is plausible that
management plays an active role in shopping the company around to private equity firms,
and likely can wield a great deal of influence in how attractive a target their company
appears to a private equity firm. If a deal-friendly board is one such component, we may
be concerned that the presence of deal-friendly or deal-experienced directors just reflects
the influence of forward-thinking management. We will address this by examining the
role of directors with various levels of tenure on the board, including those whose board
service preceded their PE deal exposure in the interlocked firm.
Second, there is a concern that directors and firms are matching on underlying
characteristics that are correlated with PE deal activity. Then the fact that a director
previously matched with a firm that received a going private offer and also currently sits
on a company’s board, suggests similarities between the past and current firm that would
make the current firm more likely to receive a PE offer. We will address this concern in a
number of ways. First, we control for what we believe to be the most likely potential
correlates of PE activity, which include industry, geography, governance, and director
attributes. To deal with the possibility that directors and firms are matching on more
generic correlates of PE activity, we also construct a measure of susceptibility of the

21

focal firm to becoming a PE target, using the PE-susceptibility of interlocked firms as a
proxy. Second, we explore the timing of PE Link activation within a firm, by exploiting
the movement of directors across firms and also by using fixed effects. Lastly, we
examine the effect of characteristics specific to the director who is responsible for the PE
linkage—under the null that if the “PE Link” effect is due solely to matching then neither
the influence of the director on the board nor the outcome of the director’s experience in
a previous deal should have predictive power in the regressions.

Management manipulation. In Table 7 we address the concern of reverse
causation, that PE-experienced directors may be recruited to a firm by management in
anticipation of doing a PE deal. In column (1), we consider only the effect of what we
call “preexisting” directors. These are directors whose board service at the at-risk firm
precedes their PE experience at a second firm in which they are directors or officers, and
which activates the PE Link dummy for the focal firm. Alternately, “migrated” directors
join the at-risk firm only after they acquired their PE experience. Migrated directors may
be candidates who were specifically recruited by management looking to populate a PEfriendly board, but this would not be the case for preexisting directors whose service on
the focal board began before they obtained PE experience through board membership at a
second company. If the PE Link effect is driven solely by migrated directors, the result
could be interpreted as indicating that pro-PE company insiders attempt to actively build
PE-friendly boards.
We find that preexisting interlocks still predict the hazard of becoming a target.
However, a shortcoming of this analysis is that we can only locate directors on boards of

22

firms only back to 2000, due to limitations of the Directors Database. For example, if we
know a director experienced a PE deal in Company A in 1997 (from our SDC supplement
of 1995-1999 transactions), but this director appears in Company B in 2000 (from
Directors Database which covers 2000-2007), this director is labeled “migrated” because
we cannot verify that he served on Company B’s board prior to 1997. The result is that
many directors are actually labeled “migrated” who in fact are likely “preexisting”; this
we believe explains the marginal significance of results in column (1).
Alternately, in columns (2)-(3) we consider only the PE Link effect of directors
who have over 2 or over 3 years of tenure on the board. These directors are not recent
recruits to the board, and hence likely are not specific hires for the purpose of facilitating
a private equity deal. In column (2), for example, for a firm at risk in 2003, we only
consider the effect of PE-experienced directors who have served on the board at least
through 2002 and 2001. Again, because we only have directors data back to 2000, this
regression only makes sense for observations in years ≥ 2002. This results in fewer
observations overall relative to column (1), but here we consider the effect of 4,724
tenured directors relative to the 3,352 preexisting directors in column (1). We find that
interlocks of these tenured directors still predicts the likelihood of receiving a PE offer.
Column (3) examines the effect of directors with 3 or more years of board service; results
are also significant, although more marginal, which we attribute to fewer overall
observations in the sample ( ≥ 2003 only) and fewer observations of such long-tenured
directors.

23

Director-firm matching. Even if management is not directly responsible for
manipulating director composition in advance of a PE deal, we might be concerned that a
director’s joint participation in a prior PE-involved firm and the current at-risk firm
reflects some underlying similarities between the two firms that make them both more
prone to take private offers. There are a few obvious candidates for omitted attributes that
may determine both board service and private equity activity, such as industry,
geography, firm governance characteristics, or director attributes/characteristics. We will
consider these in turn in Table 8.
Just as merger activity can occur in industry-specific waves, take-private activity
may have an industry component as well. In addition, board service may reflect industryspecific expertise. To eliminate the possibility that industry-specific relationships are
driving the interlocks and the likelihood of receiving a take private offer, in column (1)
we consider only the effect of PE Link where the interlocked firm belongs to a different
industry from the focal firm. Such a link cannot reflect matching on industry-specific
characteristics that would be predictive of within-industry private equity activity. But we
find that PE Link here still strongly predicts the probability of becoming a target.
In column (2), we control for the geographic proximity of the at-risk firm to all
previous take private transactions. Here, the concern is that directors tend to serve on
geographically proximate firms, and that such firms may share similar likelihood of take
private activity (due to industry clustering, regional economic conditions, geographic
focus of PE firms, etc). To address this issue, we compute, for every firm in each year, a
PE geographic proximity variable that captures an “at risk” firm’s proximity to the
volume of all prior PE activity. We define PE Proximity for firm i at time t as

24

1

∑ 1 + d (i, j ) , where j is a firm that receives a PE offer in t’<t, and d(i, j) is the physical
j ≠i

distance between firms i and j. 9 This measure weights the contribution of each firm j
experiencing a PE offer according to the inverse distance between the location of the PE
target and the focal firm i. Summing these weighted contributions across all firms j
produces a distance-weighted measure of the proximity of all PE activity to each focal
firm i. The highest values of this variable are achieved for firms that are physically
located nearest to the largest volume of prior take-private transactions. In column (2),
however, we find no evidence of geographic clustering in PE targets; special proximity to
past targets does not increase the predicted hazard of becoming a target and PE Link
continues to hold.
We may also be concerned that board service and take private activity may be
correlated with governance characteristics—i.e. “lazy” directors are drawn to poorly
governed firms, which then make ripe PE targets. We attempt to control for some basic
measures of governance, including whether the CEO also holds the chairman role and the
number of inside directors on the board—both of which reflect a lack of board
independence. 10 However, column (3) shows that CEO-chairman duality does not predict

9

We calculate distance d(i,j) by locating firms in space according to their latitudes and longitudes. Using
information available from the U.S. Postal Service, we assigned the longitude and latitude coordinates for
the center point of every zip code to each firm lying within that zip code. Over small distances, one might
use Euclid’s formula to compute the distance between two locations; however, the curvature of the earth
seriously affects these calculations over areas as large as the continental United States. Thus, we calculated
the distance between each set of points (A and B) using spherical geometry, using
d(A,B) = 687.56 * {arccos[sin(lat A) * sin(lat B) + cos(lat A) * cos(lat B) * cos(Δ)]}
where the units for latitude (lat) are radians, and Δ is the absolute value of the difference between the
longitude of A and the longitude of B in radians. The constant, 687.56, converts the distance into units of
five miles.
10
Ideally we would have a governance measure comparable to the GIM measure; however, this is only
available for S&P1500 firms which are large firms that tend not to be vulnerable as PE targets.

25

PE deals, and that inside directors have a marginal effect directionally opposite to what
we would predict under a governance hypothesis; PE Link remains robust.
In columns (4)-(5) we examine whether boards attract directors with a certain type
of expertise, which may also be correlated with PE activity. In column (4) we find that
the presence of financial experts 11 on a board—such as CFOs or VPs of Finance—is
associated with a lower likelihood of a PE offer. One possible explanation for this effect
is that boards with financially savvy directors may be better managed and leave less room
for improvement by a private equity firm. Column (5) shows that the presence of
financial investors 12 —directors who serve as Managing Directors or General Partners of
asset management firms—is associated with a higher likelihood of PE offer. This is
consistent either with such directors steering the companies toward PE deals, or being
invited to PE-leaning firms to share their expertise. We do not claim any causality in
these director attributes; however the PE Link effect remains unaffected even after
controlling for them.
Beyond these specific characteristics, we may wonder whether there is a general
“PE Susceptibility” factor on which directors match to the boards they serve on—i.e.
whether directors systematically match with companies with certain underlying
susceptibilities to going private deals—which we should be controlling for in our
regression. If there is a shared PE-susceptibility factor among interlocked firms, we
should be able to construct the focal firm’s factor using the interlocked firms’ factors as a
proxy. Thus we construct a measure of a focal firm’s PE-susceptibility by using the
11

These are directors whose job title at the company with which they are primarily affiliated contains the
phrase “Finan.”
12
These are directors whose job title contains the phrase “Managing Director” or “Partner,” or whose
primary company name contains the phrase “capital ” “investment” “ venture” or “ asset” (note this is
sensitive to use of spaces).

26

average of interlocked firms’ predicted probabilities of receiving a PE offer. We define
PE Susceptibility for firm i at time t as

1
BoardInterlock it

∑ pred Pr( PETx

jt

= 1) , where j

j

is a firm such that Int itj = 1 and pred Pr( PETx jt = 1) is the predicted probability that the
interlocked firm j receives a PE offer, which are the fitted values from the baseline logit
model excluding PE Link. In column (6) we find that while there is evidence of director
matching to firms with underlying susceptibility to PE deals, the PE Link measure is
robust to this factor.
Timing of link activation. There are a few additional steps we can take to
address the possibility that the PE Link effect is driven by director-firm matching. First,
we can examine the timing of the “activation” of the PE Link within a firm and exploit
the movement of directors across firms. In Table 9 column (1), we include a dummy
variable Chosen Firm that equals 1 for firm i if firm i at some point in time acquires a
director who has PE experience. If the PE Link effect is due to matching, then conditional
on being a firm that is chosen by a PE-experienced director, the timing of PE Link=1
should not matter. However, we find that the firm-years that specifically have PE Link=1
do strongly predict PE activity, even after controlling for the fact that this firm is a
“Chosen Firm.”
In column (2) of table 9, we track directors who leave a take private-offerreceiving-firm pre-offer, to see whether other firms that they proceed to serve on have a
higher likelihood of PE offer. If the PE Link effect is due to matching, then the fact that
these directors once matched to firms that received a PE offer would suggest that the
subsequent firms they match with also have a higher likelihood of PE offer; however,
because they leave the firm prior to PE offer and do not actually experience the PE deal
27

firstand, they cannot be transferring their PE experience to these subsequent firms. We
construct a dummy variable Left Director that equals 1 if a firm-year has a director who
left a firm that later received a PE offer. We find that this variable is not significant in
predicting PE activity, and that PE Link effect is still robust even after controlling for
“Left Director.”
Finally, to exploit within-firm variation of PE Link activation, we estimate a fixed
effects specification using a linear probability model. Since a fixed effects logit drops all
groups with no within-group variation (~95% of the firm-years in our sample), we opt for
a linear probability model. We find that inclusion of firm fixed effects in column (4)
causes the PE Link estimate to increase (column (3) results without firm effects are
shown as a comparison). This is actually consistent with the findings in columns (1),
which seem to indicate that firms that PE-experienced directors serve on are actually
poorer candidates for PE deals (perhaps because they are higher quality firms in ways
unaccounted for by our observables). Taken together, the evidence suggests that the
specific firm-years in which a PE-experienced director occupies the board has
incremental explanatory power for likelihood of receiving a PE offer.
Director-specific effects. In Table 10 we consider various characteristics specific
to the director responsible for the interlock to determine whether the magnitude of the PE
Link effect is sensitive to the influence or the experience of the director involved. If the
PE Link effect does sensibly depend on measures of director influence, this would seem
to refute the hypothesis that the results are driven simply by director-firm matching. In
columns (1)-(3), we consider interactions on PE Link where the PE Link director is a
non-executive chairman, dual CEO-chair, and a retired director, respectively. The

28

estimates are too noisy to yield statistical significance; however point estimates would
suggest that an outsider chairman would wield substantial influence in deliberations over
going private transactions whereas an insider chairman would not—this is fully
consistent with standard practice of independent directors forming a special committee to
negotiate transactions while insiders are sidelined. In addition, if the linked director is a
retiree—i.e. no longer holds a position of power on a primary company—this would
suggest that he is less influential on the board as well.
In column (4) of table 10, we examine whether PE Link has a bigger effect in
companies with less influential directors, as measured by the average centrality of the
directors on board. “Low board centrality” is a dummy variable that =1 for firms whose
directors fall in the lowest quartile of board network connectedness. The positive
interaction effect (PE Link)*(Low board centrality) shows that having a PE-experienced
director on board is especially conducive to PE offers in companies where the general
profile of the board members is relatively low. In such cases, we hypothesize that the
experienced director’s credentials will lead to his having relatively greater influence on
the agenda and outcomes of boardroom deliberations.
In columns (5)-(8) we explore the nature of the experience the PE Link director
may have been imprinted by in the prior linked deal. In column (5) we consider interlocks
to deals experienced by the PE Link director where the deal was withdrawn and never
completed. In column (6) we consider interlocks to deals where the PE offer was received
poorly by the market—where the announcement day returns of the deal were below the
median of going private deal announcement day returns. Both capture instances where
the director’s prior PE experience may have been a negative or unsuccessful one; and

29

both have substantially negative coefficients that effectively wipe out the PE Link effect.
This suggests that directors who have had prior negative experiences do not then go on to
encourage subsequent firms to be receptive to private equity offers. In column (7) we
consider PE Links by directors who were insiders in management-led buyouts in their
prior PE experience. These directors substantially enhance the PE Link effect; we
attribute this to the fact that their prior experience consists of an active initiation and
management of a prior PE deal, in contrast to experienced directors who may have just
played a sympathetic but supportive role. Lastly, it is interesting to consider PE Link
effects of directors who were MBO insiders on deals that had low announcement day
returns vs high announcement day returns. In contrast to directors who may find a high
stock market reaction to a PE deal desirable (for reasons of fiduciary duty, etc.), an MBO
insider would likely favor a low announcement day return because this means he gets to
acquire the company cheaply. Column (8) shows that while a low announcement day
return negates the effect of PE Link for a non-MBO insider, for an MBO insider the
effect of having experienced a deal with low announcement day return is quite powerful
in predicting the likelihood of PE offer in the current firm. These results are consistent
with the hypothesis that directors carry forward their experiences from other firms, and
use their influence within the board to affect outcomes.

5. Further Analysis
Lastly we try to address the concern that the results are driven by differences in
firm characteristics of the PE Link=1 vs PE Link=0 samples. For instance, firms that
have PE Links tend to be bigger and have larger boards, since such characteristics makes

30

interlocking relationships with other companies more likely. However, we know from our
baseline regressions that such characteristics are also correlated with the likelihood of
becoming a PE target. If our baseline specification inadequately controls for such
characteristics, then we might then be concerned that it is the differences in the
distribution of such covariates between the PE Link=1 vs PE Link=0 samples that might
be driving the results, and not the effect of the PE Link variable itself. 13 Ideally we would
have two comparison samples that are comparable for all covariates but differ only one
dimension, for PE Link.
If we think of our PE Link variable as a treatment indicator, we can apply
propensity score-based methods developed in the program evaluation literature to achieve
covariate balance in the treatment and control samples (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983;
Hirano, Imbens and Ridder 2003). The propensity score, p(X), is defined as the
probability of receiving treatment conditional on the covariates X, and is typically
estimated as a logit of the treatment indicator on X. In Inverse Probability of Treatment
Weighting (IPTW), treated and control observations are weighted by 1/p(X) and 1/(1p(X)), respectively, in the regression of interest. Intuitively, observations with
characteristics that result in high likelihood of treatment, p(X), are down-weighted in the
treatment group; similarly, observations with a low likelihood of treatment are downweighted in the control group. This procedure evens out differences in the covariates
between the control and treatment groups. Imbens-Wooldridge (2007) also suggest
trimming observations with p(X) outside of the interval [0.1, 0.9] to eliminate poor
candidates for matching across the control and treatment samples. The regression on the
13

Although, bigger firms with bigger boards are less likely to become PE targets given our baseline
estimates—so that it would likely not be these particular covariates that we would be concerned are driving
the PE Link effect.

31

weighted, trimmed sample then produces estimates of treatment effects independent of
distributional differences in the initial control and treatment groups.
Table 11 Panel A shows the differences in covariates between the PE Link=1 and
PE Link=0 samples. Panel A1 shows substantial differences in means for all covariates in
the initial sample. Panel A2 shows that after inverse-weighting and trimming, none of the
differences are significant at conventional levels. Panel B column (2) then shows the
regression results on this balanced sample; the results remain unchanged from our initial
baseline specification. Despite substantial differences in the characteristics of firms that
have versus lack PE-experienced directors, the IPTW method allows us to ascertain that
those differences do not account for the PE Link effect.

6. Conclusion
We have considered many alternative stories that might explain the relationship
between having a director on board who has had take-private transaction experience and
the likelihood of becoming a PE target. However, we find that the PE Link effect is quite
robust. In addition, we find that the strength of this effect seems to vary with
characteristics specific to the director responsible to the link, which is supportive of our
causal interpretation of this PE Link effect.
The evidence we have presented suggests that boards do play an important role in
private equity deal generation, particularly in the more recent deals characterized by
friendly relations between offerers and targets. To the extent that directors are imprinted
by experiences at other firms and have the power to influence their colleagues on the
board, the board interlock network in which a firm is embedded will be relevant in the

32

conversion of a potential target to an actual target. More generally, social networks are
important feature of many financial transactions involving individual agents to entire
firms.

33

References

Barnea, Amir, and Ilan Guedj, 2007, CEO Compensation and Director Networks,
Working paper.
Burt, Ronald S., 2006, Interlocking Directorates Behind the S&P Indices, Working paper.
Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini , and Christopher J. Malloy, 2007, The Small World of
Investing: Board Connections and Mutual Fund Returns, NBER Working Paper
13121.
Davis, Gerald F., 1991, Agents Without Principles? The Spread of the Poison Pill
Through the Intercorporate Network, Administrative Science Quarterly 36, 583613.
Dooley, Peter C., 1969, The Interlocking Directorate, American Economic Review 59,
314-323.
Fich, Eliezer M., and Anil Shivdasani, 2006, Are Busy Boards Effective Monitors,
Journal of Finance 61, 689-724.
Fich, Eliezer M., and Lawrence J. White, 2003, CEO Compensation and Turnover: The
Effects of Mutually Interlocked Boards, Wake Forest Law Review 38, 935-959.
Fidrmuc, Jana P., Peter Roosenboom, and Dick van Dijk, 2007, Do Private Equity
Investors Take Firms Private for Different Reasons? Working paper, Erasmus
Research Institute of Management.
Garmaise, Mark J., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2003, Informal Financial Networks: Theory
and Evidence, Review of Financial Studies 16, 1007-40.

34

Hallock, Kevin F., 1997, Reciprocally Interlocking Boards of Directors and Executive
Compensation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32, 331-344.
Halpern, Paul, Robert Kieschnick, and Wendy Rotenberg, 1999, On the Heterogeneity of
Leveraged Going Private Transactions, Review of Financial Studies 12, 281-309.
Hirano, Keisuke, Guido Imbens, and Geert Ridder, 2003, Efficient Estimation of Average
Treatment Effects Using the Estimated Propensity Score, Econometrica 71, 11611189.
Hochberg, Yael V., Alexander Ljungqvist, and Yang Lu, 2007, Whom You Know
Matters: Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance, Journal of
Finance 62, 251-300.
Imbens, Guido and Jeffrey Wooldridge, 2007, Lecture 1: Estimation of Average
Treatment Effects Under Unconfoundedness, “What’s New in Econometrics”
NBER Summer 2007 Seminar.
Khurana, Rakesh, 2002. Searching For a Corporate Savior : the Irrational Quest for
Charismatic CEOs (Princeton University Press, Princeton).
Kieschnick, Robert, 1998, Free Cash Flow and Stockholder Gains in Going Private
Transactions Revisited, Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 25, 187-202.
Kono, Clifford, Donald Palmer, Roger Friedland, and Matthew Zafonte, 1998, Lost in
Space: The Geography of Corporate Interlocking Directorates, American Journal of
Sociology 103, 863-911.
Kramarz, Francis, and David Thesmar, 2006, Social Networks in the Boardroom,
Working paper, IZA Discussion Paper 1940.

35

Larcker, David F., Scott A. Richardson, Andrew Seary, and A. Irem Tuna, 2005, Back
Door Links Between Directors and Executive Compensation, Working paper.
Lehn, Kenneth, and Annette Poulsen, 1989, Free Cash Flow and Stockholder Gains in
Going Private Transactions, Journal of Finance 44, 771-787.
Mizruchi, Mark S, 1992. The Structure of Corporate Political Action (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge).
Mizruchi, Mark S., 1996, What Do Interlocks Do? An Analysis, Critique, and
Assessment of Research on Interlocking Directors, Annual Review of Sociology 22,
271-298.
Opler, Tim, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, The Determinants of Leveraged Buyout
Activity: Free Cash Flow vs. Financial Distress Costs, Journal of Finance 48, 19851999.
Robinson, David, and Toby E. Stuart, 2007, Network Effects in the Governance of
Strategic Alliances, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 23, 242-273.
Rosenbaum, Paul, and Donald Rubin, 1983, The Central Role of the Propensity Score in
Observational Studies for Causal Effects, Biometrika 70, 41-55.
Simons, Tomas, and Luc Renneboog, 2005, Public-to-Private Transactions: LBOs,
MBOs, MBIs and IBOs, Working Paper, ECGI Working Paper Series in Finance
94/2005.
Sorenson, Olav, and Toby E. Stuart, 2001, Syndication Networks and the Spatial
Distribution of Venture Capital Investments, American Journal of Sociology 106,
1546-1588.
Useem M, 1984. The Inner Circle (Oxford University Press, New York).

36

Weir, Charlie, David Laing, and Mike Wright, 2005, Incentive Effects, Monitoring
Mechanisms and the Market for Corporate Control: An Analysis of the Factors
Affecting Public to Private Transactions in the UK, Journal of Business Finance &
Accounting 32, 909-943.

37

Table 1. Going private transactions, 2000-2007
Data on going private transactions for firms trading on the NYSE, American, and Nasdaq stock exchanges, publicly announced between
January 1, 2000 and December 31, 2007. "PE" deals are transactions in which a private equity firm led the acquiring party or was identified as
providing financing. "MBOs" are deals identified as management-led with no private equity involvement. "Other" includes offers made by other
financial buyers (i.e. Carl Icahn, powerful families such as the Pritzkers of Chicago, etc.)

Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
All years

PE
54
24
27
49
36
70
105
118
483

Year
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

PE
444
198
347
161
872
965
2,878
3,190

All years

1,700

Number of deals
MBO
Other
25
14
21
10
23
8
20
5
12
2
5
7
11
3
6
2
123

51

Mean deal value ($MM)
MBO
Other
92
772
49
230
117
64
26
59
41
2,506
304
256
1,422
135
416
2,203
211

524

All
93
55
58
74
50
82
119
126

PE
23,998
4,558
9,020
7,570
31,384
66,601
290,726
366,825

657

800,682

All
395
148
222
117
752
878
2,678
3,038

PE
161
54
236
68
329
347
440
980

1,336

322

Total deal value ($MM)
MBO
Other
2,310
10,037
986
2,302
2,571
383
524
294
447
5,011
1,522
1,278
14,218
404
2,497
4,405
25,076

24,114

Median deal value ($MM)
MBO
Other
29
67
24
25
17
66
11
43
21
2,506
263
27
484
110
266
2,203
26

54

All
36,345
7,846
11,974
8,388
36,842
69,401
305,348
373,727
849,872

All
93
34
66
44
111
333
439
805
165

Table 2. Characteristics of private equity-backed target firms
This table compares the characteristics of all public firms in 2000-2007 receiving private equity-backed going private offers against firms
that received no offers. Market-related statistics and company financials are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile by year. "a"
indicates differences in mean between PE and Public firms are significant at 5%; "b" indicates that PE and Public sample distributions are
different at 5% significance level using the Mann-Whitney-Wilcox nonparametric test.

PE
Mean
Market statistics
Market capitalization ($MM)
Market to book
Share liquidity
Company financials
Total capitalization ($MM)
Assets ($MM)
Sales ($MM)
EBITDA ($MM)
Free cash flow / Tot cap
Debt / Tot cap
Ownership / Governance structure
Insitutional ownership
Insider ownership
Board size
Inside directors (%)
Dual CEO-chairman
Network characteristics
Board interlocks
Avg board centrality
PE Link
Observations

Median

1,164
1.50
1.12

a

1,772
1,663
1,055
169
0.02
0.26

a

a
a

a
a
a
a

0.48
0.17
7.78
0.20
0.50

a

9.83
2.07
0.34

a

454

Public

a
a

a
a

221
1.22
0.80
328
330
264
35
0.06
0.19

Mean

b

b
b
b
b

0.49
0.08
7.00
0.17
0.00

b

8.00
1.91
0.00

b

b
b

b
b

Median

1,843
2.20
1.39

215
1.27
0.81

2,741
3,941
1,901
341
(0.00)
0.24

322
331
165
21
0.04
0.13

0.36
0.15
8.29
0.23
0.49

0.30
0.07
8.00
0.20
0.00

7.98
1.87
0.18

5.00
1.69
0.00

50,117

Table 3. Distribution of network measures
Panel A shows the distribution of Board Interlocks among public firms in 2007. Panel B shows
the distribution of Director Centrality among directors on public firms in 2007.

A. Distribution of Board
Interlocks in 2007
# Interlocks Freq
%
0
573
10%
1 to 2
772
14%
3 to 5
871
16%
6 to 10
1,163 21%
11 to 20
1,390 25%
21 to 30
546
10%
over 30
270
5%
All
5,585 100%
B. Distribution of Director
Centrality in 2007
# Board
Freq
%
seats
1
23,022 58%
2
8,557 21%
3 to 5
6,754 17%
over 5
1,470 4%
All
39,803 100%

Table 4. PE Link, by firm-year
Based on board composition data in 2000-2007 and our sample of going private transactions, we determine whether a company has an
interlock with a firm that has in the past received a going private offer--i.e.. whether the company currently has a director serving on the
board who previously served as a director or executive of another firm in the year that it received a going private offer. Panel A shows the
number of interlocks for all the firm-years in the sample; Panel B shows the interlocks for the subset of firm-years in which PE offers are
received.

A. All public firms

B. Firms receiving PE offers

Year

Interlocked

Not
interlocked

All

%
Interlocked

Interlocked

Not
interlocked

All

%
Interlocked

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007

766
916
1011
1095
1138
1240
1,378
1,639

6,729
6,367
5,598
5,083
4,698
4,576
4,391
3,946

7,495
7,283
6,609
6,178
5,836
5,816
5,769
5,585

10%
13%
15%
18%
19%
21%
24%
29%

12
6
7
12
9
25
29
53

36
18
18
36
26
40
71
56

48
24
25
48
35
65
100
109

25%
25%
28%
25%
26%
38%
29%
49%

All years

9,183

41,388

50,571

18%

153

301

454

34%

Table 5. Characteristics of PE Link
Panel A shows the distribution of distinct firms through which a director had prior PE experience at an at-risk firm-year with PE Link=1.
Panel B shows the distribution of distinct deals experienced by a director who has prior PE experience.

A. Distribution of distinct firms comprising
each PE Link
# Firms
Freq
%
1
7,180
78%
2
1,492
16%
3
397
4%
4
97
1%
5 to 9
17
0%
All
9,183
100%

B. Distribution of distinct deals experienced by
each PE Link director
# Deals
Freq
%
1
1,763
94%
2
104
6%
3
14
1%
All
1,881
100%

Table 6. Effect of PE Link on private equity-backed going private offer
Table shows results of logit regressions where the independent variable =1 if a firm receives a private-equity backed
going private offer. Observations are at the firm-year, and include public firms in 2000-2007. Regression (2) includes
market-based controls, (3) includes measures of leverage and profitability, and (4) includes equity ownership
controls. (5) includes board includes board characteristics, with General interlock dummy=1 if the company has any
past or contemporaneous interlocks with other boards. (6) includes industry fixed effects (Fama-French 48).
Standard errors are Huber-White heteroskedasticity-consistent, and are clustered at the firm level. * significant at
10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

PE Link

0.656***
(0.104)

0.767***
(0.110)
-0.071***
(0.022)
-0.259***
(0.061)
-0.080**
(0.032)

0.763***
(0.110)
-0.073***
(0.023)
-0.264***
(0.070)
-0.079**
(0.032)
-0.065
(0.205)
0.059
(0.142)

0.528***
(0.116)
-0.237***
(0.036)
-0.242***
(0.078)
-0.150***
(0.048)
0.184
(0.222)
0.124
(0.176)
2.268***
(0.215)
1.212***
(0.257)

0.501***
(0.114)
-0.156***
(0.043)
-0.288***
(0.089)
-0.165***
(0.050)
0.371
(0.227)
0.146
(0.196)
1.902***
(0.222)
1.120***
(0.256)
-0.112***
(0.024)
0.750***
(0.218)

0.354***
(0.116)
-0.123***
(0.045)
-0.296***
(0.094)
-0.169***
(0.053)
0.342
(0.234)
0.112
(0.169)
1.565***
(0.231)
0.831***
(0.259)
-0.077***
(0.026)
0.468**
(0.223)

Yes
No
50571
0.04

Yes
No
50470
0.05

Yes
No
50389
0.05

Yes
No
49107
0.08

Yes
No
47911
0.08

Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Size
Market to book
Share liquidity
Debt ratio
Free cash flow
Institutional ownership
Insider ownership
Board size
Interlock Dummy

Year FE
Industry FE
Observations
Pseudo R2

Table 7. PE Link effect of tenured directors
Table shows results of logit regressions where the independent variable =1 if a firm receives a privateequity backed going private offer. Observations are at the firm-year. Regression (1) includes PE Link effects
only for those directors whose service on the "at risk" firm preceded their PE experience; but directors for
full sample of public firms are only observable for 2000-2007. (2) and (3) include PE Link effects for
directors who sat on the board for the past 2 and 3 years, respectively, prior to the "at risk" year;
regressions include observations through 2002 and 2003, respectively. Standard errors are Huber-White
heteroskedasticity-consistent, and are clustered at the firm level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%;
*** significant at 1%

Variable

PE Link, preexisting directors

(1)

(2)

0.271*
(0.148)

PE Link, directors with >=2 yr tenure

0.351**
(0.137)

PE Link, directors with >=3 yr tenure

Controls
Year FE
Industry FE
PE Link, =1
Tenured directors, =1
Tenured directors, =0
Observations
Pseudo R2

(3)

0.282*
(0.149)
Yes
Yes
Yes
8501
3352
5149
46470
0.11

Yes
Yes
Yes
6711
4724
1987
32146
0.11

Yes
Yes
Yes
5779
3410
2369
26136
0.10

Table 8. PE Link effect, controlling for potential correlates of private equity activity
Table shows results of logit regressions where the independent variable =1 if a firm receives a private-equity backed going private
offer. Observations are at the firm-year, and include public firms in 2000-2007. Regression (1) captures the effect of PE Link where
the interlocks consist of companies in different Fama-French 48 industries. (2) controls for the geographic proximity of previous
private-equity-backed take private activity, by weighting each previous take private deal by its distance from the firm at risk. (3)
controls for basic measures of corporate governance such as the whether the CEO is also the Chairman and the # of insiders on
the board. (4)-(5) control for director attributes related to board composition, such as the # of finance experts and financial
investors, respectively. (6) controls for a generic "PE Susceptibility" measure of the at-risk firm, constructed as the average
predicted Pr(PE tx=1) of the firms interlocked with the at-risk firm. Standard errors are Huber-White heteroskedasticity-consistent,
and are clustered at the firm level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Variable

(1)

PE Link
PE Link, diff industry only

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

0.285**
(0.117)

0.339***
(0.116)

0.344***
(0.116)

0.337***
(0.115)

0.340***
(0.116)

0.304**
(0.120)

PE Proximity

-0.002
(0.012)

Dual CEO-Chmn

-0.082
(0.104)
-0.095*
(0.053)

# Inside directors
# Finance experts

-0.255**
(0.114)

# Financial investors

0.111**
(0.045)

PE Susceptibility

Controls
Year FE
Industry FE
Observations
Pseudo R2

0.188**
(0.084)
Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.11

Yes
Yes
Yes
40753
0.11

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Table 9. Timing of PE Link activation
Table shows results of regressions where the independent variable =1 if a firm receives a private-equity
backed going private offer. Observations are at the firm-year, and include public firms in 2000-2007.
Regression (1), Chosen firm =1 for firm i if firm i at some point in time acquires a PE-experienced director (i.e.
has PE Link=1 for some t ). In (2), Left director=1 if a firm i in year t has a director on board who left a firm preoffer (i.e. left a firm that would later receive a PE offer but did not stay to experience the offer). Regressions (3)(4) present OLS results, without and with firm fixed effects. Standard errors are Huber-White heteroskedasticityconsistent, and are clustered at the firm level. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Variable

Logit
(1)

Logit
(2)

OLS
(3)

OLS
(4)

PE Link

0.846***
(0.218)
-0.551***
(0.212)

0.350***
(0.116)

0.005***
(0.001)

0.007**
(0.003)

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
47851
0.01

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
47851
0.01

Chosen Firm
Left Director

Controls
Year FE
Industry FE
Firm FE
Observations
Pseudo / Adj R2

0.047
(0.139)
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
46470
0.12

Table 10. Director-specific PE Link effects
Table shows results of regressions where the independent variable =1 if a firm receives a private-equity backed going private offer.
Observations are at the firm-year, and include public firms in 2000-2007. Regressions (1)-(3) characterize the director who is responsible
for PE Link=1. Non-executive Chmn=1 if the PE Link is via a director who is the board chairman but is not a firm employee; Dual CEOChm=1 if the PE Link is via a director who holds both the CEO and chairman titles in the firm; Retiree=1 if the PE Link is via a director
who is retired from his primary job. In (4) Low board centrality=1 for firms whose directors fall in the lowest quartile of Average board
centrality. Regressions (5)-(8) characterize the deals experienced by the PE Link director. Withdrawn offer=1 if the interlock is with a firm
whose PE offer was withdrawn; Low annc day return=1 if the interlock is with a firm whose market return on the deal announcement day
was below the median of PE deal announcement day returns; MBO insider=1 if the director was involved as an insider in an MBO in the
prior linked deal. Standard errors are Huber-White heteroskedasticity-consistent, and are clustered at the firm level. * significant at 10%;
** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Variable
(1)

PE Link
* (Non-executive Chmn)
* (Dual CEO-Chmn)
* (Retiree)
* (Low board centrality)
Low board centrality

Director Influence
(2)
(3)

(4)

0.308** 0.362*** 0.418*** 0.279**
(0.122) (0.119) (0.122) (0.116)
0.368
(0.255)
-0.136
(0.396)
-0.264
(0.218)
1.070**
(0.468)
-0.444**
(0.226)

* (Withdrawn offer)

(5)

Director Experience
(6)
(7)

0.468*** 0.574*** 0.340*** 0.573***
(0.134) (0.144) (0.117) (0.145)

-0.279
(0.182)

* (Low annc day return)

-0.426**
(0.178)

* (MBO insider)

0.953*
(0.522)

-0.452**
(0.180)
0.012
(1.018)
1.881*
(1.109)

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

* (Low annc day return) * (MBO insider)

Controls
Year FE
Industry FE
Observations
Pseudo R2

(8)

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Table 11. Achieving covariate balance with propensity score-based weighting
Panel A compares the covariate means for the PE Link=1 and PE Link=0 samples, unweighted as in the original sample (Panel A1) and weighted
using Inverse Probability of Treatment Weighting (IPTW), trimmed at propensity score values of [0.1,0.9] (Panel A2). Panel B shows regression
results using IPTW. Standard errors are Huber-White heteroskedasticity-consistent, and are clustered at the firm level. * significant at 10%; **
significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%`

A. Covariates for PE Link=1 vs PE Link=0 samples
Variable
1. Unweighted
PE Link=1 PE Link=0 Diff
Size
6.43
5.19
1.24
Market to book
2.13
2.21
-0.07
Share liquidity
1.41
1.39
0.03
Debt ratio
0.23
0.24
-0.01
Free cash flow
0.02
-0.01
0.03
Institutional ownership
0.52
0.32
0.20
Insider ownership
0.13
0.16
-0.03
Board size
9.09
8.10
1.00
Interlock Dummy
0.99
0.80
0.19

B. Inverse Probability of Treatment-Weighted regressions
Variable

Baseline
(1)

IPTW
(2)

PE Link

0.354***
(0.116)

0.360***
(0.120)

Yes
Yes
Yes
46470
0.12

Yes
Yes
Yes
31897
0.11

Controls
Year FE
Industry FE
Observations
Pseudo R2

T-stat
52.56
-1.97
1.18
-2.89
7.14
60.38
-11.95
27.61
45.97

2. Weighted
PE Link=1 PE Link=0 Diff
6.10
6.09
0.01
2.11
2.13
-0.02
1.35
1.34
0.01
0.23
0.23
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.47
0.47
0.00
0.15
0.15
0.00
8.83
8.80
0.03
1.00
1.00
0.00

T-stat
0.50
-0.62
0.56
0.50
0.75
1.00
-1.08
0.95
1.07

