                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       IMMIGRATION AND NATIONAL WAGES:
                     CLARIFYING THE THEORY AND THE EMPIRICS

                                    Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
                                         Giovanni Peri

                                       Working Paper 14188
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14188


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     July 2008




Some sections of this paper incorporate methods and procedures contained in the previous NBER
Working Paper #12496, "Rethinking the Effect of Immigration on Wages". All estimates are, however,
updated and new. We thank David Card, Steve Raphael, and Chad Sparber for very helpful discussions
and comments. Greg Wright provided excellent research assistance. Ottaviano gratefully acknowledges
funding from the European Commission and MIUR. Peri gratefully acknowledges funding from the
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano and Giovanni Peri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Immigration and National Wages: Clarifying the Theory and the Empirics
Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano and Giovanni Peri
NBER Working Paper No. 14188
July 2008
JEL No. F22,J31,J61

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the effects of immigration on wages of native workers at the national U.S. level.
Following Borjas (2003) we focus on national labor markets for workers of different skills and we
enrich his methodology and refine previous estimates. We emphasize that a production function framework
is needed to combine workers of different skills in order to evaluate the competition as well as cross-skill
complementary effects of immigrants on wages. We also emphasize the importance (and estimate
the value) of the elasticity of substitution between workers with at most a high school degree and those
without one. Since the two groups turn out to be close substitutes, this strongly dilutes the effects of
competition between immigrants and workers with no degree. We then estimate the substitutability
between natives and immigrants and we find a small but significant degree of imperfect substitution
which further decreases the competitive effect of immigrants. Finally, we account for the short run
and long run adjustment of capital in response to immigration. Using our estimates and Census data
we find that immigration (1990-2006) had small negative effects in the short run on native workers
with no high school degree (-0.7%) and on average wages (-0.4%) while it had small positive effects
on native workers with no high school degree (+0.3%) and on average native wages (+0.6%) in the
long run. These results are perfectly in line with the estimated aggregate elasticities in the labor literature
since Katz and Murphy (1992). We also find a wage effect of new immigrants on previous immigrants
in the order of negative 6%.


Gianmarco I.P. Ottaviano
University of Bologna
Dip Scienze Economiche
Strada Maggiore 45, 40125 Bologna
ITALY
ottavian@economia.unibo.it

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu
1      Introduction

There is a long tradition of finding small and often insignificant eﬀects of immigration on the wages of native
workers when analyzing cross-city and cross-state evidence in the US.1 Two recent influential contributions,
however, (Borjas, 2003; Borjas and Katz, 2007) have emphasized the importance of estimating immigration
eﬀects using national level U.S. data. In practice, this approach has found a significant negative eﬀect of
immigration on the wages of less educated natives, producing what has been considered a vindication of the
relative labor supply theory which predicts that the large inflow of less educated immigrants into the U.S. since
1980 should have reduced the relative wages of less educated natives. This paper reconsiders and extends the
national approach applied in Borjas (2003) and Borjas and Katz (2007) and demonstrates that the negative
eﬀects previously calculated are, to a large extent, the results of parameter restrictions not adopted in the rest
of the labor and macro literature and not supported by empirical evidence. In particular, the finding of a
large negative impact on wages of less educated immigrants is largely driven by an imprecise and, in our view,
erroneous estimate of the elasticity of substitution between workers with a high school degree and workers with
no degree. Moreover, in Borjas (2003) the failure to account for capital adjustment in the short run adds an
implausibly large negative eﬀect to native wages in the short run.
     Our paper extends this so-called “national approach.” First, we produce and use a more plausible estimate
of the elasticity of substitution between workers with a high school degree and workers without one. Our
estimates of that elasticity are quite large, rather precise and in line with the practice of the rest of the labor
literature. Second, we identify a small but significant degree of imperfect substitutability between native and
immigrant workers within the same education-experience group. This estimate revises and qualifies the previous
estimates produced in Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008). We show that while very demanding specifications
such as the one used by Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) may produce insignificant values for the inverse
elasticity because of large standard errors, in most reasonable estimates (based on sample selection criteria
identical to theirs) the estimates of inverse elasticity are significant and around 0.05. Finally, and in our view
most importantly, this article emphasizes the need for a general equilibrium approach based on a production
function that accounts for direct and cross-skill eﬀects of supply (immigration) on wages, as well as for capital
adjustment. It is impossible using national data and six census years only to estimate the within-group and
across-group eﬀects freely, that is without imposing some restrictions. In a model with a rich set of skills such
as the 32 education and experience groups used in Borjas (2003) and Borjas and Katz (2007) there would be
992 of those cross eﬀects and using Census data only 192 skill by year observations are available since 1960.
Hence, studies that do not explicitly describe the underlying structure of interactions are only able to estimate
the partial eﬀect of immigration within a group (for given supply in other groups) and not the actual eﬀect
    1 See   the influential review by Friedberg and Hunt (1995) and since then Card (2001), Card and Lewis (2007) and Card (2007).



                                                                  2
of immigration on wages of native workers in each skill group. We show in section 6.1 how misleading it is to
apply the partial elasticity estimate when evaluating the aggregate eﬀect of immigration. Indeed, “[t]he labor
demand curve is downward sloping”, as Borjas (2003) puts it, but one should not forget that the demand for
each factor (type of workers) shifts when the supplies of other factors change.
   The model that we propose adopts a widely used nested CES production function which allows us to combine
supply shocks aﬀecting workers of diﬀerent education and experience levels in order to identify wage eﬀects.
Two features of the production structure are important and widely accepted in the labor, macro and growth
literatures. First, workers are grouped into two labor aggregates, highly educated (H) and less educated (L),
and those are then combined into a labor aggregate (N ) via a constant elasticity of substitution between the
two groups, σHL . Typically workers with at least some college education are included in the group of highly
educated and those with a high school education and less are in the other. Second, the labor aggregate (N ) and
the capital stock (K) are combined in a Cobb-Douglas production function since there is abundant evidence
for the U.S. that the elasticity of substitution between them is one and that in the medium-to-long run capital
adjusts to increases in labor so as to maintain constant rates of return (in the balanced growth path) and a
constant capital-output ratio.
   One could further diﬀerentiate workers by their education levels within the groups H and L. The literature,
however, generally assumes an infinite elasticity of substitution between workers with no degree and those
with a high school degree (we will call this elasticity σLL ) and also perfect substitutability between those with
some college education and college graduates (we will call their elasticity of substitution σ HH ). Given the
fundamental importance of these two parameters in determining the eﬀects of immigrants on the wages of less
and more educated workers, and given scant existing estimates of them, we devote some eﬀort to developing
reasonable estimates of their values. More common is to separate workers according to their experience level
within education groups (Card and Lemieux 2001, Welch 1979), allowing for imperfect substitutability across
them (with an elasticity of substitution across experience groups σ EXP ). A CES combination of experience
groups (nested within the education groups) can then be used to estimate the elasticities across groups. As
estimates of the parameters σHL , σ HH , σLL and σ EXP exist in the literature, one can adopt those estimates,
place them in the CES production function, and use the inflow of immigrants in each group to calculate the
eﬀects on wages of natives of diﬀerent education and experience levels. This is what we do in section 6.2, and
then we also use our own estimates of the relevant parameters (produced in section 5) and show that they are
remarkably similar to what is obtained using the parameters taken from the literature. Finally, the richness of
our model allows us to diﬀerentiate more precisely the eﬀect of immigration on wages of natives and previous
immigrants.
   Our estimation strategy has new features that significantly depart from Borjas (2003) and Borjas and Katz



                                                        3
(2007), and this has important consequences for the eﬀects of immigration. First, using CPS data we estimate
a specific elasticity between high school graduates and workers with no high school degree and show that it
is rather high— in fact, much higher than the elasticity between college graduates and high school graduates.
Second, we identify and estimate the elasticity between natives and immigrants within education-experience
groups (σ IMMI ) and show that, while it is large, it is precisely estimated in many specifications (except the
most demanding in terms of dummies). In most cases it is around 20. We also confirm the estimates found in
the literature for the elasticity of substitution between workers of diﬀerent experience groups within the same
education group.
   After combining the high substitutability between workers with no high school degree and high school
graduates with the imperfect substitutability between natives and immigrants, the actual long run eﬀect of
immigration during the period 1990-2006 on wages of natives with no degree was very small, ranging between
-0.5% and +0.7%. Even in the short run (i.e., as of 2007) accounting for the sluggish adjustment of capital,
the negative impact of immigrants on wages of native workers with no degree was only -0.7%. The explanation
for such a small eﬀect on the group of less educated workers is intuitive. Immigration has been quite balanced
between workers with a high school degree or less (L) and workers with some college education or more (H)
but within the low education group (L) immigrants with no high school degree were a much larger share of
the group than immigrants with a high school degree. Given the estimated high substitutability between those
two types of workers (σ LL is routinely assumed to be infinity in the labor literature) the eﬀect of immigrants
is diluted to the whole L group rather than concentrated among workers with no high school degree. This
attenuates much of the competition eﬀect that is due to immigrants. In the aggregate it is hard to discern
any negative eﬀect of immigrants on native wages for less educated and even allowing for perfect substitution
between natives and immigrants we at most get a negative long-run eﬀect of -0.6% on their wages as response
to immigration 1990-2006.
   At the same time, the estimated imperfect substitutability of natives and immigrants produces in the long
run a small positive eﬀect on wages of native workers with higher education (+0.5 to 1.0%), as well as on average
native wages (+0.6%). A simulation which assumes perfect substitutability between natives and immigrants
generates a wage loss for less educated U.S.-born workers of -0.6% or less over 16 years of immigration (1990-
2006). Our preferred simulations, using a small degree of imperfect substitution between natives and immigrants,
imply a small gain for the less educated natives (+0.3%), a positive eﬀect for native workers with some college
education or more (between +0.5 and 1%) and a positive average wage eﬀect for natives overall of around +0.5%
in the long run. We find a significant negative eﬀect (on the order of -5 to -8% depending on their education)
of new immigrants on the wages of previous immigrants. Two things reinforce our conviction of the validity of
our results. First, our simulated wage eﬀects on natives are perfectly consistent with previous estimates of the



                                                       4
relative demand elasticities across education and experience groups in the labor literature. In fact, as we show
in section 6, very similar wage eﬀects for each education group could be obtained using our production function,
immigration as a supply shock and elasticity estimates taken exclusively from the previous labor literature (e.g.,
Katz and Murphy, 1992; Welch, 1979; Card and Lemieux, 2001). Moreover, the simulated wage eﬀects are
also consistent with the cross-city eﬀects of immigration estimated by most authors using the so-called “area
approach” (e.g., Card, 2001; Card and Lewis, 2007).
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 frames this contribution within the existing
literature on the national eﬀects of immigration on wages and relates our model and estimates to the existing
labor literature on the eﬀects of diﬀerent kinds of labor supply and labor demand shocks. Section 3 presents in
detail the production function and the simple mechanism of adjustment of capital to labor supply. It derives the
eﬀects of immigration, considered as an increase in the supply of labor of diﬀerent types, on wages (marginal
productivity) of native and foreign-born workers of diﬀerent types and on average. Section 4 describes the
data, the criteria of sample selection and how we construct the main variables, and presents some summary
statistics and trends. Section 5 describes the empirical strategy and discusses the estimates of the crucial
elasticities (σIMMI , σ EXP , σ HL , σ LL and σ HH ). Section 6 uses the estimated parameters to calculate the long
run and the short run eﬀect on wages of immigration over the period 1990-2006. We compare systematically our
simulation results with those obtained using parameter estimates from the previous labor literature and with
those obtained using the production function and estimates from Borjas (2003) and Borjas and Katz (2007).
We also compare our simulated eﬀects with those found using the cross-area analysis and reconcile the two
approaches. Section 7 provides some final remarks.



2     Review of the Literature

This review is not exhaustive.2 There is a long list of contributions in the literature dealing with the impact of
immigrants on the wages of natives. Some of these studies explicitly consider the contribution of immigration
to increased wage dispersion and to the poor performance of real wages of the least educated since 1980. Two
questions are typically analyzed by the existing literature. The first is imbued with a “macro” flavor: Does the
inflow of foreign-born workers have a positive or negative net eﬀect on the average productivity and wages of
U.S.-born workers? This question requires that we aggregate the wages of heterogeneous workers. The second
question is more “micro” (or distributional) in focus: How are the gains and losses from immigration distributed
across U.S.-born workers (and previous immigrants) with diﬀerent levels of education? The consensus emerging
from the literature is that the first (macro) eﬀect on average U.S. wages is negligible in the long run, as capital
   2 For a recent and articulate overview of the estimates of the eﬀect of immigration on wages see Longhi, Nijkamp and Poot

(2005).




                                                             5
accumulates to restore the pre-migration capital-labor ratio. However, how long does it take to achieve the
long run capital adjustment? As for the eﬀects of immigration on the relative wages of more and less educated
U.S.-born workers, some economists argue for a large, adverse impact on less educated workers (Borjas, 1994,
1999, 2003; Borjas, Freeman and Katz, 1997; Borjas and Katz, 2007), while others favor a smaller, possibly
insignificant, eﬀect (Butcher and Card, 1991; Card, 1990; Card, 2001; Friedberg, 2001; Lewis, 2005; National
Research Council, 1997). The first group of economists argues that most of the negative eﬀects are only identified
if one looks at national data, and are missed by the cross-area approach.3 They have therefore strongly advocated
analysis based on national labor markets.
    This paper, in fact, is most closely related to three previous papers that focus exclusively on the national
market, specify a production function structure which combines workers of diﬀerent skills, estimate parameters
using national data, and then use these parameters to simulate the impact of immigration on wages. Those
papers are Borjas (2003), Borjas and Katz (2007) and Ottaviano and Peri (2006a). The novel contributions
of this paper relative to Borjas (2003) and Borjas and Katz (2007) are to consider carefully the mechanism of
capital adjustment, to estimate the elasticity between workers with a high school diploma and those without
a diploma, and to analyze the implications of imperfect substitutability between natives and immigrants. The
novelty relative to Ottaviano and Peri (2006a) is the more careful structure of nesting education groups, the
new estimates of the elasticity between workers with a high school diploma and those without a diploma (σ LL )
and the more careful, theory-based approach to the estimate of imperfect substitution between natives and
immigrant workers (σ IMMI ). Let us add that in the last few years other studies have followed the lead of
Ottaviano and Peri (2006a) and estimated the parameter 1/ σIMMI within similar models for diﬀerent samples
and countries. Raphael (2008), using US data 1970-2005, Manacorda et al. (2005) using UK data, and D’Amuri
et al. (2008) using German data. These articles all find small, but significant values for 1/ σ IMMI using
specifications similar to the one we use in this paper (with fewer dummies than in Ottaviano and Peri, 2006a).
Moreover, in the previous literature indirect evidence of imperfect substitution between natives and immigrants
was found in the form of small wage eﬀects of immigrants on natives and larger negative eﬀects on the wages of
previous immigrants (see Longhi, Nijkamp and Poot, 2005, page 468-469 for a discussion of this issue). Until
Ottaviano and Peri (2006a), however, only a very few studies explicitly estimated the elasticity of substitution
between natives and immigrants. Jaeger (1996) only covered metropolitan areas over 1980-1990, obtaining
estimates that may be susceptible to attenuation bias and endogeneity problems related to the use of local
data, and Cortes (2006), who considers low-skilled workers and uses metropolitan area data, finds a rather low
elasticity of substitution between U.S.- and foreign-born workers.
    Two other branches of the labor literature also provide much needed background for this paper. The first
   3 We  will refer more systematically to other studies that estimate the eﬀect of immigrants on US wages across cities and states
in section 6.4, where we reconcile our results with those of the so-called “area approach.”



                                                                6
branch is the one estimating the substitutability of workers with diﬀerent education levels and simulating the
impact of labor demand and supply shocks on wages. Beginning with Katz and Murphy (1992) and continuing
with Murphy and Welch (1992), Angrist (1995), Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998), Johnson (1997), Krusell et al.
(2000) and Acemoglu (2002), economists have argued that in order to understand the impact of changes in the
supply and demand for labor on the wages of workers of diﬀerent education levels it is very helpful to consider
highly educated and less educated workers as imperfectly substitutable (with constant elasticity). Those studies
classified workers with some college education or more as highly educated and all others as less educated.
Appealing to its simplicity, this two-group structure has also been advocated on the basis of the observation
that the wages of workers within the same group (e.g., workers with no degree or with a high school degree)
seem to co-move much more than do the wages of workers in diﬀerent groups (such as high school graduates and
college graduates).4 Borjas(2003), Borjas and Katz (2007) and Ottaviano and Peri (2006a), however, opt for
four symmetric education groups combined in the CES (no degree, a high school diploma, some college and a
college degree). Logically, such a structure is harder to believe as it assumes symmetry among four groups that
have a natural ordering in their proximity, and it gives rise to very imprecise and often non-significant estimates
of the elasticity 1/ σHL (see Borjas, 2003, page 1364 and Borjas and Katz, 2007, footnote 28). Moreover, this
four-group CES is not adopted by other articles that we know of in the labor literature. Hence we submit
it to closer scrutiny, allowing for four education groups but testing their elasticity of substitution in a nested
structure that can accommodate both the standard specification (of two large groups and perfect substitution
within them) and the Borjas (2003) specification (with four groups), which we then test against each other.
   The other branch of the labor literature providing useful reference analyzes the eﬀect of age structure on
the experience premium. Katz and Murphy (1992) consider a simple two group, young-old structure and find
an elasticity of substitution between them of around 3.3. Welch (1979) and Card and Lemieux (2001) use a
symmetric CES structure with several age groups and estimate elasticities between 5 and 10. While one could
also revisit the symmetric CES structure along the experience dimension, the issue of immigration and its impact
is much more focussed on the impact on the less educated (rather than of a particular age group). Since the
relevance of the parameter σ EXP is much smaller in determining the impact across education groups we are
satisfied with reproducing the literature estimates in this case.
   Finally, with respect to the treatment of physical capital, we explicitly consider its contribution to production
and treat its accumulation as driven by market forces which equalize its real returns in the long run. In particular,
we revise the usual approach that considers capital as fixed in short run simulations (Borjas, 2003; Borjas and
Katz, 2007). The growth literature (Islam, 1995; Caselli, et al. 1996) and real business cycle literature (e.g.,
Romer, 2006, Chapter 4) have estimated, using annual data on capital accumulation and diﬀerent types of
  4 See,   for instance, Katz and Murphy (1992), page 68.




                                                            7
shocks, the speed of adjustment of capital to deviations from its long run growth path. Adopting 10% per
year as a reasonable estimate of the speed of adjustment of physical capital in the U.S. (confirmed by our own
estimates for the 1960-2006 period) we analyze the impact of yearly immigration on average wages as capital
adjusts. We can evaluate the impact of immigration which occurred in the period 1990-2006 on average wages
as of 2007, and we can evaluate its eﬀects after five or ten more years.



3     Theoretical Framework

This paper treats immigration as a labor supply shock, omitting any productivity impact that it may produce
(due to improved eﬃciency, choice of better technologies or scale externalities) and therefore may miss part
of its positive impact on wages (identified often as a positive overall wage eﬀect in cross-city or cross-state
analyses such as Card, 2007, or Ottaviano and Peri 2005, 2006b). In order to evaluate the eﬀects of immigrants
on the wages of natives and other foreign-born workers with similar or diﬀerent education and experience we
need a model of how the marginal productivity of a given type of worker changes in response to changes in the
supply of other types. We also need to account for capital adjustment. This essentially amounts to assuming a
production function that parametrizes the elasticity of substitution between each type of worker and a simple
model of capital adjustment in the short and long run. Our goal is to rely on a model which is acceptable to
most economists. In particular, the structure of the labor market, the grouping of workers within skill cells,
the functional form that is assumed in aggregating diﬀerent skills and the elasticities of substitution used in
the model should be consistent with best practices in the recent labor literature. Similarly, the treatment of
substitutability between capital and labor and the adjustment of capital in the short and long run should be
compatible with best practices in the recent macro and growth literature.


3.1    Production Function

The aggregate production function we use is the very common and popular Cobb-Douglas aggregation, broadly
used in the macro and growth literature:


                                                Yt = At Ntα Kt1−α                                              (1)

where Yt is aggregate output , At is exogenous total factor productivity (TFP), Kt is physical capital, Nt is a
CES aggregate of diﬀerent types of labor (described below), and α ∈ (0, 1) is the income share of labor. All
variables, as indicated by the subscripts, are relative to year t. The production function is a constant returns to
scale (CRS) Cobb-Douglas combination of capital Kt and labor Nt . This functional form has been widely used
in the macro-growth literature (from Solow, 1956, to recent papers by Jones, 2005 and Caselli and Coleman,


                                                        8
2006) and is supported by the empirical observation that the share of income going to labor, α, is reasonably
constant in the long run as well as across countries (Kaldor, 1961; Gollin, 2002)5 . The labor aggregate Nt is
defined as6 :

                                             ∙     σ HL −1        σ HL −1
                                                                          ¸ σσHL−1
                                                                             HL
                                                     σHL            σHL
                                         Nt = θHt NHt      + θLt NLt                                                          (2)

    where NHt and NLt are respectively aggregate measures of the labor supplied by workers with high (H) and
low (L) education levels in year t, and θHt and θLt are productivity levels specific to workers with high and low
education (standardized so that θHt + θLt = 1 and any common multiplying factor can be absorbed in the TFP
term At ). Finally, the parameter σ HL is the elasticity of substitution between the two groups.
    While the above specification is clearly a simplification, it is one that is broadly accepted and popular in
the literature and presents several advantages. Above all, the fact that estimates of the parameter σ HL exist
in the literature allows us to potentially rely on those values to evaluate the eﬀects of immigration on wages
of workers with diﬀerent educational attainments. The consensus value for σ HL is usually identified as 1.5.7
An important question is which level of education to include in each of the two groups. Most of the previous
studies either include among highly educated workers those with a college degree or more (Autor, Katz and
Krueger, 1998; Krusell et al., 2000), and leave all the other workers in the L group or they include workers
with a high school degree or less in the group L, place college graduates in the group H, and split workers with
some college nearly equally between the two groups (Katz and Murphy 1992; Card and Lemieux 2001; Welch
1979). At odds with both traditions, however, is the literature which uses the national approach to analyze the
impact of immigration (Borjas 2003; Borjas and Katz 2007; Ottaviano and Peri 2006a). These papers choose
a CES aggregator of 4 education groups (Some High School, High School Graduates, Some College, College
Graduates) with a common and identical elasticity of substitution across all groups equal to σ EDU . Restricting
the elasticity across the four education groups to be the same may be required in order to obtain an estimate of
σ EDU when using Census data (due to the very few observations over time) but it is clearly suspicious. First,
the education groups are not “symmetric” since workers with no degree are clearly more similar to those with
a high school degree than to those with a college degree. Second, the existing estimates of σEDU in Borjas
(2003) and Borjas and Katz (2007) are so imprecise that they are consistent with any value of σ EDU from 1.5 to
infinity (more on this in section 5.3). Hence, rather than assuming either the specification with four symmetric
groups or the more established two education group approach, we nest the four education group specification
   5 The Cobb-Douglas functional form implies that physical capital has the same degree of substitutability with each type of

workers. Some influential studies (e.g. Krusell et al. 2001) have argued that phisical capital complements highly educated and
substitutes for less educated workers. Such an assumption, however, would imply, countrfactually, that the income share of capital
increased over time following the large increase in supply and income share of highly educated. This has not happened in the U.S.
over the period considered.
   6 This follows Katz and Murphy (1992), Autor Katz and Krueger (1997), Krusell et al. (2000), Card and Lemieux (2001),

Acemoglu (2002) and Caselli and Coleman (2006) among others.
   7 See section 5.3 for a detailed review of the estimates of σ
                                                                 HL in the literature.



                                                                9
used in Borjas (2003) into the more traditional two groups and use a production function which can encompass
the two cases. Hence we assume that each labor composite NHt and NLt is itself the CES aggregate of two
education subgroups:

                                            ∙       σLL −1        σ LL −1
                                                                          ¸ σσLL−1
                                                                             LL
                                                     σLL            σ LL
                                     NLt   = θSHSt NSHSt + θHSGt NHSGt                                                      (3)

                                            ∙       σHH −1        σHH −1
                                                                         ¸ σ σH−1
                                                                            HH
                                                     σ HH          σ HH
                                    NHt    = θSCOt NSCOt + θCOGt NCOGt                                                      (4)

   The terms Nkt for k ∈ {SHS, HSG, SCO, COG} are aggregate measures of labor supplied by workers
with, respectively, some high school education (SHS), a high school diploma (HSG), some college education
(SCO) and a college degree (COG). The parameters θkt capture the relative productivity of those groups of
workers within the aggregates NLt and NHt . The elasticities of substitution σ LL and σ HH capture, respectively,
the degree of substitutability between workers with no high school degree and with a high school degree in
expression (3) and the substitutability between workers with some college education and those with a college
degree in expression (4). The nested structure above allows for, as specific cases, the more common two-group
CES (for σ LL = σ HH = ∞ and 0 < σHL < ∞) or the four-group Borjas (2003) CES (obtained for σLL =
σ HH = σ HL = σ EDU ).8 The estimate of the parameter σLL , as we will see, is extremely relevant in determining
the eﬀect of immigration on the wages of workers with no high school degree. However, there are no specific
estimates of it in the literature and the common practice is to assume it is equal to ∞ and to aggregate workers
with a high school degree or less together (usually weighted by diﬀerent units of eﬀective labor). We need,
however, to collect more evidence on this parameter before accepting the assumption σLL = ∞ (used in most
of the literature) rather than σ LL = σHH = σ HL (preferred in Borjas 2003) and our structure allows us to do
so using CPS data and the method used by Katz and Murphy (1992) (see section 5.3).
   We then assume that within each Nkt are workers with diﬀerent experience levels, who are also imperfect
substitutes. In particular, following the specification used in Welch (1979) and Card and Lemieux (2001), we
write:                                               ⎡               ⎤ σσEXP−1
                                                      X8     σEXP −1    EXP

                                                   = ⎣ θkj NkjtEXP ⎦
                                                              σ
                                             Nkt                                                                            (5)
                                                      j=1


where j is an index spanning experience intervals of five years between 0 and 40, so that j = 1 captures workers
with 1 − 5 years of experience, j = 2 those with 6 − 10 years, and so on. The parameter σ EXP > 1 measures
the elasticity of substitution between workers in the same education group but with diﬀerent experience levels
                                                                                   P
and θkj are experience-education specific productivity levels (standardized so that j θkj = 1 for each k and
  8 The   nested case assumes a split between H and L that includes all workers with some college among highly educated. This is
slightly diﬀerent from the tradition of dividing them between the two groups and we will check empirically that it does not make
a large diﬀerence in the estimate of σHL . A split of workers with some college between the two groups would further reduce the
eﬀect of immigration on wages.


                                                              10
assumed invariant over time, as in Borjas, 2003, Borjas and Katz , 2007, and Ottaviano and Peri, 2006a). The
parameter σ EXP is the elasticity of substitution between workers with the same education level and diﬀerent
experience. Finally, specific to the immigration literature and first introduced by Ottaviano and Peri (2006a),
we define Nkjt as a CES aggregate of U.S.-born (domestic, D) and foreign-born (F ) workers. Denoting the
supply of labor by workers with education k and experience j who are, respectively, U.S.-born (Domestic) or
foreign-born, by Dkjt and Fkjt , and the elasticity of substitution between them by σ IM MI > 0, our assumption
is that:

                                      "       σ IMMI −1            σIMMI −1
                                                                              # σσIMMI−1
                                                                                IMMI
                                                σ IMMI              σ IMMI
                              Nkjt = θDkj Dkjt            + θF kj Fkjt                                         (6)

The terms θHkjt and θF kjt measure the specific productivity levels (relative quality) of foreign- and U.S.-born
workers. They may vary across education-experience groups but (as with the θkj above) they are assumed to be
invariant over time. They are standardized so that (θHkj + θF kj ) = 1. Foreign-born workers are likely to have
diﬀerent abilities pertaining to language, quantitative skills, relational skills and so on. These characteristics,
in turn, are likely to aﬀect their choices regarding occupations and jobs, therefore foreign-born workers might
be diﬀerentiated enough to be imperfect substitutes for U.S.-born workers, even within the same education and
experience group.


3.2    Physical Capital Adjustment

Physical capital adjustment in response to immigration may not be immediate. However, investors respond
continuously to inflows of labor and to the consequent increase in the marginal productivity of capital; how fast
they respond is an empirical question. Further, immigration is not an unexpected and instantaneous shock. If
we define the short run eﬀect as the impact of immigration given a fixed capital stock, we can ask: for how
long is capital fixed and why? Immigration is an ongoing phenomenon, distributed over years, predictable
and rather slow. Despite the acceleration in legal and illegal immigration after 1990, the inflow of immigrants
measured less than 0.6% of the labor force each year between 1960 and 2006. In a dynamic context the relevant
parameter in order to evaluate the impact of immigration on average wages is the speed of adjustment of capital.
In the long run, on the balanced growth path such as in the Ramsey (1928) or the Solow (1956) models, the
variable ln(Kt /Nt ) follows a constant positive trend growth determined only by the growth rate of total factor
productivity (ln At ) and unaﬀected by the size of Nt . Therefore the average wage in the economy, which depends
on Kt /Nt , does not depend on immigration in the long run. Shocks to Nt , such as immigration, however, may
temporarily aﬀect the value of Kt /Nt , causing it to be below its long run trend. How much and for how long
ln(Kt /Nt ) remains below trend as a consequence of immigration depends on the yearly inflow of immigrants and



                                                          11
on the yearly rate of adjustment of physical capital. The theoretical and empirical literature on the speed of
convergence of a country’s capital per worker to its own balanced growth path (Islam, 1995; Caselli et al. 1996),
as well as the business cycle literature on capital adjustment (see Romer, 2006, Chapter 4.7), provide estimates
for this speed of adjustment that we can use together with data on yearly immigration to obtain the eﬀect of
immigration over 1990-2006 on average wages in 2007 and in the subsequent years as capital continues to adjust.
We devote the next section, 3.2.1, to showing in detail the connection between average wages and the capital-
labor ratio. In analyzing the simulated eﬀects of immigrants we first focus on the long run eﬀects (Section 6.2),
allowing for full capital adjustment, as a natural reference. Then in Section 6.3 we use the estimated speed of
capital adjustment (from the macro literature) to show the eﬀect of sixteen years of immigration (1990-2006)
on wages as of the year 2007, and we then compare those results with the traditional way of computing “short
run” eﬀects on wages.


3.2.1    Partial Adjustment, Total Adjustment and Wages

Given the production function in (1) the eﬀect of physical capital Kt on the wages of individual workers operates
through the eﬀect on the marginal productivity of the aggregate Nt . Let us call wtN the compensation to the
composite factor Nt , which is equal to the average wage in the economy9 . In a competitive market it equals the
marginal productivity of Nt , hence:

                                                                   µ        ¶1−α
                                                      ∂Yt              Kt
                                              wtN   =     = αAt                                                           (7)
                                                      ∂Nt              Nt

    Assuming either international capital mobility or capital accumulation along the balanced growth path of
the Ramsey (1928) or Solow (1956) models, the real interest rate r and the aggregate capital-output ratio
Kt /Yt are both constant in the long run and the capital-labor ratio Kt /Nt grows at a constant rate equal to
1
α   times the growth rate of technology At . This assertion is also supported in the data, and is particularly
true for our period of consideration, 1960-2006. As depicted in Figure 1 the capital-output ratio (Kt /Yt ) shows
small deviations around a constant mean over the 46 years considered. And there is no evidence that in the
period of fastest immigration (1990-2006) the ratio systematically deviated from its average. Moreover, the log
capital-labor ratio, ln(Kt /Nt ), shown in Figure 2 exhibits remarkably fast reversion to its long run trend (also
shown in figure 2), as evidenced by the fact that the path of the variable crosses the trend eleven times in the
sample. And again, there is no systematic evidence of a downward departure from the trend in the 1990-2006
period10 . In order to show the eﬀect of diﬀerent patterns of capital adjustment on the average wage (wtN ) it is
useful to write the capital stock as Kt = κt Nt , where κt is the capital-labor ratio. Hence wtN (from equation
   9 The “average wage” wN is obtained by averaging the wages of each group (by education, skill and nativity), weighting them
                           t
by the share of the group in the total labor supply.
  10 We analyze the capital data and their dynamic behavior empirically in Section 6.3.




                                                             12
(7)) can be expressed in the following form:


                                               wtN = αAt (κt )1−α                                              (8)

    Calculating the marginal productivity of capital and equating it to the interest rate r, augmented by capital
                                                                                                    ³     ´ α1 1
depreciation δ, we obtain the expression for the balanced growth path capital-labor ratio, κ∗t = 1−α  r+δ     Atα .
                                                                                                        ¡ ¢∗
Substituting this into equation (8) implies that the average wage on the balanced growth path, wtL =
  ³     ´ 1−α
           α    1
α 1−α
    r+δ       Atα , does not depend on the total supply of workers Nt . Hence, in the short run, the change in
labor supply due to immigration aﬀects average wages only if (and by the amount that) it aﬀects the capital-labor
ratio. Assuming that technological progress (∆At /At ) is exogenous to the immigration process, the percentage
change in average wages due to immigration can be expressed as a function of the percentage response of κt to
immigration. Taking partial log changes of (8) relative to immigration we have:

                                                        µ         ¶
                                       ∆wtN                 ∆κt
                                            = (1 − α)                                                          (9)
                                        wtL                  κt   immigration

   where (∆κt /κt )immigration is the percentage deviation of the capital-labor ratio from κ∗t due to immigration.
With full capital adjustment and the economy on the balanced growth path, (∆κt /κt )immigration equals 0.
At the same time, if one assumes fixed total capital, Kt = K, then (∆κt /κt )immigration equals the negative
percentage change of labor supply due to immigration: − ∆F
                                                        Nt , where ∆Ft is the increase in labor supply due to
                                                          t



foreign-born workers in the period considered and Nt is the aggregate labor supply at the beginning of the period.
In the obviously counterfactual case in which we keep capital unchanged over sixteen years of immigration, 1990-
2006, the inflow of immigrants increases the amount of hours worked by 11.4% of its total value in 1990. This,
combined with a capital share (1 − α) equal to 0.33, implies a negative eﬀect on average wages of 3.8 percentage
points. Accounting for the sluggish yearly response of capital and for yearly immigration flows, however, we can
estimate the actual response of the capital-labor ratio to immigration flows in the 1990-2006 period, without
the extreme assumption that capital be fixed for 16 years. We do this in Section 6.3 when we revisit the short
and long run eﬀects of immigration on wages.


3.3    Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages

We use the production function (1) to calculate the demand functions and wages for each type of labor at a given
point in time. Choosing output as the numeraire good, in a competitive equilibrium the (natural logarithm of)
the marginal productivity of U.S.-born workers (D) equals (the natural logarithm of) their wage. Denoting the
broad education level with b ∈ B ≡ {H, L}, the specific education level with k ∈ E ≡ {SHS, HSG, SCO, COG}
and the experience level with j = 1, 2, ..., 8, we can write the wage of a generic U.S.-born worker (equal to her



                                                        13
marginal productivity) as:

                                                           µ             ¶
                  ¡         ¢     1                            1      1
 ln wDbkjt    = ln αAt κ1−α
                        t     +     ln(N  t ) + ln θ bt −         −        ln(Nbt ) + ln θkt −                 (10)
                                σHL                          σ HL    σbb
                µ             ¶                       µ                    ¶
                   1      1                                 1         1                              1
                     −          ln(Nkt ) + ln θkj −              −           ln(Nkjt ) + ln θDkj −        ln(Dkjt )
                  σbb σ EXP                              σ EXP     σ IMMI                          σIMM I

Similarly, for a foreign-born worker in the same b, k, j skill group the wage is:

                                                         µ            ¶
                  ¡      1−α
                             ¢     1                         1      1
 ln wF bkjt   = ln αAt κt      +      ln(Nt ) + ln θbt −        −        ln(Nbt ) + ln θkt −                  (11)
                                 σ HL                      σ HL σ bb
                µ              ¶                     µ                   ¶
                   1       1                              1         1                                1
                       −         ln(Nkt ) + ln θkj −           −           ln(Nkjt ) + ln θF kj −        ln(Fkjt )
                  σ bb   σEXP                           σEXP     σ IM MI                          σ IMMI

where Dkjt (Fkjt ) represents the total labor input (hours worked) of male and female U.S.-born (foreign-born)
workers of education k (in broad group b) and experience j and wDbkjt (wF bkjt ) represents the average wage
of the group. We assume that the relative eﬃciency parameters, represented by the θ’s, as well as total factor
productivity At , depend on technological factors and are independent of the supply of foreign-born.
   Given (10) and (11), the overall impact of immigration on natives with education k and experience j can
                                                                            ¡         ¢
be decomposed into a positive eﬀect that works through capital adjustment ln αAt κ1−α
                                                                                  t     and four eﬀects that
operate through Nkjt , Nkt , Nbt and Nt . The corresponding expressions are reported in Appendix A. Here we
provide the basic intuition. First, there is the positive overall eﬀect of immigration on the productivity of
workers in group b, k, j due to increased supply of all types of labor: a worker, whether native or immigrant,
benefits from the increase in aggregate labor supply thanks to imperfectly substitutability among diﬀerent types
                                             1
of workers. This eﬀect operates through    σ HL   ln(Nt ). Second, there is the eﬀect on marginal productivity gen-
erated by the supply of immigrants within the same broad education group (but diﬀerent specific education
                                                ³          ´
                                                  1
group). This eﬀect operates through the term − σHL   − σ1bb ln(Nbt ). It is negative if workers with similar
broad education are closer substitutes than workers with diﬀerent broad education (σ bb > σ HL ). Third, there
is the eﬀect due to the supply of immigrants within the same specific education group. This eﬀect operates
           ³           ´
through − σ1bb − σEXP
                    1
                         ln(Nkt ). It is negative if workers with similar education-experience are more substi-
tutable than workers with the same education but diﬀerent experience level (σ EXP > σ bb ). Finally, while in
(10) the stock of native workers Dkjt is unaﬀected by immigration, there is still an additional negative eﬀect
                                                               1
of immigrants on the wages of foreign born workers through − σimmi ln(Fkjt ) in (11), which takes into account
the fact that foreign-born workers may not be perfect substitutes for U.S.-born workers with equal skills and
education.
   Notice that the wages of native workers in group b, k, j are aﬀected by a direct partial eﬀect of immigrants in
their same education-experience group plus 56 other cross-eﬀects produced by immigrants in other groups and



                                                          14
a capital-adjustment term. The direct partial eﬀect, in fact, can be thought of as measuring the wage impact,
keeping constant the aggregate supplies Nt , Nbt and Nkt . Such eﬀects have been estimated, for instance, in
sections II to VI of Borjas (2003) by regressing the wage of natives ln(wHkjt ) on the labor supply of immigrants
in the same skill group b, k, j in a panel across groups and over census years, controlling for year-specific
eﬀects (absorbing the variation of Nt ) and education-by-year specific eﬀects (absorbing the variation of Nbt and
Nkt ). The resulting partial elasticity, expressed as the percentage variation of native wages (∆wDbkjt /wDbkjt )
in response to the percentage variation of foreign employment in the group (∆Fbkjt /Fbkjt ), is given by the
following expression:

                                                ¯                            ∙µ                        ¶µ             ¶¸
                               ∆wDbkjt /wDbkjt ¯¯                                   1            1          sF bkjt
                  εpartial   =                                           =                 −                               (12)
                   kjt
                                ∆Fbkjt /Fbkjt ¯Nkt ,Nbt ,Nt   constant            σ IMMI       σ EXP         sbkjt

where sF bkjt is the share of overall wages paid in year t to foreign-born workers in education group b, subgroup
k, with experience j. Analogously, sbkjt is the share of the total wage bill in year t accounted for by all workers
in education group b, subgroup k and with experience j. Hence, by construction, the elasticity εpartial
                                                                                                kjt     captures
                                                                           ³                 ´
                                                                               1        1
only the eﬀect of immigration on native wages operating through the term − σEXP    − σIMMI     ln(Nkjt ) in (10).
While this term is likely to be negative (if σ IMMI > σ EXP ), its value is clearly uninformative about the eﬀect
of overall immigration on the wages of native workers within the skill group. In fact, the total eﬀect depends
not only on the changes in the capital stock but also on the increased relative labor supply of all education and
experience cells as well as on all the cross elasticities (σ HL , σ bb , σ EXP , σIMMI ). “The labor demand curve is
downward sloping” (Borjas, 2003) in each cell, but it shifts when the supplies of other imperfectly substitutable
factors change.



4    Data, Variables and Sample Description

A detailed description of the data, the exact specification of the samples and a step-by-step account of how
each variable has been constructed can be found in Appendix B11 . The variable definitions, construction and
sample selection coincide exactly with those in Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008). The data we use are from
the integrated public use microdata samples (IPUMS) of the U.S. Decennial Census and from the American
Community Survey (Ruggles et al., 2008). In particular, we use the general 1% sample for Census 1960, the 1%
State Sample, Form 1, for Census 1970, the 5% State sample for the Censuses 1980 and 1990, the 5% Census
Sample for year 2000 and the 1% sample of the American Community Survey (ACS) Sample for the year 2006.
The large size of the samples ensures a high level of precision in estimating our variables in each year. Since
  11 The STATA codes used to perform selection of samples, construction-averaging of variables by cell  and all
the regressions and simulations contained in this paper are available with detailed explanations at the website:
http://www.econ.ucdavis.edu/faculty/gperi/codesOP2008.htm
  The authors encourage interested researchers to use them duefully acknowledging the source.



                                                               15
they are all weighted samples we use the variable “personal weight” to produce the average and aggregate
statistics below. Following the Katz and Murphy (1992) tradition we construct two somewhat diﬀerent samples
to produce measures of hours worked (or employment) by cell and average wages by cell. The employment
sample is more inclusive as it aims at including all the hours worked in each education-experience-nativity (and
sometimes gender) cell. It contains people aged 18 and older in the census year12 not living in group quarters,
who worked at least one week in the previous year.
    To construct the measure of hours worked in each cell and year these workers are grouped into four school-
ing groups, eight experience groups and two nativity (US- and foreign-born) groups.13 Schooling groups are
constructed using the variable EDUCREC which classifies levels of education consistently across censuses and
ACS data. The four groups identified are: individuals with no high school degree, high school graduates, indi-
viduals with some college education and college graduates. We define years of experience as years of potential
experience. They are calculated using the variable “AGE” and with the assumption that people without a high
school degree enter the labor force at age 17, people with a high school degree enter at 19, people with some
college enter at 21 and people with a college degree enter at 23. Then we select only workers with experience
of at least one year and less than or equal to forty years.14 We group workers into eight five-year experience
intervals beginning with those with 1 to 5 years of experience and ending with those with 36 to 40 years of
experience. The status of “foreign-born” is given to those workers who are non-citizens or are naturalized
citizens (using the variable “CITIZEN” since 1970 and ”BPL” in 1960). The hours of labor supplied by each
worker are calculated by multiplying hours worked in a week by weeks worked in a year (see Appendix B for
the exact definition and computational procedure) and individual hours are multiplied by the individual weight
(PERWT) and aggregated within each education-experience group. This measure of hours worked by cell is the
basic measure of labor supply. We also calculate (and alternatively use) the employment (count of employed
people) by cell (summing up the personal weights for all people).
    To construct the average wage in each cell we use a more selective sample since we want to be sure that
we are measuring the correct average “price of labor” in the cell. Hence, from the employment sample we
eliminate workers who do not report wages (or report 0 wages) and those who are self-employed (since it is hard
to separate labor and non-labor income). In a second and more restrictive wage sample (used to produce the
estimates of Table 3) we also eliminate workers still enrolled in school. The average weekly wage in a cell is
constructed by calculating the real weekly wages of individuals (equal to annual salary and income, INCWAGE,
deflated using the CPI and adjusted in its topcodes as described in Appendix B, divided by weeks worked
  12 While sixteen years of age is the cut-oﬀ chosen by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for those people who are defined as “working

age” we choose the cut-oﬀ at eighteen (corresponding to seventeen in the census year) to conform with Borjas, Grogger and Hanson
(2008).
  13 We also consider, in the regression analysis, cells with only male, only female or pooled male and female individuals. The

summary statistics and the aggregate trends in this section are provided for the pooled sample of males and females together.
  14 This selection eliminates a sizeable group of young and old individuals with experience of 0 years or less (due to a misclassification

of their initial age of work) and 41 or more.


                                                                    16
in a year) and averaging them for each cell using weights equal to the hours worked by the individual times
her personal weight. This is our preferred method to calculate wages because it includes wages of all workers,
including part-time workers who constitute a large group in some cells, but weights their contribution to the
average wage by their labor supply (hours worked).
   The procedure described above allows us to construct the variables Dbkjt , Fbkjt , (hours worked) and wDbkjt ,
wF bkjt (average weekly wages) for domestic and foreign-born workers of each education level (in group b and
subgroup k), experience level (j) and year t (1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006). Those are the basic variables
used in the empirical analysis when estimating the elasticity parameters (section 5) and when simulating the
eﬀects of immigration (section 6). These variables also allow us to construct sNbkjt and κN bkjt , the share of
each group in the total wage bill and in total hours worked for each represented year t. When estimating the
production-function parameters (σ HL , σ HH , σ LL , σ EXP and σ IMMI ) we always use the entire panel of data,
1960-2006. When we simulate the eﬀects of immigration on real wages, using those estimates, we focus on the
most recent period, 1990-2006. Before proceeding with the econometric analysis, let us present some salient
features of the immigration and wage data and some informative trends and summary statistics.
   Table 1 reports the percentage increase in hours worked due to immigrants (column 3) and the percentage
change in weekly wages of natives (column 4) for each education-experience group over the period 1990-2006
pooling men and women together. This period is the most recent available in the data and the one on which we
focus our simulations. One can see in Table A1 in the Table Appendix the evolution of immigrant labor supply
(expressed as a percentage of hours worked) in each education-experience group over all the years considered
(from 1960 to 2006). Also, Table A2 in the Table Appendix shows the real value (in 2000 constant U.S. $) of
weekly wages for U.S.-born workers in each group between 1960 and 2006 and Table A3 reports the ratio of
immigrant to native weekly wages for each skill group and year in the entire sample.
   Even a cursory look at the values in Column 3 of Table 1 reveals that the inflow of immigrants has been
uneven across groups. Focussing on the rows marked “All Experience Groups”, in each of the four detailed
educational groups we notice that the group of workers with no high school degree experienced the largest
percentage increase in hours worked due to immigrants over the 1990-2006 period (equal to +23.6%) followed
by the group of college graduates (+14.6%), while high school graduates and the group of workers with some
college education experienced only a 10% and 6% increase, respectively, in hours worked due to immigrants.
Interestingly, however, such imbalances are drastically reduced if we consider the broad educational categories
corresponding to highly educated (H) and less educated (L) in the model above. When we merge workers
with a high school degree or less (see the row in the middle of Table 1) immigrant labor accounts for only a
13.2% increase in hours worked (1990-2006). This is because the group of high school graduates received few
immigrants and the group of workers with no high school degree constitutes only a very small share of the



                                                        17
total labor supply (only 8% of total hours worked in 2006 are supplied by workers with no degree versus 30%
by workers with a high school degree). In comparison, the group of workers with some college education or a
college degree experienced, during the same period, a 10% increase in hours worked because of immigrants (last
row of Table 1). It is clear already from these numbers that the substitutability between the group of workers
with no degree and those with a high school degree will be crucial in determining how much of the competition
eﬀect of immigrants on wages remains localized to the group of workers with no degree (for which immigrants
constituted a relevant relative supply shock) and how much is diﬀused to the group of workers with at most a
high school degree (for which immigration did not represent much of a relative supply shock).
   Column 4 of Table 1 shows the percentage change of real weekly wages in each education-experience group
between 1990 and 2006. A cursory comparison of columns 3 and 4 of Table 1 suggests that it would be hard to
find a negative correlation between increases in the share of immigrants and the real wage changes of natives
across the detailed education groups. The group of workers with no high school degree received an increase in
labor supply due to immigrants two to three times larger (in percentage terms) than the group of high school
graduates or college dropouts, and the wage performance of the first group (-3.1%) is somewhat worse than
the performance of the other two (-1.2% and -1.9%, respectively). However, the group of college graduates
received the second largest increase in labor supply due to immigrants (+14.6%) and experienced by far the
best wage performance (+9.6%). In fact, looking more closely at the performance of the group of workers with
no degree, their negative wage performance seems to be exclusively due to the large, negative wage changes
within the group of workers with more than 30 years of experience (who experienced a negative 9% change
in their real wage). This group, however, received a relatively small inflow of immigrants (14.3 and 21.9%)
compared to other experience groups with no high school degree some of which experienced more than 30%
increase in size because of immigration. A look at Figures 3 and 4 conveys the same information in a more
compact way. Figure 3 summarizes graphically the percentage increase in labor supply due to immigration in
eight education-experience groups and Figure 4 shows the real wage change for the same groups, also during the
1990-2006 period. Rather than demonstrating a negative correlation of immigration and wages across education
groups, which would produce two histograms that are mirror images of one another (one U-shaped and the
other hump-shaped), the two charts suggest a possible positive association between the variables for education
groups above high school and no association at all for the two histograms as a whole.
   Obviously these partial and raw correlations do not reveal much about the actual eﬀect of immigration on
wages. It is time to use our model to estimate the crucial elasticities across groups of workers and calculate
how much of the real wage variation observed in the data can be explained by changes in labor supply due
to immigrants. In terms of the education groups described in this section the natural questions arising are:
(i) How much of the negative performance in the wage of native dropouts in the 1990-2006 period was due to



                                                     18
immigration within that group? (ii) How much of the college-high school dropout wage gap widening was due
to immigration? (iii) Was there any eﬀect of immigration on overall average wages of U.S.-born workers? We
will address these questions in Section 6 below.



5     Parameter Estimates

5.1     Estimates of σ IMMI

We begin with the estimation of the elasticity of substitution between smaller groups in the CES and pro-
gressively we aggregate those up to estimate elasticity between the larger aggregates. At the lowest level,
foreign-born and natives are combined within each education-experience group with an elasticity of substitution
equal to σIMMI . This parameter, first estimated in Ottaviano and Peri (2006a) has attracted a lot of attention
and recent studies have produced estimates of it for the U.K. (Manacorda et al., 2006), for Germany (D’Amuri
et al., 2008; Felbermayr, Geis and Kohler, 2008) and Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) have re-estimated it
for the U.S. Further evidence of imperfect substitution between native and foreign-born workers comes from a
long list of studies in the past that found larger negative eﬀects (within skill groups) of immigration on wages
of previous immigrants relative to wages of native workers,15 while several anecdotal stories as well as rigorous
empirical evidence (see Ottaviano and Peri 2006a and Peri and Sparber 2008) emphasize that immigrants choose
diﬀerent occupations and jobs from natives and have diﬀerent skills (manual versus language) even within similar
education and age groups.
                                                                                  1
    While the original Ottaviano and Peri (2006a) estimate of                  σ IMMI   was probably too large we think that
there is enough indirect and direct evidence of imperfect substitution16 to deserve a careful second look at
the Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) estimates. This is important because even small degrees of imperfect
substitution (as we will see in section 6) imply non-trivial diﬀerences on the eﬀect of immigrants on wages of
natives and previous immigrants. Moreover Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) and Ottaviano and Peri (2006a)
find relatively large standard errors and impose very demanding controls (in the form of sets of dummies) in
                       1
the estimates of    σ IMMI .   Such a large set of dummies is not justified by the theoretical framework used, nor is
it in line with the procedure used to estimate the other elasticities of the model.
    We proceed as follows. Taking the diﬀerence between expression (10) and expression (11) we obtain equation
                                                                       1
(13) below that provides the basis for the estimation of            σ IMMI :
  15 See, for instance, Grossman (1982) page 599, and Card (2001), Table 7. Longhi et al. (2005) summarize the literature and,

considering nine previous studies using U.S. data, conclude that “...immigrants have a significantly bigger depressing eﬀect on wages
of other immigrants than on natives’ wages” (page 468-69).
  16 A recent paper by Raphael and Smolensky (2008) also estimates        1
                                                                       σ IMMI
                                                                               for the U.S. finding a significant value in most cases.
Discussions with Steve Raphael allowed us to understand in greater detail why Borjas et al. (2008) do not estimate a significant
inverse elasticity.




                                                                 19
                                                             θF kj       1
                                ln(wF bkjt /wDbkjt ) = ln(         )−        ln(Fkbjt /Dkbjt )                           (13)
                                                             θDkj     σ IMMI

   where wF bkjt /wDbkjt is the relative wage of immigrants and U.S.-born workers in education group k (within
broad group b), experience group j and period t; Fkbjt /Dkbjt measures the relative hours worked by the two
              θF kj
groups and    θDkj     is the relative foreign-native productivity. Notice that in line with what is described in the
                                              θF kj
model, it is reasonable to assume that        θDkj    varies across education-experience group but that it is constant
over time. There are two very good reasons for this. First, remember that while technology aﬀects the relative
productivity of education (and experience) groups in diﬀerent ways over time, such diﬀerences are absorbed
by the θ0 s in the higher levels of the production function nesting. In equation (13) as we use ratios of wages
and hours worked within education-experience-period groups one can allow technology to be specific to each
education-experience-year and those specific terms all cancel out leaving only the relative “productivity” of
                            F kjθ                                            F kjθ
immigrants and natives ln( θDkj  ). Second, the restriction of constant ln( θDkj  ) is perfectly in line with (in fact it
is less restrictive than) the assumption made at the higher level of CES nesting. For instance the experience-
specific productivity terms θkj are assumed to be constant over time. This is the assumption made in section
5.2 below as well as in Borjas (2003) (see section VII.A of the paper) and in Borjas and Katz (2007) (see section
                                                                                                  θF kj
1.4 of the paper) to estimate the elasticity σ EXP . In our interpretation the term               θDkj    captures mostly the
relative labor eﬀectiveness (quality) of foreign-born versus natives. While we have reasons to believe that it
may be related to the education-experience of the group it is much less clear that this changes systematically
over time in a way correlated to the change in the percentage of immigrants. Hence, our basic regression to
              1
estimate   σ IMMI     is:


                                                                  1
                                ln(wF bkjt /wDbkjt ) = Ikj −          ln(Fkbjt /Dkbjt ) + ukbjt                          (14)
                                                               σ IMMI

   Where Ikj are 32 education by experience fixed eﬀects and ukbjt is a group-specific error term. In the
basic specifications (denoted as “basic”) reported in Column (2) of Tables 2 and 3 we treat the error ukbjt as
potentially correlated within education-experience groups (hence the clustering of the standard errors) but with
no other systematic component. To capture potential systematic changes of the relative productivity of foreign
workers over time in the specifications reported in in column (3) of Table 2 and 3 (with the title “Add Time
Eﬀects”) we allow also for a time-specific eﬀect (It ). If the systematic change in quality is due mostly to new
immigrants (who have low levels of experience) one can think that we should include a systematic experience
by time component (Ijt ) and we do this in specifications of column (4) of Tables 2 and 3 labelled “Add Time
by Experience eﬀects”. Finally, if the change in quality of young, less experienced immigrants over time is also
systematically related to their education groups one can also include education by time eﬀects (Ikt ). We include



                                                               20
all the interactions in the specifications of column (5) in Table 2 and 3 labelled as “Add Time by Education
Eﬀects”. This last specification is identical to those estimated in Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) and in
                                                     1
column (6) we report their exact estimates of     σ IMMI     for the corresponding specifications, where available.
   The problem of specifications in columns (5) and (6) is that the extremely large number of dummies (104)
absorbs a very large part of the identifying variation (based on 192 observations at most). This causes a 3-4 fold
increase in the standard errors (relative to the basic specification), reducing our ability to identify precisely the
parameter. More importantly, such extreme saturation using dummies, when the variables are already ratios
(rather than levels) within a cell, is a much more demanding method than what is applied to estimate any other
elasticity in the model. We illustrate in section 5.2 and 5.3 below that the same issue applies to the estimate of
                                                  1             1
the other inverse elasticities of the model,   σ EXP   and   σ EDU   : saturating the variation in the education-year and
experience-year dimensions with dummies makes the estimates insignificantly diﬀerent from 0.
   Before commenting on the regression results, reported in Tables 2 and 3, it is very useful to take a look at
the data to see that the relative immigrant-native wages show a very clear negative correlation with the relative
immigrant-native hours worked across groups and decades, the clear sign of imperfect substitution. Figure 5
simply shows the scatterplot of ln(wF bkjt /wDbkjt ) and ln(Fkbjt /Dkbjt ) defined above and the very significantly
negative regression line (the coeﬃcient is equal to 0.05, and the robust standard error, clustered by group, is
equal to 0.007). Figure 6 shows the scatterplot once we subtract from each skill group the estimated fixed eﬀect
Ikj . The changes over time (relative to a group-specific average) of the relative immigrant-native hours supplied
and weekly wages appear even more significantly negatively correlated with each other (the coeﬃcient is equal
to -0.06 and the robust standard error, clustered by group, is 0.008). The negative and significant correlation,
very apparent from the data is “prima facie” evidence of imperfect substitution. The elasticity implied by such
coeﬃcients is around 20 and significantly diﬀerent from ∞. Finally, even a very simple look at the data in Tables
A1 and A3 confirms that groups experiencing large increases in the share of foreign-born (e.g. all workers with
no degree and experience between 10 and 30 years) also underwent a significant deterioration in the wage of
foreign-born relative to nationals.
                                                   1
   Table 2 reports the estimated values of      σ IMMI   using our basic wage and employment sample (described in
section 4) and specifications that include an increasing set of control dummies. As described above, beginning
with specification (1) which does not include any dummy, we add education by experience eﬀects (exactly as
specified in expression 14) in specification (2). In specification (3) we add time eﬀects, in (4) we also include
time by experience eﬀects and in (5) we add time by education eﬀects. The first row includes only men, the
second only women and the third men and women pooled in the calculation of the relative wages. As men
and women may have diﬀerent productive characteristics and diﬀer in their attachment to the labor market
it is traditional in this literature to prefer samples of men only. Our regressions show similar results when



                                                             21
using either gender or a pooled sample. In the fourth row the method of estimation is 2SLS and the relative
foreign-native employment in the group is used as instrument for relative hours worked, to reduce the potential
endogeneity of hours worked to wage compensation. In the fifth row we restrict the sample to 1970-2006, as the
share of foreign-born in employment only started increasing in the seventies. The sixth row shows the estimates
obtained using only groups with high school education or less, the seventh row restrict the sample to the groups
of workers with 20 years of experience or less.
   Three robust results emerge from Table 2. First, all the full-sample specifications in columns (1) to (4)
                                            1
produce highly significant estimates of − σIMMI ranging between -0.024 and -0.095 and mostly around -0.05,
implying an elasticity σ IMM I = 20. Second, the standard errors (robust and clustered by education-experience
group) of those specifications in columns (1)-(4), including the whole sample (rows one to five), are generally
below 0.015 and in the basic specifications (column 2) they are smaller or equal to 0.012. In contrast, the
specifications that include all dummies (column 5) produce errors mostly larger then 0.03, and usually three
to four times larger than for the basic specification. The estimates in Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) are
shown in column (6) next to our corresponding estimates (column 5). The only very minor diﬀerences between
the two estimates (leading to very small numerical discrepancies) reside in our use of a simpler cell-size weighting
(number of observations) in the regression (rather than the slightly more sophisticated weighting used in Borjas,
Grogger and Hanson, 2008) and in the fact that we first take the average of cell wages to calculate wF bkjt /wDbkjt
and then apply the logarithm (consistent with the theoretical model) to that ratio. Borjas, Grogger and Hanson
(2008) take the average of logarithmic individual wages of native and immigrants in each cell, instead, and then
subtract one from the other17 . Comparing the Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) estimates with the others in
the same row it is clear that the large standard errors and insignificant estimates in their paper are a result of
the saturation with dummies. While it is hard to determine which set of dummies capture important demand
shocks, and to decide which set to include, we want to emphasize that the inclusion of similar sets of dummies
(see sections 5.2 and 5.3 below) would make the estimates of all inverse elasticities in this model statistically
insignificant.
   Finally, in most specifications we find no appreciable diﬀerence in the estimates using men or women or
both groups pooled. If anything the specification using men only, which is usually preferred in this literature,
                                                               1
produces larger estimates of the inverse elasticity         σ IMMI    in the basic specification of column (2). Rows 4 and 5
of Table 2 (as well as Table A4 in the Appendix that separates all the results between men and women) present
robustness checks. Using the 2SLS method (with relative employment instrumenting relative hours worked)
and omitting observations for 1960 does not change significantly any result. In the last the two rows of Table 2,
we inquire whether the small but significant degree of imperfect substitution, estimated using all groups is also
 17 We   also run our regressions using their exact method and codes obtaining results essentially identical to those reported.




                                                                 22
present restricting our sample to less educated or to young workers. Since the inflow of young, less educated
immigrants is credited with the large competition eﬀects on less educated natives it is relevant to check that
even for those specific groups some degree of imperfect substitutability exists. While the estimates become
somewhat more imprecise and in some instances a bit smaller, by and large they are still significant and usually
around -0.05, even when we include all dummies. We take this as evidence that young and less educated native
workers exhibit a significant, if small, degree of imperfect substitution with immigrants.
    Table 3 does not need lengthy comment, as it reproduces Table 2 exactly except that in the sample in
which we construct wages we eliminate (besides self-employed and workers reporting no wage) workers still
attending school. We perform this check since Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) argues that the estimates of
    1
− σIMMI in Ottaviano and Peri (2006a) were significantly aﬀected by the inclusion of individuals still attending
school. While reproducing (essentially exactly) Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) results in the “fully-dummy-
saturated” regressions of column (5), Table 3 shows that the inclusion or exclusion of people attending school
does not make any diﬀerence in the estimates of the basic specification and of all other specifications. We
interpret the large imprecision of the estimates in column (5) and the stability of estimates in other columns as
another sign that the relevant identifying variation in the data demonstrates imperfect substitutability which
is in large part absorbed by the inclusion of the dummies. Notice that a formal test performed using even the
coeﬃcients and standard errors in column (5) of Table 2 or 3 only rejects once out of 14 times the hypothesis
       1
of − σIMMI = −0.05 at a 5% significance level. Hence, even the Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) estimates
cannot reject such a degree of imperfect substitution (i.e., an elasticity of 20). It is only that their standard
errors are too large, and the identifying variation too small, to produce significant point estimates18 .


5.2     Estimates of σ EXP

We can now use equation (14) to infer the systematic, time-invariant, components of the eﬃciency terms θDkj
and θF kj . In particular, those terms can be obtained using the estimates of the fixed eﬀects Ibkj , from equation
(14) and imposing the standardization that they add up to one for each education and experience group as
follows:
                                       b           exp(Ibkj ) b               1
                                       θF kj =                 , θDkjt =                                                     (15)
                                                          b
                                                 1 + exp(Ikj )           1 + exp(Ibkj )

                    θDkj and b
Using the values of b         θF kjt from above and the estimate σ    bIMMI we can construct the aggregate la-
                                      ∙      e IMMI −1
                                             σ                   e IMMI −1 ¸ σ
                                                                 σ
                                                                               e IMMI
                                                                               σ
                                                                             e IMMI −1
                                       b
bor input, following (6), as Nkjt = θDkj Dkjt
                                               e IMMI
                                               σ
                                                         b
                                                       + θF kj Fkjt
                                                                   e IMMI
                                                                   σ
                                                                                       . Aggregating the marginal
pricing conditions for each education-experience group (given by relations (10) and (11)) implies the following
  18 We also performed the regression specified in Table 2 using a wage sample that includes only full-year full-time workers. The

estimates are almost identical to those presented in Table 2 and are available upon request..




                                                               23
relationship between the compensation going to the composite labor input Nkjt and its supply:

                             ³                                        µ             ¶
                                   1  1−α ´    1                          1     1
              ln(W kjt ) = ln αAtα κt α +         ln(Nt ) + ln θbt −         −        ln(Nbt ) + ln θkt                   (16)
                                             σ HL                       σ HL σ bb
                             µ              ¶
                                1        1                            1
                           −        −         ln(Nkt ) + ln θkj −         ln(Nkjt )
                               σ bb σ EXP                          σ EXP

where W kjt = wF bkjt (Fkjt /Nkjt ) + wDbkjt (Dkjt /Nkjt ) is the average wage paid to workers in the education-
experience group k, j and can be considered as the compensation to one unit of the composite input Nkjt .19
                                                                              1
Equation (16) provides the basis for estimating the parameter              σ EXP   , which measures the elasticity of rela-
tive demand for workers with identical education and diﬀerent experience levels. Empirical implementation is
achieved by rewriting it as:

                                                                      1     bkjt ) + ekjt
                                   ln(W kjt ) = It + Ikt + Ikj −         ln(N                                             (17)
                                                                   σ EXP

                                                               ³   1   1−α ´
                                                                                1
where the year fixed eﬀects It control for the variation of ln αAtα κt α + σHL    ln(Nt ), the year by education fixed
                                                          ³            ´                   ³            ´
                                                              1
eﬀects Ikt control for the variation of the term ln θbt − σHL    − σ1bb ln(Nbt )+ ln θkt − σ1bb − σEXP
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                          ln(Nkt ) and
education by experience fixed eﬀects Ikj capture the terms ln θkj that we assumed in section 3.1 constant over
time. The term ekjt represents a education-experience specific random disturbance. Notice that specification
(17) requires the inclusion of the terms It and Ikt to absorb eﬀects predicted by the model due to changes in
the broader labor aggregates and their productivity. On the other hand, the term Ikj controls for education-
experience specific productivity terms that are assumed constant over time. Such an identifying assumption
follows closely Borjas (2003) (see section VII.A of the paper) and Borjas and Katz (2007) (see section 1.4 of the
paper) and is exactly akin to the assumption made in the basic specification (14) above. Notice for instance
                                                                                                                  1
that we (and the previous literature) do not include experience by time eﬀects Ijt in estimating               σ EXP   . As we
see in Table 4 below, the saturation of the model with that extra set of dummies would reduce the estimates of
    1
− σEXP to a value insignificantly diﬀerent from 0.
                                                    1
   Each cell of Table 4 reports the estimate of − σEXP from a separate regression. In column (1) we implement
                                         bkjt ) constructed exactly as described above. We alternatively use a
regression (17) using the labor index ln(N
sample of men only (first row), women only (second row) or men and women pooled (third row). In the fourth
                                                                bkjt ), and in the last row we omit year
row we use employment, rather than hours worked to construct ln(N
                                                                                   bkjt is not very dissimilar from
1960. As the elasticity of substitution σ IMMI is quite large, the construction of N
simply adding hours worked by native and immigrants within the cell. Column (2) shows the results when we
             bkjt ) using the more intuitive sum of hours worked within the cell. The method of estimation in
construct ln(N
  19 The wage W
                 kjt is an average of the wages paid to U.S.- and foreign-born workers in group k, j. The averaging weights are
equal to the share of hours worked by each sub-group in the group k, j.



                                                              24
                                                                                                  bkjt ). Once
Table 4 is 2SLS using ln(Fkjt ), the hours worked by immigrants in the cell, as instrument for ln(N
we control for the dummies immigration is considered as a pure supply shock and is used to instrument the
                bkjt ). Column (3) departs from the basic specification by adding a set of time by experience
variation of ln(N
fixed eﬀects in the estimation. Its purpose is to illustrate the eﬀect of absorbing with dummies a large part of
                                  1
the variation when estimating − σEXP . The reported standard errors are heteroskedasticity robust and clustered
by education-experience group.
   Before commenting on the results reported in Table 4 let us remind the reader that estimates of the elasticity
    1
− σEXP exist in the literature. They use the variation in relative cohort size to estimate the eﬀect on relative
cohort wages. The most influential are the following three. First Welch, using five-year experience groups within
                                                                                   1
four education groups (in a set-up similar to this paper) estimated a value of − σEXP between -0.080 and -0.218
(see Table 7 and 8 of Welch, 1979) corresponding to an elasticity between 4.6 and 12. Then Katz and Murphy
using only two experience groups (young, equivalent to 1-5 years of experience and old, equivalent to 26 to 35
                              1
years of experience) find − σEXP = −0.342 (footnote 23 in Katz and Murphy, 1992) equivalent to an elasticity of
3. Finally, in the most influential contribution Card and Lemieux (2001) using the supply variation due to the
                                              1
baby boomers’ cohorts estimate a value of − σEXP between -0.107 and -0.237 (Table V in Card and Lemieux,
2001) implying an elasticity between 4.2 and 9.3.
   It is therefore reassuring to notice that the estimates of Column (1) and (2) of Table 4 relative to men
and to the pooled sample are exactly in the range estimated by Welch (1979) as well as, for the large part,
                                                                     1
in the range estimated by Card and Lemieux (2001). The estimated − σEXP ranges between -0.07 and -0.16.
Only for the sample of women (second row) are the estimates imprecise and not significant — possibly due to
larger heterogeneity of this sample because of the lower labor market attachment of women (most of the results
of Welch, 1979, and Card and Lemieux, 2001, are based on men only). Notice also the extreme similarity of
                                        bkjt ) in the more cumbersome model-based way (column 1) or simply
the results obtained by constructing ln(N
adding hours worked in the cell (column 2). This is often the case when the sub-groups of workers exhibit high
elasticity of substitution. All in all, our preferred estimated value of σEXP (using the men or pooled sample
for the whole period) is between 6.2 and 7.7. and it is perfectly compatible with the estimates in Welch (1979)
and Card and Lemieux (2001).
   Finally, column (3) saturates the education-experience, experience-time and education-time variation with
                                                     1
dummies and generates insignificant estimates of − σEXP . This is the same eﬀect produced by dummy saturation
                        1
in the estimates of − σIMMI (in Column 5 of Tables 2 and 3) and shows the sensitivity of these elasticity estimates
to the inclusion of an excessive number of dummies. In the light of the practice in the previous literature
                                                                                     1
(including Borjas, 2003 and Borjas and Katz, 2007), of the existing estimates of − σEXP and consistently with the
previous section, we consider therefore specifications (1) and (2) as providing the relevant parameter estimates.



                                                        25
Essentially the estimates of σ EXP in the literature range between 5 and 10 and our preferred estimates indicate
a value between 6 and 8.


5.3      Estimates of σ HL , σ LL and σ HH

5.3.1     Using the Model

Aggregating one level further, we can construct the CES composite N   bkt . We obtain the estimates b θkj from the
                                                                                       X
experience by education fixed eﬀects in regression (17), as follows: b
                                                                     θkj = exp(Ibkj )/    exp(Ibkj ). Then we use
                                                                                                            j
                                                                                                   ⎡                  ⎤ σe σe EXP−1
                                                                                                     8                     EXP
                                                                                                    X        e EXP −1
                                                                                                             σ
                                                                      bkt
the estimated values of σ EXP to construct, according to formula (5), N                          = ⎣   b
                                                                                                       θkj Nkjt
                                                                                                               e EXP
                                                                                                               σ
                                                                                                                      ⎦             . The
                                                                                                     j=1
production function chosen, together with marginal cost pricing, implies that the compensation going to the
labor input Nkt and its supply satisfy the following expression:



                      ³                                               µ                  ¶
                          1  1−α ´         1                               1        1                               1
        ln(W kt ) = ln αAtα κt α +             ln(Nt ) + ln θbt −                −           ln(Nbt ) + ln θkt −        ln(Nkt )    (18)
                                         σHL                              σ HL     σbb                             σ bb

                 P ³ Nkjt ´
where W kt =        j   Nkt    W kjt is the average wage in education group k20 in broad group b. The problem of
                                                                                          1
using the general formula (18) as basis for the empirical estimates of                   σ bb   is that we only have 6 observations
(years) in each broad education group (H and L) and we need to allow at least an education-specific time trend
to capture the term ln θkt . This would not give enough degrees of freedom to estimate a parameter for each group
allowing σHH , σ LL and σ HL to be diﬀerent. Therefore, using the National Census Data the only possibility is
to assume the (unverified) restriction that σ HH = σLL = σ HL = σ EDU so that equation (18) above reduces to:

                                        ³   1  1−α ´            1                        1
                          ln(W kt ) = ln αAtα κt α +               ln(Nt ) + ln θkt −       ln(Nkt )                                (19)
                                                             σ EDU                    σ EDU
                                            1
   Equation (19) allows the estimation of σEDU  using 24 observations (four education groups over six years) if
                          ³     1 1−α ´
                                            1
we assume that the term ln αAtα κt α + σEDU    ln(Nt ) can be absorbed by a common time eﬀect (or a common
time-trend) and the education-specific productivity ln θkt can be summarized in an education-specific time trend
(plus possibly an education-specific fixed eﬀect). By doing so we can estimate the following specification:

                                                                                  1     bkt ) + ekt
                                  ln(W kt ) = It + (T ime T rend)k −                 ln(N                                           (20)
                                                                               σ EDU

Conditional on these controls, the identifying assumption is that any other change in employment of foreign-
  20 The weight for the wage of each group equals the size of the composite input for that education-experience cell, L
                                                                                                                        kjt , relative
to the size of the composite input for the whole education group Lkt . This is measured by the share of group k, j in total working
hours of educational group k.



                                                                 26
born within a group is a supply shift. The above one is the assumption made in Borjas (2003), Ottaviano and
Peri (2006a) and Borjas and Katz (2007). It is impossible, due to the very few periods of observation in the
Census data to test empirically the validity of the restriction σ HH = σ LL = σ HL = σ EDU . Moreover such
restriction is neither common to the rest of the labor literature (that, as we illustrated above, mostly assumes
σ HH = σ LL = ∞ and σ HL < ∞) nor innocuous in determining the eﬀects of immigration on wages (as we will
show in section 6). It is very important, therefore, that we complement the current estimates with further data
to produce independent estimates of σ LL and σ HL , that we do in the next section using CPS yearly data.
                                      1
   Table 5 shows the estimates of − σEDU assuming the restriction σ HH = σ LL = σ HL = σ EDU and imple-
                                                 1      1            1
menting regression (20). If the elasticities   σ HL , σ LL   and   σ HH   are not equal, such procedure would at best give
an estimate of their average value. In this section we mostly care to show that even such average value is rather
sensitive to the inclusion of few fixed eﬀects, and in most cases our estimates of σ EDU are a bit larger than
(but comparable to) the one estimated and used in Borjas (2003) and Borjas and Katz (2007). The key point,
however, made in the next section is that when we allow σLL and σ HH to be diﬀerent from σ HL the data
strongly suggest that those within-broad group elasticities are much larger than between-broad group elasticity
and that σLL is close to ∞.
   The diﬀerence between specification (1) and (2) in Table 5 is the construction of the aggregate labor input
   bkt ). In specification (1) we follow the model-based procedure described above and use the estimated elas-
ln(N
                                          bkt ). In specification (2) we simply add hours worked across native
ticities σ IMMI and σ EXP to construct ln(N
and foreign workers and between diﬀerent experience groups as if they were perfect substitutes. The estimated
equation in column (1) and (2) is exactly as in expression (20) and the time eﬀects It are assumed to be a
common time trend while (T ime T rend)k are education-specific time trends. The method of estimation is 2SLS
using ln(Fkt ) the (logarithm of) hours supplied by foreign-born workers in education group k as instrument for
   bkt ). Specification (3) diﬀers as it allows the common time eﬀects It to be captured by dummies rather
ln(N
than by a trend while specification (4) adds to the time trends four education-specific dummies. Specification
(1) and (2) reproduce the method adopted in Borjas (2003), Borjas and Katz (2007) and Ottaviano and Peri
(2006a), specification (3) seems more consistent with the theoretical model as we have no reason to believe that
                       ³     1 1−α ´
                                        1
the aggregate term ln αAtα κt α + σEDU      ln(Nt ) follows a trend in time, while specification (4) is a bit more
demanding, as it assumes education-specific intercepts as well as time-trends to capture the terms ln θkt .
                                  1
   We estimate the elasticity − σEDU on men only (first row), women only (second row), men and women pooled
(third row) and, as in the previous tables, using employment rather than hours as alternative measure of labor
input (fourth row) and omitting 1960 (fifth row). Most of the specifications in column (1) and (2) using the
whole 1960-2006 sample produce estimates around −0.4, that imply σ EDU = 2.5. Allowing a free time eﬀect
(column 3) or restricting the sample to post 1970, both cause a significant decline in the estimated value of



                                                              27
   1
σ EDU   that drops to 0.2 - 0.3 implying an elasticity σEDU between 3.3 and 5. Finally, including education eﬀects
                                                      1
(column 4) increases the estimates of              σ EDU   up to −0.7 but also dramatically increase their standard error so
that the value is not significantly diﬀerent from 0.
   One needs to be careful when comparing these estimates to the previous literature. The only clear comparison
                                         1
is with Borjas (2003) that estimates − σEDU = −0.759 (standard error equal to 0.582) and Borjas and Katz
                        1
(2007) who estimate − σEDU = −0.412 (with standard error equal to 0.312) as they use exactly the same model.
The first point estimate is consistent with those in column (4) of Table 5, while the second is close to those
in column (1) and (2). Our standard errors are smaller than those in the two previous studies, and the point
                                                          1
estimates are similar to them. Hence our estimates of − σEDU are as good as those produced by previous studies
                                                                                                                      1
on the national impact of immigrants. Comparing these values, however, to the estimates of                          σ HL   from the
previous literature (such as Katz and Murphy, 1992; Angrist, 1995; Johnson, 1997; and Krusell et al, 2000) is
very misleading. Those studies expressly estimate the elasticity between two groups (not four) with high and
low education. They separate the groups at schooling level equal to high school graduation or some college
education and expressly consider as perfect substitutes workers within each of the two groups. Hence, relative
                                                                                                           1
to that literature, the present method estimates an elasticity that averages the inverse                 σ HL   (estimated mostly
                                     1             1                                                                1
between 0.5 and 0.7) and           σ HH   and    σ LL   assumed equal to 0 in those studies. Interpreting        σ EDU   as such an
average, values ranging between 0.24 and 0.44 as in our preferred specifications of Columns (1) and (2) of Table
                                                                                    1
5 are perfectly consistent with that literature. Our estimates of                σ EDU   provide no information, however, on the
                           1      1            1
individual values of     σ HL , σ HH   and   σ LL ,   nor do they test whether the equality restriction is upheld by the data.
                                                                                                                               1
As there is no indication in the literature that those elasticities are equal, and as the actual value of                    σ LL   is
particularly relevant to calculate the wage eﬀect of immigrants in the next section, we use the CPS yearly data
                                     1      1             1
to estimate independently          σ HL , σ HH   and    σ LL   and test the restriction that they are equal.


5.3.2     Using the CPS and the Katz and Murphy Method

We implement the method used by Katz and Murphy (1992) (KM from now on) and described in section VI.A
                                            1
of their paper. The estimate of           σ HL   that they obtain is the most widely cited and used in this whole literature
and therefore we think it is appropriate to take their data and method as natural reference and extend them to
             1            1
estimate   σ HH   and   σ LL .   We use the yearly IPUMS-CPS data from King et al (2008) and we use a definition of
the sample, of the education groups and of weekly wages, hours worked and other variables identical to those
used for the Census data in the previous section.21 The details for the construction of the sample and variables
using the CPS data are in Appendix C. Essentially we consider workers 18 years or older not living in group
quarters, who worked at least a week last year with experience between 1 and 40 years to construct the sample
 21 The
      IPUMS (Integrated Public Use Microdata Samples) produces comparable variable definitions and names between the
CENSUS data (that we used in the previous sections) and CPS data (that we use in this section).



                                                                      28
of hours worked (that measures labor inputs). And we use the same sample omitting self-employed and workers
who did not receive wage compensation to construct the average weekly wages, weighting each individual by
her hours worked. The data cover the period 1963-2006, so we have 44 yearly observations to estimate each
elasticity. We first reproduce the exact KM method extending their analysis to the period 1963-2006 (their
regressions only included the 1963-1987 period) and we run the following regression:


                                                                   1
                                        ln(wHt /wLt ) = It −            ln(NHt /NLt ) + ut                                       (21)
                                                                 σ HL

    The wHt is the average weekly wage of workers with college degree (calculated as hours-weighted average)
and wLt is the hours-weighted average weekly wage of high school graduates. The KM method considers group
H as made of college-equivalent labor units and L as constituted by high-school equivalent units. Hence the
supply NHt is constructed including hours worked by college educated plus hours worked by those with some
college weighted by 0.69 (the conversion factor between some college and college estimated by KM) while NLt
includes hours worked by high school graduates plus those worker by people with no degree weighted by 0.93
and hours worked by people with some college weighted by 0.29.22 Interpreting the term It as capturing the
systematic component of the relative productivity ln(θHt /θLt ), and ut as capturing its random component,
equation (21) can be easily derived by taking the relative marginal productivity of NHt and NLt in our model.
The only diﬀerence is that the nesting of our model implies that workers with some college should contribute
their hours of work only to the construction of NHt (rather then being split between the two groups) as they
are all included in group H. Finally following KM we consider the evolution of It over time as a time trend.
                                                          1
    The first column of Table 6 shows the estimates of − σHL implementing equation (21). We use the sample
of men and women pooled in Table 6 (as done by KM) while we report in Table A5 in the Appendix the
corresponding estimates using wages calculated on the male sample only. The diﬀerence between the first and
the second row is in the split of hours worked by those with some college education. In the first row we split
them between the two groups (as described above and exactly reproducing KM) and in the second we include
them in the group H only, more consistently with out model. The third row uses employment rather than hours
worked as measure of labor supply and the last row omits the Sixties. We report in brackets the OLS standard
errors and in square brackets the Newey-West autocorrelation-robust standard errors (as the time-series data
may contain some autocorrelation).
                        1
    The estimates of − σHL obtained with the KM method extended to the 1963-2006 (or 1970-2006) period are
between -0.52 and -0.66, with standard errors between 0.06 and 0.09 hence very significantly diﬀerent from 0.
They are close to the original estimates -0.709 with standard error of 0.15 and confirm the imperfect substitution
  22 For the justification of thse weights see Katz and Murphy (1992) page 68. The results are essentially identical weighting workers

with no degree by 1 in the group L and splitting workers with some college 50-50 between the H and the L group.




                                                                 29
between workers in the H and in the L group with an elasticity ranging between 1.5 and 1.8. The estimate
obtained including workers with some college in H only (second row) is somewhat smaller -0.32, and compatible
with an elasticity between 2 and 3. All in all those estimates confirm that an elasticity around 2, which has
been frequently used in the literature, seems a reasonable estimate of σ HL .
   The KM method and our nested structure, moreover, allow us to estimate on the time series data also the
                 1             1
elasticities   σ HH   and    σ LL   in particular from expressions (3) and (4) of our model we can derive the following
two estimating equations:


                                                                     1
                                     ln(wHSGt /wSHSt ) = ILt −             ln(NHSGt /NSHSt ) + uLt                           (22)
                                                                    σ LL


                                                                      1
                                     ln(wCOGt /wSCOt ) = IHt −           ln(NCOGt /NCODt ) + ut                              (23)
                                                                    σ HH
                                              1
Equation (22) is used to estimate           σ LL   by regressing the relative weekly wages of high school graduates relative
to workers with no degree on their relative hours worked, assuming that ILt (that captures ln(θHSGt /θSHSt ))
                                                                      1
follows a time-trend, while (23) is used to estimate                σ HH   by regressing the relative weekly wages of college
graduates relative to those with some college on their relative hours worked, also assuming that IHt (that
                                                                                                       1
captures ln(θCOGt /θSCOt )) follows a time trend. Column 2 and 3 of Table 6 report the estimates of − σLL and
   1
− σHH respectively. Column 2 and 3 of Table A5 report the same estimates for the sample of men only. The most
                                                                                                           1
important result emerging very consistently from those estimates is that both of them, and particularly − σLL ,
                                           1                                1         1
are much smaller in absolute value than − σHL . In the majority of cases − σLL and − σHH are not significantly
                                     1
diﬀerent from 0. The estimates of − σLL are at most equal to -0.039 and a one-sided test can exclude at any
confidence level that the estimate is larger than 0.10 in absolute value. The F-test statistic of the hypothesis
   1                                    1
− σLL =-0.32 (the lowest estimate of − σHL ) is 258, rejecting the null of equality at an overwhelming level of
                               1
confidence. The estimate of − σHH is around -0.10, and also a one-sided test always reject the hypothesis that
it is equal to -0.32.
   Hence the two crucial results emerging from Table 6 (and 5A) are the following. First, the restriction
  1          1          1                                                                                        1
σ HL   =   σ HH   =   σ LL   is overwhelmingly rejected by the data. Second the estimated value of             σ LL   is between
0.039 and 0, implying an elasticity of substitution between workers with high school degree and those with no
                                                       1                                                          1
high school of 25 or above. The value of             σ HH   is estimated around 0.10, also much smaller than    σ HL ,   often not
significantly diﬀerent from 0, implying an elasticity of 10 or larger.
   The method used above to estimate those crucial elasticities does not hinge on variation of supply generated
by immigration. The CPS data do not allow us to measure hours variation due to immigrants as they begin
recording immigration status in 1994 leaving 12 observations only. However, the CPS begins recording “Hispanic



                                                                   30
Origin” status from 1970. Hence assuming that changes in Hispanic workers among less educated are mainly
due to immigration we can re-estimate (22) on post 1970 data (37 observations) instrumenting NHSGt /NSHSt
                                                                                                 1
with the equivalent measure of relative hours worked by Hispanics only. The point estimate of − σLL (not in the
Table) using this method is -0.019 and the standard error is 0.035. Again no evidence of imperfect substitution
is found.
    All in all, the last two sections produce very robust evidence that is consistent with the previous labor
                                                                                                     1      1            1
literature that leads us to the following assessment relative to the parameters                    σ HL , σ HH   and   σ LL .   While
imposing the equality restriction used first by Borjas (2003) and then by Ottaviano and Peri (2006a) and Borjas
                                                1
and Katz (2007) generates estimates of       σ EDU    around 0.40, that value can at most be interpreted as an average
of those elasticities. However, using CPS data we find that the equality restriction its overwhelmingly rejected
by the data. The same data suggest that reasonable estimates for individual elasticities are in the range between
                     1                                         1            1
0.5 and 0.66 for   σ HL   and between 0 and 0.10 for         σ HH   and   σ LL   with the first coeﬃcient closer to 0.10 and the
                                                        1
second closer to 0. The estimated value of           σ EDU    around 0.40 is indeed between those estimates, compatible
with the idea that it somehow estimates an average between them.



6     Immigration and Wages: 1990-2006

We are now ready for the third and final step in calculating the eﬀects of immigration on the wages of U.S.- and
foreign-born workers. The first step of the procedure (Section 3) required specifying a production function and
deriving labor demand curves and the elasticity of wages with respect to immigration of workers with diﬀerent
skills. The second step (Section 5) required estimation of the relevant parameters (elasticities of substitution).
The third step (this section) uses these estimates and the actual flow of immigrants by group during the 1990-
2006 period (reported in column 3 of Table 1) in the expressions reported in Appendix A to calculate the eﬀects
of immigrants on the wages of U.S.- and foreign-born workers in individual groups as well as overall.


6.1     The Fallacy of Partial Eﬀects

Most existing empirical studies on the eﬀect of immigration on wages (including Borjas, Freeman and Katz,
1997; Card, 2001; Friedberg, 2001; Section IV—but not Section VII—of Borjas, 2003; and Borjas, 2006) carefully
estimate the partial elasticity of native wages to immigration within the same skill group (often taken as an
education-experience group) and treat this elasticity as “the eﬀect of immigration on wages”.23 As we illustrated
in Section 3.3, the partial eﬀect, described in equation (12), is uninformative of the actual overall eﬀect of
immigration on wages. To evaluate that we need to consider the entire distribution of immigrants across skill
  23 Even the recent meta-study by Longhi, Nijcamp and Poot (2005) considers this partial eﬀect as the relevant estimate across

studies.



                                                                    31
groups, the cross eﬀects among groups and the adjustment of capital. More importantly, the partial elasticity
(12) is likely to be negative in most reasonable models as long as immigrants are closer substitutes for natives
in the same group (education-experience) than they are to natives in other skill groups.
                                                               ³                 ´
                                                                    1        1
    For instance, using estimates from Tables 2 and 4, the term σIMMI   − σEXP      is calculated to be negative
                                                        1                                                        1
and around −0.10 (since the preferred estimate of    σ IMMI   is around 0.05 and the preferred estimates of   σ EXP   are
around 0.15). This is a partial elasticity and can be interpreted, using formula (12) as meaning that an increase
by 10% in the hours supplied in group k, j, given constant supply in the other groups (i.e., keeping fixed the
aggregates Nkt and Nt ) would produce a negative 1% variation in the real wage of native workers in the group.
If one fails to notice the partial nature of the elasticity above, one could be tempted to generalize these findings,
interpreting them as saying that the inflow of immigrants over the period 1990-2006, which increased total hours
worked by 11.4%, caused a negative 1.1% change (over 1990-2006) in the average wages of natives (0.10∗11.4%),
or that groups such as high school dropouts, for which the inflow of immigrants was as high as 23% of initial
hours worked, lost as much as 2.3% of their wage. Such a simplistic generalization is misleading, however, as
expression (12) only accounts for the eﬀect on wages of immigrants in the same skill group and omits all the
cross-group eﬀects from immigrants in other skill groups, many of which are positive eﬀects. In fact (as we see
                                                                         ³              ´
                                                                            1        1
in Section 6.2 below), while sharing the same negative partial elasticity σIMMI − σEXP   , the wage eﬀects on
natives across groups were very diﬀerent: some were positive and others negative, depending on the relative
size of the skill groups, the relative strength of cross-group eﬀects and the actual pattern of immigration across
groups. The simplistic values of -1.1% or -2.3% mentioned above do not bear any resemblance to the actual
wage eﬀects calculated below, which diﬀer across education groups and depend on the elasticity and supply
in each group. Limiting our attention to the elasticity εpartial
                                                         kjt     , or emphasizing this eﬀect too much, would be
misleading in evaluating the eﬀect of immigration on wages.


6.2    Long Run Eﬀects of Immigration on Wages

The results in Table 7 are some of the most important in the paper. These simulation results describe the impact
of immigration over the 1990-2006 period on the wages of U.S.- and foreign-born workers in the long run. We
focus on the 1990-2006 period as it is the most recent covered by available Census and ACS data and it is the
period of greatest immigration in recent U.S. history. To obtain the simulated eﬀects we proceed in four steps.
First, using expressions (25) and (26) in Appendix A, the relevant parameter values σ IMMI , σ EXP , σ HL , σHH
and σ LL as well as the percentage change in foreign-born workers by skill group, ∆Fkj,1990−2006 / Fkj,1990 (shown
in Table 1) we calculate the percentage change in real wages for U.S.-born and foreign-born workers in each
skill group (k, j). The value of the elasticities used in each simulation are reported in the first five rows of Table
7. Second, we obtain the average wage change in each education group for foreign- and U.S.-born workers by



                                                         32
weighting the percentage change of each experience sub-group by its wage share in the education group. This
provides the entries in the rows labelled “less than HS” , “HS graduates”, “Some CO” and “CO graduates” in
Table 7. Third, we average the changes across education groups for U.S.- and foreign-born separately, again
weighting them by their wage shares as described in formulas (27) and (28) in Appendix A. Those values are
reported in the rows labelled “Average US-born” and “Average Foreign-Born”. Finally, we average the changes
for the two groups (U.S.- and foreign-born workers), still using wage-share weights (as described in formula (29)
in Appendix A), to obtain the overall wage change reported in the last row labelled “Overall Average”. The
upper part of Table 7 can be compared to the results obtained in the previous literature (Borjas, 2003 and
Borjas and Katz, 2007) that mostly focuses on the eﬀect of immigration on the wages of U.S.-born workers. The
lower part of Table 7 reports the eﬀects of immigration on the wages of foreign-born, less frequently considered
in the previous literature. The table reports the “long run” eﬀects, namely the wage eﬀects once capital has
fully adjusted, (∆κt /κt )immigration = 0.24
   In order to evaluate how our simulation fits with the previous labor literature the first three columns present
the simulated wage eﬀect of immigrants using the most common elasticity estimates from the literature. As
argued above, it is common in the labor and macro literature to adopt a value of σHL between 1.5 and 2
(following Katz and Murphy, 1992; Johnson, 1997; Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1998; Krusell et al., 2000 and
others). It is also common to consider workers with some college and a college education (within H) as perfect
substitutes as well as for workers with no degree and with a high school degree within L, hence σ LL = σ HH = ∞.
From Card and Lemieux (2001) and Welch (1979) we borrow a value of σ EXP between 3.3 and 10. Finally we
assume perfect substitution between immigrants and natives in a cell, σ IMMI = ∞. Column 1 uses values of
elasticity in the low end of the range from the literature, column 2 uses values in the high end and column 3
chooses a typical median value. The wage eﬀects of column (3) would therefore be what the“median economist”
would predict without re-estimating the elasticity of demand using the immigration shocks. As we see, the
simulated eﬀects imply a very modest negative wage eﬀect for native workers with no degree (−0.5%) as well
as for those with a high school degree (−0.3%), and a modest positive wage eﬀect for workers with some college
or more (+0.1%).
   Before looking at the intermediate columns which use our own estimates, let us compare those eﬀects with
those estimated in Borjas and Katz (2007), shown in the last column in Table 7. It is evident that the restriction
σ HL = σ LL = σ HH = 2.4 (rejected by the data) is responsible for generating the large negative impact (-4.7%)
on the group of natives with no degree, estimated in that article. That restriction is also responsible for
generating the significant negative eﬀect on college graduates (-1.6%). Plainly stated, while immigration over
1990-2006 was rather unbalanced, especially between workers with no high school degree (+23.6% labor supply
 24 Notice that, by assumption of constant return to scale (in K and N) in the production function, and because we assume no
eﬀect of immigration on technology, the overall average wage eﬀects in the long-run has to be 0.



                                                            33
due to immigrants) and high school graduates (+10% due to immigrants), it was rather balanced between
workers with high school or less (+13% of labor supply) and those with some college or more (+10%). The
elasticity value σ LL plays a fundamental role in determining the relative wage eﬀects, and a value as low as
2.4 (used by Borjas and Katz, 2007) produces dramatic eﬀects relative to our estimated value of 20 (see below)
or to the routinely assumed value of ∞ (closer to 20, and in fact producing an almost identical eﬀect to that
obtained using an estimate of 20) used in columns 1-3. Those large negative eﬀects, therefore, contrast with
what one would predict using parameters previously estimated.
   What do the parameter estimates of σ IMMI , the only parameter specific to the immigration literature, add
to a model that otherwise uses standard estimates from the labor literature? Columns 4 to 6 illustrate such an
eﬀect. While the degree of imperfect substitution between natives and immigrants is small (σ IMMI is between
15 and 30, and most likely around 20), it is enough to generate non-trivial diﬀerences, particularly on the wage
of the group with no degree and on the wage of foreign-born workers. For instance, column 6 uses the typical
estimate of σ IMMI = 20 and shows, relative to column 3 (with identical parameters and σ IMMI = ∞) that
less educated natives now experience a small, real wage gain (+0.7%) rather than a small loss (-0.5%) and,
similarly, college graduates increase their gain to 0.9% (up from 0.1%). These diﬀerences of 0.8-1.0%, while
not as large as those between columns 3 and 10, contribute to producing an even less pessimistic assessment
of the eﬀect of immigration on native wages. The small real wage gains of natives in column 6 relative to 3
happen, obviously, at the expense of previous immigrants who bear most of the direct competition eﬀect of
new immigrants (as our model assumes that they are perfect substitutes with them) and lose, in our median
estimates of column 6, between 4.5 and 7.5% of their wage. This is the relevant distributional shift due to
immigrants: all native workers gain (a little) from immigrants and all previous immigrants lose (a non-trivial
amount) from new immigration. On average, natives gain 0.6% of their wages from immigration because the
imperfect substitutability of immigrants allows them to appropriate a larger part of the immigration surplus,
at the expense of previous immigrants who lose 6.4% of their real wages.
   Finally, columns 7 to 9 repeat the simulations using the range of parameters estimated in this paper. The
main departure from the results of columns 4 to 6 is that the elasticities σ HL , σ LL and σ HH are now estimated
using the CPS data. However, since σ LL and σHH are quite large (between 10 and 50) and our estimates of
σ HL are close to those in the literature (between 1.4 and 2), the simulations in columns 7-9 are remarkably
close to those in 4-6. They are also not very diﬀerent from those in 1-3 but are significantly diﬀerent from those
of Borjas and Katz (2007) in column 10. In our typical estimate (column 9) natives with no degree actually
experience a very small gain (+0.3%) since their mild imperfect substitutability with immigrants compensates
for the small negative eﬀect (-0.5%) caused by the relative abundance of immigrants in the group L. Still, in
relative terms workers with some college or a college degree gain the most in our preferred simulation (+1.0%



                                                       34
and +0.5%, respectively). What is remarkable, however, is that even with the smallest value of σ LL , which is
compatible with our estimates (in Section 5.3.2) the group of less educated natives loses at most 0.3% of its real
wage as the result of 16 years worth of immigrant inflows, and the other groups gain, in the long run, between
0.4% and 1%.
   In summary, while very diﬀerent from those presented in Borjas and Katz (2007), our estimated eﬀects
for native workers are extremely similar to those produced by simply applying the most common elasticity
estimates available in the labor literature to the immigration-driven labor supply shock. The only diﬀerence
is due to the fact that our explicit estimate of a small degree of imperfect substitution between natives and
immigrants produces a small, positive wage eﬀect on all natives and a significant, negative wage eﬀect on
previous immigrants.


6.3    Short Run Eﬀects with Yearly Capital Adjustment

How long does it take for physical capital to adjust and restore its long run returns? And in the presence of
sluggish adjustment of capital what are the eﬀects of immigration on wages in the short run? As discussed
in Section 3.3 (and shown in Appendix A), accounting for capital adjustment simply adds a non-zero term,
        ³      ´
(1 − α) ∆κκt
             t
                        , to the change in the wage of each group. Hence, the short run wage response for
               immigration
each group and for the averages will diﬀer from the long run response by a common constant, due to the chosen
Cobb-Douglas structure in which κt only aﬀects marginal productivity of workers through the overall average
wage. A popular way to analyze the deviation of ln(κt ) from its balanced growth path trend, used in the growth
and business cycle literature, is to represent its time-dynamics in the following way:


                                                                                ∆Ft
                              ln(κt ) = β 0 + β 1 ln(κt−1 ) + β 2 (trend) + γ       + εt                             (24)
                                                                                Lt
                                                                                                             ³            ´
                                                                                                    1            1−α
   where the term β 2 (trend) captures the balanced growth path trajectory of ln(κt ), equal to     α   ln       r+δ At       ,
and the term β 1 ln(κt−1 ) captures the sluggishness of yearly adjustment to shocks. The parameter (1 − β 1 ) is
commonly called the “speed of adjustment ” since it is the share of the deviation from the balanced growth
                                               ∆Ft
path (trend) eliminated each year. Finally,    Lt    are the yearly immigration shocks and εt are other shocks.
Assuming that immigration shocks cause a proportional decrease in κt in each year, in order to calculate the
eﬀect of immigration on κt over, say, the 1990-2006 period, one needs an estimate of the parameter β 1 . Once we
                                                           ∆Ft
know β 1 and the sequence of yearly immigration flows,     Lt ,   one can use (24) to obtain an impulse response of
ln(κt ) and its deviation from trend as of 2007 (short run), as well as for later years (medium and long run). The
                                                                                                                     ∆Ft
previous migration literature has essentially assumed β 1 = 0 in the short run calculations, aggregating the         Lt

over one or two decades assuming fixed capital stock (implying a very large deviation from the trend!). On the
other hand, it has assumed β 1 = 1, (full adjustment) in the long run calculations. The recent empirical growth


                                                         35
literature (Islam, 1995; Caselli et al., 1996) and the recent business cycle literature (Romer, 2006, Chapter 4), in
contrast, provide model-based and empirical estimates of β 1 . The recent growth literature usually estimates a
10% speed of convergence of capital to the own balanced growth path for advanced (OECD) economies (Islam,
1995; Caselli et al., 1996), implying β 1 = 0.9. Similarly, the business cycle literature calculates the speed of
convergence of capital to be between 10% and 20% in each year (Romer, 2006, Chapter 4) for closed economies,
and even faster rates for open economies. Hence β 1 = 0.9 seems a reasonable estimate (if anything on the
conservative side). We also estimated a simple AR(1) process with trend for ln(κt ). We constructed the variable
κt = (Kt /Lt ), dividing the stock of U.S. capital at constant prices (Net Stock of Private and Government Fixed
Assets from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2008) by the total non-farm employment from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics (2008) for each year during the period 1960-2006. We estimated several specifications including
                                         ³      ´                     ³     ´
changes in total employment as a shock ∆L  Lt
                                              t
                                                 , or immigrants only   ∆Ft
                                                                        Lt    as a shock and instrumented those
with changes in the population (to correct for endogeneity of employment).25
   All estimates of β 1 ranged between 0.8 and 0.9 (a speed of adjustment of 10 to 20% a year) with standard
errors ranging between 0.02 and 0.08. We could never reject β 1 = 0.9, and we could always reject β 1 = 1 (no
adjustment). Hence we consider 10% a reliable estimate of the yearly speed of capital adjustment. Using the
series of immigration rates over 1990-2006 and the estimated parameters of capital adjustment β 1 = 0.9, γ =
−0.9 (assuming that capital adjustment begins the same year as immigrants are received), the recursive equation
(24) allows us to calculate (∆κ1990−2006 /κ1990 )immigration as of year 2007 and the share of the deviation from
trend that remains five years (medium run) later in 2012. Using formula (9) we can calculate the eﬀect of ∆κ
on the average wage and on each group’s wage. To the contrary, assuming no adjustment of capital in the
short run (β 1 = 1, γ = −1), since the cumulated inflow of immigrants during the 1990-2006 period amounts
to 9.6% of the total hours worked in 199026 , implies an eﬀect of immigration on average real wages equal to
(0.33) ∗ (−9.6%) = −3.2%, as of 2007. Using the actual 10% speed of adjustment of capital each year, however,
we obtain an eﬀect on the capital-labor ratio due to immigration of just −3.5%, corresponding to a mere −1.1%
(= 0.33 ∗ 3.5%) eﬀect on real wages as of 2007, and in five more years (2012) the negative eﬀect on wages is
reduced to −0.6%.
   Table 8 reports the simulated eﬀects on wages as of 2007 (column 1) and as of 2012 (column 2). The values
are calculated accounting for the yearly (short run) capital adjustment described above in response to the yearly
inflow of immigrants up to 2006. We use the parameter values as in column 9 of Table 7 (which represents our
preferred specification). In the first column of Table 8 we show the wage eﬀect as of 2007, and in the second we
  25 We constructed ∆F , for each year from 1960 to 2006, using the following procedure. From the U.S. Department of Justice,
                         t
Immigration and Naturalization Service we obtained the number of (legal) immigrants for each fiscal year 1960-2006. We then
distribute the net change of foreign-born workers in each decade (measured from Census data and from the American Community
Survey, which includes illegal immigrants as well as legal ones) over each year in proportion to the gross yearly flows of legal
immigrants.
  26 This number is a bit smaller than the 11% in Table 1 because here we cumulate yearly percentage changes, using the beginning

of each year as the initial value, while in Table 1 we expresse the total 1990-2006 changes as a percentage of 1990 values.


                                                               36
show the eﬀect as of 2012 assuming no immigration between 2007 and 2012. This gives us an idea of the speed
at which the economy converges to the long run eﬀects (column 3). As a comparison, column 4 shows the wage
eﬀect obtained with the traditional method of keeping capital fixed (over 16 years), thus allowing a very large
decrease in the capital-labor ratio between 1990 and 2006, while column 5 shows the wage eﬀects obtained using
the traditional short run method (fixed capital) and the parameter values as in column 10 of Table 7— that is,
it shows the eﬀects of immigration over 1990-2006 obtained using the Borjas and Katz (2007) method for the
short run eﬀect, corresponding also to the method used in Borjas (2003).
   Three features are worthy of notice and comment. First, there is a significant diﬀerence in the eﬀects on
native wages between our method, which accounts for the short run adjustment of capital, and the traditional
method with fixed capital. Not accounting for short run capital adjustments produces a negative eﬀect on
wages of all natives around 2.1% (the diﬀerence between values in column 1 and column 4). Second, cumulating
the over-estimate of the negative eﬀect on less educated workers due to the assumption σ HL ,=σ LL = σHH
and the negative eﬀect of the traditional short run treatment of capital, the estimates obtained following the
Borjas and Katz (2007) method, reported in column 5, show a -7.8% eﬀect on wages of workers with no degree.
This is one order of magnitude larger than our estimated short run eﬀect (-0.7%). Finally, one sees that after
only 5 years about 40% of the distance between the short run eﬀects and long run eﬀects has been eliminated,
with the average wage eﬀect on natives equal to 0% (up from -0.4% in 2007) and moving towards the long
run eﬀect of +0.6%. Given the estimated speed of capital adjustment, the inter-census changes (10 years) are
better approximated by the long run eﬀects than by the short run eﬀects. The negative short run eﬀects for
old immigrants range between -6% and -9%, because this group is the one experiencing most of the competition
from new immigrants.
   All in all, our preferred estimates indicate that immigration had a small negative impact in the short run
on natives with a high school degree or less (on the order of -0.6 to -0.7%), but in the long run the eﬀect on
these groups was a small gain (+0.3 to +0.4%). In any case the eﬀects are small and explain very little of the
diﬀerence in performance of wages between workers with a college degree and those with a high school degree or
less over the 1990-2006 period. Just to give an idea of the inability of immigration to explain wage performances
in the 1990-2006 period, let us consider the wage change of workers with no degree (-2.6% in real terms) and
the wage change of those with college or more (+9.6% in real terms) that are reported in Table 1. Of the 12.2
percentage point diﬀerence in growth between the two groups (obtained by subtracting the first value from the
second) our preferred specification (column 9 of table 7) implies that only 0.2 percentage points (=0.5%-0.3%)
can be explained by immigration. The typical estimate from a standard labor model (column 3 of Table 7)
would imply that 0.6 percentage points are explained by immigration. In either case less than one twentieth of
the total diﬀerence can be explained by immigration. Immigration explains even less if we consider the wage



                                                       37
diﬀerential between workers with high school or less and those with college or more. Over the 1990-2006 period
the first group had a decline of 1.5% and the second an increase of 9.6%, for a diﬀerence of 11.4 percentage
points. Again, the simulations of Table 7 imply a diﬀerential in wage performance due to immigration of 0.15%
for our preferred estimate and of 0.5% for the traditional labor estimates. While we may still be worried by a
0.5% eﬀect over 16 years it does not even come close to explaining the almost 12 percentage point diﬀerential
in growth between workers with a high school degree or less and college graduates.


6.4     Comparison with cross-city estimates

We have already emphasized above that the estimates and simulations presented in this paper are perfectly
in line, in method and values, with a long tradition in the labor literature that estimates the elasticity of
substitution between workers of diﬀerent skills and determines the impact of demand and supply shocks on
wages (from Katz and Murphy, 1992, to Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1998, to Card and Lemieux, 2001). We
want to argue here that our results also go in the direction of reconciling the apparent puzzle in the estimates
of immigration eﬀects at the local and at the national level.
   As mentioned earlier, several studies on the relative wage eﬀects of immigrants using local data (e.g., for
metropolitan areas) typically find a small negative relative eﬀect of immigrants on wages even when accounting
for the internal migration response of U.S. natives (Card, 2001; Card and DiNardo, 2000; Lewis, 2005) and
correcting for the endogeneity of the immigrant’s choice of location (both factors would cause an attenuation
bias in the estimates). In light of the present model and results, those small eﬀects are not surprising at
all. Immigrants at levels of education lower than high school compete imperfectly with the large group of
natives with a high school degree or less. Moreover, their inflow is rather balanced, in most cities, between this
group and the group of college graduates. Most of the states that attracted many low skilled migrants such
as California, New York, Texas, and Illinois also attracted a large group of highly educated workers.27 While
immigrants are a disproportionate share of workers with no degree, if we merge them with high school graduates
their inflow in the last decade was not much larger than the inflow of immigrants among college graduates, in
most states and cities, as a percentage of their respective group. Such a pattern of supply would produce small
relative eﬀects in light of our elasticity estimates. For instance, the small elasticities estimated in Table 6.7 of
Card and Lewis (2007), implying that an increase of 10% in the relative supply of high school dropouts (due
to immigrant inflows) would decrease their wage by 0.3-0.5% relative to high school graduates, is perfectly in
line with the estimates of 1/σ LL (=0.04) in Section 5.3.2 above. Similarly, the small relative eﬀects (between
-0.03 and -0.10) of immigration on the wage of quartile 1 relative to quartile 2 for natives estimated in Table
7 of Card (2007) is in line with the estimates of 1/σ LL between 0.03 and 0.10 as long as we interpret the two
  27 The most notable exception is Arizona, a state that attracted mostly immigrants with a high school degree or less over the

1990-2006 period.



                                                              38
quartiles as mostly containing workers with a high school education or less. Certainly the possibility that natives
use other mechanisms to protect their wages from immigration (such as mobility across states, or changes in
specialization) may still be important, and this is worth analyzing.
    A second interesting phenomenon emerging from the city and state analysis (e.g., in our recent work, Ot-
taviano and Peri, 2005, 2006b, 2007 and recent work by Card, 2007) points to a positive and significant eﬀect
of immigration on the average wage of U.S. natives across U.S. states and metropolitan areas. This positive
and significant eﬀect survives 2SLS estimation, using instruments that should be exogenous to city-specific,
unobservable productivity shocks. While the imperfect substitution estimated in this paper can go part way
to explaining the positive eﬀects on average native wages, the magnitude of estimates at the city level is much
bigger than the small positive eﬀect estimated here. In fact, our model predicts an increase in the wage of
natives of 0.5% for an increase in labor supply due to immigrants of 10%, while typical city-level estimates
imply average wage increases of 2 − 2.5%. It is possible that improved eﬃciency, gains from specialization,
and improved technological adoption have a part in explaining those local average eﬀects. While the eﬀect of
immigration on productivity is the next item in our research agenda, in this paper we have ruled out any eﬀect
of immigration on technology, eﬃciency or productivity, and in this respect we have taken a rather conservative
approach.



7     Conclusions

The present paper adopts the “national approach” to the analysis the eﬀect of immigration on wages in the
tradition of Borjas (2003), Borjas and Katz (2007) and Ottaviano and Peri (2006a). In the process it clarifies
four fundamental points.
    First, a structural model of production that combines workers of diﬀerent skills as well as capital, and
furthermore estimates their elasticities of substitution, is necessary to assess the eﬀect of immigration on the
wages of native workers of diﬀerent skills. Estimating a reduced form or a partial elasticity cannot possibly be
informative of the total eﬀect of immigration as this derives not only from the direct competition but also from
the indirect complementarities of immigrants.
    Second a crucial parameter in determining the eﬀect of immigrants is the elasticity of substitution between
workers with no degree and workers with a high school degree. This paper demonstrates that the long-established
tradition in labor economics (but overlooked by Borjas, 2003, Borjas and Katz, 2007 and Ottaviano and Peri,
2006a) of assuming that this elasticity is infinite is strongly supported by the data. While the elasticity between
workers with some college education or more and those with high school education or less is much smaller (equal
to 2), the balanced inflow of immigrants belonging to these two groups implies very small relative wage eﬀects
of immigration, and a very small negative impact on wages of less educated immigrants.

                                                        39
   Third, there seems to be a small but significant degree of imperfect substitution between natives and im-
migrants within education-experience groups. An elasticity of 20 is strongly supported by our estimates. This
cannot be ruled out even by the extremely conservative method of Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008). For
immigration to the US between 1990 and 2006, it implies an average positive long-run eﬀect on native wages
equal to +0.6% and an average negative eﬀect on the wages of previous immigrants of about -6%.
   Fourth, accounting for capital adjustment, the negative eﬀect of immigration on wages is modest even in the
short run: −0.7% for workers with no high school degree as of 2007. This represents a substantial revision of the
previous short-run eﬀects calculated using the Borjas and Katz (2007) method that would be for the 1990-2006
period equal to around −7.8% or workers with no high school degree. Such a large discrepancy is mainly due
to their unwarranted assumptions of a fixed capital stock and a small elasticity of substitution between workers
with no degree and those with a high school degree (around 2.4).
   In sum, this paper reconciles the estimates and the findings of the national approach to the eﬀects of
immigration on wages with most of the estimates of the substitutability across workers of diﬀerent skills produced
by the labor literature in the last fifteen years. It also reconciles the aggregate evidence on the wage eﬀects of
immigrants with the evidence from the “area approach” which has always found small eﬀects across US cities.
In this respect, we hope that our modeling strategy as well as our estimates and simulations can provide a
unified reference point for the current and future debate on the wage-eﬀects of immigration in the US.




                                                       40
References

Acemoglu, Daron. 2002. Directed Technical Change. Review of Economic Studies, 69(4), pp. 781-810.

Angrist, Joshua. 1995. The Economic Returns to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. American Eco-
nomic Review 85, no. 5:1065-1087.

Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Alan Krueger (1998) “Computing Inequality: Have Computers Changed
The Labor Market?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, MIT Press, vol. 113(4), 1169-1213.

Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2008. Interactive NIPA Tables and Interactive Fixed Assets Tables.
http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn/home/gdp.htm.

Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2008. National Employment Data. http://www.bls.gov/bls/employment.htm.

Borjas, George. 1994. The Economics of Immigration. Journal of Economic Literature 32, no. 4:1667-1717.

Borjas, George. 1999. Heaven’s Door. Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, 1999.

Borjas, George. 2003. The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration
on the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, no. 4: 1335-1374.

Borjas, George. 2006. Native Internal Migration and the Labor Market Impact of Immigration. Journal of
Human Resources 41, no.2: 221-258.

Borjas, George, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. The Evolution of the Mexican-Born Workforce in the United States.
in Borjas, George, editor “Mexican Immigration to the United States” National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference Report, Cambridge Ma.

Borjas, George, Jeﬀrey Grogger and Gordon Hanson. 2008. Imperfect Substitution between Immigrants and
Natives: A Reappraisal. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper # 13887, Cambridge Ma.

Borjas, George, Richard Freeman, and Larry Katz. 1997. How Much Do Immigration and Trade Aﬀect Labor
Market Outcomes?. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1997, no1: 1-90

Butcher, Katrin and David Card. 1991. Immigration and Wages: Evidence from the 1980s. American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 81, no. 2: 292-296.

Card, David. 1990. The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market. Industrial and Labor Relation
Review 43, no 2: 245-257.

Card, David. 2001. Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of Higher Immi-
gration. Journal of Labor Economics 19, no 1: 22-64.

                                                       41
Card, David. 2007. How Immigration Aﬀects U.S. Cities. CReAM Discussion Paper, no. 11/07.

Card, David, and John DiNardo. 2000. Do Immigrant Inflows Lead to Native Outflows? NBER Working Paper,
no. 7578, Cambridge, Ma.

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux. 2001. Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Returns to College for Younger
Men? A Cohort Based Analysis. Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, no.2: 705-746.

Card, David, and Ethan Lewis. 2007. The Diﬀusion of Mexican Immigrants During the 1990s: Explanations and
Impacts. in Borjas, George , editor Mexican Immigration to the United States. National Bureau of Economic
Research Conference Report, Cambridge Ma.

Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort. 1996. Reopening the Convergence Debate; A New
Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics. Journal of Economic Growth 1, no.3: 363-389.

Caselli, Francesco, and Wilbur Coleman. 2006. The World Technology Frontier. American Economic Review
96, no.3: 499-522.

Cortes, Patricia. 2006. The Eﬀect of Low-Skilled Immigration on U.S. Prices: Evidence from CPI Data.
Manuscript. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

D’Amuri, Francesco, Gianmarco Ottaviano, and Giovanni Peri. 2008. The Labor Market Impact of Immigration
in Western Germany in the 1990’s. FEEM Working Paper No. 16, 2008.

Felbermayr G., W. Geis, W. Kohler. 2008. Restrictive Immigration Policy in Germany: pains and Gains Fore-
gone? Manuscript University of Tubingen, April 2008.

Friedberg, Rachel, and Jennifer Hunt. 1995. The Impact of Immigrants on Host Country Wages, Employment
and Growth. Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, no. 2: 23-44.

Friedberg, Rachel. 2001. The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116, no. 4: 1373-1408.

Gollin, Douglas. 2002. Getting Income Shares Right. Journal of Political Economy 100, no 2: 458-474.

Grossman, Jean B. 1982. The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in Production. Review of Economics
and Statistics 64, no.4: 596-603.

Islam, Nasrul. 1995. Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, no.4:
1127-1170.




                                                       42
Jaeger, David. 1996. Skill Diﬀerences and the Eﬀect of Immigrants on the Wages of Natives. U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics, Economic Working Paper no.273. Washington D.C.

Johnson, George E. 1997. Changes in Earnings Inequality: The Role of Demand Shifts. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 11, no. 2: pp. 41-54

Jones, Charles. 2005. The Shape of Production Functions and the Direction of Technical Change. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 120, no2: 517-549.

Kaldor, Nicholas. 1961. Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth in the Theory of Capital. F. A. Lutz and
D.C. Hague Editors. New York, St. Martins.

Katz, Larry, and Kevin Murphy. 1992. Changes in Relative Wages 1963-1987: Supply and Demand Factors.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no.1: 35-78.

Ruggles, Steven , Matthew Sobek, Trent Alexander, Catherine A. Fitch, Ronald Goeken, Patricia Kelly
Hall, Miriam King, and Chad Ronnander. 2008. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series:             Version 3.0
[Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN: Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor].
http://www.ipums.org.

Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Victor Rios-Rull and Giovanni Violante. 2000. Capital-Skill Complementarity and
Inequality: A Macroeconomic Analysis. Econometrica 68, no. 5: 1029-53.

Lewis, Ethan. 2005. Immigration, Skill Mix, and the Choice of Technique. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Working Paper no. 05-08 Philadelphia, PA.

Longhi, Simonetta, Peter Nijkamp, and Jacques Poot. 2005. A Meta-Analytic Assessment of the Eﬀect of
Immigration on Wages Journal of Economic Surveys 86, no. 3 451-477.

Manacorda Marco, Alan Manning and John Wadsworth. 2006. The Impact of Immigration on the Structure of
Male Wages: Theory and Evidence from Britain IZA Discussion paper 2352. Bonn, Germany.

Murphy, Kevin and Finis Welch. 1992. The Structure of Wages. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107, no.
1: pp. 285-326

National Research Council. 1997. The New Americans: Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal Eﬀects of Immi-
gration. National Academy Press, Washington D.C..

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2005. Cities and Cultures. Journal of Urban Economics 58, no.2:
304-307.



                                                     43
Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2006a. Rethinking the Eﬀect of Immigration on Wages. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper # 12496, Cambridge Ma.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2006b. The Economic Value of Cultural Diversity: Evidence from
U.S. Cities. Journal of Economic Geography 6, no1: 9-44.

Ottaviano, Gianmarco, and Giovanni Peri. 2007. The Eﬀect of Immigration on U.S. Wages and Rents: A General
Equilibrium Approach. CReAM Discussion Paper no 13/07 London, UK.

Peri, Giovanni, and Chad Sparber, 2008. Task Specialization, Immigration and Wages. CReAM Discussion
Paper 02/08, March 2008.

Ramsey, Frank. 1928. A Mathematical Theory of Saving. Economic Journal 38, no.152: 543-559.

Raphael S. and E. Smolensky. 2008. Immigration and Poverty in the Unites States. Manuscript, UC Berkeley,
April 2008.

Romer, David. 2006. Advanced Macroeconomics. McGraw-Hill, Third Edition. New York, NY.

King, Miriam, Steven Ruggles, Trent Alexander, Donna Leicach, and Matthew Sobek. 2008. Integrated Public
Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 2.0. [Machine-readable database]. Minneapolis, MN:
Minnesota Population Center [producer and distributor].

Solow, Robert. 1956. A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 70
no. 1: 65-94.

Welch, Finis. 1979. Eﬀects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies Financial Boost. Journal of
Political Economy 87, no. 5: 65-97.




                                                    44
A       Theoretical Appendix: Wage Reaction to Immigration

We denote the change in the supply of foreign-born due to immigration between two censuses in group k, j as
∆Fkjt = Fkjt+10 − Fkjt . We can use the demand functions (10) and (11) to derive the eﬀect of immigration on
native and foreign-born wages. The resulting expressions are as follows:



 µ                 ¶T otal             XXX8 µ               ¶ µ             ¶µ ¶XX 8 µ               ¶
     ∆wDbkjt                      1                  ∆Fcqit      1       1     1              ∆Fbqit
                             =               sF cqit         +       −                sF bqit          + (25)
      wDbkjt                     σHL     i=1
                                                      Fcqit     σ bb   σ HL   sbt i=1
                                                                                              Fbqit
                                       c∈B q∈E                                              q∈b
              µ                      ¶µ       ¶X8 µ               ¶ µ                  ¶µ       ¶µ               ¶
                     1     1               1               ∆Fbkit         1         1       1             ∆Fbkjt
        +               −                          sF bkit           +        −                   sF bkjt          +
                  σ EXP   σ bb            sbkt i=1          Fbkit       σimmi    σ EXP    sbkjt            Fbkjt
                                                                 µ     ¶
                                                                   ∆κt
                                                     + (1 − α)
                                                                    κt immigration

     and:



 µ                ¶T otal              XXX8 µ               ¶ µ             ¶µ ¶XX 8 µ               ¶
     ∆wF bkjt                     1                  ∆Fcqit      1       1     1              ∆Fbqit
                             =               sF cqit         +       −                sF bqit          + (26)
     wF bkjt                     σHL     i=1
                                                      Fcqit     σ bb   σ HL   sbt i=1
                                                                                              Fbqit
                                       c∈B q∈E                                              q∈b
              µ                      ¶µ       ¶X8 µ                ¶ µ                ¶µ       ¶µ               ¶
                    1          1           1                ∆Fbkit        1        1       1             ∆Fbkjt
        +                 −                         sF bkit         +         −                  sF bkjt          +
                  σ EXP       σ bb        sbkt i=1           Fbkit      σimmi   σ EXP    sbkjt            Fbkjt
                                                        µ      ¶
                                                          ∆κt                  1 ∆Fbkjt
                                              + (1 − α)                    −
                                                            κt immigration σ immi Fbkjt

where sF bkjt is the share of overall wages paid in year t to foreign workers in education group b, subgroup k,
with experience j 28 . Analogously, sbkjt is the share of the total wage bill in year t accounted for by all workers
in education group b, subgroup k and with experience j.29
     Using the percentage change in wages for each skill group, we can then aggregate and find the eﬀect of im-
migration on several representative wages. The average wage for the whole economy in year t, inclusive of U.S.-
                                                                    P P P
and foreign-born workers, is given by the following expression: wt = b k j (wF bkjt κF bkjt + wDbkjt κDbkjt )
where we indicate with κF bkjt (κDbkjt ) the hours worked by immigrants (natives) of education b, subgroup
k and experience j as a share of total hours worked in the economy. Similarly, the average wage of U.S.-
born and foreign-born workers can be expressed as weighted averages of individual group wages: wDt =
P P P                       P P P                      P P P                        P P P
  b  k  j (wDbkjt κDbkjt )/  b k  j κDbkjt and w F t =  b k   j (wF bkjt κF bkjt )/  b k j κF bkjt , respec-

 28 s                            wF bkjt Fbkjt
     F bkjt   =
                  [[[
                    8
                            (wF cqit Fcqit +wDcqit Dcqit )
                c∈B q∈K i=1
 29 s               wF bkjt Fbkjt +wDbkjt Dbkjt
     bkjt   =
                [[[     8
                              (wF cqit Fcqit +wDcqit Dcqit )
                c∈B q∈K i=1




                                                                   45
tively. The percentage change in the average wage of native workers as a consequence of changes in each group’s
wage due to immigration is given by the following expressions:

                                   P P P          ∆wDbkjt wDbkjt                P P P                 ∆w
                                                                                                  Dbkjt
                       ∆wDt          b    k    j ( wDbkjt  wDt κDbkjt )          b        k  j( w       )sDbkjt
                            =                 P P P                         =            P P PDbkjt                                              (27)
                       wDt                     b   k   j   κDkjt                           b  k   j sDbkjt

         ∆wHbkjt
where     wHbkjt    represents the percentage change in the wage of U.S.-born in group b, k, j due to immigration,
and its expression is given in (25). Similarly, the percentage change in the average wage of foreign-born workers
is:

                                   P P P          ∆wF bkjt wF bkjt              P P P                ∆wF bkjt
                        ∆wF t         b   k    j ( wF bkjt  wF t κF kjt )        b        k       j ( wF bkjt )sF bkjt
                              =               P P P                         =        P P P                                                       (28)
                        wF t                   b   k   j   κF bkjt                        b       k       j   sF bkjt
         ∆wF bkjt
where     wF bkjt   represents the percentage change in the wage of foreign-born in group b, k, j due to immigration,
and its expression is given in (26). Finally, by aggregating the total eﬀect of immigration on the wages of all
groups, native and foreign, we can obtain the eﬀect of immigration on average wages:



                        µ                                                            ¶        X X X µ ∆wF bkjt                                                 ¶
∆wt X X X                   ∆wF bkjt wF bkjt           ∆wDbkjt wDkjt                                                                          ∆wDbkjt
    =                                        κF bkjt +               κDbkjt              =                                        sF bkjt +           sDbkjt
 wt     j
                             wF bkjt wF t              wDbkjt wDt                                             j
                                                                                                                        wF bkjt               wDbkjt
           b   k                                                                              b       k
                                                                                                                                                 (29)
      Recall that the variables sF bkjt and sDbkjt represent the group’s share in total wages and notice that the
correct weighting in order to obtain the percentage change on average wages is the share in the wage bill and
not the share in employment. Due to constant returns to scale of the aggregate production function (1), while
some of the wage changes are positive and others negative, when weighted by their wage shares the summation
of these changes equals 0 once capital has adjusted fully (i.e., in the long run); hence, the change in the overall
average wage in (29) is approximately 0 in the long run. However, if U.S.- and foreign-born workers are not
perfectly substitutable, the overall eﬀect on the wage of U.S.-born workers (27) need not be 0 but will be positive
instead and the eﬀect on the average wage of foreign-born workers (28) will be negative. We also adopt the same
averaging procedure (weighting percentage changes by wage shares) in calculating the eﬀect of immigration on
specific groups of U.S.-born and foreign-born workers. For instance, the changes in average wages of college
                                             P ³ ∆wDCOGjt          ´ P
educated, U.S.-born workers is calculated as j wDCOGjt      sDCOGjt / j sDCOGjt and the change in average
                                                                  P ³ ∆wF,SHSjt         ´ P
wages of foreign-born with no high school diploma is calculated as j wF,SHSjt   sF,SHSjt / j sF,SHS,jt , and
so on.




                                                                     46
B        Data Appendix for the IPUMS Census Data

We downloaded the IPUMS data on June 1st, 2008. The data are relative to these samples:
    1960 1% sample of the census; 1970 1% sample of the census; 1980 5% sample of the census; 1990 5% sample
of the census; 2000 5% sample of the census; 2006 1% sample of the ACS
    We constructed two datasets that cover slightly diﬀerent samples. The first aggregates the employment
and hours worked by U.S.- and foreign-born males and females in 32 education-experience groups, in each
census year. This is called the employment sample. The second is called the wage sample and it is used to
calculate the average weekly and hourly wages for U.S.- and foreign-born, males and females in the same 32
education-experience groups in each census year. The first sample is slightly more inclusive than the second.


B.1      Definition of the Samples and Restrictions

B.1.1     EMPLOYMENT SAMPLE

For the EMPLOYMENT SAMPLE our definition aims at including all workers who supplied some hours of work
and who were in the 32 cells (defined by education and experience) that we consider. The relevant eliminations
made in the sample were:
    1)    Eliminate people living in group quarters (military or convicts), which are those with the gq variable
equal to 0, 3 or 4.
    2)    Eliminate people younger than 18.
    3)    Eliminate those who worked 0 weeks last year, which corresponds to wkswork2=0 in 1960 and 1970
and wkswork1=0 in 1980-1990-2000 and ACS.
    4)    Once we calculate experience as age-(time first worked), where (time first worked) is 17 for workers
with no HS degree, 19 for HS graduates, 21 for workers with some college education and 23 for college graduates,
we eliminate all those with experience <1 and >40.
    Construction of hours worked and employment by cell
    To calculate the total amount of hours worked by natives and immigrants, male and female, in each education-
experience cell, we add the hours worked by each person multiplied by her personal weight (PERWT) in the
cell.
    To calculate the total employment (body-count) for natives and immigrants, male and female, in each cell
we sum the personal weight (PERWT) of each individual in the cell.




                                                       47
B.1.2   WAGE SAMPLE

For the WAGE SAMPLE we identify only employee workers. Since we weight the weekly wage of each worker
for the hours of work supplied when we calculate the average weekly wage within a group, the heterogeneity in
attachment to the labor force is accounted for.
   For the WAGE SAMPLE used in Tables 2, 4 and 5:
   a)     Apply the same elimination as for the Employment sample
   b)     Eliminate those workers who do not report valid salary income (999999) or report 0.
   c)     Eliminate the self-employed (keeping those for whom the variable CLASSWKD is between 20 and
28).
   For the WAGE SAMPLE used in Table 3:
   a) Apply all elimination as in the above wage sample
   b) Eliminate those who are still enrolled in school (variable SCHOOL = 2) or, for year 1970, we construct
        gen school=higraded - (int(higraded/10))*10
        and also eliminate SCHOOL==2
   Construction of the average weekly wage for each group
   In each education-experience cell we average the weekly wage of individuals, each weighted by the hours
worked by the individual. Hence individuals with few hours worked (low job attachment) are correspondingly
weighted little in the calculation of the average wage of the group.


B.2     Individual Variables Definition and Description

Education: We defined education groups as: Some High School (SHS), High School Graduate (HSG), Some
College (SCO) and College Graduates (COG). All groups in each year are defined using the variable EDUCREC
which was built in order to consistently reflect the variables HIGRADE and EDUC99. In particular, we define
as SHS those with EDUCREC<=6, HSG are those with EDUCREC=7, SCO are those with EDUCREC=8 and
COG are those with EDUCREC=9.
   Experience: Defined as potential experience, assigns to each schooling group a certain age reflecting the
beginning of their working life; in particular, the initial working ages are: 17 years for SHS, 19 years for HSG,
21 years for SCO and 23 years for COG.
   Immigration Status: In each year, only people who are not citizens or who were naturalized citizens are
counted as immigrants. This is done using the variable CITIZEN and by attributing the status of foreign-born
to people when the variable is equal to 2 or 3. In 1960, the variable is not available and the selection is done
using the variable BPLD (birthplace, detailed) and attributing the status of foreign-born to all of those for
which BPLD>15000, except for the codes 90011 and 90021 which indicate U.S. citizens born abroad.


                                                       48
    Weeks Worked in a Year: For the censuses 1960 and 1970 the variable used to define weeks worked in
the last year is WKSWORK2, which defines weeks worked in intervals. We choose the median value for each
interval so that we impute to individuals weeks worked in the previous year according to the following criteria:
6.5 weeks if wkswork2=1; 20 weeks if wkswork2=2; 33 weeks if wkswork2=3; 43.5 weeks if wkswork2=4; 48.5
weeks if wkswork2=5; 51 weeks if wkswork2==6. For the censuses 1980, 1990, 2000 and ACS we use the variable
wkswork1 which records the exact number of weeks worked last year.
    Hours Worked in a Week: For census years 1960 and 1970 the variable used is HRSWORK2 which
measures the hours worked during the last week, using intervals. We attribute to each interval its median value
and measure the number of hours per week worked by an individual according to the following criteria: 7.5
hours if hrswork2=1; 22 hours if hrswork2=2; 32 hours if hrswork2=3; 37 hours if hrswork2=4; 40 hours if
hrswork2=5; 44.5 hours if hrswork2=6; 54 hours if hrswork2=7; 70 hours if hrswork2==8. For the censuses
1980, 1990, 2000 and ACS we use the variable UHRSWORK which records the exact number of hours worked
in the usual week by a person.
    Hours Worked in a Year: This is the measure of labor supply by an individual and it is obtained
multiplying Hours Worked in a Week by Weeks Worked in a Year, as defined above.
    Yearly Wages: The yearly wage in constant 1999 US $ is calculated as the variable INCWAGE multiplied
by the price deflator suggested in the IPUMS, which is the one below. Recall that each census and ACS is
relative to the previous year so the deflators below are those to be applied to years 1960, 1970, 1980, and so on:
       Y ear     1959   1969     1979   1989   1999    2005
     Def lator 5.725 4.540 2.314 1.344 1.000 0.853
    Topcodes for Yearly Wages: Following an established procedure we multiply the topcodes for yearly
wages in 1960, 1970 and 1980 by 1.5.
    Weekly Wages: The weekly wage for an individual is constructed by dividing the yearly wage as defined
above by the number of weeks worked in a year, as defined above.



C     Data Appendix for the IPUMS-CPS data

We downloaded the IPUMS-CPS data on April 28th 2008 including the years 1963-2006 in the extraction.
    Just as for the Census, we constructed an employment sample and a wage sample. We used the first to
calculate measures of hours worked and employment and the second to calculate the average weekly wages for
U.S.- and foreign-born, males and females, in each skill group and in each census year. The first sample is more
inclusive than the second. We construct hours worked, employment and average wage for each of 4 education
groups (workers with no high school, high school graduates, workers with some college and college graduates)
following as closely as possible the procedure described in Katz and Murphy (1992), page 67-68 and detailed


                                                       49
below.


C.1      Definition of the Samples and Restrictions

C.1.1    EMPLOYMENT SAMPLE

For the EMPLOYMENT SAMPLE our definition aims at including all workers who supplied some hours of work
and who were in the education by experience sample as the one used for Census data. The relevant eliminations
made in the main sample where:
   1)     Eliminate people living in group quarters (military or convicts), which are those with the gq variable
equal to 0, 3 or 4.
   2)     Eliminate people younger than 18.
   3)     Eliminate those who worked 0 weeks last year which corresponds to wkswork2=0 until 1975 and
wkswork1=0 after 1975. Eliminate those who worked 0 hours by omitting hrswork=0 until 1975 and uhrswork=0
after 1975.
   4)     Once we calculate experience as age-(time first worked), where (time first worked) is 17 for workers
with no HS degree, 19 for HS graduates, 21 for workers with some college education and 23 for college graduates,
we eliminate all those with experience <1 and >40.
   Construction of the hours worked and employment by education group and year
   We first calculate the total amount of hours worked by sex-education-experience cell in each year by adding
up the hours worked by each person in the cell, multiplied by her personal weight (PERWT). Then we calculate
the average weekly wage in each of the four education groups (SHS, HSG, SCO, COG) over the 1963-2006
period and we sum up in each education group-year the hours worked by each experience-sex group scaled by the
average (1963-2006) weekly wages of the group relative to males with 10-15 years of experience. This converts
hours worked to equivalent hours assuming that diﬀerent groups have diﬀerent labor eﬀectiveness. We use the
same procedure to calculate employment in each education group per year.


C.1.2    WAGE SAMPLE

The construction of the Wage sample follows these steps:
   a)     Apply the same elimination as for the Employment sample
   b)     Eliminate those workers who do not report valid salary income (999999) or report 0.
   c)     Eliminate the self-employed (keep those for whom variable CLASSWKR is between 20 and 28).
   Construction of the average weekly wage by education cell in each year.
   In each of the sex-education-experience cells in each year we average the weekly wage of individuals, each
weighted by the hours worked by the individual. Then we aggregate the average wage of each cell within the


                                                      50
four education groups for each year by weighting the average weekly wage in the sex-education-experience cells
by the average (1963-2006) hours worked by the education-experience-sex group relative to the total of the
education group. This keeps the composition constant within the education group when calculating average
wages.


C.2      Individual Variables Definition and Construction

Education: We defined four education groups: Some High School (SHS), High School Graduates (HSG), Some
College (SCO) and College Graduates (COG). All groups in each year are defined using the variable EDUCREC
which was built in order to consistently reflect the variables HIGRADE and EDUC99. In particular, we define
as SHS those with EDUCREC<=6, then HSG are those with EDUCREC=7, SCO are those with EDUCREC=8
and COG are those with EDUCREC=9.
   Experience: Defined as potential experience, assigning to each schooling group a certain age reflecting the
start of their working life; in particular, the initial working ages are: 16 years for SHS, 19 years for HSG, 21
years for SCO and 23 years for COG.
   Weeks Worked in a Year: For the CPS up to1975 the variable used to define weeks worked in the last
year is WKSWORK2, which defines weeks worked in intervals. We choose the median value for each interval
so that we impute to individuals weeks worked in the previous year according to the following criteria:
   6.5 weeks if wkswork2=1; 20 weeks if wkswork2=2; 33 weeks if wkswork2=3; 43.5 weeks if wkswork2=4;
48.5 weeks if wkswork2=5; 51 weeks if wkswork2==6.
   For the CPS after 1975 we use the variable wkswork1 which records the exact number of weeks worked last
year.
   Hours Worked in a Week: For the CPS up to 1975 we use hrswork, which records the number of hours
worked last week, and after 1975 we use uhrswork which records the exact number of hours worked in a usual
week by a person.
   Hours Worked in a Year: This is the measure of labor supply by an individual and it is obtained
multiplying Hours Worked in a Week by Weeks Worked in a Year, as defined above.
   Yearly Wages: The yearly wage in current US $ is calculated as the variable INCWAGE
   Weekly Wages: The weekly wage for an individual is constructed by dividing the yearly wage as defined
above by the number of weeks worked in a year, as defined above.
   Hispanic: The Hispanic ethnicity indicator, used to proxy immigrants after 1970, is obtained from the
variable HISPAN.




                                                      51
  Tables
                                        Table 1:
                         Immigration and Native Wages, 1990-2006
Column 1:                      Column 2:               Column 3:            Column 4:
Education                      Experience              Percentage change    Percentage
                                                       in hours worked in   change      in
                                                       the group due to     weekly wages,
                                                       new     immigrants   Natives, 1990-
                                                       1990-2006            2006
                               1 to 5 years                         8.5%              0.7%
                               6 to 10 years                       21.0%             -1.5%
                               11 to 15 years                      25.9%              0.6%
                               16 to 20 years                      31.0%              1.6%
No High School Degree          21 to 25 years                      35.7%              1.3%
                               26 to 30 years                      28.9%             -1.6%
                               31 to 35 years                      21.9%             -8.8%
                               36 to 40 years                      14.3%            -10.1%
                               All Experience groups               23.6%             -3.1%
                               1 to 5 years                         6.7%             -5.3%
                               6 to 10 years                        7.7%             -1.6%
                               11 to 15 years                       8.7%             -1.4%
                               16 to 20 years                      12.1%              1.8%
                               21 to 25 years                      13.0%              0.6%
High School Degree
                               26 to 30 years                      11.8%             -0.9%
                               31 to 35 years                      11.0%             -2.0%
                               36 to 40 years                       9.3%             -4.0%
                               All Experience groups               10.0%             -1.2%

High School Degree or Less     All Experience groups               13.2%             -1.5%

                               1 to 5 years                          2.6%            -5.4%
                               6 to 10 years                         2.6%            -2.0%
                               11 to 15 years                        3.9%             0.1%
                               16 to 20 years                        6.2%             0.6%
Some College Education         21 to 25 years                        8.4%            -2.5%
                               26 to 30 years                       12.0%            -3.1%
                               31 to 35 years                       12.3%            -3.8%
                               36 to 40 years                       12.7%            -3.0%
                               All Experience groups                 6.0%            -1.9%
                               1 to 5 years                          6.8%             0.4%
                               6 to 10 years                        12.2%             6.5%
                               11 to 15 years                       13.7%            14.2%
                               16 to 20 years                       12.2%            17.3%
                               21 to 25 years                       17.5%             9.1%
College Degree
                               26 to 30 years                       24.4%             4.3%
                               31 to 35 years                       26.1%             1.7%
                               36 to 40 years
                               All Experience groups               14.6%              9.3%

Some College and More          All Experience groups               10.0%              4.5%

                                             52
                                                               Table 2
                               Estimates of (-1/σIMMI), National Census and ACS, U.S. data 1960-2006
                    Wage Sample: All people who worked for wages except the self-employed, weighted by hours worked
Specification                                (1)              (2)           (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)           Number of
                                          No Fixed           Basic       Add Time         Add Time by         Add Time by         BGH (2008)       Observations
                                           Effects                        Effects          Experience          Education           Table 4
                                                                                             effects            effects           Column (3)
Sample:
Men                                      -0.048***      -0.063***       -0.028**        -0.068***           0.009                0.009             192
                                         (0.008)        (0.009)         (0.013)         (0.012)             (0.027)              (0.034)
Women                                    -0.043***      -0.057***       -0.073***       -0.095***           -0.058*              -0.044**          192
                                         (0.008)        (0.012)         (0.017)         (0.010)             (0.030)              (0.022)
Pooled Men and Women                     -0.032***      -0.042***       -0.024*         -0.066***           -0.015               -0.011            192
                                         (0.009)        (0.010)         (0.015)         (0.010)             (0.035)              (0.031)
IV (using relative employment)           -0.035***      -0.043**        -0.027*         -0.066***           -0.038               -0.024            192
Pooled M-W                               (0.007)        (0.010)         (0.014)         (0.010)             (0.039)              (0.032)
1970-2006                                -0.032***      -0.042***       -0.039**        -0.062***           -0.036               n.a               160
Pooled M-W                               (0.009)        (0.010)         (0.016)         (0.012)             (0.039)
Less Educated Workers Only               -0.040***      -0.052***       -0.015          -0.032***           -0.072*              n.a               96
Pooled M-W                               (0.009)        (0.010)         (0.026)         (0.010)             (0.037)
Young workers Only                       -0.016         -0.022**        -0.063***       -0.071***           -0.041               n.a               96
Pooled M-W                               (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.023)         (0.017)             (0.049)
                                                                     Included fixed effects:
Education by Experience effects          No             Yes            Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes
(32 in total)
Year Effects                             No             No              Yes              Yes                Yes                  Yes
(6 in total)
Year by Experience Effects               No             No              No               Yes                Yes                  Yes
(48 in total)
Year by Education Fixed effects          No             No              No               No                 Yes                  Yes
(24 in total)
Note: Each cell reports the estimate of the parameter -1/σIMMI. The estimated specification in column (2) is exactly as in equation (14) in the main text. The other
specifications omit or include other dummies. Column (6) reports the estimates from Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) where available. Each observation in a
regression represents one of 32 education-experience cells over a considered year (1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006). The dependent variable is the logarithm
of the relative foreign-native average wage in the cell. The average wage for each group in the cell is the hours-weighted average weekly wage including individuals
working at least one week, not self-employed and earning positive salary. The explanatory variable is the logarithm of the relative foreign-native labor supplied by
individuals in the cell measured as hours worked by individuals not in group quarters. In the fourth row we instrument relative hours worked with relative
employment. Each observation is weighted in the regression by the number of observations (employment) in the cell. In parenthesis we report the heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors, clustered over the 32 education-experience groups. ***= significant at 1% level; **=significant at 5% level; *= significant at 10% level.

                                                                                53
                                                              Table 3
                             Estimates of (-1/σIMMI), National Census and ACS, U.S. data 1960-2006
Wage Sample: all people who worked for wages- except for the self-employed and people enrolled in school- weighted by hours worked
Specification                                (1)               (2)           (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)           Number of
                                          No Fixed            Basic       Add Time         Add Time by         Add Time by         BGH (2008)       Observations
                                           Effects                         Effects          Experience          Education           Table 4
                                                                                              effects            effects           Column (1)
Sample:
Men                                      -0.053***       -0.068***       -0.037***       -0.077***           0.036                0.044             192
                                         (0.006)         (0.008)         (0.010)         (0.013)             (0.024)              (0.029)
Women                                    -0.047***       -0.059***       -0.074***       -0.094***           -0.01                -0.025            192
                                         (0.007)         (0.011)         (0.015)         (0.011)             (0.023)              (0.017)
Pooled Men and Women                     -0.037***       -0.047***       -0.031***       -0.074***           0.010                0.011             192
                                         (0.006)         (0.008)         (0.012)         (0.010)             (0.020)              (0.025)
IV (using relative employment)           -0.039***       -0.048***       -0.034***       -0.073***           0.002                0.002             192
Pooled M-W                               (0.006)         (0.008)         (0.012)         (0.012)             (0.021)              (0.025)
1970-2006                                -0.038***       -0.046***       -0.046***       -0.068***           -0.008               n.a               160
Pooled M-W                               (0.006)         (0.009)         (0.012)         (0.012)             (0.029)
Less Educated Workers Only               -0.046***       -0.057***       0.007           -0.037***           -0.019               n.a               96
Pooled M-W                               (0.005)         (0.007)         (0.011)         (0.009)             (0.018)
Young workers Only                       -0.024***       -0.028**        -0.078***       -0.086***           0.026                n.a               96
Pooled M-W                               (0.008)         (0.010)         (0.017)         (0.017)             (0.029)
                                                                      Included fixed effects:
Education by Experience effects          No              Yes            Yes              Yes                 Yes                  Yes
(32 in total)
Year Effects                             No              No             Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
(6 in total)
Year by Experience Effects               No              No             No                Yes                Yes                  Yes
(48 in total)
Year by Education Fixed effects          No              No             No                No                 Yes                  Yes
(24 in total)
Note: Each cell reports the estimate of the parameter -1/σIMMI. The estimated specification in column (2) is exactly as in equation (14) in the main text. The other
specifications omit or include other dummies. Column (6) reports the corresponding estimates from Borjas, Grogger and Hanson (2008) where available. Each
observation in a regression represents one of 32 education-experience cells over a considered year (1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006). The dependent variable
is the logarithm of the relative foreign-native average wage. The average wage for each group in the cell is the hour-weighted average weekly wage including
individuals working at least one week, not self-employed, not attending school and earning positive salary. The explanatory variable is the logarithm of the relative
foreign-native labor supplied by individuals in the cell, measured as hours worked. In the fourth row we instrument relative hours worked with relative employment.
Each observation is weighted by the number of observations (employment) in the cell. In parenthesis we include the heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors,
clustered over the 32 education-experience groups. ***= significant at 1% level; **=significant at 5% level; *= significant at 10% level.

                                                                                54
                                                                      Table 4
                                       Estimates of (-1/σEXP), National Census and ACS U.S. data 1960-2006
                                                                              (1)                    (2)                    (3)                   Number of
                                                                             Basic                 Basic               Add Time by               Observations
                                                                         Specification          Specification           Experience
                                                                        (use σIMMI=20            (assuming             fixed effects
                                                                         to construct              σIMMI=∞)
                                                                             Nkjt)
  Sample:
  Men                                                                  -0.16***             -0.16***                 -0.05                 192
                                                                       (0.05)               (0.06)                   (0.04)
  Women                                                                -0.05                -0.05                    -0.03                 192
                                                                       (0.05)               (0.05)                   (0.04)
  Pooled Men and Women                                                 -0.14***             -0.14**                  -0.02                 192
                                                                       (0.04)               (0.04)                   (0.03)
  Pooled Men and Women                                                 -0.13***             -0.13**                  -0.03                 192
  Employment as Measure of Labor Supply                                (0.05)               (0.05)                   (0.03)
  Pooled Men and Women                                                 -0.07***             -0.07***                 -0.01                 160
  1970-2006                                                            (0.03)               (0.03)                   (0.03)
                                                                       Included fixed effects:
  Education by Experience Effects                                      Yes                  Yes                      Yes
  (32 in total)
  Year by Education Fixed Effects                                      Yes                    Yes                    Yes
  (24 in total)
  Year by Experience Effects                                           No                     No                     Yes
  (48 in total)
Note: Each cell reports the estimate of the parameter -1/σEXP. Each observation represents one of 32 education-experience cells over one of the considered years
(1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006). The dependent variable is the logarithm of the average weekly wage of native and immigrant workers in the cell (Men,
Women or Pooled M-W depending on the row) constructed as the hours-weighted average weekly wage including all individuals working at least one week, not
self-employed and earning positive salary. The explanatory variable is the logarithm of the labor composite Nkjt whose construction is described in the text. In
constructing Nkjt we use hours worked as a measure of individual labor supply (except in the fourth row where we use employment). The method of estimation is
2SLS using the logarithm of labor supplied by foreign-born workers (in hours or in employment) in the cell ln(Fkjt) as an instrument for total labor supply ln(Nkjt ) in
the cell. Each observation is weighted by the cell employment. The Basic specification is as equation 917) in the text. In parenthesis we include the
heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered over the 32 education-experience groups.
***= significant at 1% level; **=significant at 5% level; *= significant at 10% level.




                                                                                  55
                                                                      Table 5
                                      Estimates of (-1/σEDU), National Census and ACS, U.S. data 1960-2006



                                                    (1)                       (2)                  (3)                               (4)                   Number of
                                                    Basic Specification       Basic                With     Common             With Education-            Observations
                                                    (assuming                 Specification        Year Effects and            Main Effects and
                                                    σEXP=6.6;                 (assuming            Education-Specific         Education-Specific
                                                    σIMMI=20)                 σEXP=∞;              Trends                          Trends
                                                                              σIMMI=∞)

Men                                                 -0.44***                 -0.42**               -0.29***                  -0.65                       24
                                                    (0.19)                   (0.18)                (0.10)                    (0.86)
Women                                               -0.46***                 -0.43***              -0.35**                   -0.48                       24
                                                    (0.20)                   (0.19)                (0.15)                    (0.62)
Pooled Men and Women                                -0.43***                 -0.41***              -0.30***                  -0.63                       24
                                                    (0.17)                   (0.16)                (0.12)                    (0.74)
Pooled Men and Women                                -0.40***                 -0.38***              -0.29***                  -0.70                       24
Employment as a Measure of Labor Supply             (0.13)                   (0.12)                (0.10)                    (0.90)
Pooled Men and Women                                -0.24***                 -0.23***              -0.25*                    -0.17*                      20
1970-2006                                           (0.11)                   (0.11)                (0.13)                    (0.09)
                                                                        Included fixed effects
Education-Specific Time Trend                       Yes                      Yes                   Yes                       Yes
Common Year -Fixed Effects                          No                       No                    Yes                       No
Education-Specific Fixed Effect                     No                       No                    No                        Yes
Note: Each cell reports the estimate of the parameter -1/σEDU. Each observation represents one of four education cells in each of the considered years (1960, 1970,
1980, 1990, 2000 and 2006). The dependent variable is the logarithm of the average weekly wage of native and immigrant workers in the cell (Men, Women or
Pooled M-W depending on the row) constructed as an hour-weighted average weekly wage including all individuals working at least one week, not self-employed
and earning positive salary. The explanatory variable is the logarithm of the labor composite Nkt whose construction is described in the text. In constructing Nkj we
use hours worked as a measure of individual labor supply (except in the fourth row where we use employment). The method of estimation is 2SLS using the
logarithm of labor supplied by foreign-born workers (in hours or in employment) in the cell, ln(Fkt) as an instrument for total labor supply ln(Nkt )in the cell. Each
observation is weighted by the cell employment. The basic specification is as specified in equation (20) in the text. In parenthesis we include the heteroskedasticity-
robust standard errors, clustered over the four education groups.
***= significant at 1% level; **=significant at 5% level; *= significant at 10% level.




                                                                                  56
                                                                   Table 6
                                  Estimates of (-1/σHL), (-1/σHH), and (-1/σLL) CPS, U.S. data 1963-2006,
                                                     Katz and Murphy (1992) method




                                                                 (1)                           (2)                       (3)                      Number of
                                                                 Estimates of                  Estimates of              Estimates of            Observations
                                                                 -1/σHL                        -1/σLL                    -1/σHH

   Pooled Men and Women                                          -0.54***                                                                      44
   With "Some College" split between H and L                     (0.06)
                                                                                               -0.029                    -0.16*
                                                                 [0.07]
                                                                                               (0.018)                   (0.08)
   Pooled Men and Women                                          -0.32***                                                                      44
                                                                                               [0.021]                   [0.10]
   With "Some College" in H                                      (0.06)
                                                                 [0.08]
   Pooled Men and Women                                          -0.66***                      -0.039                    -0.08                 44
   Employment as a Measure of Labor Supply                       (0.07)                        (0.020)                   (0.09)
                                                                 [0.09]                        [0.024]                   [0.11]
   Pooled Men and Women                                          -0.52***                      0.021                     -0.13                 36
   1970-2006                                                     (0.06)                        (0.028)                   (0.08)
                                                                 [0.08]                        [0.025]                   [0.09]

Note: Each cell is the estimate from a separate regression on yearly CPS data. In the first column we estimate the relative wage elasticity of the group of workers
with a high school degree or less relative to those with some college or more. Method and construction of the relative supply (hours worked) and relative average
weekly wages are described in the text and identical to Katz and Murphy (1992). In the first row we split workers with some college education between H and L.
In the second row we include them in group H, following the CES nesting in our model. In the second column we consider only the groups of workers with no
degree and those with a high school degree (the dependent variable is relative wages and the explanatory is relative hours worked). In the third column we
consider only workers with some college education and workers with a college degree or more (the dependent variable is relative wages and the explanatory is
relative hours worked). In brackets are the standard errors and in square brackets the Newey-West autocorrelation-robust standard errors.
***= significant at 1% level; **=significant at 5% level; *= significant at 10% level.




                                                                              57
                                                                     Table 7
                                                 Simulated Wage Effects of Immigrants, 1990-2006:
                                                                Long Run Effects
                             Parameters From the Existing               Parameters from Existing Labor
                                                                                              Parameters from Our Estimates Borjas and
                             Labor Literature                           Literature and                                      Katz (2007)
                                                                        σIMMI from Our Estimates                            Parameters
                             (1)      (2)       (3)                     (4)         (5)        (6)
                                                                                             (7)         (8)       (9)      (10)
                             Low      High      Typical                 Low         High       Typical
                                                                                             Low         High      Typical
σHL                          1.4      2         1.5                     1.4         2          1.5
                                                                                             1.4         2         2        2.4
σHH                          ∞             ∞             ∞               ∞             ∞     10     ∞    10        10       2.4
σLL                          ∞             ∞             ∞               ∞             ∞     10     ∞    50        20       2.4
σEXP                         3.3      10        5             3.3       10        5          6.2         7.7       7        3
σIMMI                        ∞             ∞             ∞    15        30        20         20          20        20                                     ∞
                                    % Real Wage Change of US-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2006
Less than HS                 -0.6%    -0.5%     -0.5%         +1.0%     +0.5%     +0.7%      -0.3        +0.6      +0.3     -4.7%
HS graduates                 -0.3%    -0.2%     -0.3%         +0.3%     +0.1%     +0.2%      +0.4        +0.3      +0.4     +0.9%
Some CO                      +0.1%    +0.1%     +0.1%         +0.6%     +0.3%     +0.5%      +1.0        +0.1      +0.9     +2.2%
CO graduates                 +0.1%    +0.1%     +0.1%         +1.1%     +0.6%     +0.9%      +0.5        +0.5      +0.5%    -1.7%
Average US-born               0.0%     0.0%      0.0%         +0.8%     +0.4%     +0.6       +0.6%       +0.6      +0.6%    +0.1%
                                   % Real Wage Change of Foreign-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2006
Less than HS                -0.6%      -0.5%     -0.5%      -6.1%      -3.0%     -4.6%      -5.6%       -4.7%     -4.9%     -4.7%
HS graduates                -0.3%      -0.2%     -0.3%      -9.8%      -5.1%     -7.4%      -7.2%       -7.3%     -7.0%     +0.9%
Some CO                     +0.1%      +0.1%     +0.1%      -6.1%      -3.1%     -4.5%      -4.0%       -4.1%     -4.0%     +2.2%
CO graduates                +0.1%      +0.1%     +0.1%      -9.2%      -5.0%     -7.6%      -8.0%       -8.0%     -8.1%     -1.7%
Average Foreign-born        +0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      -8.6%      -4.3%     -6.4%      -6.6%       -6.5%     -6.4%     -0.8%
Overall average              0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%       0.0%        0.0%      0.0%      0.0%

Note: The percentage wage changes for each education group are obtained averaging the wage change of each education-experience group (calculated using the
formulas in the text) weighted by its wage share in the education group. The US-born and Foreign-born average changes are obtained weighting changes of each
education group by its share in the 1990 wage bill of the group. The overall average wage change adds the change of US- and foreign-born weighted for the relative
wage shares in 1990.




                                                                               58
                                                                     Table 8
                                                 Simulated Wage Effects of Immigrants, 1990-2006:
                                                                Short Run Effects


                                                      1                       2                       3                      4                      5
                                                 As of 2007               As of 2012               Long Run               Fixed K             Short Run in
                                                 (short run)            (medium run)                                    (Traditional         Borjas and Katz
                                                                                                                         Short Run)            (2007) and
                                                                                                                                              Borjas (2003)

                                     % Real Wage Change of US-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2006
Less than HS                       -0.7%             -0.3%              0.3%            -2.8%                                                       -7.8%
HS graduates                       -0.6%             -0.2%              0.4%            -2.7%                                                       -2.2%
Some CO                             0.0%              0.4%              0.9%            -2.1%                                                       -0.9%
CO graduates                       -0.5%             -0.1%              0.5%            -2.6%                                                       -4.7%
Average, US-Born                   -0.4%              0.0%              0.6%            -2.5%                                                       -3.0%
                     % Real Wage Change of Foreign-Born Workers Due to Immigration, 1990-2006
Less than HS                       -6.0%             -5.6%             -4.9%            -8.1%                                                       -7.8%
HS graduates                       -8.2%             -7.8%             -7.0%           -10.3%                                                       -2.2%
Some CO                            -5.1%             -4.7%             -4.0%            -7.2%                                                       -0.9%
CO graduates                       -9.0%             -8.6%             -8.1%           -11.1%                                                       -4.7%
Average Foreign-born               -7.5%             -7.1%             -6.4%            -9.6%                                                       -3.0%
Overall Average:                   -1.1%             -0.6%             0.0%             -3.2%                                                       -3.2%
Native and US-Born
Note: The simulations in the first four columns use the parameter estimates of column 9 in Table 7. The last column uses the parameter estimates of Borjas and Katz
(2007), reported in column 10 of Table 7. The adjustment of the capital-labor ratio relative to its long run trend is estimated yearly using the actual inflow of
immigrants and the estimated speed of adjustment of physical capital (10% per year).




                                                                                59
Figures
                                                                                                     Figure 1
                                                                                       U.S. Capital-Output Ratio 1960-2006


                                    3.500



                                    3.000



                                    2.500



                                    2.000
                                                                                                                                                                     capital/output ratio in the U.S.
                              k/y




                                                                                                                                                                     average
                                    1.500



                                    1.000



                                    0.500



                                    0.000
                                            60

                                                   62

                                                          64

                                                                 66

                                                                        68

                                                                               70

                                                                                      72

                                                                                             74

                                                                                                    76

                                                                                                           78

                                                                                                                  80

                                                                                                                         82

                                                                                                                                84

                                                                                                                                         86

                                                                                                                                                88

                                                                                                                                                       90

                                                                                                                                                              92

                                                                                                                                                                     94

                                                                                                                                                                            96

                                                                                                                                                                                   98

                                                                                                                                                                                          00

                                                                                                                                                                                                 02

                                                                                                                                                                                                        04

                                                                                                                                                                                                               06
                                          19

                                                 19

                                                        19

                                                               19

                                                                      19

                                                                             19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                           19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                year


                              Source: Authors’ calculations using BEA data on the Stock of Physical Capital and GDP


                                                                                        Figure 2
                                                                      Log Capital-Labor Ratio and Trend 1960-2006
                                    0.4



                               0.35



                                    0.3



                               0.25
          Ln(Capital/Labor)




                                    0.2



                               0.15



                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                 Ln(Capital/Labor)
                                                                                                                                                                                 Trend
                               0.05



                                     0
                                      61

                                                     63

                                                            65

                                                                   67

                                                                          69

                                                                                 71

                                                                                        73

                                                                                               75

                                                                                                      77

                                                                                                             79

                                                                                                                    81

                                                                                                                           83

                                                                                                                                  85

                                                                                                                                          87

                                                                                                                                                 89

                                                                                                                                                        91

                                                                                                                                                               93

                                                                                                                                                                      95

                                                                                                                                                                             97

                                                                                                                                                                                     99

                                                                                                                                                                                            01

                                                                                                                                                                                                   03

                                                                                                                                                                                                          05
                                       ar
                                    Ye

                                    19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                         19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                                           19

                                                                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                              -0.05
                                                                                                                         Years


                              Source: Authors’ calculations using BEA data on the Stock of Physical Capital and BLS data on total non-
                              farm employment.
                                                                                                                   60
                                   Figure 3
    Immigration and the increase in total hours worked by group, 1990-2006

                           25.0%
       25.0%
                                                             Young (experience below 20 years)
                    22.2%                                    Old (Experience above 20 years)                  21.8%

       20.0%




       15.0%

                                                 11.5%                                                11.5%
                                                                                   10.7%
       10.0%                              8.8%



        5.0%                                                               3.8%



        0.0%
                  Some High School    High School Graduate                Some College               College Graduate
                                                              Group



Note: Percentage Increase in Hours Worked due to immigrants, 1990-2006, by education and
experience group.


                                    Figure 4
      Change in real weekly wages of US-born workers by group, 1990-2006




    12.0%
                                                                 Young (experience below 20 years)       11.3%
                                                                 Old (Experience above 20 years)

    10.0%


     8.0%
                                                                                                                   6.0%
     6.0%


     4.0%


     2.0%
                 0.4%
     0.0%

                                         -1.2% -1.3%                       -1.2%
    -2.0%

                                                                                     -3.0%
    -4.0%


    -6.0%                -5.4%
               Some High School      High School Graduate                  Some College                College Graduate
                                                              groups


Note: Percentage changes in real weekly wages for U.S.-born workers, 1990-2006, by education
and experience group.



                                                              61
                                             Figure 5
              Correlation between relative Immigrant-Native wages and hours worked.
                      Education-Experience-Year Groups, Males only, 1960-2006




                                                .1
                  Ln(Wage immigrants/Wage natives)
                                       0

                                                                                                                    Coefficient=-0.05
                                                                                                                    Standard error=0.007
                      -.2     -.1   -.3




                                                                       -5    -4         -3            -2           -1              0
                                                                                  Ln(Hours immigrants/Hours natives)

                                                                                         Education-Experience-Year Group
                                                                                         WLS regression Line


Note: Each observation corresponds to an education-experience group in one of the considered years (1960, 1970, 1980,
1990, 2000, 2006) The horizontal axis measures the logarithm of the relative hours worked in the group by male immigrants/
natives and the vertical axis measure the logarithm of the relative weekly wage paid to male immigrants/ natives.


                                              Figure 6
          Partial correlation between relative Immigrant-Native wages and hours worked
                      Education-Experience-Year Groups, Males only, 1960-2006
                                                                  .2
                                 Ln(Immigrant Wages/Native Wages)
                                                          .1




                                                                                                                    Coefficient=-0.06
                                                                                                                    Standard Error=0.008
                             -.2      -.1       0




                                                                        -2        -1                 0                1                    2
                                                                                       Ln(Immigrant hours/Native hours)

                                                                                        Education_Experience-Year Groups
                                                                                        WLS (with fixed effects) regression line


Note: Each observation corresponds to an education-experience group in one of the considered years (1960, 1970, 1980,
1990, 2000, 2006) The scatter-plot reports the residuals of log relative wages and log relative hours of male immigrant/natives
after we control for (32) education by experience fixed effects.

                                                                                                62
Table Appendix
                                             Table A1:
                Percentage of Total Hours Worked by Foreign-Born by Group 1960-2006
                                       Pooled Male and Female
                  Group                                                              Year
       Education      Experience                    1960         1970         1980       1990           2000          2006
                      1 to 5                          3.4%          4.9%        8.8%        19.4%        27.3%        31.3%
                      6 to 10                         4.1%          5.6%       13.8%        28.6%        46.2%        46.0%
                      11 to 15                        3.9%          6.6%       15.6%        27.4%        47.4%        56.0%
       No High
                      16 to 20                        4.5%          6.9%       13.2%        28.6%        45.0%        56.1%
       School
                      21 to 25                        4.5%          6.5%       12.6%        27.9%        39.7%        52.6%
       Degree
                      26 to 30                        5.3%          5.9%       11.5%        21.0%        39.5%        46.0%
                      31 to 35                        8.2%          5.5%        9.1%        17.6%        36.9%        43.4%
                      36 to 40                       12.3%          5.9%        8.1%        15.4%        27.2%        42.6%
                      All
                      Experience                    6.2%         6.0%        11.2%        23.2%        39.0%        47.6%
                      Levels
                      1 to 5                          1.5%          2.5%        3.2%         6.7%        11.6%        13.5%
                      6 to 10                         1.9%          2.7%        3.8%         6.9%        14.1%        17.4%
                      11 to 15                        2.3%          3.2%        4.6%         6.5%        13.3%        20.6%
       High School    16 to 20                        3.3%          3.3%        4.5%         7.0%        10.9%        18.5%
       Graduates      21 to 25                        3.0%          3.5%        5.0%         7.4%         9.7%        14.9%
                      26 to 30                        4.7%          4.1%        4.8%         6.9%         9.7%        11.8%
                      31 to 35                        6.7%          3.5%        5.0%         7.0%         9.6%        11.7%
                      36 to 40                       11.2%          4.9%        5.2%         6.6%         8.3%        11.4%
                      All
                      Experience                    3.5%         3.3%         4.3%         6.9%        10.9%        14.9%
                      Levels
                      1 to 5                          2.6%          3.3%        4.5%         6.4%         8.4%         8.8%
                      6 to 10                         3.6%          4.6%        5.0%         7.0%         9.3%        11.2%
                      11 to 15                        4.2%          5.5%        5.8%         6.5%         9.8%        11.7%
       Some
                      16 to 20                        4.6%          5.4%        6.5%         6.2%         9.2%        12.2%
       College
                      21 to 25                        4.7%          5.1%        6.8%         6.6%         8.1%        10.5%
       Education
                      26 to 30                        5.2%          5.1%        6.4%         7.2%         7.4%         9.4%
                      31 to 35                        8.6%          4.7%        6.6%         7.6%         7.3%         8.4%
                      36 to 40                        9.3%          5.6%        6.4%         7.0%         7.8%         8.6%
                      All
                      Experience                    4.9%         4.7%         5.6%         6.7%         8.5%        10.2%
                      Levels
                      1 to 5                          3.1%          3.8%        4.4%         7.1%        11.8%        11.8%
                      6 to 10                         4.1%          6.5%        6.5%         8.9%        13.7%        18.8%
                      11 to 15                        4.6%          6.2%        8.4%         9.2%        14.6%        18.2%
                      16 to 20                        4.4%          5.7%       10.0%         8.9%        13.3%        17.5%
                      21 to 25                        5.4%          5.5%        8.4%         9.9%        11.4%        15.5%
       College
                      26 to 30                        6.7%          5.5%        7.3%        11.1%        10.4%        13.8%
       Graduates
                      31 to 35                        8.4%          6.4%        7.3%         9.4%        11.0%        11.4%
                      36 to 40                       10.1%          7.2%        6.9%         8.9%        13.4%        12.4%
                      All
                      Experience                    5.2%         5.7%         7.1%         9.0%        12.5%        15.3%
                      Levels
      Note: Sample and method of construction of hours worked are described in the text. The data are from Ruggles et al.
      (2008)

                                                               63
                                 Table A2:
  Weekly Wages of U.S. Natives in Constant 2000 U.S. $ by group, 1960-2006
                         Pooled Male and Female
                Group                                                        Year
Education             Experience            1960       1970         1980        1990          2000         2006
                      1 to 5                304          360          336         265           280          266
                      6 to 10               417          514          474         400           413          394
                      11 to 15              480          581          527         460           471          463
   No High
                      16 to 20              507          601          578         495           511          503
   School
                      21 to 25              507          624          611         521           540          527
   Degree
                      26 to 30              507          637          624         557           561          548
                      31 to 35              506          617          644         578           577          527
                      36 to 40              510          604          646         580           597          522
                      All
                      Experience            485          589           562          485          489          474
                      Levels
                      1 to 5                 395          472          453          377          382          357
                      6 to 10                523          642          572          501          509          493
                      11 to 15               580          709          640          572          569          564
   High School        16 to 20               609          730          702          613          627          623
   Graduates          21 to 25               628          739          720          640          658          644
                      26 to 30               623          742          734          681          673          675
                      31 to 35               621          750          738          687          679          674
                      36 to 40               620          741          738          676          691          649
                      All
                      Experience             568          679          635          580          601          591
                      Levels
                      1 to 5                 477          565          507          452          451          428
                      6 to 10                620          768          656          605          603          593
                      11 to 15               704          865          765          698          703          698
   Some
                      16 to 20               744          914          839          755          769          760
   College
                      21 to 25               769          946          860          815          808          795
   Education
                      26 to 30               757          961          883          858          835          831
                      31 to 35               748          940          886          856          863          823
                      36 to 40               743          871          884          839          867          814
                      All
                      Experience             690          825          723          698          728          717
                      Levels
                      1 to 5                613          787          645          685          720          687
                      6 to 10               804          1041         869          927          979          987
                      11 to 15              937          1235         1116         1097         1259         1252
                      16 to 20              1037         1350         1258         1212         1386         1422
                      21 to 25              1060         1423         1336         1345         1392         1467
   College
                      26 to 30              1042         1404         1357         1386         1412         1446
   Graduates
                      31 to 35              1065         1353         1350         1400         1491         1423
                      36 to 40              1044         1278         1299         1358         1462         1451
                      All
                      Experience             926         1199         1048         1111         1245         1270
                      Levels
Note: Sample and method of construction of weekly wages (in constant 2000 U.S. $) are described in the text. The data
are from Ruggles et al. (2008).

                                                         64
                                 Table A3:
Relative Weekly Wages of Foreign-Born/ US-Born Workers by group, 1960-2006
                          Pooled Male and Female
             Group                                                             Year
 Education      Experience                 1960         1970         1980         1990         2000         2006
                1 to 5                        1.09         1.05         1.03         1.13         1.18         1.10
                6 to 10                       0.98         0.96         0.90         0.90         0.93         0.87
                11 to 15                      1.01         1.03         0.91         0.89         0.91         0.81
   No High
                16 to 20                      1.01         1.00         0.90         0.90         0.93         0.82
   School
                21 to 25                      1.05         0.99         0.91         0.90         0.89         0.81
   Degree
                26 to 30                      1.03         0.99         0.90         0.88         0.86         0.79
                31 to 35                      1.07         1.04         0.88         0.87         0.85         0.83
                36 to 40                      1.07         1.01         0.91         0.90         0.82         0.84
                All Experience
                                              1.04         1.01         0.91         0.92         0.92         0.86
                Levels
                1 to 5                        0.98         1.01         0.95         0.98         0.98         0.95
                6 to 10                       0.94         0.98         0.92         0.94         0.92         0.86
                11 to 15                      0.93         0.99         0.92         0.92         0.91         0.84
   High
                16 to 20                      1.03         0.98         0.91         0.96         0.91         0.83
   School
                21 to 25                      1.01         0.98         0.92         0.97         0.89         0.86
   Graduates
                26 to 30                      1.07         1.02         0.92         0.92         0.92         0.85
                31 to 35                      1.04         1.05         0.92         0.94         0.93         0.83
                36 to 40                      1.04         1.00         0.96         0.96         0.91         0.89
                All Experience
                                              1.02         1.00         0.93         0.95         0.92         0.86
                Levels
                1 to 5                        0.93         0.96         0.96         1.02         1.02         0.99
                6 to 10                       0.92         0.94         0.95         0.98         0.97         0.93
                11 to 15                      0.94         0.98         0.95         0.96         0.95         0.91
   Some
                16 to 20                      0.96         0.95         0.92         0.98         0.95         0.95
   College
                21 to 25                      1.03         0.93         0.94         0.97         0.95         0.90
   Education
                26 to 30                      1.04         0.87         0.91         0.95         0.96         0.93
                31 to 35                      1.02         1.06         0.92         0.96         0.94         0.90
                36 to 40                      1.04         1.11         0.97         0.98         0.92         0.94
                All Experience
                                              1.01         0.96         0.94         0.98         0.96         0.93
                Levels
                1 to 5                        0.96         0.92         0.98         0.99         1.15         1.08
                6 to 10                       0.85         0.89         0.98         0.93         1.06         1.03
                11 to 15                      0.93         0.93         0.99         0.95         0.97         0.98
                16 to 20                      0.95         0.94         0.99         1.02         0.94         0.92
   College      21 to 25                      1.02         0.97         0.98         1.01         0.96         0.89
   Graduates    26 to 30                      1.04         0.89         1.01         1.00         0.99         0.90
                31 to 35                      0.88         0.93         0.97         0.99         1.00         0.89
                36 to 40                      0.96         1.05         0.95         0.99         0.96         0.97
                All Experience
                                              0.96         0.93         0.98         0.98         1.01         0.96
                Levels

 Note: Sample and method of construction of weekly wages (in constant 2000 U.S. $) are described in the text. The data
 are from Ruggles et al. (2008).



                                                          65
                                                             Table A4
                                         Estimates of σIMMI, National U.S. data, 1960-2006
                  Wage Sample: All people who worked for wages except the self-employed, weighted by hours worked

Specification                          No         Fixed Basic                  Plus        Time Plus Time by Plus          Time      by Number       of
                                       Effects                                 Effects          Experience effects Education effects    Observations

IV (using relative employment), -0.051***                  -0.064**           -0.032***            -0.070***                -0.004                    192
Men                             (0.007)                    (0.009)            (0.012)              (0.012)                  (0.031)
IV (using relative employment), -0.047***                  -0.057***          -0.073***            -0.096***                -0.071***                 192
Women                           (0.007)                    (0.012)            (0.017)              (0.011)                  (0.029)
1970-2006, Men                  -0.044***                  -0.062***          -0.032*              -0.059***                -0.001                    160
                                (0.009)                    (0.011)            (0.018)              (0.014)                  (0.033)
1970-2006, Women                -0.045***                  -0.060***          -0.068***            -0.086***                -0.057**                  160
                                (0.008)                    (0.013)            (0.018)              (0.012)                  (0.028)
Less Educated Only, Men         -0.056***                  -0.072***          -0.015               -0.015                   -0.021                    96
                                (0.009)                    (0.009)            (0.014)              (0.012)                  (0.035)
Less Educated Only, Women       -0.051***                  -0.074***          -0.076***            -0.093***                -0.103***                 96
                                (0.008)                    (0.010)            (0.019)              (0.008)                  (0.028)
Young Workers Only, Men         -0.035***                  -0.045***          -0.063**             -0.074***                0.003                     96
                                (0.009)                    (0.010)            (0.023)              (0.019)                  (0.039)
Young Workers Only, Women       -0.027**                   -0.038**           -0.092***            -0.098***                -0.098***                 96
                                (0.012)                    (0.018)            (0.020)              (0.020)                  (0.031)
                                                                       Fixed Effects Included:
Education by Experience effects        No                  Yes                Yes                  Yes                      Yes
(32 in total)
Year Effects                           No                  No                  Yes                 Yes                      Yes
(6 in total)
Year by Experience Effects             No                  No                  No                  Yes                      Yes
(56 in total)
Year by Education Fixed effects        No                  No                  No                  No                       Yes
(24 in total)
 Note: This table presents the same specifications as rows 4, 5, 6 and 7 of Table 2 and estimates them on the sample of men and women (separately) rather than on the
 pooled sample as in Table 2.
 In parenthesis we report the heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors, clustered over the 32 education-experience groups.
 ***= significant at 1% level; **=significant at 5% level; *= significant at 10% level.




                                                                             66
                                                                 Table A5
                                 Estimates of (-1/σHL), (-1/σHH), and (-1/σLL) CPS, U.S. data 1963-2006,
                                              Katz and Murphy (1992) Method, Men Only


                                                                Estimates of          Estimates of          Estimates of           Number of
                                                                -1/σHL                -1/σLL                -1/σHH                Observations

     Men Only                                                   -0.60***                                                        44
     with "Some College" split between H and L                  (0.062)
                                                                                      -0.030                -0.11
                                                                [0.077]
                                                                                      (0.017)               (0.09)
     Men Only                                                   -0.37***                                                        44
                                                                                      [0.018]               [0.11]
     with "Some College" in H                                   (0.06)
                                                                [0.08]
     Men Only                                                   -0.72***              -0.037*               -0.04               44
     Employment as a Measure of Labor Supply                    (0.07)                (0.019)               (0.10)
                                                                [0.09]                [0.020]               [0.12]
     Men Only                                                   -0.58***              0.008                 -0.09               36
     1970-2006                                                  (0.07)                (0.025)               (0.09)
                                                                [0.09]                [0.027]               [0.10]


Note: Variables, definitions and regressions as in Table 6. The only difference is that the sample used to construct wages is limited to men only. In
brackets are the heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and in square brackets the Newey-West autocorrelation-robust standard errors.
***= significant at 1% level; **=significant at 5% level; *= significant at 10% level.




                                                                           67
