NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPECTATIONS, LEARNING AND BUSINESS CYCLE FLUCTUATIONS
Stefano Eusepi
Bruce Preston
Working Paper 14181
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14181

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

The authors thank seminar participants at the Australasian Workshop in Macroeconomic Dynamics
2008, Australian National University, Columbia University, ESSIM 2008, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta, Northwestern University, Society of Economic Dynamics 2007, Society of Computational
Economics 2008, Universitat Automoma and CREI-Universitat Pompeu Fabra. We thank Albert Marcet,
Kristoffer Nimark, Jaume Ventura and particularly Florin Bilbiie for useful conversations and comments.
The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and are not necessarily reflective of views
at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. The usual caveat applies.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Stefano Eusepi and Bruce Preston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Expectations, Learning and Business Cycle Fluctuations
Stefano Eusepi and Bruce Preston
NBER Working Paper No. 14181
July 2008
JEL No. D83,D84,E32
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a theory of expectations-driven business cycles based on learning. Agents have
incomplete knowledge about how market prices are determined and shifts in expectations of future
prices affect dynamics. In a real business cycle model, the theoretical framework amplifies and propagates
technology shocks. Improved correspondence with data arises from dynamics in beliefs being themselves
persistent and because they generate strong intertemporal substitution effects in consumption and leisure.
Output volatility is comparable with a rational expectations analysis with a standard deviation of technology
shock that is 20 percent smaller, and has substantially more volatility in investment and hours. Persistence
in these series is captured, unlike in standard models. Inherited from real business cycle theory, the
benchmark model suffers a comovement problem between consumption, hours, output and investment.
An augmented model that is consistent with expectations-driven business cycles, in the sense of Beaudry
and Portier (2006), resolves these counterfactual predictions.

Stefano Eusepi
Macroeconomic and Monetary Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Libery street
New York, NY 10045-0001
stefano.eusepi@ny.frb.org
Bruce Preston
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
bp2121@columbia.edu

1

Introduction

Recently there has been a renewed interest in shifting expectations as a source of business cycle
fluctuations. A range of models have been explored that rely variously on multiple equilibria,
exogenous news about future productivity and imperfect information – see, for example,
Benhabib and Farmer (1994), Schmitt-Grohe (2000), Beaudry and Portier (2006), Jaimovich
and Rebelo (2008) and Lorenzoni (2008). These frameworks seek not only to explain business
cycles fluctuations with changes in expectations but also to resolve comovement problems
that arise in real business cycle theory.
This paper explores an alternative theory based on learning dynamics. In the context of an
otherwise standard stochastic growth model, we consider an environment in which households
and firms have an incomplete model of the macroeconomy, knowing only their own objectives,
constraints and beliefs. Agents are optimizing, have a completely specified belief system but
do not know the equilibrium mapping between primitive disturbances, the aggregate state of
the economy and market clearing prices. By extrapolating from historical patterns in observed
data they approximate this mapping to forecast exogenous variables relevant to their decision
problems, such as the rental rate of capital and the real wage. This belief structure has the
property that beliefs affect the true data generating process of the economy which in turn
affects belief formation. The economy is therefore self-referential: shifts in beliefs about future
returns to labor and capital affect current market clearing prices which in turn can reinforce
beliefs. In this environment, current prices can become less informative about future economic
conditions generating fluctuations in real activity.
This kind of mechanism driving business cycle fluctuations is found in early writings on
macroeconomic dynamics. For example, Pigou (1927), on page 122, writes:
"[...] a rise in prices, however brought about, by creating some actual and some
counterfeit prosperity for business man, is liable to promote an error of optimism,
and a fall in prices an error of pessimism, and this mutual stimulation of errors
and price movements may continue in a vicious spiral until it is checked by some
interference from outside."
1

Hence, shifts in expectations, whether in part due to changes in fundamentals or in part
due to error are a source of business cycle fluctuation that may be self-fulfilling. Our model
is very much in the spirit of this quote.1 Learning breaks the tight link between fundamentals and, through expectations formation, equilibrium prices and allocations, giving rise to
additional volatility relative to a rational expectations analysis of the model. Furthermore,
shifts in expectations occur not because of exogenous “news shocks” about the future state
of the economy – as proposed in the recent literature on expectations-driven business cycles – or “sunspots” but because of the agents’ learning process, which depends on current
available data. Revisions in agents’ beliefs about future returns to their capital holdings generate endogenous aggregate demand shocks which amplify the effects of exogenous changes to
productivity. Moreover, learning might be thought to improve the internal propagation mechanisms of the model, since beliefs are a function of historical data, introducing an additional
state variable.
Calibrating the model to match properties of post-war U.S. quarterly data, the central
results of the paper are as follows. First, learning amplifies technology shocks. Relative to
a rational expectations analysis of the model, a 20 percent smaller standard deviation of
technology shocks is required to match the standard deviation of HP-filtered output data.
Moreover, the volatility of investment and hours relative to output is 40 and 25 percent
greater than under rational expectations. Second, the persistence properties of our model
bear much closer resemblance to observed data. The first order autocorrelation properties of
output, hours and investment growth are well matched despite shocks being identically and
independently distributed over time – hump-shaped impulse responses are observed. These
features of the data are typically problematic for real business cycle theory as documented
by Cogley and Nason (1993) and Rotemberg and Woodford (1996). In general, the learning
model provides a superior characterization of second order moments of observed data than
does the model under rational expectations.
The improvement in fit can be traced to shifting beliefs acting as endogenous demand
shocks, interpretable as news and having similar effects to government expenditure or invest1

The model will not have the property of “vicious spirals”.

2

ment specific technology shocks. The latter will be given specific emphasis when interpreting
results. The only source of exogenous variation are technology shocks, which have two effects. First, as in standard real business cycle theory, a temporary technology shock shifts the
production frontier with well understood implications. Second, in subsequent periods, households revise their beliefs in response to changed market opportunities. In particular, relative
to rational expectations, households are more optimistic about the future path of returns to
capital and more pessimistic about future returns to labor. The former leads to substitution
of current for future consumption and a high marginal utility of income, an effect reinforced
by lower projected wages. Combined, these expectations effects induce a larger fall in consumption and consequently a larger shift in labor supply and investment in the period after
the shock. This amplification of substitution and income effects in response to a technology
shock relative to rational expectations explains the increased volatility in these variables. The
delayed adjustment in beliefs explains the persistence. Furthermore, these observations highlight our connection to Pigou (1927): erroneous optimism or pessimism about future returns
to capital and wages are in part validated by the data. Moreover, shifts in expectations about
future returns to labor and capital are for a given technological frontier and endogenous to
the technology shock. In this sense they have similarity to demand shocks in so far as hours
and consumption negatively comove in response to a revision in expectations.
As there is additional endogenous variation in the marginal utility of income for a given
production frontier, the model suffers a comovement problem. Hours and consumption display negative correlation. Furthermore, while hours growth exhibits positive autocorrelation,
consumption growth has negative autocorrelation. The third result of the paper shows that
in a model of the kind proposed by Beaudry and Portier (2006) this comovement problem can
be resolved. That paper explores primitive assumptions on technology and preferences that
are consistent with so called expectations-driven business cycles – in response to an expectational shock, output, hours, investment and consumption display positive comovement. We
propose a new pairing of assumptions that delivers this property. They are a small degree of
increasing returns combined with non-separability in utility between consumption and hours.2
2

The results do not rely on having an upward sloping demand for labor schedule or indeterminacy. Moreover, indentical results obtain if increasing returns are replaced by a model of endogenous entry and exit as

3

The first assumption provides an endogenous shift in the production frontier from external
economies so that consumption does not crowd out investment, while the latter assists in
capturing the comovement between hours and consumption. Under these assumptions, which
introduce no additional states variables, our model provides an even better characterization
of observed data. Moreover, the interaction of learning with these model features provides
additional amplification and propagation relative to a rational expectations model with these
characteristics and our baseline model under learning. The modified model implies some 30
percent greater volatility in output for a given technology shock.
The results are robust to a range of alternative assumptions. In particular, our analysis
could be criticized on the ground that it is well understood that real business cycle theory
fails to account for various properties of observed data without augmenting the model with
additional frictions such as variable capital utilization and investment adjustment costs. We
show that our benchmark model performs well when compared to rational expectations models
with these features.
Finally, we compare our analysis with earlier explorations of learning as a source of amplification and propagation. In particular, we revisit the analysis of Williams (2003) which
also looked at learning in a standard real business cycle model. That paper concludes that
learning based on extrapolating historical patterns in observed data, as considered here, is
unlikely to help improve the performance of real business cycle models. Reproducing that
analysis in the context of our model shows that this is indeed the case. The difference in
conclusions stems from the failure in Williams (2003) to model optimal decisions conditional
on maintained beliefs as done in Marcet and Sargent (1989) and Preston (2005). Williams
(2003) also considers a related but distinct class of learning models in which agents face uncertainty about structural parameters rather than the statistical relation between prices and
state variables that obtains in equilibrium. This conceptually distinct exercise is argued to be
more promising in generating economic fluctuations. The results of this paper indicate this
is not necessarily true.
This paper belongs to a long literature reconciling the predictions of real business cycle
considered by Portier (1995) and Jaimovich (2007).

4

theory with observed data – see, inter alia, Hansen (1985), Rogerson (1988), Christiano and
Eichenbaum (1992), Benhabib and Farmer (1994), Andolfatto (1996), Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996), Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997) and Schmitt-Grohe (2000). These papers introduce
various frictions including indeterminacy of rational expectations equilibrium to benchmark
theory to improve the amplification and propagation of technology shocks. Our paper furthers
this line of inquiry by considering learning dynamics as an alternative friction.
The introduction of imperfect information and learning in the real business cycle framework dates back to Kydland and Prescott (1982). In their model, the stochastic process for
technology is composed of two unobserved shocks with different persistence. Agents face a
signal extraction problem when predicting future productivity. More recently, Edge, Laubach,
and Williams (2007) show in a similar model that learning has important effects in the response of the economy to a persistent shift in productivity growth. In this class of models
learning is not an endogenous source of propagation because changes in endogenous variables
do not affect the agents’ learning process. On the contrary, gradual recognition of the productivity changes generates a gradual response to the shock – a property determined by the
specified signal-to-noise ratio in the exogenous process.
In addition to the above mentioned learning literature, our paper relates to other recent
contributions by Milani (2006), Carceles-Poveda and Giannitsarou (2007) and Huang, Liu,
and Zha (2008). Milani (2006) considers whether learning dynamics improve the fit of a simple estimated New Keynesian model. Carceles-Poveda and Giannitsarou (2007) analyze the
consequences of learning dynamics for asset pricing in a real business cycle model. Huang,
Liu, and Zha (2008) explore the amplification and propagation of technology shocks. Like
Williams (2003), these papers consider models in which only one-period-ahead forecasts matter for household and firm behavior – decisions are not optimal given the maintained beliefs.
Moreover, and in further contrast to these papers, the analysis here studies model properties at the steady state distribution of beliefs so that initial conditions are not a source of
amplification and propagation.
Finally, this paper connects with recent work on imperfect information and business cycle
dynamics. Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006) consider a model where agents have a noisy

5

signal about aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity and explore implications for generating
long expansions and short contractions in economic activity. Lorenzoni (2008) develops a
theory of demand shocks in a model with heterogeneous productivity shocks and diverse
private information. Agents’ signal extraction problem lead to expectational errors relative
to a full information model, which generate dynamics that are qualitatively like demand
shocks when the only primitive disturbances are technology shocks.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 lays out a simple real business cycle model.
Section 3 discusses the assumed belief structure. Section 4 details the data and calibration.
Section 5 presents the core results under our benchmark assumptions. Section 6 gives results
for a model consistent with expectations driven business cycles in the sense of Beaudry and
Portier (2006). Section 7 provides some robustness exercises. Section 8 concludes.

2

A Simple Model

The following section details a stochastic growth model similar in spirit to Kydland and
Prescott (1982), Prescott (1986) and King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988). A continuum of
households faces a canonical consumption allocation problem and decides how much to consume of the economy’s single available good, how much to invest, and how much labor to
supply to firms in the production of the available good. A continuum of competitive firms
produces goods using labor and capital as inputs. The major difference to this earlier literature is the incorporation of near-rational beliefs, delivering an anticipated utility model of the
kind discussed by Kreps (1998) and Sargent (1999). The analysis follows Marcet and Sargent
(1989) and Preston (2005), solving for optimal decisions conditional on current beliefs.
Various mechanisms of persistence, such as investment adjustment costs and variable capital utilization, are abstracted from. This facilitates identification of key mechanisms operating
in our model that would be present in more richly specified environments and provides pellucid results on the ability of near-rational expectations to replicate salient features of the
data.3 The sequel demonstrates that frictions of this kind tend to amplify further the effects
3

This should not be taken to suggest that the benchmark real business cycle model is the best competing
model. Our approach seeks to elucidate a new theoretical mechanism for expectations-driven business cycles,
while at the same time showing it is consistent with empirical regularities.

6

identified in our benchmark analysis.

2.1

Microfoundations

Households. Households maximize their intertemporal utility derived from consumption
and leisure
Êtj

∞

T =t

subject to the flow budget constraint


 
β T −t ln CTj − ν HTj

j
Ctj + Kt+1
= RtK Ktj + Wt Htj + (1 − δ) Ktj

(1)

(2)

where Ctj denotes household j ′ s consumption, Ktj the holdings of the aggregate capital stock
available at the beginning of period t, with K0j > 0 given; and Htj represents the fraction of
the available time (normalized to one unit per period) spent on non-leisure activities. The
function v (·) is convex. The functional forms are chosen to be consistent with a balanced
growth path – see King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988). Households supply labor and capital in
perfectly competitive markets. RK
t is the rental rate of capital and Wt is the real wage. The
household’s discount factor and the depreciation rate of capital satisfy 0 < β, δ < 1.
The expectation operator Êtj denotes agent j’s subjective beliefs. In forming expectations,
households and firms observe only their own objectives, constraints and realizations of aggregate variables that are exogenous to their decision problems and beyond their control. The
agent’s problem is to choose sequences of consumption, hours worked, and capital in order
to maximize (1) subject to (2), taking as given prices and the capital stock available at the
beginning of the period. Beliefs are specified in the next section.
Household optimization yields the conditions
 
Wt = Ctj ν H Htj

(3)

from equating the marginal rate of substitution between an additional unit of consumption
and additional unit labor supply to their relative prices and



Ctj  K
j
β Êt
Rt+1 + (1 − δ) = 1
j
Ct+1
7

(4)

the Euler equation from equating the marginal rate of substitution between consumption
today and tomorrow to the real interest rate.
The paper’s primary goal is the quantitative evaluation of the model. Following Kydland
and Prescott (1982), a log-linear approximation of the model around a balanced growth path
is employed. For any variable Gt define gt = Gt /Xt as the corresponding normalized variable,
where Xt is the level of technology in period t described further below. The model is then
studied in log deviation from a non-stochastic steady state in these transformed variables
so that ĝt = ln (gt /ḡ), with ḡ denoting the steady state value of gt . Details of the steady
state and the log-linear approximation are confined to the appendix. Here it suffices to note
that consumption, investment, output, the capital stock and real wages grow at the rate of
technological progress in the balanced growth path so that
yt =

Yt
Ct
It
Wt
Kt
; ct =
; it =
; wt =
and kt =
Xt
Xt
Xt
Xt
Xt−1

are stationary. Hours and the rental rate of capital are stationary on the balanced growth path.
Studying the approximated model also facilitates economic interpretation of later results.
Log-linearizing, solving the flow budget constraint forward, imposing the transversality
condition and substituting for hours using a log-linear approximation to (3) gives the intertemporal budget constraint
ǫc Êt

∞

T =t

β T −t ĉjT

=

β −1 k̂tj

+ Êt

∞

T =t

β

T −t


−1
ǫw ŵT + R̄R̂K
T − β γ̂ T .

The coefficients ǫc and ǫw are constants that are composites of model primitives, R̄ > 0
the gross rental rate, and γ̂ t = ln (Xt / (Xt−1 γ̄)) the log deviation of the growth rate in
technological progress relative to steady state growth. This relation states the expected
present value of consumption must be equal to the capital stock available at the beginning of
the period plus the expected present value of wage and rental income. These latter variables
are outside the control of the household, given the assumption of competitive markets.
To determine optimal consumption decisions, combine the intertemporal budget constraint

8

with a log-linear approximation to (4) to yield
1 − β  −1 j
j
ĉt =
β
k̂t − γ̂ t + R̄R̂tK + ǫw ŵt
ǫc
∞

(1 − β)
j
+Êt
β T −t
− β β R̄R̂K
T +1 +
ǫ
c
T =t
Êtj

∞


β T −t

T =t

(1 − β)
βǫw ŵT +1 .
ǫc

(5)

The consumption decision rule comprises three terms. The first shows the impact that the
current level of the capital stock and current prices have on consumption. The second and
third terms show how expected variations in permanent income affect current consumption.
The former has two parts corresponding to the positive income effect and the negative substitution effect of higher returns to capital on current consumption. The latter has only one part
as the income and substitution effects of a wage increase both increase current consumption.
Firms. There is a continuum of identical competitive firms of mass one. Each produces
the economy’s only good using capital and labor as inputs according to the production function
 α 
1−α
Yti = Kti
Xt Hti

where 0 < α < 1. Labor augmenting technological progress, Xt , satisfies the stochastic
process
ln (Xt+1 /Xt ) = ln γ̄ + at+1
where at is an independent, identically distributed random variable with zero mean and
standard deviation σ A . γ̄ > 0 is the steady state rate of technology growth. This aggregate
disturbance is the only source of exogenous variation in the model. Each firm chooses labor
and capital inputs to maximize profits
j
j
Πit = Yti − RK
t Kt − Wt Ht

taking factor prices as given. The first-order conditions to a firm’s optimization problem
provide
 α
 −α
Wt = (1 − α) Kti (Xt )1−α Hti
1−α
 α−1 
Xt Hti
RK
= α Kti
t
9

which equate factor prices with their real marginal products.

2.2

Market clearing and aggregate dynamics

We are interested in studying the behavior of macroeconomic aggregates. As households have
the same preferences and constraints; firms the same technology; and beliefs are assumed
homogeneous across all agents (although they are assumed not to be aware of that) the
analysis considers a symmetric equilibrium in which k̂ti = k̂tj = k̂t ; Ĥtj = Ĥti = Ĥt ; ı̂it = ı̂jt = ı̂t
for all i, j, t.
Integrating over the continuum provides aggregate consumption demand
1 − β  −1
ĉt =
β k̂t + R̄R̂tK − β −1 γ̂ t + ǫw ŵt
ǫc
∞

T −t (1 − β)
+Êt
β̃
− β β R̄R̂TK+1 +
ǫ
c
T =t
Êt

∞

T =t

where



β T −t

(6)

(1 − β)
βǫw ŵT +1
ǫc

Êtj dj = Êt denotes average expectations in the population. Aggregate consumption

dynamics inherit the properties of individual decision rules. This is the only model equation
that depends on expectations, and therefore of central focus. If near-rational expectations are
to be a source of amplification and propagation of primitive shocks, the effects must originate
here.
A log-linear approximation yields the remaining model equations. Aggregate capital dynamics are given by the accumulation equation
ȳ (1 − δ)
ȳ
c̄
(1 − δ)
k̂t+1 = α +
k̂t + (1 − α) Ĥt − ĉt −
γ̂ t .
γ̄
γ̄
k̄
k̄
k̄

(7)

The labor-leisure choice determines aggregate labor supply as
ǫH Ĥt = −ĉt + ŵt

(8)

where ǫH is the inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply. Factor prices are expressed as
ŵt = αk̂t − αĤt
R̂K
= γ̂ t + (α − 1) k̂t + (1 − α) Ĥt .
t
10

(9)
(10)

And the resource constraint provides
c̄
ı̄
αk̂t + (1 − α) Ĥt = ĉt + ı̂t .
ȳ
ȳ

(11)

Given our assumption about technological progress, equations (6) - (11) together with the
expectations formation mechanism specified in the next section completely determine the
aggregate dynamics of the economy.

3

Beliefs

Optimal decisions require households to forecast the evolution of future wages and returns to
capital. They are assumed to use a simple econometric model, relating wages and the capital
rental rate to the aggregate stock of capital. That is
R̂tK = ω r0 + ω r1 k̂t + ert ,

(12)

w
w
ŵt = ω w
0 + ω 1 k̂t + et

(13)

k̂t+1 = ω k0 + ω k1 k̂t + ekt

(14)

and

where ert , ert and ert are i.i.d. shocks. The beliefs contain the same variables that appear
in the minimum state variable rational expectations solution to the model. And, while the
rational expectations solution does not contain a constant, it has the natural interpretation
under learning of capturing uncertainty about the steady state (equivalently the level of
technology). It is assumed that wages and capital are forecast in normalized units as under
rational expectations.
Rational Expectations. The model solution under rational expectations implies (to a
first-order approximation) that labor and capital prices and the next-period capital stock are
k
linearly related to aggregate capital, with time-invariant coefficients ω r0 = ω w
0 = ω 0 = 0 and
w
k
k
ω r1 = ω̄ r1 , ω w
1 = ω̄ 1 , ω 1 = ω̄ 1 . Hence, the agents’ forecasting model nests beliefs that would

be observed in a rational expectations equilibrium. Furthermore, under rational expectations
w
k
k
ert = ω̄ r3 γ̂ t , ew
t = ω̄ 3 γ̂ t and et = ω̄ 3 γ̂ t .

11

Perpetual learning. Agents estimate equations (12) — (14), updating their coefficient
estimates every period as new data become available. Following recent literature, households
update their estimates using a discounted least-squares estimator, assigning lower weight
to older observations to protect against structural change.4 Letting ω ′ = (ω 0 , ω 1 ), zt =
R̂tK , ŵt , k̂t+1 and qt−1 = 1, k̂t , the algorithm can be written in recursive terms as

′
ω̂ t = ω̂ t−1 + gRt−1 qt−1 zt − ω̂ ′t−1 qt−1


′
− Rt−1
Rt = Rt−1 + g qt−1 qt−1

(15)
(16)

where ω̂ t denotes the current period’s coefficient estimate and g ∈ (0, 1) denotes the constant
gain, determining the rate at which older observations are discounted. The constant gain
assumption delivers perpetual learning, as market participants ‘forget’ the past. However,
the model has the property that if beliefs were instead given by a recursive least-square
algorithm, defined by g = t−1 , the learning process would converge to the rational expectations
coefficients.5 Under the constant gain algorithm, agents’ estimates converge to a distribution.
Evans and Honkapohja (2001) show that for a gain sufficiently close to zero the distribution
is normal and centered around the time-invariant coefficients of the rational expectations
coefficients. Put differently, the model naturally “nests” the rational expectations model
with g arbitrarily small. Finally, the above constant gain algorithm can be interpreted as a
Kalman filter of a random coefficients model, with specific priors on the coefficients’ drift (see
Appendix).
Timing and information. Agents update their estimates at the end of the period, after
making consumption and labor supply decisions. This avoids simultaneous determination of
the parameters defining agents’ forecast functions and current prices and quantities. However,
to compare the model under learning with the predictions under rational expectations, we
assume that agents’ expectations are determined simultaneously with consumption and labor
supply decisions, so that agents observe all variables that are determined at time t, including
4

Of course we consider an otherwise stationary model environment with a single shock so as to clearly
isolate the role of expectations in generating business cycle fluctuations. Adding structural change would
generate further volatility.
5
In the temporal limit, agents have an infinite amount of data.

12

k̂t+1 . For example, the one-period-ahead forecast of R̂tK is
r
r
Êt R̂K
t+1 = ω̂ 0,t−1 + ω̂ 1t−1 k̂t+1

where ω̂ r0,t−1 and ω̂ r1t−1 are the previous period’s estimates of belief parameters that define the
period t forecast function. Hence, they observe the same variables that a ‘rational’ agent would
observe. The only difference is that they are attempting to learn the ‘correct’ coefficients that
characterize optimal forecasts. An alternative approach would be to assume expectations are
formed before taking decisions, but this would render comparison of the learning model to the
benchmark real business cycle model difficult as rational expectations would not be a special
case of the assumed belief structure.
That beliefs are updated a period after new data arrive is a key component of learning as
a friction. Like models of sticky information – see, for example, Mankiw and Reis (2002)
– where only some firms can update information about the state of the economy, we assume
that all agents can revise their beliefs in response to new data, but only with a one-period
lag subject to the constraint of the constant gain learning technology.6
It is assumed the innovation, γ̂ t , is not used in equations (12) — (14). This does not imply
γ̂ t is unobserved – indeed, (5) implies consumption decisions are in part determined by
these innovations. The interpretation is that while individual households and firms observe
these disturbances they do not know how they are mapped into market clearing prices in
general equilibrium. This assumption is similar to, though arguably more appealing than,
the imperfect common knowledge literature where it is often assumed that only certain kinds
of aggregate data are public knowledge or only certain markets are available to trade statecontingent claims. Absent these assumptions prices would fully reveal information about
which agents are assumed to have only imperfect understanding – there is no inference
problem. In the present model, if the innovation was used in forecasting, agents would not
face an inference problem and learn quickly given that the only disturbance in the model is
the technology shock.7
6

More generally, beliefs are state variables that are sluggish by assumption, much like habit formation,
price indexation, investment adjustment costs and labor market search (the latter typically assuming that
new matches are only productive in future periods).
7
Formally, including the disturbance would generate a singularity in the regression if initial beliefs coincide

13

Finally in forecasting over the decision horizon agents do not take into account that they
update their beliefs in subsequent periods. The model is therefore one of anticipated utility
– see Sargent (1999).
True Data Generating Process. Using (12) — (14) to substitute for expectations in
(6) and solving delivers the actual data generating process

and

zt = T1 (ω̂ t−1 ) qt−1 + T2 (ω̂ t−1 ) γ̂ t


′
ω̂ t = ω̂ t−1 + gR−1
T1 (ω̂ t−1 ) − ω̂ ′t−1 qt−1 + T2 (ω̂ t−1 ) γ̂ t
t qt−1


′
Rt = Rt−1 + g qt−1 qt−1
− Rt−1




ĉ
 t 


 ı̂t  = Ψzt ,


Ĥt

(17)
(18)
(19)

(20)

where T1 (ω̂) and T2 (ω̂) are nonlinear functions of the previous period’s estimates of beliefs and
Ψ is a matrix comprised of composites of primitive model parameters. The actual evolution of
zt is determined by a time-varying coefficient equation in the state variables k̂t and γ̂ t , where
the coefficients evolve according to (18) and (19). The evolution of zt depends on ω̂ t−1 , while
at the same time ω̂ t depends on zt . Learning induces self-referential behavior. Agents use
current prices and capital holdings to make inferences about future macroeconomic conditions,
but in equilibrium prices depend on agents’ beliefs, and prices in turn affect the evolution of
beliefs. This dependence on zt is related to the fact that outside the rational expectations
equilibrium T1 (ω̂ t−1 ) = ω̂ ′t−1 and similarly for T2 .
with the rational expectations equilibrium. When initial beliefs differ from the rational expectations equilibrium, the regression is well defined, but because there is no uncertainty about the forecasting model, beliefs
quickly converge to the predictions of a rational expectations analysis (where the singularity would again
emerge given infinite data. And with a small gain, as in our analysis, the regression’s variance-covariance
martix would still be close to singular). Finally, if the proposed interpretation is unappealing, this particular
assumption could be relaxed by introducing an additional shock to the model. We refrain from doing this to
ensure comparability with the standard real business cycle framework.

14

4

Calibration

The sample characteristics we seek to match are for U.S. data, 1955:Q1 to 2004:Q4. A short
description of each series is contained in the Appendix. Concerning households’ preferences we
set the discount rate β = 0.99. We assume separable preferences between consumption and
leisure with log-utility for consumption and close-to-linear utility of leisure.8 Accordingly,
the inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply, ǫH , is set equal to 0.0025. Firms’ technology
is specified by a capital share α = 0.34 and steady state growth rate of labor augmenting
technical progress equal to γ̄ = 1.0053, consistent with the quarterly mean output growth
over the sample.
Two parameters are left to calibrate: the standard deviation of the shock, σ A , and the constant gain, g. We calibrate these two parameters by minimizing the sum-of-squared distances
between the model implied volatility of HP-detrended output and the first autocorrelation
coefficient of output growth and the corresponding data moments. To do this, at each iteration in the minimization problem the model is simulated for 20000 periods. The first 2000
periods of the simulation are discarded and required statistics are computed using the remaining observations. This insures that the model reaches its stationary distribution of belief
parameters, implying that our calibration and subsequent results do not depend on the initial
conditions on the belief parameters.
As illustration of the possible effects of initial beliefs on inference, consider the following
example. Suppose that data are generated according to the process xt = x̄ + εt , where
x̄ > 0 is a constant and εt an i.i.d mean zero disturbance. Estimate the mean using all
sample observations and assume that the initial condition on the expectation of this mean is
x̄e > x̄. Over time, beliefs about the mean of xt will be revised down as realizations of this
random variable fluctuate around the true mean. The resulting estimates exhibit positive
autocorrelation. Yet the true model has zero serial correlation. Our simulation approach
ensures inference is not driven by transitional dynamics of this kind.9
8

This approximates the labor supply properties of a model of indivisable labor – see Hanson (1985) and
Rogerson (1988).
9
This is one way in which our work is distinguished from Milani (2006).

15

The procedure gives a gain of 0.0029. To interpret this magnitude, note the gain indexes
the weight that agents assign to past data. This value of the gain implies that observations that
are 50 years old receive a weight of (1 − 0.0029)200 ≃ 0.5, implying agents do not discount past
data too heavily.10 To gauge the relative magnitude across observations, the weight assigned
to the most recent data observation is approximately one.
One concern about the analysis might be that this choice of gain provides excessive freedom to fit observed data. Several points are worth making. First, many deviations from
benchmark theory involve increased parameterization. This is true when incorporating investment adjustment costs, variable capital utilization, financial market frictions and labor
market search – see, for example, Andolfatto (1996), Burnside and Eichenbaum (1996) and
Carlstrom and Fuerst (1997). All these model variants engender more highly parameterized
models and all seek to match the kinds of properties discussed here. In the same spirit, learning is an example of alternative friction whose implications for model fit are being evaluated.
Second, our calibrated gain is considerably smaller than values found in the literature,
which range from 0.01 − 0.05 – see, for example, Milani (2006), which estimates the gain,
and Orphanides and Williams (2005). Branch and Evans (2006) show that a simple VAR
with constant gain performs well in forecasting output growth and inflation, with respect to
alternative more sophisticated models. The constant gain model is also shown to approximate
well the behavior of output growth forecasts in the Survey of Professional Forecasters. The
choice of gain that maximizes the fit in their VAR is 0.007, which is also above our calibration. In a more sophisticated model, the gain parameter could be calibrated to replicate key
properties of expectations data from surveys. We leave that to future research.
Finally note that under rational expectations we only have to choose σ A to match the
standard deviation of HP-filtered output.
10

For this value of g, agents would give approximately zero weight to observations that are 500 years old.

16

5

Central Results

5.1

Statistical Properties

Tables 1 and 2 report summary statistics on the cyclical properties of various U.S. data series
and the model under both rational expectations and learning dynamics. For each variable the
relative standard deviation and correlation with output are reported. Table 1 reports these
statistics for HP-filtered series (facilitating comparison to earlier studies based on filtered
data), while Table 2 presents the corresponding statistics for the growth rates of each series
(which is more natural given the assumed stochastic trend).
Table 1: HP filtered moments
Statistic Data REE Learning
Technology:

σA

-

1.22

0.98

Output:

σY

1.54

1.54

1.52

σ C /σ Y

0.52

0.54

0.38

ρY,C

0.69

0.97

0.83

σ I /σ Y

2.87

2.42

3.06

ρY,I

0.90

0.99

0.98

σ H /σ Y

1.13

0.49

0.71

ρY,H

0.88

0.97

0.96

σ w /σ Y

0.54

0.54

0.38

ρY,w

0.12

0.97

0.84

σ P r /σ Y

0.68

0.54

0.38

ρY,P r

0.52

0.97

0.84

Consumption:

Investment:

Hours:

Wages:

Labor Prod:

The first row of Table 1 shows learning dynamics amplify the effects of technology shocks.
To match the variance and serial correlation properties of output, the learning model requires
a technology disturbance with a standard deviation that is about 20 percent smaller than
required under rational expectations. Moreover, the relative volatility of hours and investment is 40 and 25 percent higher respectively, bearing closer resemblance to data implied
17

moments than the rational expectations model. The former represents a significant success,
being problematic for standard real business cycle theory – see Hansen (1985) and Rogerson
(1988).11 In regards to consumption, wages and labor productivity, the model performs less
well. Given the high elasticity of the labor supply and the assumption of perfectly competitive
markets the model predicts Ĉt ≈ ŵt = Ŷt − Ĥt and is therefore too stylized to capture the
different dynamics of these variables. The source of the discrepancy between the model and
the data resides in the behavior of consumption, discussed further below.
Table 2 shows the same set of statistics in terms of growth rates, underscoring that the
model under learning delivers a better fit. In particular, the model does not display the
counterfactually large output growth volatility which occurs under rational expectations.12
Table 2: Growth rates
Statistic
Output:

Consumption:

Investment:

Hours:

Wages:

Data REE Learning

σ ∆Y

0.88

1.19

0.99

σ ∆C /σ ∆Y

0.60

0.52

0.54

ρ∆Y ,∆C

0.51

0.98

0.80

σ ∆I /σ ∆Y

2.54

2.45

2.82

ρ∆Y ,∆I

0.71

0.99

0.94

σ ∆H /σ ∆Y

0.93

0.50

0.65

ρ∆Y ,∆H

0.70

0.98

0.87

σ ∆w /σ ∆Y

0.60

0.52

0.54

ρ∆Y ,∆w

0.08

0.98

0.80

0.95

0.52

0.54

0.68

0.98

0.80

Labor Prod: σ ∆P r /σ ∆Y
ρ∆Y ,∆P r
11

Using different measures of hours and real activity, or different sample sizes, affects the specific values of
σ H /σ Y , but does not alter our conclusions regarding the model’s performance. For example, using non-farm
business output as a measure of economic activity yields σ H /σY = 0.83 for the whole sample and σ H /σ Y = 1.1
for the sample 1982:Q3-2006:Q1. Using average weekly hours (from the BLS household survey data) and real
GDP as a measure of output gives a relative standard deviation of 0.88, over the same period.
12
The rational expectations model over-predicts the standard deviation of output growth by some 30 percent
in contrast to 10 percent for the learning model.

18

Turning to the correlations between each series and output, all moments are closer to the
data than are those under rational expectations. Of particular note are the weaker correlations of consumption, wages and labor productivity with output. To presage later discussion,
these improvements in fit arise from learning endogenously generating dynamics that are qualitatively like those elicited by the presence of demand shocks. Revisions to beliefs shift the
marginal utility of income. And for a given technology frontier these variations in marginal
utility have qualitative similarities to demand shocks. As shown by Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992), the inclusion of such shocks in conjunction with technology disturbances can
improve the fit of unconditional moments pertaining to labor market variables.
Since Cogley and Nason (1993, 1995), the internal propagation mechanisms of technology
shocks have been a central preoccupation of real business cycle theory. These papers demonstrate that the impulse response functions of model variables are entirely determined by the
assumed stochastic properties of technology shocks – the existence of capital as a state variable adds little propagation. Rotemberg and Woodford (1996), in related criticism of real
business cycle theory, show that predictable variation in model simulated output, hours and
consumption data is negligible, despite evidence of substantial forecastable variation of these
series in observed data. Moreover, what predictable variation there is in the model is of the
wrong kind.
Figure 1 plots the autocorrelation function for output growth together with model predictions under both rational expectations and learning. The rational expectations real business
cycle model has virtually no propagation, having an autocorrelation function that is essentially equal to zero at all horizons – recall that the growth rate of technology is given by
an i.i.d. process. In contrast, the learning model matches the first-order serial correlation
properties, though generates little persistence beyond that. While matching this feature of
the data was part of the calibration, we view it as a success given how well remaining model
properties are captured.
Table 3 reports the autocorrelation properties of the growth rate of key model variables.
Investment, output and hours growth are remarkably well matched relative to the predictions
of the model under rational expectations. That wages, labor productivity and consumption

19

are counterfactually predicted to have negative serial autocorrelation stems from the well
known comovement problem in real business cycle theory (given that the dynamics of these
series in the model are indistinguishable) emphasized by Barro and King (1984). While the
impact effect of technology shocks does induce positive comovement, subsequent dynamics
under learning are driven by revisions to beliefs. The next section shows that these revisions
to beliefs are isomorphic to demand shocks in the sense that for a given production frontier
shifts in expectations imply consumption and hours must be negatively correlated from the
labor-leisure condition (3). This explains the observed positive serial correlation in hours and
concomitant negative serial autocorrelation in consumption. The final section introduces an
extension to the baseline model that resolves these counterfactual predictions.
Table 3: Autocorrelation in growth rates
Statistic Data REE Learning

5.2

Wages:

∆w

0.19

0.10

-0.14

Consumption:

∆C

0.25

0.11

-0.14

Investment:

∆I

0.34

-0.03

0.42

Output:

∆Y

0.28

0.00

0.28

Labor Prod:

∆P r

0.05

0.10

-0.14

Hours:

∆H

0.58

-0.03

0.44

Impulse Response Functions

Further insight can be gleaned from impulse response functions to a unit technology shock.
The effects of a disturbance depend on the precise beliefs maintained by households at the time
of the shock. Impulse response functions for the learning model are therefore generated by
simulating the model twice for 2000+T periods. The first 2000 periods guarantee convergence
to the model stationary distribution and are discarded. The second simulation includes a unit
shock in period 2001. The T -period impulse response to a unit technology shock is then given
by the difference between these two trajectories. The simulation is repeated 3000 times.
For stationary variables, the impulse response functions are expressed in percentage deviations from steady state. For non-stationary series, the impulse responses are reported in
20

percentage deviations from the trend growth rate.13 For these later series, a unit technology
shock results in a permanent increase in their level. In each plot the solid lines correspond to
the median point-wise impulse response function, while the dotted lines provide a 75 percent
band – that is, the 12.5 and 87.5 percentiles of the simulated impulse responses. The dashed
line gives the corresponding impulse response predicted by a rational expectations analysis of
the model.
Figures 2 - 6 report the impulse response functions for output, consumption, investment,
hours and the rental rate of capital. For all series the impact effects of a technology shock
are almost identical when comparing the median impulse response under learning and the
impulse response under rational expectations. This is because agents’ beliefs are distributed
around the rational expectations prediction function, as shown in the next section. However,
in the case of learning, there is variation in the impact effects. The observed amplification
of technology shocks in the previous section is in part sourced to this variation. Depending
on the precise beliefs of households and firms at the time of the shock, which along with the
capital stock determine the state of the economy, the impact effect of the technology shock
could be larger or smaller.
Output, hours and investment display a hump-shaped profile in response to a technology
shock. This reflects earlier noted persistence properties induced by learning dynamics. At
the time of the shock, belief coefficients are fixed so that the impact effects are on average
the same. In subsequent periods, beliefs are revised in response to observed data with a
one-period lag. This generates persistence in the actual data generating process for all series.
An interesting feature of the model concerns dynamics the period after the technology
shock dissipates. In a rational expectations equilibrium, all model variables, appropriately
normalized, are a linear function of the capital stock and the disturbance to the growth rate
of technology. As the disturbance is assumed to be i.i.d., the observed dynamics one period
after the shock are entirely determined by adjustment in the capital stock. Under learning,
this is not the case. The technology shock leads to revisions in beliefs that commence the
period after the disturbance. Subsequent dynamics are largely driven by revisions to beliefs.
13

Equivalently, the dynamics are those observed in transition to the new steady state associated with the
higher level of technology.

21

In the period after the disturbance, agents revise upwards their beliefs about the returns
to investment and downwards their beliefs about wages – not just for the next period, but
for all future periods in the household’s decision horizon. Hence, the present discounted value
of capital returns rises and the present discounted value of labor returns falls relative to the
predictions of rational expectations. Figure 7 plots the time series of these sums under each
belief structure. Recalling aggregate consumption dynamics given by equation (6), optimism
about future returns – a steeper profile – tilts the consumption profile towards greater future
consumption. This and the flatter expected wage path serve to increase the marginal utility
of income relative to rational expectations, leading to larger labor supply and investment
effects. Both predictions are, therefore, in part realized in equilibrium outcomes in the period
after the shock: the return to capital rises and investment demand surges, while the real wage
drops as aggregate labor supply increases.14 Thus the model generates dynamics that are
consistent with those described by Pigou (1927).
Learning amplifies the standard substitution and income effects that operate in real business cycle theory in response to a technology shock. In particular, the response in consumption
and hours resemble the effects of an investment-specific shock affecting the expected future
rate of return on investment. Agents forecast higher returns to capital which induce them to
decrease current consumption and increase their labor supply through the familiar intertemporal substitution effect on leisure – see Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huffman (1988) for
a treatment of investment-specific shocks. This further amplifies the strong substitution effect already present under rational expectations. Shifts in expectations are endogenous to
technology disturbances giving the model greater flexibility in fitting various second-order
moments. Increased variation in marginal utility of income generates increased volatility in
hours worked. Because these variations in hours are caused by variations in the supply of
labor for a given production frontier, the model also better matches the various statistics
14

The assumption that agents forecast normalized wages, which fall in response to a positive technology
shock, is not important for the result. In a model with stationary but persistent techonology shocks, agents
would forecast a rise in wages, but one that is smaller relative to rational expecations. Hence, it remains
true that agents project a flatter profile for real wages. Only in the case of i.i.d. productivity shocks does
learning induce higher wages and consumption than rational expectations. This is because under rational
expectations the intertemporal substitution effects work in the opposite direction than under persistent shocks.
Consumption and wages increase on impact and then converge to their steady state values.

22

relating to labor market variables – to wit, hours, wages and average labor productivity.
Moreover, the tight correlation between consumption and output is broken.

5.3

Distributions of Beliefs

Because beliefs are central to our story it is useful to study their properties further. Consider
the following thought experiment. An econometrician observes an economy with data generated according to the real business model under rational expectations. For each observed
sample, the econometrician runs the exact regressions that comprise the beliefs in the learning model – recall equations (12) — (14) – calibrated with a gain equal to g = 0.0029. The
coefficients are recorded for many simulations.15
The dashed line in Figure 8 plots a kernel estimate of the implied distribution of the
resulting parameter estimates. Six distributions are reported corresponding to the intercept
and slope coefficient in each of the three forecasting equations. Because the econometrician
is outside the model – equivalently, the econometrician is small relative to the population
of rational expectation agents – the distribution reflects pure sampling error: there is no
feedback of this sampling error on the true data generating process. The distributions are
centered on the rational expectations equilibrium, exhibit negligible bias, and have a fairly
tight variance. This variance would go to zero as the gain parameter goes to zero, as this would
imply that all data are given equal weight. But with the chosen positive gain it is evident
that the econometrician has fairly accurate estimates of the parameters characterizing the
true data generating process, and would therefore make comparably good forecasts of future
returns as the rational agent.
Now imagine a world where all agents modeled by our real business cycle theory actually
construct forecasts based on these estimated models. This is precisely the model discussed
in this paper. The kernel estimate of the resulting ergodic distribution of beliefs is given by
the solid lines. The distribution of the estimated coefficients on capital is not centered on
the rational expectations parameters. The distributions are re-centered around the rational
15

To compute the distribution of beliefs, the model is simulated 2250 periods and agents’ estimates are
recorded after discarding the first 2000 observations. The simulation is repeated 7000 times.

23

expectations coefficients to facilitate comparison with the non-feedback case.16 However the
median impact impulse responses shown in the previous section indicate that agents’ median
forecast is in line with rational expectations.
The variation in possible beliefs that can be held by agents is substantially more dispersed
than in the previous thought experiment. This dispersion is what leads to the nonlinear impulse response functions and the associated uncertainty of their paths. This in turn generates
the increased volatility in the learning model.
The figures show that the bulk of the dispersion in agents’ beliefs is endogenously determined by the interaction between observed prices and updating of agents’ beliefs. The
dispersion in beliefs reflects that prices are less informative about future macroeconomic conditions. This model feature is further manifestation of shifting expectations as a source of
business cycle fluctuations that is very much in the spirit of Pigou and Keynes. Shifting
beliefs about the future returns to capital and wages, perhaps due to greater optimism about
future investment opportunities, leads to changes in current market clearing prices for labor
and capital. In turn, these prices reinforce beliefs.
These dynamics obviously relate to a number of recent papers on news shocks and business
cycle dynamics – see for example Beaudry and Portier (2006) and Jaimovich and Rebelo
(2008). The present analysis is distinct in the sense that there is only a single source of
disturbance – technology shocks. The observed dynamics can be sourced to two kinds of
variation: that due to the direct effects of the shock and that due to revisions in beliefs.
Because the latter are endogenous to variations in technology they could arguably be termed
“endogenous news shocks”. Note, however, that the mechanism in each case is different. In our
model, dynamics are generated by contemporaneous technology shocks and the endogenous
pessimism and optimism reflected in revisions to beliefs. Endogenous news affects agents’
decisions through intertemporal substitution effects on labor. In contrast, these other papers
generate shifts in current equilibrium prices in response to signals about productivity at some
future date that are exogenous to current technology: exogenous news affects agents’ decisions
through an income effect. Hence, in our model, negative comovement between consumption
16

The “bias” in the estimates, a product of the nonlinearity of beliefs and linear regression methods, is
about 6% for each coefficient. As the gain goes to zero this bias vanishes.

24

and hours implies higher hours and lower consumption; in models with exogenous news,
negative comovement implies higher consumption and lower hours. Irrespective, learning
clearly provides a mechanism through which expectations-driven business cycles emerge.

6

Expectations-Driven Business Cycles

Under learning dynamics, real business cycle theory still faces difficulty in matching two key
characteristics of the data. The first is the relative volatility of hours and output – and labor
market variables more generally. Without a high elasticity of labor supply, the model struggles to replicate the volatility of output. And while learning alleviates the magnitude of the
discrepancy between data and model predictions, there remains the question of what other
model features would better fit this dimension of the data.17 The second data characterization regards the problem of comovement: hours and consumption are negatively correlated.
Introducing an alternative belief structure can do little to resolve this model prediction. For a
given production frontier, and under the assumption that consumption and leisure are normal
goods, shifting beliefs, regardless of how they are modeled, cause variation in the marginal
utility of income for which optimal decisions demand negative comovement in these variables.
An emerging literature under the rubric expectations-driven business cycles studies assumptions on preferences and technology that resolve this comovement problem. The motivating example is typically a news shock about the state of future technology. In the
benchmark model under rational expectations it creates an increase in consumption and a
decrease in hours and investment.
Beaudry and Portier (2006) explore primitive assumptions on production technology that,
in a competitive environment, are consistent with positive comovement in these variables.
They show that if production in a multi-sector model displays cost complementarities in
intermediate goods inputs then an otherwise standard real business cycle model will produce expectations-driven business cycles: positive comovement between consumption, output, hours and investment in response to an expectations shock. A growing number of papers
17

Introducing labor market search as in Andolfatto (1996) is one possible remedy, though this friction
appears to have more success with persistence properties than as a source of amplification.

25

have proposed alternative resolutions to the comovement problem by considering more complex variants of the standard real business cycle model. Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008) propose
modified preferences, variable capital utilization and adjustment costs to investment; Chen
and Song (2007) introduce financial frictions; den Haan and Kaltenbrunner (2007) focus on
labor market frictions; Floden (2006) considers a model with vintage capital; and Christiano,
Motto, and Rostagno (2006) introduce monetary frictions.

6.1

The Model

Motivated by this literature, the benchmark model is augmented as follows. First, following
Beaudry and Portier (2004) and Eusepi (2008), a production technology with a small degree
of increasing returns is introduced. Second, household preferences are assumed to be nonseparable in consumption and leisure but consistent with a long-run balanced growth path.
These model features resolve the comovement problem. Increasing returns tends to induce
persistent positive comovement in investment, consumption and hours in periods after a
technology shock as the production function shifts out over time due to the external economies.
Moreover, the assumption limits the quantity of investment crowded out by consumption. If
increasing returns are deemed unappealing a model of endogenous entry and exit delivers
an isomorphic production structure – see, for example, Portier (1995) or Jaimovich (2007).
Non-separable preferences raise the marginal utility of consumption when labor supply is high,
delivering tighter comovement between these variables. This modeling choice is dictated by
keeping the model as simple as possible – no state variable is added – and to provide a
meaningful comparison with the benchmark real business cycle framework.
Households maximize
Êtj

∞

T =t

subject to

β

T −t



Ctj

1−σ 

v 1 − Ljt
1−σ



j
Ctj + Kt+1
= RtK Ut Ktj + Wt Htj + (1 − δ (Ut )) Ktj .

The notation remains as before, with the following additions. Ut is the utilization rate of capital in any period t. The function δ (·) gives the associated capital depreciation costs attached
to a given utilization rate of capital. We choose δ (Ut ) = θ−1 Utθ . It is included to address
26

the potential criticism that the benchmark model is designed to minimize amplification and
propagation under rational expectations. The results show that even in the presence of this
friction learning amplifies volatility relative to rational expectations by a greater magnitude
than in the benchmark analysis. The only other change in the household’s problem is the more
general utility function. The utility function is assumed to be consistent with constant hours
on the balanced growth path: it displays a constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution
and constant Frisch elasticity of labor supply.
Firms maximize
YT − WT HT − RTK (Ut Kt )
by choice of effective capital input, Ut Kt , and labor input, Ht , subject to the production
technology
Yt = Ψt (Ut Kt )α (Xt Ht )1−α
where
η

Ψt = (Ut Kt )α (Xt Ht )1−α Xt−η .

The term, Ψt , denotes the external effects of aggregate capital, indexed by the constant
η ≥ 0. The term Xt−η guarantees that a balanced growth path exists in this model. The
assumptions σ = 1, η = 0 and Ut = 1 for all t delivers our benchmark model. Details of the
first-order conditions; log-linear approximation; and resulting model equations are found in
the appendix.

6.2

Calibration

The inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply is set at the same value as in the simple real
business cycle model. There are two extra parameters with respect to the benchmark model.
The first parameter, measuring the aggregate externality, is set as η = 0.1, consistent with the
lowest estimate in Baxter and King (1991). This value implies a “small” degree of externality
and a locally determinate equilibrium under rational expectations.18 The second parameter is
the household’s intertemporal elasticity of substitution, σ, which is chosen to make the ratio
18

The parameter implies a downward-sloping demand for labor. For the connection between externality
and indeterminacy, see Benhabib and Farmer (1994).

27

of the standard deviations of consumption and output in the model and HP-filtered data as
close as possible. This gives σ = 1.5.19 The parameters σ A and g are again calibrated to
match the standard deviation of output in the filtered data and the first autocorrelation of
output growth respectively. The gain is now g = 0.0015, half that in the benchmark model.
This gain implies a 74% weight on observations that are 50 years old. The appendix shows
the parameter indexing variable depreciation, θ, is pinned down by the steady state return
on capital and the steady state depreciation rate.

6.3

Results

Table 4 reports a subset of earlier presented statistics for the generalized model. The model
does well in most dimensions. Assuming an intertemporal elasticity of consumption equal
to σ = 1.5 achieves a stronger correlation between consumption and hours, reflected in the
positive autocorrelation of the former. This comes at the cost of slightly lower volatility of
investment relative to the benchmark model. These results address some of the concerns
regarding predictable movements laid out in Rotemberg and Woodford (1996). While no
evidence is adduced here on the magnitude of predictable movements in model dynamics,
what is true is that the movements will be of the right kind.
Table 4: Model with increasing returns and non-separable preferences
Statistic
σY

σ C /σ Y

σ I /σ Y

σ H /σ Y

ρY,C

ρY,H

∆C

∆Y

∆I

∆H

1.54

0.52

2.87

1.13

0.69

0.88

0.25

0.28

0.34

0.58

σ = 1.5

1.50

0.52

2.42

0.70

0.99

0.99

0.14

0.27

0.35

0.39

σ=1

1.50

0.33

3.04

0.70

0.92

0.98

0.01

0.22

0.30

0.33

Data
Model:

19

Under these parameter choices, the preferences of the representative agent have the property that consumption is an inferior good. Florin Bilbiie is thanked for alerting the authors to this possibility. The appendix
describes microfoundations with costly labor market participation in which individual household preferences
have consumption and leisure being normal goods but in which aggregate preferences approximate those
assumed above. Eusepi and Preston (2008) develop theoretical implications in detail.

28

The second row shows the performance of the model when σ is equal to 1. This weakens
the autocorrelation properties of consumption, which, as before, is noticeably less volatile
than output. One last result is that the extended model improves the overall fit with the
data but also increases amplification considerably. The standard deviation of the shock that
is required to match the volatility of output is more than 30% lower than the required value
under rational expectations (not shown).
The impulse response functions in figures 9 - 13 confirm that the model can generate
expectations-driven business cycles, as consumption, investment and hours rise also after
the productivity shock has occurred. Interestingly, learning as an endogenous news shock
generates greater amplification and propagation when compared to other recent models of
news-driven business cycles. For example, in Jaimovich and Rebelo (2008), model implied
statistics are fairly similar across models with and without the news shock – current technology largely determine time series properties in that paper. This is not the case in our
model.

7

Robustness

Modeling learning dynamics introduces one free parameter. It might reasonably be asked how
sensitive are our results to the choice of gain parameter. Furthermore, our approach might
be criticized on the ground that it is well known that real business cycle models need to be
augmented with additional frictions to replicate observed data. And that if we permitted
the real business cycle model under rational expectations a one parameter deviation from the
benchmark model it would provide a similarly good fit as the model under learning dynamics.
Or that the presence of such frictions would mitigate the role of learning as an amplification
and propagation mechanism. The following exercises allay such concerns, showing that:
• Large gain coefficients generate excess volatility and counterfactual autocorrelations in
many variables and therefore inferior fit of observed data;
• Introducing other frictions to the benchmark model under rational expectations, such
as variable capital utilization or adjustment costs in investment, are not as successful
29

in fitting the data as well as our one parameter deviation of learning dynamics; and
• Even when learning is introduced in conjunction with these frictions, it continues to provide significant amplification and propagation relative to the same model under rational
expectations.

7.1

Alternative Parameter Assumptions

Table 5 reports a subset of statistics for a number of variants of the benchmark model. The
calibration is held fixed at our benchmark values for the model under learning, so that the
standard deviation of technology shocks remains unchanged across simulations. Models 1
and 2 show the benchmark results for the rational expectations and learning models. The
latter reiterates earlier results for ease of comparison while the former gives the results under
rational expectations assuming the same standard deviation of technology shocks as model
2. The improved amplification is again immediate. Models 3 and 4 show the cases of a lower
elasticity of labor supply (ǫH = 0.25). Under both rational expectations and learning, the
volatility of output falls for a given standard deviation technology shock. Concomitantly,
the relative volatility of investment and hours also decline, while the relative volatility of
consumption increases. The serial correlation properties adjust accordingly. These results
underscore the centrality of the elasticity of labor supply in generating plausible volatility in
real business cycle models.
Model 5 shows the learning model under a higher gain, g = 0.009, which is three times as
large as our benchmark case. It significantly increases volatility in all series, but tends to overshoot corresponding sample moments. This makes clear that the modeler is not unconstrained
in choosing this parameter – increasingly larger gains do not translate into increasingly better
correspondence with data.
The final row reports statistics for an alternative model of learning. Many recent papers
have proposed analyses of learning dynamics in the context of models where agents solve
infinite horizon decision problems, but without requiring that agents make forecasts more
than one period into the future. In these papers, agents’ decisions depend only on forecasts
of future variables that appear in Euler equations used to characterize rational expectations
30

equilibrium. Key contributions include Bullard and Mitra (2002) and Evans and Honkapohja
(2003).
Table 5: Robustness
Statistic
σY

σ C /σ Y

σ I /σ Y

σ H /σ Y

ρY,C

ρY,H

∆C

∆Y

∆I

1.54

0.52

2.87

1.13

0.69

0.88

0.25

0.28

0.34

Baseline RE

1.24

0.54

2.42

0.49

0.97

0.97

0.11

0.00

−0.03

Baseline Learn

1.52

0.38

3.07

0.72

0.83

0.96

Low Elast. RE

1.13

0.56

2.35

0.39

0.98

0.97

0.10

0.01

−0.02

Low Elast. Learn 1.28

0.43

2.91

0.55

0.87

0.95

−0.17

0.22

0.41

High Gain

2.30

0.32

4.00

1.04

0.03

0.95

−0.35

0.44

0.26

Euler Equation

1.24

0.54

2.42

0.49

0.97

0.97

0.10

0.00

−0.03

Data
Model:

−0.14 −0.28

0.42

Of particular relevance to the present study are the analyses of Williams (2003) and
Carceles-Poveda and Giannitsarou (2007). The former studies precisely the question explored
here: can learning be a source of business cycle fluctuations? The latter is similarly motivated,
with specific focus on asset pricing implications of real business cycle theory. Both papers
make use of models with learning dynamics in which only one-period-ahead expectations matter to expenditure and production plans of households and firms. Both conclude that learning
of the kind considered here is unpromising in generating amplification and propagation.20
A final related paper is Huang, Liu, and Zha (2008). It considers the same model as
Williams (2003) where only one-period-ahead expectations matter, but examines a belief
structure that does not nest the rational expectations equilibrium of the model. In particular,
a class of self-confirming equilibria is analyzed – see Sargent (1999). The resulting impulse
20

Williams (2003) also considers learning about structural parameters rather than the equilibrium mapping
between state variables and prices and concludes that such uncertainty gives rises to greater amplification.
This is a conceptually distinct exercise to that pursued in the present paper.

31

response functions indicate that such beliefs help amplify technology shocks. However, no
attempt is made to calibrate the model to fit observed data. Again, our paper is distinguished
from that analysis by considering optimal decisions conditional on beliefs and by constraining
the class of beliefs to nest the rational expectations equilibrium of the model. The analyses
also differ insofar as we consider model properties implied by the ergodic distribution of beliefs
to remove the effects of initial conditions. Huang, Liu, and Zha (2008), in contrast, consider
one specific choice of initial beliefs.
The final row replicates this kind of analysis in the context of the model developed here.
Williams (2003) proceeds assuming that the Euler equations predicted by a rational expectations analysis of the model represent decision rules of agents under learning. The only model
equation to change is that for consumption demand. The Euler equation is


K
ct = Et ct+1 − Et β R̄Rt+1
+ γ̂ t+1 .

(21)

The model under learning then assumes household consumption decisions are determined as


K
ct = Êt ct+1 − Êt β R̄Rt+1
+ γ̂ t+1

(22)

This requires the further assumption that households directly forecast their own future consumption using regressions of the kind specified in section 2. Preston (2005) shows that this
decision rule leads to suboptimal decisions – see also Marcet and Sargent (1989).21 All remaining model equations are unchanged as they do not directly depend on the specification
of beliefs.
Not modeling optimal decisions and assuming consumption decisions are made according
to (22) leads to dramatically different conclusions. Learning dynamics fail to generate amplification and propagation. Model implied moments are essentially indistinguishable from a
rational expectations analysis of the model. This negative finding has less to do with learning
than it does with the assumed nature of economic decisions. In real business cycle theory
the only intertemporal decision is the household’s consumption and saving decision. To make
21

That (21) describes optimal decisions under rational expectations and not learning reflects the property under rational expectations of equilibrium probability laws embedding information about all relevant
constraints, including transversality conditions and intertemporal budget constraints. This is not true once
beliefs are exogenously specified as in the learning model contemplated here.

32

this decision households must forecast the entire future sequence of wages and real interest
rates. These beliefs about future prices determine current market clearing prices, which in
turn determine beliefs. A consequence of the model of household behavior given by (22) is
the connection between market prices that govern future consumption and investment opportunities and current allocations and prices is severed. The economic structure of the model
is completely changed and revealed to matter greatly for implied model dynamics. Only by
properly modeling the interactions of households’ and firms’ beliefs about the economy and
the markets in which they operate can we fully understand the potential of near-rational
beliefs to explain observed data.

7.2

Alternative Frictions

Table 6 presents two final exercises. First, under both belief structures, model implications
under variable capital utilization are considered. Second, under rational expectations only, a
model with investment adjustment costs is presented. This permits a comparison of learning
dynamics with one popular friction employed in the real business cycle literature. A more
exhaustive comparative exercise is beyond the scope of this paper. The data moments and
benchmark results are again presented in the first three rows.
Including variable capital utilization serves to amplify technology shocks under both belief
structures. However, learning still provides 23 percent greater volatility. Regardless of the nature of beliefs, the relative volatilities, covariances and autocorrelations are largely unchanged.
Introducing investment adjustment costs of the form


It
Kt+1 = It 1 − φ
+ (1 − δ)Kt
It−1
with φ(γ̄) = φ′ (γ̄) = 0 and φ′′ (γ̄) > 0 in the rational expectations model certainly improves
correspondence with data on some dimensions – the first-order serial correlation properties
of output and investment are much improved and output is more volatile.22 But remaining
moments are, if anything, further from the data. In particular, the relative volatility of
investment is considerably dampened. Finally, while results for learning under investment
In this experiment σA and φ′′ (γ̄) are chosen to match the volatility of HP-filtered output and the first
order autocorrelation of output growth.
22

33

adjustment costs have not been presented, we conjecture that such frictions will only enhance
the amplification and propagation of near-rational expectations. Frictions that introduce
additional state variables make current quantities and prices more sensitive to households’
and firms’ beliefs about future economic conditions – and this is the heart of our theory of
Pigou-type fluctuations.
Table 6: Alternative Frictions
Statistic
σY

σ C /σ Y

σ I /σ Y

σ H /σ Y

ρY,C

ρY,H

∆C

∆Y

∆I

1.54

0.52

2.87

1.13

0.69

0.88

0.25

0.28

0.34

Baseline RE

1.24

0.54

2.42

0.49

0.97

0.97

0.11

0.00 −0.03

Baseline Learn

1.52

0.38

3.07

0.72

0.83

0.96

−0.14

Var. Cap. Utl. RE

1.81

0.51

2.48

0.51

0.98

0.98

Var. Cap. Utl. Learn 2.23

0.38

2.91

0.66

0.93

0.98

−0.08

0.26

0.38

Inv. Adj. Costs RE

0.68

2.09

0.39

0.96

0.89

−0.04

0.16

0.56

Data
Model:

8

1.53

0.28

0.42

0.0 −0.02 −0.03

Conclusion

This paper explores learning dynamics as a source of economic fluctuations, assessing its
implications for the amplification and propagation of technology shocks in real business cycle
models. In the spirit of Pigou (1927) a model is developed in which self-fulfilling expectations
are possible in response to technology shocks. The benchmark model delivers volatility in
output comparable to a rational expectations analysis with a standard deviation of technology
shock that is 20 percent smaller, and has substantially more volatility in investment and hours.
The model captures persistence in these series, unlike standard models. The improvement in
fit stems from shifting beliefs having properties of demand shocks.
While introducing learning dynamics improves model fit relative to rational expectations,
the benchmark model suffers a comovement problem between consumption, hours, output
34

and investment. An augmented model that is consistent with expectations-driven business
cycles, in the sense of Beaudry and Portier (2006), resolves these counterfactual predictions.
This richer model produces additional amplification and propagation, requiring 30 percent
smaller technology shocks than a rational expectations analysis, while providing a superior
characterization of other second-order moments of observed data.

35

References
A, D. (1996): “Business Cycles and Labor-Market Search,” American Economic
Review, 86(1), 112.
B , P.,  F. P  (2004): “When Can Changes in Expectations Cause Business
Cycle Fluctuations in Neo-Classical Settings?,” NBER Working Paper 10776.
(2006): “When Can Changes in Expectations Cause Business Cycle Fluctuations in
Neo-Classical Settings?,” Journal of Economic Theory, 135, 458—477.
B , J.,  R. F  (1994): “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 63, 19—41.
B, W. A.,  G. W. E (2006): “A Simple Recursive Forecasting Model,”
Economics Letters, (91), 158—166.
B, J.,  K. M (2002): “Learning About Monetary Policy Rules,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 49(6), 1105—1129.
B , C.,  M. E  (1996): “Factor-Hoarding and the Propagation of
Business-Cycle Shocks,” American Economic Review, 86(5), 1154—1174.
C  -P , E.,  C. G (2007): “Asset Pricing with Adaptive
Learning,” forthcoming, Review of Economic Dynamics.
C, C. T.,  T. S. F  (1997): “Agency Cost, Net Worth, and Business
Cycle Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis,” American Economic
Review, 87(5), 893—910.
C , K.,  Z. S& (2007): “Financial Friction, Capital Re-allocation and News-driven
Business Cycles,” mimeo.
C, L. J.,  M. E  (1992): “Current Real-Business-Cycle Theories
and Aggregate Labor-Market Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 82, 430—450.
36

C, L. J., R. M,  M. R& (2006): “Monetary Policy and the
Stock Market Boom-Burst Cycles,” unpublished, Northwestern University.
C& , T.,  J. M. N (1993): “Impulse Dynamics and Propagation Mechanisms
in a Real Business Cycle Model,” Economics Letters, 453, 77—81.
(1995): “Output Dynamics in Real-Business-Cycle Models,” American Economic
Review, 85(3), 492—511.
  H, W.,  G. K   (2007): “Anticipated Growth and Business Cycles
in Matching Models,” mimeo.
E& , R., T. L,  J. W (2007): “Learning and Shifts in Long-Run
Productivity Growth,” Journal of Monetary Economics, pp. 2421—2438.
E *, S. (2008): “A Note on Expectations-Driven Business Cycles in Economies with
Production Exernalities,” forthcoming International Journal of Economic Theory.
E *, S.,  B. P  (2008): “Preferences and Macroeconomic Comovement,” unpublished, Columbia University.
E, G. W.,  S. H+*, (2001): Learning and Expectations in Economics.
Princeton, Princeton University Press.
(2003): “Expectations and the Stability Problem for Optimal Monetary Policies,”
Review of Economic Studies, 70(4), 807—824.
F , M. (2006): “Vintage Capital and Expectations-Driven Business Cycles,” mimeo.
G

-, J., Z. H -.,  G. W. H (1988): “Investment, Capacity

Utilization and the Real Business Cycle,” American Economic Review, 78(3), 402—417.
H , G. (1985): “Indivisible Labor and the Business Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 16, 309—337.

37

H&, K., Z. L,  T. Z (2008): “Learning, Adaptive Expectations, and Technology
Shocks,” unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.
J, N. (2007): “Firm Dynamics and Markup Variatopms: Implications for Sunspot
Equilibria and Ednogenous Economic Fluctuations,” forthcoming, Journal of Economic
Theory.
J, N.,  S. R   (2008): “Can News About the Future Drive the Business
Cycle,” unpublished, Northwestern University.
K&, R. G., C. I. P ,  S. T. R   (1988): “Production, Growth and Business
Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 21, 195—232.
K&, R. G.,  S. T. R   (1999): “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,” in Handbook
of Macroeconomics. Elsevier.
K *, D. (1998): “Anticipated Utility and Dynamic Choice,” in Frontiers of Research in
Economic Theory, ed. by D. Jacobs, E. Kalai, and M. Kamien, pp. 242—274. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
K, F. E.,  E. C. P  (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 50(6), 1345—1370.
L ., G. (2008): “A Theory of Demand Shocks,” unpublished, MIT.
M+-, N. G.,  R. R  (2002): “Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal
to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 4, 1295—
1328.
M , A.,  T. J. S&  (1989): “Convergence of Least-Squares Learning in Environments with Hidden State Variables and Private Information,” Journal of Political
Economy, pp. 1306—1322.
M, F. (2006): “Expectations, Learning and Macroeconomic Persistence,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 54, 2065—2082.
38

N - &, S. V.,  L. V +* (2006): “Learning Asymmetries in Real Business Cycle Models,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(4), 753—772.
O* , A.,  J. C. W (2005): “Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations, and Monetary Policy,” in The Inflation Targeting Debate, ed. by B. S. Bernanke, and
M. Woodford. University of Chicago Press.
P&, A. C. (1927): Industrial Fluctuations. London: MacMillan.
P , F. (1995): “Business Formation and Cyclical Markups in French Business Cycles,”
Annales D’Economie et de Statistique, 37/38, 411—440.
P , E. (1986): “Theory Ahead of Business Cycles Measurement,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 25, 11—66.
P , B. (2005): “Learning About Monetary Policy Rules when Long-Horizon Expectations Matter,” International Journal of Central Banking, 1(2), 81—126.
R& , R. (1988): “Indivisible Labor, Lotteries and Equilibrium,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 21, 3—16.
R  &, J.,  M. W (1996): “Real Business Cycle Models and the Forecastable Movements in Output, Hours and Consumption,” American Economic Review,
86(1), 71—89.
S& , T. J. (1999): The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton University Press.
S-G , S. (2000): “Endogenous Business Cycles and the Dynamics of Output,
Hours and Consumption,” American Economic Review, 90, 1136—1159.
W, N. (2003): “Adaptive Learning and Business Cylces,” unpublished, Princeton
University.

39

A
A.1

Appendix
Data

We use quarterly data for the US economy. The sample is 1955:Q1 to 2004:Q4. The variables
are constructed as follows with DLX codes in parentheses. Output is Real Gross Domestic
Product (GDPH); nominal consumption is computed as the sum of nondurable goods (CN),
services (CS) and government expenditures (G); nominal investment is the sum of private nonresidential investment structures (FNS), Equipment and software (FNE), private residential
investment (FR) and consumption durable goods (CD). Consumption and investment are
converted to real terms by using the GDP deflator (GDP/GDPH). Hours are measured by
non-farm business hours (LXNFH). All variables a transformed to per capita terms by using
the civilian non-institutional population above 16 years (LN16N). Productivity is measured
as output per hour in the non-farm business sector (LXNFA). Finally, the hourly wage is
measured by compensation per hour in the non-farm business sector (LXNFC). Real wage
is obtained by using the non-farm output price deflator (LXNFI). We also document the
volatility of hours by using (as an alternative measure) the average hours of all persons at
work from the household survey (LENCLWHN). For this series, we use the sample 1982:Q32006:Q1.

A.2

Model

This section delineates the general model that includes capacity utilization, non-separability
between consumption and leisure and externalities of production.
A.2.1

Households

Consumers choose consumption, leisure and capital to maximize
∞

Êt
β T −t u (CT , LT )
T =t

subject to

Ct + Kt+1 = RtK (ut Kt ) + Wt Ht + (1 − δ (Ut )) Kt
Lt = 1 − Ht .
40

The first order conditions are
Ct : uc (Ct , Lt ) = Λt
K
Kt+1 : β Êt Λt+1 Rt+1
ut+1 − Λt + β Êt [Λt+1 (1 − δ (Ut+1 ))] = 0

Lt : uL (Ct , Lt ) = −Λt Wt
Ut : RtK = δ ′ (Ut ) .
In the sequel we assume

Ct1−σ v (1 − Lt )
u (Ct , Lt ) =
1−σ

 
where ν ′ H̄ > 0, H̄ is steady state hours worked, and ǫν = ν ′′ H̄/ν > 0. Also, we assume
1
δ (Ut ) = Utθ
θ

 
with δ Ū = δ in steady state.

Normalized non-stationary variables are denoted by lower case letters. Stationary variables

are left unchanged. Hence, for any trending variable Gt define gt = Gt /Xt as the corresponding
normalized variable. The model is then studied in log deviation from a non-stochastic steady
state in these normalized variables so that ĝt = ln (gt /ḡ), with ḡ denoting the steady state
value of gt .
In terms of normalized variables the first-order conditions are as follows. For consumption:
λt ≡ Xtσ Λt = Xtσ uc (Ct , Lt ) = Xtσ Ct−σ v (Ht ) = c−σ
t v (Ht ) .
For capital:
1 = β Êt
For Leisure:


λt+1 1  K
U
+
(1
−
δ
(U
))
R
t+1
t+1
t+1
λt γ σt+1

λt wt = Xtσ−1 Λt Wt = −

ct1−σ ′
v (Ht ) .
1−σ

A log-linear approximation to these relations around a balanced growth path provides:
1. Marginal utility of consumption:
λ̂t = −σĉt − ψ (1 − σ) Ĥt
41

where in steady state

2. Euler equation:
β Êt β

−1

 
H̄v′ H̄
w̄H̄
  (σ − 1)−1 =
.
ψ≡
c̄
v H̄


(1 − δ)
δ
−1
R̂K
+ β −
t+1 + Ût+1 − σ θ Ût+1 = 0
σ
γ̄
γ̄

λ̂t+1 − λ̂t − σγ̂ t+1

which on using the steady state relation


θδ
R̄K Ū
(1 − δ)
−1
= σ
= β −
σ
σ
γ̄
γ̄
γ̄
becomes
Êt

λ̂t+1 − λ̂t − σγ̂ t+1



(1 − δ)
−1
K
R̂t+1
= 0.
+β β −
γσ

3. Labor-leisure choice:
(1 − σ) ĉt + ǫν Ĥt = λ̂t + ŵt ,
which, combined with the expression for marginal utility, gives:
σ −1 λ̂t + ŵt = ǫH Ĥt
where

(σ − 1)2
ǫH = ǫν −
ψ>0
σ

is the inverse Frisch elasticity of labor supply.23
4. Capacity utilization:
Ût =
A.2.2

1
R̂tK .
(θ − 1)

Firms

The firms’s problem is
max YT − WT HT − RTK (Ut Kt )

Ut Kt ,Ht

subject to the production technology

23


η
Yt = Ψt (Ut Kt )α (Xt Ht )1−α where Ψt = (Ut Kt )α (Xt Ht )1−α Xt−η

The restriction ǫH > 0 guarantees the concavity of the utility function.

42

denotes the external effects of aggregate capital. The term Xt−η guarantees that a balanced
growth path with exogenous growth exists in this model. Output is made stationary by the
following transformation
α α 1−α
Ψt γ −α
= yt
t kt Ut Ht

which is log-linearized to
Ψ̂t − αγ̂ t + αk̂t + αÛt + (1 − α) Ĥt = ŷt .

(23)

The external effects can be expressed in terms of stationary variables

α
η
Ut
Ψt =
kt Ht1−α ,
γt
and after log-linearizing
Ψ̂t = ηα Ût + k̂t − γ̂ t + (1 − α) η Ĥt .

(24)

The first order condition with respect to hours is
−Wt + (1 − α) Ψt (Ut Kt )α (Xt )1−α Ht−α = 0
which becomes
(1 −

α
α) Ψt Xt−1

and hence



Kt
Ut
Xt−1

α

(Xt )1−α −α Wt
Ht =
Xt
Xt

α
−α
(1 − α) Ψt γ −α
= wt .
t (Ut kt ) Ht

Combined with the definition of output gives
wt = (1 − α)

yt
Ht

which in log-linear form becomes
ŵt = ŷt − Ĥt .

(25)

The capital input decision gives:
0=

−RtK

+ αΨt



43

Ut
kt
γt

α−1

Ht1−α .

Using the definition of output yields
RtK = αγ t

yt
Ut kt

which in log-linear form is
R̂K
t = γ̂ t + ŷt − Ût − k̂t .

(26)

Finally, the evolution of capital in log-linear terms is described by:
k̂t+1 =

A.3

δθ
ı̄
(1 − δ)
k̂t − γ̂ t − Ût .
ı̂t +
γ̄
γ̄
k̄

(27)

Consumption decision rule

The final task is to derive the optimal consumption decision rule under arbitrary expectations.
Households choose a path for consumption, taking as given their initial capital holdings,
capital and labor prices and their expectations about future prices. The flow budget constraint
can be expressed in terms of stationary variables
−1
ct + kt+1 = (γ t )−1 RK
kt .
t (Ut kt ) + wt Ht + (1 − δ (Ut )) (γ t )

Log-linearization gives

γ̄ σ−1 β −1 k̂t =

employing the relations











c̄
ĉ
k̄ t

+ k̂t+1 −







R̄γ̄ σ−1 R̂tK + Ût + 1−α
ŵt + 1−α
Ĥt − γ̂ t −
α
α




(1−δ)
δ

−γ̂
−
θ
Û
t
t
γ̄
(1−δ)

w̄ H̄
1 − α Ū R̄k
1 − α σ−1
=
=
R̄γ̄
and
α
γ̄
α
k̄

R̄k Ū 1 − δ
−1
+
= γ̄ σ−1 β −1 = β̃ .
γ̄
γ̄

Defining
R̄γ̄

σ−1



(1 − δ)
−1
= γ̄
β −
γ̄ σ
(1 − δ)
−1
= β̃ −
γ̄
= R̃
σ−1

44

and

R̄k Ū
γ̄

=

δθ
,
γ̄

the expression above can be further simplified to


c̄
1−α
1−α
−1
K
k̂t = β̃ ĉt + k̂t+1 + β̃ γ̂ t − R̃ R̂t +
ŵt +
Ĥt .
α
α
k̄

Using the labor supply condition
σ −1 λ̂t + ŵt = ǫH Ĥt
and the definition of marginal utility gives the following constant-consumption labor supply
ǫH −

σ−1
ψ Ĥt = −ĉt + ŵt
σ

(28)

Substituting for labor supply decision Ĥt using the household’s first-order condition gives
−1

k̂t = β̃ ǫc ĉt + β̃ γ̂ t + k̂t+1 − ǫw ŵt − R̃R̂tK
where
c̄
(σ − 1)
+ ǫH − ψ
σ
k̄

(σ − 1)
=
1 + ǫH − ψ
σ

ǫc =
ǫw

−1

1−α
R̃
α

−1
1−α
R̃
.
α

Solving forward and taking expectations yields the intertemporal budget constraint
ǫc Êt

∞


β̃

T −t

−1

ĉT = β̃ k̂t + Êt

T =t

∞


β̃

T −t

−1

ǫw ŵT + R̃R̂TK − β̃ γ̂ T

T =t

as of time t. Solving the Euler equation backward from time T and taking expectations at t
yields
Êt σĉT + ψ (1 − σ) ĤT

= σĉt + ψ (1 − σ) Ĥt + Êt

T −1

T =t

β̃ R̃R̂TK+1 − σγ̂ T +1



.

Substituting for the constant-consumption labor supply we obtain
T −1


K
Êt ([(1 − χ) σĉT + χσ ŵT ]) = σĉt + ψ (1 − σ) Ĥt + Êt
β̃ R̃R̂T +1 − σγ̂ T +1
T =t

where
χ=

ψ (1 − σ)
.
σǫH + ψ (1 − σ)
45

Rearranging in terms of expected consumption and substituting into the intertemporal
budget constraint we get
ĉt + σ −1 ψ (1 − σ) Ĥt =
(1 − χ) 1 − β̃
ǫc β̃
Êt

∞

T =t

β̃

T −t

k̂t +





(1 − χ) 1 − β̃

−1
(ǫw + ǫ̃c χ) ŵT + R̃R̂TK − β̃ γ̂ T − β̃ σ −1 β̃ R̃R̂TK+1 − γ̂ T +1  .

ǫc

Finally, we obtain the consumption decision rule, depending only on forecast of prices that
are beyond the control of the household
ĉt + σ −1 ψ (1 − σ) Ĥt =

(1 − χ) 1 − β̃  −1
−1
β̃ k̂t + R̃R̂tK − β̃ γ̂ t + (ǫw + ǫc χ) ŵt
ǫc


∞
(1
−
χ)
1
−
β̃

T −t
β̃ −
 γ̂ T +1
β̃
+Êt
ǫ
c
T =t


∞
(1
−
χ)
1
−
β̃

T −t

+Êt
β̃
− β̃σ −1  β̃ R̃R̂TK+1
ǫc
T =t
+Êt

∞


β̃

T −t

(1 − χ) 1 − β̃
ǫc

T =t

β̃ (ǫw + ǫc χ) ŵT +1 .

Setting σ = 1 and χ = 0 we get back to the simple real busisiness cycle model.

A.4

Steady State

From the Euler equation we get
R̄k Ū
γ̄

1−δ
γ̄
1−δ
−1
= β̃ −
γ̄

= γ̄ σ−1 β −1 −

and from the capacity utilization first-order condition
R̄k Ū
δθ
R̄k Ū
=
=⇒ θ =
γ̄
γ̄
δ
46

which defines θ, allowing to determine U and therefore Rk . The ratios
c̄ ȳ
ȳ
R̄k Ū ı̄
1 − δ c̄
ȳ
ı̄
c̄
; =1−
; = − and = / .
= (α)−1
γ̄ k̄
γ̄
ȳ
k̄
k̄
k̄ k̄
k̄ k̄
Finally the steady state level ψ, for a given choice of H̄, is determined by
 
H̄v ′ H̄
w̄H̄ k̄
  (σ − 1)−1 =
ψ =
k̄ c̄
v H̄
1 − α σ−1 k̄
=
R̄γ̄
(σ − 1)−1
α
c̄
1 − α k̄
=
R̃ (σ − 1)−1 .
α
c̄

A.5

The model with costly participation

The preferences described above suffer from the problem that, for a given σ, if the Frisch
elasticity of labor supply increases beyond some threshold level, consumption becomes an
inferior good. In this section we show how a simple model of costly labor market participation
gives a similar labor supply and consumption decision rule. We assume that each ‘household’
is composed of a continuum of family members. Labor is indivisible: each member of the
household decides whether to work a fixed amount of hours or to not participate in the labor
market. Participating in the labor market entails a cost. We assume perfect risk sharing
within the household.
The maximization problem for the household is
Et

∞


β T −t u (CT , LT )

T =t

subject to
Ct + Kt+1 + Xt Φ (et ) = RK
t (ut Kt ) + Wt Ht + (1 − δ (Ut )) Kt
Lt = 1 − Ht ,
where et denotes the fraction of household members that are working. Household consumption
is defined as
Ct = et Cte + (1 − et ) Ctu
47

where Cte denotes consumption of employed members and Ctu is consumption of the unemployed. The utility function is defined as
(Cte )1−σ ν (h)
(Ctu )1−σ ν (0)
u (Ct , Lt ) = et
+ (1 − et )
,
1−σ
1−σ
where
Lt = 1 − Ht = 1 − et h.
Finally, the function Φ (et ) denotes the cost attached to labor market participation and has
the following properties
Φe (et ) > 0, Φee (ē) > 0.
Total household consumption satisfies a standard Euler equation, while the first order
conditions for the employed and unemployed are
(Cte )−σ ν (h) = Λt

(29)

(Ctu )−σ ν (0) = Λt

(30)

implying the risk-sharing condition
Cte
ν (h)
=
u
Ct
ν (0)

1
σ

.

Employed household members enjoy greater consumption in compensation of work effort.
The first order condition with respect to participation gives

1 
− (Cte )1−σ ν (h) + (Ctu )1−σ ν (0) = Λt [Wt h − Cte + Ctu − Φe,t ]
1−σ

which, rearranging, becomes

σ
(C e − Ctu ) = Wt h − Φe,t .
σ−1 t
Expressing the variables in stationary levels and log-linearizating provides
ĉet = ĉut
ē (c̄e − c̄u )
ĉt =
Ĥt + ĉet
c̄

σ e (c̄e − c̄u ) e
ĉt = ψ ŵt − ǫφ φ̄Ĥt ,
σ−1
c̄
48

(31)

where
ψ=

H̄ w̄
,
c̄

ǫφ =

Φee ē
,
Φe

φ̄ =

Φe ē
.
c̄

In steady state the following holds

ē (c̄e − c̄u )
σ−1
=
ψ − φ̄ > 0.
c̄
σ

Substituting for ĉet and using the above steady state relation we get



σ−1
ψ − φ̄ ĉt −
ψ − φ̄ Ĥt = ψ ŵt − ǫφ φ̄Ĥt ,
σ

which gives the following constant-consumption labor supply



σ−1
ǫφ φ̄
ψ

−
 ŵt .
ψ − φ̄ Ĥt = −ĉt + 
σ
ψ − φ̄
ψ − φ̄

To derive the optimal decision rule, the flow budget constraint can be expressed in terms

of stationary variables as
−1
ct + kt+1 + Φ (et ) = (γ t )−1 RK
kt .
t (Ut kt ) + wt Ht + (1 − δ (Ut )) (γ t )

Log-linearization gives

γ̄ σ−1 β −1 k̂t =

which becomes











Φe ē c̄
Ĥ
c̄ k̄ t

+

c̄
ĉ
k̄ t

+ k̂t+1 −







R̄γ̄ σ−1 R̂tK + Ût + 1−α
ŵt + 1−α
Ĥt − γ̂ t − ,
α
α




(1−δ)
δ

−γ̂
−
θ
Û
t
t
γ̄
(1−δ)



c̄
c̄
1−α
1−α
−1
K
ŵt +
Ĥt .
k̂t = β̃ ĉt + φ̄ Ĥt + k̂t+1 + β̃ γ̂ t − R̃ R̂t +
α
α
k̄
k̄
Using the for the constant-consumption labor supply
−1

k̂t = β̃ ǫc ĉt + β̃ γ̂ t + k̂t+1 − ǫw ŵt − R̃R̂tK
where
ǫc

ǫw

−1


c̄
ǫφ φ̄
σ−1
1−α
c̄
−
=
+ 
ψ − φ̄
R̃
− φ̄
σ
α
k̄
k̄
ψ − φ̄



−1


ψ
ǫ
φ̄
σ
−
1
φ
 R̃ 1 − α .
 
−
= 1 + 
ψ − φ̄
σ
α
ψ − φ̄
ψ − φ̄
49

Iterating forward and taking expectations provides
ǫc Êt

∞


β̃

T −t

−1

ĉT = β̃ k̂t + Êt

T =t

∞


β̃

T −t

−1

ǫw ŵT + R̃R̂TK − β̃ γ̂ T

T =t

the intertemporal budget constraint as of time t. Combining (29) and (31) we obtain
ĉt =


σ−1
ψ − φ̄ Ĥt − σ −1 λ̂t .
σ

Solving the Euler equation backward from time T and taking expectations
T −1


Êt λ̂T = λ̂t + Êt
β̃ R̃R̂TK+1 − σγ̂ T +1
T =t







Êt σĉT + ψ − φ̄ (1 − σ) ĤT



= σĉt + ψ − φ̄ (1 − σ) Ĥt + Êt

T −1


β̃ R̃R̂K
T +1 − σγ̂ T +1

T =t



.

Substituting for the constant-consumption labor supply yields
T −1


Êt ([(1 − χ) σĉT + χσ ŵT ]) = σĉt + ψ (1 − σ) Ĥt + Êt
β̃ R̃R̂TK+1 − σγ̂ T +1
T =t

by using


2
ψ − φ̄ (1 − σ)
.
χ=

2
σǫφ φ̄ + ψ − φ̄ (1 − σ)




Rearranging in terms of expected consumption and substituting into the intertemporal budget
constraint we get
ǫc Êt

∞


β̃

T −t

T =t

−1

= β̃ k̂t + Êt



∞


1
1−χ
β̃

T −t

$

ĉt + σ


−1

T −1

%


ψ − φ̄ (1 − σ) Ĥt + Êt
σ −1 β̃ R̃R̂TK+1 − γ̂ T +1 − χŵT
T =t

−1

ǫw ŵT + R̃R̂TK − β̃ γ̂ T .

T =t

Further simplification leads to


ĉt + σ −1 ψ − φ̄ (1 − σ) Ĥt =
(1 − χ) 1 − β̃
ǫc β̃
Êt

∞

T =t

β̃

T −t

k̂t +



(1 − χ) 1 − β̃
ǫc



−1
(ǫw + ǫ̃c χ) ŵT + R̃R̂TK − β̃ γ̂ T − β̃ σ −1 β̃ R̃R̂TK+1 − γ̂ T +1  .

50

Finally, we obtain the consumption decision rule, depending only on forecast of prices that
are beyond the control of the household,
(1 − χ) 1 − β̃  −1


−1
ĉt + σ −1 ψ − φ̄ (1 − σ) Ĥt =
β̃ k̂t + R̃R̂tK − β̃ γ̂ t + (ǫw + ǫc χ) ŵt
ǫc


∞
(1
−
χ)
1
−
β̃

T −t
β̃ −
 γ̂ T +1
+Êt
β̃
ǫ
c
T =t


∞
(1
−
χ)
1
−
β̃

T −t

+Êt
β̃
− β̃σ −1  β̃ R̃R̂TK+1
ǫ
c
T =t
+Êt

∞


β̃

T −t

(1 − χ) 1 − β̃
ǫc

T =t

β̃ (ǫw + ǫc χ) ŵT +1 .

Setting σ = 1 and χ = 0 (σ = 1) we get back to the simple RBC model. For low values of
φ̄ (the cost of participating) the decision rule approximates our representative agent model.
To give the intuition of the equivalence between the representative agent and the model
with costly participation consider an increase in the representative agent’s income that leaves
unchanged the price of capital and the price of labor. Under the current calibration the agent’s
preferences imply that consumption is an inferior good. Therefore with higher income the
agent decreases consumption and increases leisure. In the case of a "family" with costly labor
market participation, the positive income transfer induces a higher fraction of family members
to exit the labor market and consume leisure, while the family members that are still working
do not decrease their consumption. However aggregate consumption decreases because of a
composition effect. As shown above, family members that do not work are allocated lower
consumption. Since their number increases, aggregate consumption also decreases. Also
notice that assuming σ > 1, by letting Φee , Φe → 0 the model becomes Rogerson’s lottery
model with non-separable preferences described in King and Rebelo (1999).

A.6

Constant gain learning and the Kalman filter

Agents update their beliefs using the following constant-gain algorithm


′
ω̂ t = ω̂ t−1 + gR−1
t qt−1 z̃t − ω̂ t−1 qt−1
51

(32)



′
Rt = Rt−1 + g qt−1 qt−1
− Rt−1

where we now assume for simplicity that z̃t = T (ω̂ t−1 )qt−1 is one-dimensional (for example
kt+1 ) and qt is a two-dimensional vector. Following Evans and Honkapohja (2001) and Sargent
and Williams (2005), the limiting behavior of the estimates are approximated by the following
system of ordinary differential equations24
·

ω̂ = R−1 Mq (ω̂) [T (ω̂) − ω̂]
Ṙ = Mq (ω̂) − R

 25
′
where Mq (ω̂) = E qt−1 qt−1
. Asymptotically R converges to Mq (ω̂).

As a way to justify and interpret the use of constant-gain algorithms it is common to

relate them to the Kalman filter. Assume agents believe that the data generating process is
the following random walk model of coefficient variation
z̃t = ω ′t−1 qt−1 + ẽzt
ω t = ω t−1 + ẽωt
where for simplicity we assume that z̃t is one-dimensional and qt is a n-dimensional vector.
The shock ẽzt has standard deviation σ A and variance-covariance matrix of ẽωt is assumed to
be Σω << σ 2z I. The matrix Σω defines agents’ prior about the variance in the coefficients’
drift. Let ω̂ t|t−1 the optimal estimate of ω t conditional on information up to date t − 1. This
is obtained from the following Kalman filtering equations


Pt qt−1
′
−
ω̂
q
z̃
t
t−1
t|t−1
′
1 + qt−1
Pt qt−1
′
Pt qt−1 qt−1 Pt
1
= Pt −
+ 2 Σω
′
1 + qt−1 Pt qt−1 σ z

ω̂ t+1|t = ω̂ t|t−1 +
Pt+1
where we use
E
24



ω t − ω̂ t|t−1


′
ω t − ω̂ t|t−1 = σ 2z Pt .

(33)
(34)

This ODE system is called the mean dynamics of the estimates. Sargent and Williams (2005) investigate
a second ODE system which describe the escape dynamics, which are not the focus of this paper. In the
simulations conducted with the calibrated model we did not observe escape dynamics.
25
The unconditional expectation has finite value if the system is E-Stable. See also Evans and Honkapohja
(2001).

52

Sargent and Williams (2005) propose the following approximation to the filtering equations. For large t, (34) can be approximated by
Pt+1 = Pt − Pt Mq (ω̂) Pt +

1 ω
Σ .
σ 2z



′
Pt qt−1 ≈ 1, the filtering equations can be re-written as
Further assuming that 1/ 1 + qt−1


ω̂ t+1|t = ω̂ t|t−1 + Pt qt−1 z̃t − ω̂ ′t|t−1 qt−1
1
Pt+1 = Pt − Pt Mq (ω̂) Pt + 2 Σω .
σz

(35)

The asymptotic behavior of (35) can be shown to be equivalent to the asymptotic behavior
of constant-gain least squares, provided agents’ priors on Σω satisfy
Σω = g 2 σ 2z Mq (ω̂)−1 .

(36)

To show this, the matrix P converges asymptotically to a unique positive definite matrix
which solves the Riccati equation
P Mq (ω̂) P =

1 ω
Σ .
σ 2z

Using (36) the solution becomes P = gMq (ω̂)−1 . Hence, in large samples, Pt converges to
P and Rt converges to Mq (ω̂), implying that the constant gain algorithm and the Kalman
filter have the same asymptotic behavior. As shown in Sargent and Williams (2005), the
two algorithms share the same asymptotic behavior in large samples but their transitional
dynamics display differences in small samples. In this paper, we analyze the dynamics of
agents’ beliefs at their stationary distribution, and therefore evaluate the learning algorithm
in large samples.

53

0.3
0.25

Output growth ACF

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
−0.05
−0.1

1

2

3

4

5
quarters

6

7

8

9

Figure 1: Output autocorrelation function. The thick dashed line denotes US data, the thick
solid line denoted the model with learning, while the dotted line denotes the model under
rational expectations.

1.5
1.4
1.3

Output

1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 2: Dotted lines denote the 75% bands, solid line denotes the median impulse response
under learning. The dashed line denotes the impulse response under rational expectations.

54

1.1
1

Consumption

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 3: Dotted lines denote the 75% bands, solid line denotes the median impulse response
under learning. The dashed line denotes the impulse response under rational expectations.

4.5
4

Investment

3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 4: Dotted lines denote the 75% bands, solid line denotes the median impulse response
under learning. The dashed line denotes the impulse response under rational expectations.

55

1.2
1

Hours

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 5: Dotted lines denote the 75% bands, solid line denotes the median impulse response
under learning. The dashed line denotes the impulse response under rational expectations.

1.4

Rental Rate of Capital

1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 6: Dotted lines denote the 75% bands, solid line denotes the median impulse response
under learning. The dashed line denotes the impulse response under rational expectations.

56

T=t

EtΣ∞ βT−tRk

T+1

20
10
0
−10

0

5

10

15

20
quarters

25

30

35

40

0

5

10

15

20
quarters

25

30

35

40

T=t

EtΣ∞ βT−twT+1

5
0
−5
−10

Figure 7: Dotted lines denote the 75% bands, solid line denotes the median impulse response
under learning. The dashed line denotes the impulse response under rational expectations.
The top panel is the present discounted value of returns to capital and the bottom panel the
corresponding value for wages.

57

Coefficient

10
20
5

10

K equation

w equation

k

R equation

Intercept

0
−2

−1

0

1

0
−1.4

2

20

−1.2

−1

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

50

10
0
−1
20

−0.5

0

0.5

1

0
0.2
50

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

−0.1

0

0.1

0.2

0
0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

10
0
−0.2

Figure 8: Solid line: model with feedback. Dotted line, model without feedback.

2.6
2.4
2.2

Output

2
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 9: Output dynamics in response to a technology shock with increasing returns and
non-separable preferences. The thick solid line denotes the model with learning, with the
dotted lines showing the 12.5 and 87.5 percentiles.
58

1.3
1.25

Consumption

1.2
1.15
1.1
1.05
1
0.95

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 10: Consumption dynamics in response to a technology shock with increasing returns
and non-separable preferences. The thick solid line denotes the model with learning, with the
dotted lines showing the 12.5 and 87.5 percentiles.

2

Hours

1.5

1

0.5

0

−0.5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 11: Hours dynamics in response to a technology shock with increasing returns and
non-separable preferences. The thick solid line denotes the model with learning, with the
dotted lines showing the 12.5 and 87.5 percentiles.

59

7
6

Investment

5
4
3
2
1
0

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 12: Investment dynamics in response to a technology shock with increasing returns
and non-separable preferences. The thick solid line denotes the model with learning, with the
dotted lines showing the 12.5 and 87.5 percentiles.

1.2
1
0.8

Rt

k

0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

quarters

Figure 13: Rental rate dynamics in response to a technology shock with increasing returns
and non-separable preferences. The thick solid line denotes the model with learning, with the
dotted lines showing the 12.5 and 87.5 percentiles.

60

