                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  WAGES AND WORKING CONDITIONS




                          Henry Saffer


                     Working Paper No. 11418




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, Mk 02138
                          August 19814




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Health Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
INTRODUCTION


    The concept of a compensating difference has been an accepted

theory since the time of Adam Smith. As applied to competitive labor
markets, this theory states that, ceteris paribus, a wage difference
occurs as compensation for the various positive and negative working
conditions associated with employment. Considerable research effort
has been expended in search of empirical evidence for this theory. In
reviews of the empirical literature, Smith (1979) and Brown (1980)
both report that the evidence is inconclusive. The failure to find
consistent empirical evidence of the theory is attributed to problems

with omitted variables and measurement error. The purpose of this
paper is to provide an alternative empirical method of measuring the
value of working conditions and to test for the existence of a

compensating difference.
    The usual empirical approach to testing for a compensating
difference is to define an empirical model with some measure of income

as the dependent variable and a set of human capital, demographic and

working conditions variables as regressors. The working conditions
variables measure undesirable job attributes and are therefore

expected to have a positive affect on income.
    The biases associated with this technique are due to the omission

of ability data, the omission of some relevant working conditions data
and measurement error in the included working conditions data. First,

if ability is positively correlated with income and with nonpecuniary
compensation, the exclusion of ability data will create an upward bias

in the included variables. Second, if any excluded working condition
                                     —2—



is correlated with income and the included working conditions, then
the included variables are biased. The direction of bias due to
omitted working conditions data depends on the correlation between the

excluded and included variables. Finally, a measurement error problem
occurs as a consequence of using working conditions data as proxies

for nonpecuniary compensation.
    Two   types   of working conditions data are available and the

specification of the measurement error problem is dependent on which
type is chosen. The most frequently used data are derived from
external sources, such as industry—occupation specific accident rates.
When this type of data are used, a measurement error is introduced as
a result of assigning an average value to all individuals in a
particular category. The second type of working conditions data is
subjective self—reported data. When this type of data is used, the

lack of a known measurement scale introduces measurement error.

    Brown (1980) improved the standard empirical approach to measuring
compensating differences by using a first difference specification.
The data he used measure all variables at two points in time. For
each variable, the difference specification uses the change in values
between the two time periods. Variables that do not change with time
are canceled from the equation. Ability is assumed not to change with
time and, therefore, is unrelated to both the change in income and the

change in working conditions.
    The difference specification used by Brown also eliminates
potential selection bias. Selection bias will occur if any -
individuals   in the first period sample are not included in the second

period sample and if the selection process is systematically related
                                  —3—



to individual characteristics. This type of selection process will
introduce uncontrolled heterogeneity into a cross sectional equation
estimated with the selected sample. Since the difference

specification uses only the selected sample and subtracts the first

period equation from the second period equation, selection
heterogeneity will be canceled.

    Brown measured working conditions with data derived from external
sources. This type of working conditions data contains an additive
meaasurement error due to the assignment of an average value to all
individuals in each aggregate. In Brown's empirical model, if an
individual does not switch jobs, measured working conditions do not

change and, therefore, these working conditions will be canceled. If
individuals do switch jobs, a second measurement error is introduced
with the new working conditions data. The two measurement errors are
uncorrelated across time and, thus, will not cancel. Brown's
empirical results provide no evidence of a compensating difference.

    Duncan and Holmiund (1983) also attempt to find empirical evidence

of the compensating difference theory. Like Brown, they also use the
difference specification. However, unlike Brown, Duncan and Holmlund
measure working conditions with subjective self—reported data. They
assume that the relationship between the observed working conditions
data and the actual values can be characterized by an additive error
term. That is, w =   w   + e, where w is the observed value, w is the

actual value and e is an error term. Under this assumption, the
difference specification will reduce the measurement error bias in
proportion to the correlation of the error terms in the two time

periods.
                                 —4—



   The usual assumption about subjective self—reported data however,
is: w = aw* + e, where a is a scale parameter.1 The subjective nature

of the data requires the inclusion of a multiplicative scale term.
The difference specification will not eliminate this scale term.
Duncan and Holmlund's empirical results show some evidence of a
positive relationship between wage growth and an increase in the
unpleasantness of work. Of the 12 working conditions variables used,

nine have the expected sign but only three are significant.
    This paper presents another extension of the approach initiated by

Brown. As in Brown's work, the wage change specification is used to
control for bias due to omitted ability data. Then, as in Duncan and

Hoimlund's study, working conditions are measured using subjective
self—reported data. However, in this paper, working conditions are
measured by a single comprehensive variable. This approach eliminates
omitted working conditions as a source of bias. The working

conditions measure is then treated as an unobserved variable which

limits measurement error to an unknown scale factor. The model is

estimated using a technique derived by memiya (1978).


EMPIRICAL SPECIFICATION


    The data set used to test for a compensating difference was the

1973—1977 Quality of Employment Survey (QES). Conducted by the
University of Michigan, the QES is a national sample of 1455

individuals, 16 years of age or older, who worked for pay 2øor more
hours per week in 1973. These individuals were interviewed again in
1977. The QES contains a number of demographic, human   capital   and
                                   —5.-




labor market variables for both 1973 and 1977.

   Specification of an empirical model with a single unobserved

working conditions variable, w, first requires definition of the
unobserved variable. This variable is defined by assuming that each
employment situation provides a vector of working conditions and that

each individual attaches a subjective weight to these working
conditions.2 Let w be defined as the sum of these subjectively
weighted working conditions, with larger values of w indicating less

favorable working conditions.
    Given a working conditions variable, the compensating difference
hypothesis can be tested in two ways. First, w can be included as a
regressor with human capital and demographic variables in an earnings

equation. A positive and significant coefficient for w would be
evidence of a compensating difference. Second, the hypothesis can be
tested by specifying a working conditions equation with income and
other variables as regressors. In this case, a positive and
significant coefficient for income would provide evidence of a
compensating difference. These two behavioral relationships form a

structural model with earnings and working conditions as jointly

determined endogenous variables.
    The estimation problem is summarized by the following simultaneous

model:



              (1) y =w*g1+X1b1+u1
              (2) w= yg2+X2b2+u2

where all variables are specified as the change between 1977 and 1973,
                                     —6—



X1 are exogenous variable matrices, y is income, g and b1 are
coefficient vectors, u. are error vectors and i equals one and two.

    Because w* i_s an unobserved variable, estimation requires
introduction of an observable indicator variable. However, w is
defined as an index of all working conditions, observable and
unobservable. No specific observed working conditions variable is
thus adequate as an indicator variable. However, the QES contains a
generalized working conditions variable which can act as the

indicator.
    This variable which measures exposure to any unhealthy or
dangerous working condition is a function of both observable and

unobservable working conditions and both objective and subjective
aspects of these working conditions. Using the 1977 and 1973 data, a
dichotomous indicator, w, was constructed. If the respondents report
a deterioration in their working environment, then w = 1 and otherwise
w = 0.   Since these data are subjective, the relationship between w

and w must be defined as:


               if w =   1   then aw* + e   >   0 and

              if w = 0 then aw* + e        <   0



where a is a scale parameter, e is an error term with E(e) = 0 and e

is uncorrelated with u1 and U2.
    A technique for consistent and efficient estimation of this type

of model is provided by Amemiya (1978). This method requires that
the reduced form of the model be estimated. Let the reduced form be

defined as:
                                 —7—



              (3) y = XP1+v1
              (4) w = XP2 + v2


where P. are coefficient vectors, X is the data matrix of all

exogenous variables in the structural model and v are error vectors.

Equation (3) is estimated by least squares and, using w in place of

w, equation (4) is estimated by probit.
    Next define M. such that XM1 = X1.    Using (3) and (4), the
structural equations can be written as:



              (5) P1 = 1i1a1 ÷ n1
              (6) P2 = H2a2 + n2


                                                                and n.
where H = (P21M1), H2 = (P19M2), a1 = (g1,b1), a2 =    (g2b2)
are error vectors. As Pmemiya suggests, (5) and (6) are estimated by
generalized least squares using the inverse of the covariance matrices

of the error terms as weight matrices. These covariance matrices are
estimated from the error vectors and coefficient vectors of the

reduced form equations.
    The selection of variables in the X1 matrix was guided by prior
theoretical and empirical work on the causal determination of income.

Since considerable research has established human capital as a primary
determinant of income, several measures of human capital were included
in X1. These variables are years in the labor force (EXP), its square
(EXPSQ) and years of schooling (ED). Each of these variables was
computed as the change between 1977 and 1973. In addition, because
human capital theory suggests that these variables have a linear
                                —8—



relationship with the log of income, income will be specified in log

form (my).
    The final variable included in X1 is suggested by the theory of

compensating differences. Equation (1) represents the envelope of
isocompensation functions and isoprofit functions. A variable is

required to fix the position of this envelope since the underlying
functions shift over time. To control the envelope, the variable
included in X is the change in job satisfaction (JOBSAT) between 1977

and 1973. Freeman (1978) argues that job satisfaction is a function
of income, other observed variables and unobserved working
conditions.4 Given Freeman's argument, job satisfaction is an index

of total compensation derived from employment. The inclusion of
JOBSAT in X1 holds total compensation constant and thus helps control

the position of the envelope.
    The selection of variables for the X2 matrix was guided by job
matching theory.5 This theory assumes that individuals, when
accepting a job offer, have only imperfect information about the
working conditions associated with the job. Individuals with greater
skill in acquiring and interpreting job information should thus be
better able to avoid jobs with less desirable working conditions. The
variables chosen to measure skill in job matching are education (ED)
and age (AGE73). Education is defined as in X1 and age is measured as
age in 1973. The change in education is included as a measure of the
change in general knowledge and age is included under the assumption

that younger workers experience proportionally greater increases in
job matching skill than do older workers. Also included in X2 are

dichotomous quit (QUIT) and layoff (LAY) variables. The quit variable
                                       —9—



is set equal to one if the individual reports quitting the job held in

1973. Similarly, the layoff variable is set equal to one if the
individual reports a permanent layoff from the 1973 job. Both of
these variable are included as measures of prior success in job
matching. The job satisfaction variable is also included in X2 to
fulfill the same    role   as in X1.

    Column (1) of Table 1 contains the sample means for all variables.

Of the initial 1455 observations, 303 were deleted because the

individual was self—employed in 1973, over 60 years old in 1973, or
had randomly missing data for 1973. In addition, 487 observations
were deleted if 1977 data were unavailable.6 The remaining sample
contains 665 observations.



RESULTS



    In Table 1, the estimation results for the reduced form earnings

equation are shown in column (2) and the estimation results for the

reduced form total compensaion equation are shown in column (3). The
coefficients in column (2) form the vector P1 and the coeffients in
column (3) form the vector P2. As reduced form coefficients, these
values have no behavioral interpretation but, along with the reduced
form variances and covariances, are necessary for estimation of the

structural model.
    The computation of the coefficients of the structural model

represented by equations (1) and (2) requires estimation of equations
(5) and (6). Using GLS, the coefficients of equations (5) and (6)
were estimated and then used to compute the coefficients of equations
                                  —10—




(1)   and (2). The results of these computations for equations (1) and
(2) are reported in Table 1, columns (4) and (5), respectively.

      The empirical test of the compensating difference theory is
provided by the coefficient of w in equation (1) and by the
coefficient of lny in equation (2). These coefficients are reported
in columns (4) and (5) of Table 1, respectively, and both
coefficients, as predicted by the theory, are positive, although only
w is significant. Positive coefficients imply that, ceteris paribus,
a worsening of working conditions has a positive effect on earnings.
Because w is an unobserved variable, its coefficient can only be
estimated up to a scale factor. Therefore, discussion of the
magnitude of the compensating difference is not meaningful.

      The lack of significance of my in equation (2) is possibly the
result of uncontrolled variance in w*. If the X2 variables do not
adequately control exogenous variation in w, then the coefficient of
my will be biased. Since economists have devoted considerably more
effort to explaining wages than to explaining working conditions, the
earnings equation should be considered as the better test of the

compensating difference theory.
      The coefficients of the exogenous variables in the structural
earnings equation are reported in column (4) of Table 1. The
experience variable shows the effect of labor force withdrawal or

unemployment on wage growth. Setting the derivative of my, with
respect to EXP, equal to zero and solving for EXP shows a negative
change in income for those individuals who were out of work for more
than 1.42 years. As expected, an increase in education is found to

have a positive effect on wage growth. The equation R2 is quite low,
                                 —11—



but this is a common problem for difference specification models.
    The coefficients of the exogenous variables in the structural

working conditions equation are reported in column (5) of Table 1.

Education and age were included as job match variables. Both

variables are only marginally significant but have the expected signs.
Of the two prior match variables, QUIT and LAY, only QUIT is
significant. The positive sign of the quit variable indicates that

quitting the 1973 job resulted in a worsening of working conditions.

Again, the equation's    is relatively small.
    The structural model was also tested for sensitivity to
specification. The alternative specifications included use of the
linear and double log form for income and the inclusion of a marriage
and health variable as additional exogenous variables. None of these

changes, nor any permutations, improved the reported results.


CONCLUS IONS



    Past attempts to find empirical evidence of a compensating

difference have been hindered by problems with omitted variables and
measurement error. Brown was the first to suggest a wage change
formulation to cancel the effects of time invariant omitted variables.
However, Brown's working conditions data contain a time variant
measurement error wich biased the results. Duncan and Hoimlund also
use a wage change formulation to test for a compensating difference.

Their working conditions data contain a multiplicative measurement

error which is not canceled by the change specification. The wage
change specification used in these studies does not address the
                                —12—



problem of omitted working conditions nor does either study provide
clear empirical evidence of a compensating difference.
    The methodology used in this paper eliminates the bias due to
omitted ability data, omitted working conditions data and measurement

error. First, a wage change specification is used to eliminate bias
due to omitted ability data. Second, a single comprehensive measure
of working conditions is used to eliminate bias due to omitted working
conditions data. Finally, working conditions are treated as an
unobserved variable which restricts measurement error to a scale

factor in the estimated coefficients. The empirical results show a
positive relationship between changes in income and changes in working

conditions.
                                     —13—

                               Table 1
                  Means and Estimated Coefficientsa




                               Reduced Form              Structural Model

Variable        Means          my                w       my               w
                 (1)           (2)              (3)       (4)             (5)


w                 .13                                    .3079
                                                        (2.46)
                                                                         .1569
my                .44
                                                                    (     .17)
EXP              3.46      —.2142           —.0405      —.1911
                           (2.78)           (    .22)   (1.86)

EXPSQ           13.32       .0429               .0092    .0388
                           (2.54)           (    .23)   (1.73)

ED                .23       .0861           —.1543       .1348      —.1683
                           (3.29)           (2.53)      (3.54)      (1.59)

QUIT              .24      —.0220            .2614                   .2642
                           (   .48)         (2.37)                  (2.09)

JOBSAT            .04       .0266           —.2063       .0873      -.2108
                           (1.17)           (3.82)      (2.39)      (3.15)

AGE73           35.80      —.0072           —.0107                  —.0096
                           (4.12)           (2.59)                  (1.25)

LAY               .04      —.0818           —.2532                  —.2406
                           (   .88)         (1.17)                   (    .91)
intercept                   .8574           —.7505       .9045      -.8738
                           (8.36)           (3.08)      (5.29)       (1.34)

R2                             .06               .03      .02             .03




a) The t values are reported in parentheses.
                                —14—


                              FOOTNOTES



1.  See Lee (1982) and Muthen (1983) for additional discussion of this
assumption.
2. Research papers on compensating differences often paraphrase the
first paragraph of Chapter Ten in Smith's Wealth of Nations. This
paragraph outlines the concept of a compensating difference.
Referring to the observed differences in wages, Smith goes on in the
second paragraph to state "...this difference arises partly from
certain circumstances in the employments themselves, which, either
really, or at least in the imaginations of men, make up for a small
pecuniary gain in some, and counter—balance a great one in others...".
In other words, Smith believes that subjectivity is part of the
measurement of nonpecuniary compensation.
3. Amemiya's estimation technique is conceptually similar to, but
more efficient than, Heckinan's technique.
4. The change in job satisfaction is an ordered categorical and
subjective variable. This variable can be assumed to have a monotonic
relationship with a latent total compensation variable. However, the
job satisfaction variable is used without attempting to construct the
latent counterpart because these data act only as exogenous controls.
5. working conditions data should be excluded from the X2 matrix
since these data are implicitly included in w. The X matrix should
contain only variables which are causal determinants o w.
6. The deletion of data resulting from the failure to reinterview in
1977 introduces a potential selection bias if these data were used to
estimate separate equations for 1973 and 1977. However, as explained
in the text, any selection heterogeneity in the separate cross
sections is canceled from the difference specification.
                                 —15—

                              REFERENCES



Amemiya, T. (1978). "The Estimation of a Simultaneous Equation
    Generalized Probit Model." Econometrica 46(5):1193—205.

Bartel, A. (1981). "Race Differences in Job Satisfaction A
    Reappraisal." Journal of Human Resources 16(2):294—303.

Brown, C. (1980). "Equalizing Differences in the Labor Market." The
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 94(l):1l3—34.

Duncan, G. (1976). "Earnings Functions and Nonpecuniary Benefits."
    Journal of Human Resources ll(4):462—83.

_________ and Holmiund B. (1983). "Was Adam Smith Right After All?
    Another Test of Compensating Wage Differentials." Journal of
    Labor Economics l(4):366—79.
Freeman, R. (1978). "Job Satisfaction as an Economic Variable."
    American Economic Review 68(2):l35—41.
Heckman, J. (1978). "Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous
    Equation System." Econometrica 46(6):931—59.
Lee, L. (1982). "Health and Wage: A Simultaneous Equation Model with
    Multiple Discrete Indicators." International Economic Review
    23 (   1) :   199—221.

______ (1981). "Fully Recursive Probability Models and Multivariate
    Log—Linear Probability Models for the Analysis of Qualitative
    Data." Journal of Econometrics 16(l):51—69.

Muthen, B. (1983). "Latent Variable Structural Equation Modeling with
    Categorical Data." Journal of Econometrics 22(1l2):43—65.

Smith, R. (1979). "Compensating Wage Differentials and Public Policy:
    A Review." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 32(3):339—51.

University of Michigan, Institute for Social Research, (1979).
    Quality of Employment Survey, Available Data, Ann Arbor, MI.
