NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSING SUPPLY AND HOUSING BUBBLES
Edward L. Glaeser
Joseph Gyourko
Albert Saiz
Working Paper 14193
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14193

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

We thank Jose Scheinkman, Andrei Shleifer, participants at the University of British Columbia's 2008
Summer Symposium on Urban Economics and Real Estate, the editors and referee for helpful comments
on the paper. Naturally, we remain responsible for any errors. Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center
for State and Local Government for financial support. Gyourko and Saiz thank the Research Sponsor
Program of the Zell/Lurie Real Estate Center for the same. Finally, Andrew Moore provided excellent
research support on the empirical work. Scott Kominers and Matt Resseger provided excellent research
assistance on the theory. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Housing Supply and Housing Bubbles
Edward L. Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, and Albert Saiz
NBER Working Paper No. 14193
July 2008
JEL No. G12,R1,R31
ABSTRACT
Like many other assets, housing prices are quite volatile relative to observable changes in fundamentals.
If we are going to understand boom-bust housing cycles, we must incorporate housing supply. In
this paper, we present a simple model of housing bubbles that predicts that places with more elastic
housing supply have fewer and shorter bubbles, with smaller price increases. However, the welfare
consequences of bubbles may actually be higher in more elastic places because those places will overbuild
more in response to a bubble. The data show that the price run-ups of the 1980s were almost exclusively
experienced in cities where housing supply is more inelastic. More elastic places had slightly larger
increases in building during that period. Over the past five years, a modest number of more elastic
places also experienced large price booms, but as the model suggests, these booms seem to have been
quite short. Prices are already moving back towards construction costs in those areas.

Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
Joseph Gyourko
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1480 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
gyourko@wharton.upenn.edu

Albert Saiz
University of Pennsylvania
Wharton School of Business
3620 Locust Walk
1466 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
saiz@wharton.upenn.edu

Introduction
In the 25 years since Shiller (1981) documented that swings in stock prices were
extremely high relative to changes in dividends, a growing body of papers has suggested that
asset price movements reflect irrational exuberance as well as fundamentals (DeLong et al.,
1990; Barberis et al., 2001). A running theme of these papers is that high transactions costs
and limits on short-selling make it more likely that prices will diverge from fundamentals. In
housing markets, transactions costs are higher and short-selling is more difficult than in almost
any other asset market (e.g., Linneman, 1986; Wallace and Meese, 1994; Rosenthal, 1989).
Thus, we should not be surprised that the predictability of housing price changes (Case and
Shiller, 1989) and seemingly large deviations between housing prices and fundamentals create
few opportunities for arbitrage.
The extraordinary nature of the recent boom in housing markets has piqued interest in
this issue, with some claiming there was a bubble (e.g., Shiller, 2005). While nonlinearities in
the discounting of rents could lead prices to respond sharply to changes in interest rates in
particular in certain markets (Himmelberg et al., 2005), it remains difficult to explain the large
changes in housing prices over time with changes in incomes, amenities or interest rates
(Glaeser and Gyourko, 2006). It certainly is hard to know whether house prices in 1996 were
too low or whether values in 2005 were too high, but it is harder still to explain the rapid rise
and fall of housing prices with a purely rational model.
However, the asset pricing literature long ago showed how difficult it is to confirm the
presence of a bubble (e.g., Flood and Hodrick, 1990). Our focus here is not on developing
such a test, but on examining the nature of bubbles, should they exist, in housing markets.
House price volatility is worthy of careful study in its own right because it does more than just

1

transfer large amounts of wealth between homeowners and buyers. Price volatility also
impacts the construction of new homes (Topel and Rosen, 1988), which involves the use of
real resources that could involve substantial welfare consequences. When housing prices
reflect fundamentals, those prices help migrants make appropriate decisions about where to
live. If prices, instead, reflect the frothiness of irrational exuberance, then those prices may
misdirect the migration decisions that collectively drive urban change.
Most asset bubbles also elicit a supply response, as was the case with the proliferation
of new internet firms in Silicon Valley in the late 1990s. Models of housing price volatility
that ignore supply miss a fundamental part of the housing market. Not only are changes in
housing supply among the more important real consequences of housing price changes, but
housing supply seems likely to help shape the course of any housing bubble. We show this is,
indeed, the case in Section II of this paper, where we develop a simple model to investigate
the interaction between housing bubbles and housing supply.
The model suggests that rational bubbles can exist when the supply of housing is fixed,
but not with elastic supply and a finite number of potential homebuyers. We model irrational,
exogenous bubbles as a temporary increase in optimism about future prices. Like any demand
shock, these bubbles have more of an effect on price and less of an effect on new construction
where housing supply is more inelastic. Even though elastic housing supply mutes the price
impacts of housing bubbles, the social welfare losses of housing bubbles may be higher in
more elastic areas, since there will be more overbuilding during the bubble.
We also endogenize asset bubbles by assuming that home buyers believe that future
price growth will resemble past price growth. Supply inelasticity then becomes a crucial
determinant of the duration of a bubble. When housing supply is elastic, new construction

2

quickly comes on line as prices rise, which causes the bubble to quickly unravel. The model
predicts that building during a bubble causes post-bubble prices to drop below their prebubble levels. The impact of housing supply elasticity on the size of the post-bubble drop is
ambiguous because the more elastic places have more construction during a bubble, but their
bubbles are shorter.
We then examine data on housing prices, new construction and supply elasticity during
periods of price booms and busts. While this empirical analysis is not a test for bubbles, much
of the evidence is consistent with the conclusions of our models. For readers who resolutely
do not believe in bubbles, the empirical results in the paper still provide information on the
nature of housing price volatility across markets with different supply conditions.
In performing the empirical analysis, we distinguish between areas with more or less
housing supply elasticity using a new geographical constraint measure developed by Saiz
(2008). We also investigate differences in price and quantity behavior between the most
recent boom and that which occurred in the 1980s.
During both the 1980s boom and the post-1996 boom, more inelastic places had much
larger increases in prices and much smaller increases in new construction. Indeed, during the
1980s, there basically was no housing price boom in the elastic areas of the country. Prices
stayed close to housing production costs. If anything, the gap in both price and quantity
growth between elastic and inelastic areas was even larger during the post-1996 boom than it
was during the 1980s. However, in the years since 1996, there were a number of highly elastic
places (e.g., Orlando and Phoenix) that had temporary price explosions despite no visible
decline in construction intensity.

3

The fact that highly elastic places had price booms is one of the strange facts about the
recent price explosion. Our model does not suggest that bubbles are impossible in more
elastic areas, but it does imply that they will be quite short, and that is what the data indicate.
While the average boom in inelastic places lasted for more than four years, the average
duration of the boom in more elastic areas was 1.7 years.
Does the housing bust of 1989-1996 offer some guidance for the post-boom years that
are ahead of us? During that period, mean reversion was enormous. For every percentage
point of growth in a city’s housing prices between 1982 and 1989, prices declined by 0.33
percentage points between 1989 and 2006. The level of mean reversion was more severe in
more inelastic places, but on average, elasticity was uncorrelated with either price or quantity
changes during the bust.
Relatively elastic markets such as Orlando and Phoenix have not experienced sharp
increases in prices relative to construction costs in the past, so they have no history of
substantial mean reversion. Yet some insight into their future price paths might be provided
by the fact that for two decades leading up to 2002-2003, prices in their markets (and other
places with elastic supply sides) never varied more than ten to fifteen percent from what we
estimate to be minimum profitable production costs (MPPC), which is the sum of physical
production costs, land and land assembly costs, and a normal profit for the homebuilder.
Those three factors sum to well under $200,000 in these markets. If these markets return to
their historical norm of prices matching these costs, then they will experience further sharp
price declines. We now turn to the model that frames our empirical work.

II.

Housing Bubbles and New Construction: A Simple Framework

4

A small, but growing, financial literature has examined the connection between
bubbles and asset supply by looking at lock-up provisions (Ofek and Richardson, 2003; Hong
et al., 2006). These provisions restrict the ability of asset owners to sell, and when they
expire, there can be a burst in the supply of shares on the market and a significant drop in
prices. In Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong (2006), the number of truly ebullient buyers is
limited, so the extra supply means that the marginal buyer is much more skeptical and prices
fall.1
Apart from this small but important literature, the bulk of the theoretical work on
bubbles written by financial and monetary economists has assumed that the supply of assets is
either fixed or determined by a monetary authority. While this assumption is appropriate for
some markets, it is not for housing markets, where new homes regularly are built in response
to rising prices. In this section, we incorporate housing supply into a simple model of
housing bubbles. In doing so, we treat irrational exuberance essentially as an exogenous
phenomenon, ignoring recent attempts to micro-found overoptimism (Barberis et al., 2001;
Hong et al., 2008). We focus on the extent to which supply mutes or exacerbates housing
bubbles and their welfare impacts.
We assume a continuous time model where a city’s home prices are determined by the
intersection of supply and demand. Demand comes from new homebuyers, whose willingness
to pay for housing is based on the utility gains from living in the city and expected housing
price appreciation. The supply of homes for sale includes new homes produced by developers
and old homes sold by existing homeowners. All homes are physically identical.

1

Shleifer’s (1986) work on whether the demand for stocks slopes down can be interpreted as a similar exercise
showing that extra demand from index funds for a stock causes prices to rise.

5

We differentiate between the stock of housing at time t, which is denoted H (t ) , and the

supply of homes for sale at that time period, which is denoted S (t ) . The supply of homes for
sale at time t combines the flow of new construction, denoted I (t ) , and older homes being put
on the market by their owners. The supply of new homes is determined by developers, and we
assume that the marginal cost of development equals c0 + c1 I (t ) . This linear production cost
reflects the possibility that there are scarce inputs into housing production, so that the cost of
production rises linearly with the amount of production.2 Ideally, we would model the
decision of existing owners to sell as an optimization problem, but this would greatly
complicate the model. To simplify, we assume that each current homeowner receives a
Poisson-distributed shock with probability λ in each period that forces the homeowner to sell,
leave the area and receive zero utility for the rest of time. Homeowners who do not receive
the shock do not put their homes on the market. While convenient, not allowing homeowners
to time their sale abstracts from potentially important aspects of housing bubbles.3 Even
though each individual homeowner’s decision to sell is stochastic, we assume a continuum of
homeowners, so the number of existing homes for sale at time t is deterministic, proportional
to the existing stock of homes and equal to λH (t ) .
For the housing market to be in equilibrium, price (denoted P(t ) ) must equal
construction costs whenever there is new construction. The level of new homes for sale at
time t therefore equals the maximum of zero and (P(t ) − c0 ) / c1 .
Ours is an open city model in which demand comes from a steady flow of new buyers
who are interested in moving into the city. At every point in time, there is a distribution of
2

We could also assume that production costs rise with the stock of housing in the area, but this only adds
unnecessary complications.
3
However, Glaeser and Gyourko (2008) conclude the risk aversion limits the ability of consumers to arbitrage
prices by delaying the sales of their homes.

6

risk-neutral buyers who are willing to purchase a home in the city if the expected utility gain
from living in the city plus the expected returns when they sell exceeds the price of the house.
Consumers have no option to delay purchase; they either buy at time t or live outside of the
city for eternity. We normalize the utility flow outside of the city to equal zero. Inside the
city, individual i receives a time-invariant flow of utility denominated in dollars equal to u (i ) ,
until that person receives a shock that forces them to sell.
We further assume that, at all points of time, there is a distribution of u (i ) among a
fixed number of potential buyers. Some people greatly benefit from living in the city, while
others gain less.4 Across buyers, the utility from living in the city, u (i) , is distributed
uniformly with density

1
on the interval [u, v0 ] . At any point in time, there is a marginal
v1

buyer. Individuals whose utility flow from living in the city is greater than that of the
marginal buyer will purchase a home, while individuals whose utility flow from living in the
city is less than the marginal buyer will not. If the utility flow from the marginal buyer at time
t is denoted u * (t ) , then the number of buyers will equal

v0 − u * (t )
. This represents the level
v1

of demand, D(t). Alternatively, we can invert the equation and write that the utility flow to
the marginal buyer equals v0 − v1 D(t ) .
While the utility from living in the area is time invariant, buyers do recognize that at
each future date they will sell their homes with probability λ and then receive the sales price of
the house. Individuals who bought at time t understand that with probability 1 − e − λj they will

4

In the financial economics literature, it is less natural to assume that there is a heterogeneous demand for an
asset. Instead, heterogeneity is more likely to come from differences in beliefs among investers (Hong et al.,
2006).

7

have sold their house and left the city by time t+j . This forward-looking aspect of the model
means that the current willingness-to-pay for housing will reflect expectations of future prices.
We assume that an individual making decisions at time t discounts future cash or utility
flows at time t+j with a standard discount factor e − rj , where r is the interest rate. The expected
utility flow from someone who receives utility u (i ) from living in the city is then given by
∞
u (i )
+ λEt ⎛⎜ ∫ e −( r +λ )( x −t ) P( x)dx ⎞⎟ − P(t ) , where Et (.) reflects expectations as of time t. If
⎠
⎝ x =t
r+λ

there is construction, the overall equilibrium in the housing market at time t satisfies:
(1)

∞
v0 − v1 D(t )
+ λEt ⎛⎜ ∫ e −( r + λ )( x −t ) P( x)dx ⎞⎟ = P(t ) = c0 + c1 ( S (t ) − λH (t )) ,
⎝ x =t
⎠
r+λ

where D(t ) = S (t ) . Equation (1) represents a system of two equations (the consumer’s and
developer’s indifference relations) and two unknowns (P(t) and D(t)). This system can be
solved as a function of the current stock of housing H(t) and expected future prices.
Rational, self-sustaining bubbles can satisfy the demand equation if there is no
building. For example, if D(t) equals a constant, D, and there is no construction, then the first
half of equation (1) will be satisfied at all t, if P(t) equals

v0 − v1 D
+ ke rt , where k represents
r

an indeterminate constant of integration. The component ke rt represents a “rational” bubble,
where continuously rising prices justify continuously rising prices. When supply is fixed,
stochastic bubbles are also possible.5
While rational bubbles are compatible with a fixed housing supply, they cannot exist
with elastic housing supply and a finite number of potential homebuyers:
5

There could be a bubble that ends with probability δ at each point in time, which survives with probability

for each period t+j, where prices equal

e −δj

v −v D
v0 − v1 D
+ ke ( r +δ ) t during the bubble and then fall to 0 1 after
r
r

the bubble ends.

8

Proposition 1: If housing supply is elastic and the mass of potential buyers at each time t is
finite, then there is no equilibrium where at any time t, P (t + j ) > c0 + ε , for all positive j and
for any finite ε . (All proofs are in the appendix).
Perpetually rising prices means a perpetually rising housing supply, which eventually
means there are more homes being offered than there are potential customers in the market.
The result in the proposition hinges on our assumption of linear production costs, which
implies that there is no cap on the number of homes that could be produced. However, we do
not need such an elastic supply of housing to rule out rational bubbles. Rational bubbles
cannot exist if the supply of housing, given high enough prices, is greater than the maximum
possible number of buyers. Hence, we will turn our attention to irrational bubbles, but before
doing so, we discuss the equilibrium without irrationality.
In a perfectly rational world where supply rules out rational bubbles, the value of H(t)
determines whether the city is growing or stagnant. If H (t ) ≥

constant at

If H (t ) <

v0 − rc 0
, then prices will be
v1λ

v0 − v1λH (t )
, which is less than c0 , and there will be no construction.
r

v0 − rc0
, then construction will equal
v1λ

γ = .25r 2 +

⎞
⎛ v0 − rc0
− H (t ) ⎟⎟e −γj at each date t+j, where
⎠
⎝ v1λ

γ ⎜⎜

v − rc0
λ (r + λ )v1
so that the
− .5r .6 Hereafter, we assume that H (t ) < 0
v1λ
(r + λ )c1 + v1

⎛ a + v 0 − rc 0 ⎞
⎟⎟ , and the amount of housing
H (t ) + (1 − e −γj )⎜⎜ 0
v1λ
⎠
⎝
⎛ a + v0 − rc 0
⎞
a + v0 − rc0
on sale at any point in time is given by 0
− (λ − γ )e −γj ⎜⎜ 0
− H (t ) ⎟⎟ .
v1
v1λ
⎝
⎠

6

The total housing stock, H(t+j) will equal e

−γj

9

city is growing. At time t, the expected price at time t+j will equal
⎛ a + v0 − rc0
⎞
c0 + c1γ ⎜⎜ 0
− H (t ) ⎟⎟e −γj , and we define this as PR ,t (t + j ) .
v1λ
⎝
⎠

Irrational Bubbles
We now turn to less rational bubbles. We model such bubbles as a temporary burst of
irrational exuberance by buyers about future prices. We do not require that everyone share
this overoptimism, since there is no way of selling housing short in the model. Development
occurs instantaneously and reflects current, rather than future, prices so we can remain
agnostic about whether developers perceive the bubble in progress. The bubble acts much like
any other short-run increase to demand. Prices and construction levels temporarily rise and
then fall below equilibrium levels because of the extra housing built during the boom.
We begin by assuming that irrational bubbles represent a completely exogenous burst
of overoptimism about future prices that will last for a fixed period of time. Buyers do not
know that they are being influenced by a bubble. Equation (1) continues to hold, as long as
Et (.) is interpreted not as the rational expectation of future prices, but rather the bubbleinfluenced expectation.
One method of introducing a bubble is to assume that buyers take today’s prices and
just have some optimistic rule of thumb about the future. We will investigate a model of this
form in the next section. In this section, we treat bubbles as an exogenous overestimate of
prices relative to the rational expectations equilibrium. Under some circumstances, this
exogenous overestimate might be justified by overoptimistic extrapolation, but that will not
generally be the case.

10

If PR ,t (t + j ) represents the correct expectation of future prices in the rational
expectations equilibrium, then during the bubble people believe that future prices will equal
PR ,t (t + j ) plus some added quantity. Technically, we assume that during a bubble people
overestimate the total value of
equilibrium, by

∫

∞

x =t

e −( r + λ )( x −t ) P ( x)dx , relative to the rational expectations

θ (t)
. For example, this would be satisfied if people believe future prices
r+λ

will equal PR ,t (t + j ) +

r + λ −φ
θ (t )eφj , but this is only one of many possibilities. The exact
r+λ

nature of buyers’ beliefs is not critical for our purpose, as long as they believe that

∫

∞

x =t

e −( r + λ )( x −t ) P ( x)dx equals

∫

∞

x =t

e −( r +λ )( x −t ) PR ,t ( x)dx +

θ (t )
.
r+λ

This error about future prices will then impact prices at time t, but the extent of this
influence depends on the elasticity of supply. If there were no supply response, then overoptimism will raise prices by λ times

θ (t)
. As mobility ( λ ) increases, the impact of
r+λ

incorrect future beliefs rises because more mobility causes people to care more about the
future. Allowing a construction response will mute the price impact of overoptimism because
added supply means that the marginal buyer has a lower utility benefit from living in the city.
In a growing city that experiences a bubble, prices at time t will equal the rational expectations
⎞
⎛ a + v0 − rc0
λc1θ (t )
price, c0 + c1γ ⎜⎜ 0
. The price impact of the bubble
− H (t ) ⎟⎟ , plus
(r + λ )c1 + v1
v1λ
⎠
⎝

increases with mobility and the inelasticity of supply ( c1 ), and decreases with the
heterogeneity of preferences ( v1 ).

11

Our next two propositions consider the impact of an exogenous bubble where θ (t ) = θ
for the period t to t+k and then equals zero thereafter. Proposition 2 describes the general
impact of the bubble on prices, investment and the housing stock. Proposition 3 examines the
interaction between the bubble and housing supply elasticity. Recall that we assume
H (t ) <

v0 − rc0
, so the city is growing:
v1λ

Proposition 2: During the bubble, an increase in θ causes prices, investment and the
housing stock to increase. The impact on prices and investment becomes weaker over the
course of the bubble, but the impact on the housing stock increases over the course of the
bubble. When the bubble is over, higher values of θ decrease housing prices and investment,
and increase the housing stock.
During the period of the bubble (or any demand boost), there is a surge in prices and
new housing construction. Since the bubble’s magnitude is fixed during its duration, the price
and development impact of the bubble actually declines over time as new housing is built, but
this implication will disappear below when we assume that beliefs are fueled by the
experience of price growth.
When the bubble ends, housing prices fall below what they would have been if the
bubble had not happened. The price crash represents both the end of the overoptimism and the
extra supply that was built during the high price bubble period. The extra supply of housing
results in lower prices and construction levels ex post. Unsurprisingly, longer bubbles have a
larger impact. Our primary interest, however, is in the interaction between the bubble and
housing supply, which is the subject of Proposition 3:
Proposition 3: (a) During a bubble, higher values of c1 -- a more inelastic housing supply-will increase the impact of θ on prices. Higher values of c1 will decrease the impact that θ
has on total housing investment during the boom.

12

(b) After the bubble is over, higher values of c1 will reduce the adverse impact that
the bubble has on price levels when c1 is sufficiently high, and will increase the impact that the
bubble has on prices when c1 is sufficiently low. If the bubble is sufficiently long, then
higher values of c1 increase the negative impact that the bubble has on price levels once it has
burst.
Part (a) of Proposition 3 details the impact that more inelastic housing supply
(reflected in higher values of c1 ) has on the bubble during its duration. When housing supply
is more inelastic, the bubble will have a larger impact on price and a smaller impact on the
housing stock. The impact of c1 on the flow of investment depends on the stage of the bubble.
Early in the bubble, places with more elastic housing supply will see more new construction in
response to the bubble. Over time, however, the housing investment response to the bubble
will actually be lower in places where supply is more elastic because there has already been so
much new building in those markets.
The interaction between an exogenous bubble and supply inelasticity is quite similar to
the connection between elasticity and any exogenous shift in demand. During the time the
bubble is raging, more inelastic places will have a larger shift in prices and will also
experience a sharper reduction in prices when the bubble ends. More elastic places will have a
larger increase in new construction, at least during the early stages of the bubble, and will
always experience a larger increase in total housing stock from the bubble.7
Part (b) of the proposition discusses the impact of housing elasticity on prices when the
bubble is over. The post-bubble impact on prices can either be larger or smaller in places with
more inelastic housing supply because there are two effects that go in opposite directions.
7

One of the counter-factual elements in this model is that prices and investment drop suddenly at the end of the
bubble rather than declining gradually, as they generally do in the real world. The price drop at the end of the
bubble will be larger in more inelastic places with higher values of c1 . Higher values of c1 moderate the decline
in new construction at the moment when the bubble ends.

13

First, places with more elastic housing build more homes in response to the bubble. These
extra homes act to reduce price levels when the bubble is over. Second, the impact of extra
homes on prices will be lower in places where housing supply is more elastic. Either effect
can dominate, so it is unclear whether the price hangover from a housing bubble is more
severe in places where supply is more or less elastic.
Just as more elastic housing supply can either increase or decrease the impact of the
bubble on ex post prices, more elastic housing supply can either increase or decrease the
welfare consequences of a bubble. Abstracting from the impacts that bubbles might have on
savings decisions or on risk averse consumers, the inefficiency of a housing bubble comes
from the misallocation of real resources—that is, the overbuilding of an area. This
overbuilding will be more severe in places where housing supply is more elastic.
We can calculate the expected welfare loss for a bubble that occurs only at period t, so
that buyers during that time period overestimate future prices, but no one after them makes
that same mistake. In that case, the number of people who buy housing at period t equals
⎞
⎛ a0 + v0 − rc0
λθ (t )
, which equals the share of people who would
− H (t ) ⎟⎟ +
v1λ
⎠ (r + λ )c1 + v1
⎝

λH (t ) + γ ⎜⎜

have bought housing absent the bubble plus

λθ (t )
. The total welfare loss is found by
(r + λ )c1 + v1

adding consumer welfare for the consumers who bought during that time period minus
development costs, or −

λ2θ (t ) 2
. This is decreasing in c1 . More inelastic markets will
(r + λ )c1 + v1

have bigger price swings in response to a bubble, but the welfare losses will be smaller, since
there is less of a construction and mobility response.

14

The parallel of this in the real world is that if there is a housing bubble in a very
inelastic market such as greater Boston, prices may swing a lot, but there will be little change
in migration or construction patterns. If there is a housing bubble in a more elastic area such
as Phoenix and Orlando, then many thousands of extra homes will be built and many people
will make migration mistakes.

Self-Reinforcing Bubbles and Adaptive Expectations
The conclusion that greater resource misallocation results from overbuilding in more
elastic places assumes that the magnitude of the bubble is independent of housing elasticity.
However, if bubbles are endogenous and sustained by rising prices, then more inelastic places
might have bigger and longer bubbles, because rising demand is more likely to translate into
rising prices in those markets. To examine this possibility, we assume that bubbles take the
form of an irrational belief that prices will continue to rise at a fixed rate for all eternity.
We continue to work with our continuous time model, but we now assume that
individuals update their beliefs only at discrete intervals. For example, if the bubble begins at
time period t, then between period t and period t+1, individuals have exogenously come to the
view that future prices will increases perpetually so that buyers believe that P (t + j ) will equal

P(t ) + ε • j for all j. While this hybrid discrete-continuous time set-up is somewhat unusual,
it is inspired by a financial econometrics literature examining settings where researchers only
observe a continuous time process at discrete intervals (Hansen and Scheinkman, 1995).
At time period t+1, individuals update their beliefs and base them on price growth
between period t and t+1. Between time periods t+1 and t+2, people extrapolate from price
growth between period t and t+1 and believe that P (t + j ) will equal

15

P (t + 1) + ( P (t + 2) − P(t + 1)) • ( j − 1) for all j. At every subsequent period t+x, where x is an
integer, updating again occurs. As long as prices continue to rise between period t+x and
t+x+1, buyers believe that future prices, P (t + j ) , will equal
P (t + x) + ( P(t + x) − P(t + x − 1) • ( j − x) .8 The future growth in price is assumed to equal
the growth rate during the period between the last two integer time periods. We let g(t) denote
the expected future growth rate at time t.
As soon as price declines for one period, beliefs revert to rationality and the
equilibrium returns to the rational expectations equilibrium with, of course, an extra supply of
housing. If prices grow by less than they did the period before, prices will start to fall, and we
will refer to this as the end of the bubble.
We will normalize the date of the start of the bubble to be zero and assume that the city
has reached its long-run stable population level at that point, so that H (0) =

v0 − rc 0
and
v1λ

P (0) = c0 . Because more housing will be built with the boom, if the irrational expectations
disappear, the long-run steady state is that new construction will then end forever and H(t) will
remain at its highest level at the peak of the boom. Prices will then satisfy
P (t ) =

v0 − v1λH (t )
for the rest of time. We let H I (t ) = H (t ) − H (0) denote the incremental
r

housing built during the boom, so that P (t ) = c 0 −

v1λH I (t )
after the bubble ends. New
r

housing built during the boom has a permanent, negative impact on prices after the boom is
over, since this city begins at steady-state population levels, but the impact of the amount of
housing built is independent of housing supply elasticity in the area.
8

See Mayer and Sinai (2007) for a recent examination of the possible role of adaptive expectations in the recent
boom.

16

The demand side of the model is captured by the equation:
(1’) P (t ) =

∞
v − v D(t )
v0 − v1 D(t )
λg (t )
,
+ λEt ⎛⎜ ∫ e −( r +λ )( x −t ) ( P (t ) + g (t ) • ( x − t ))dj ⎞⎟ = 0 1
+
⎝ x =t
⎠
r+λ
r
r (r + λ )

which must hold throughout the bubble. The supply side continues to satisfy
c0 + c1 I (t ) = P(t ) , which implies that I (t ) = λg (t ) /(r + λ ) − λv1 H I (t ) . Including the supply
rc1 + v1

response into the pricing equation implies that P(t ) = c 0 +

λc1

⎛ g (t )
⎞
− v1 H I (t ) ⎟ .
⎜
rc1 + v1 ⎝ r + λ
⎠

Unsurprisingly, supply mutes the price response to optimistic beliefs.
During the first period, individuals believe that g (t ) = ε . In the second period, g (t )
reflects the price growth during the first period. In the third period, g (t ) reflects the price
growth during the second period. For the bubble to continue, not only must prices rises, but
they must rise at an increasing rate. Without ever-increasing optimism, new construction
would cause prices to fall. Yet, the ever-rising prices that are needed to fuel increasingly
optimistic beliefs are only possible if housing supply is sufficiently inelastic and if people are
sufficiently patient:
2
Proposition 4: If λ < r , then no bubble can persist beyond the first time period. If

1− r

2

r
, then at time one, there exists a c1 , denoted c1* , where an initial bubble will persist if
1− r
2
and only if c1 > c1* . If λ < 2r , then no bubble can persist beyond the second time period, but
1− r
2
if λ > 2r , then there exists a second value of c1 , denoted c1** which is greater than c1* , where
1− r

λ>

an initial bubble can persist if and only if c1 > c1** .
Proposition 4 shows the connection between housing inelasticity and endogenous
bubbles. If housing supply is sufficiently elastic, then a temporary burst of irrational
exuberance will be met with an abundant supply of new housing, which will in turn ensure
17

that housing price gains are less than those expected by the optimistic buyers. The failure of
reality to match expectations will quickly cause the bubble to pop. However, if housing
supply is inelastic, then prices will increase by more and these early, observed price increases
cause the bubble to persist, because we have assumed adaptive expectations.
The degree of inelasticity needed for the bubble to survive increases over time, so that
only places with extremely inelastic housing supplies can have long-lasting bubbles. These
effects mute the implication of the last section that housing bubbles will cause greater welfare
losses through overbuilding in more elastic areas since the construction response to
overoptimism is more severe. The adaptive expectations model essentially endogenizes the
degree of overoptimism (after the initial perturbation) and finds that self-sustaining
overoptimism is more likely in inelastic areas. This means that the overall social costs of
bubbles may well be larger in places where housing is more inelastically supplied. The
connection between inelasticity and the housing produced by a bubble is explored in
Proposition 5:
Proposition 5: If c1 < c1* , so that the bubble lasts exactly one period, then the amount of
excess housing built over the course of the bubble will be decreasing mononotically with c1 ,
and the price loss at the end of the bubble is monotonically increasing with c1 . If
c1* < c1 < c1** , so that the bubble lasts exactly two periods, then housing built during the bubble
and the price drop at the end of the bubble may either rise or fall with c1 .
The first part of Proposition 5 shows that if the bubble lasts exactly one period, then
places with more inelastic housing supply will have less housing built during the bubble. This
corresponds to the results of the last section, since a one-period bubble is essentially a wholly
exogenous bubble. In the case of a one-period bubble, the price drop at the end of the bubble
will also be higher in more inelastic areas, just as we found in the previous section.
18

The second result in the proposition shows that any clear implications disappear when
the bubble last for two periods. In that case, the degree of overoptimism in the second period
will be increasing with housing supply inelasticity since the price increase during the first
period is also increasing with inelasticity.
The core inequality that determines whether new construction rises with inelasticity is
2 λv
λv1
−
⎛
λc1 ⎞⎛⎜ − rc1 + v11 ⎞⎟
rc1 + v1
⎟ 2e
.
(2) r ⎜⎜ r + λ +
−1 > 1− e
⎟
(rc1 + v1 ) ⎟⎠⎜⎝
⎝
⎠

This obviously fails when r is sufficiently small. When v1 is sufficiently small, the inequality
must hold. More inelastic housing actually leads to more new construction over the course of
the bubble in this case because more inelastic housing in the first period causes the price
appreciation during that period to be higher, which in turn pushes up new construction during
the second period. This finding depends on our adaptive expectations assumption. We intend
this result to be interpreted as showing only the possibility that inelasticity can increase
housing supply, not to claim generality for it.
The ambiguous effect of supply inelasticity on new construction is mirrored in the
ambiguous effect of supply inelasticity on price declines at the end of one period. More
inelastic housing supply means higher prices during the second period of the bubble, but it
also means less new housing supply. These effects work in opposite direction in their impact
on the price drop after the bubble, so the overall impact of inelasticity on price declines is
ambiguous.
In sum, the model has two clear empirical predictions and is ambiguous on a number
of other points. During a bubble, price increases will be larger in more inelastic areas, and
bubbles will be shorter and rarer in more elastic areas. The implications about construction

19

inelasticity and housing production during the bubble are ambiguous, because more inelastic
places have bigger bubbles but smaller construction responses during the bubble. The impact
of elasticity on welfare and on price and post-bubble price and investment declines also are
ambiguous.

III.

Housing Market Data and Empirical Analysis

Our empirical work is meant to examine the implications that the model has about the
interaction between overoptimism and housing supply. However, in no sense do we attempt to
test for the existence of bubbles or any other form of market irrationality. We begin with a
description of our data and follow with an examination of how markets behaved across
metropolitan areas facing different degrees of constraints to supply. We also study three
distinct periods of time, which are defined by the peaks and troughs in national price data.

Data Description and Summary Statistics
The Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO) indices of metropolitan
area-level prices are the foundation of the home price data we use.9 To create price levels, we
begin by computing the price of the typical home as the weighted average of the median house
value from the 2000 census across each county in the metropolitan area, where the weights are
the proportion of households in the county. That value is then scaled by the relevant change in
the OFHEO index over time. This then proxies for the price over time of the median quality
home in 2000 in each market. All prices are in constant 2007 dollars, unless explicitly noted.

9

The OFHEO series can be downloaded at the following URL: http://www.ofheo.gov/hpi_download.aspx.

20

Housing permits serve as our measure of new quantity. Permits are available at the
county level from the U.S. Bureau of the Census.10 We aggregate across counties to create
metropolitan area-level aggregates using 2003 definitions provided by the census.
While the price and quantity series are available on a quarterly basis, we use annual
data because our focus is on patterns over a cycle, not on higher frequency, seasonal effects.
Annual data arguably are less noisy, too. Moreover, when we want to compare prices to costs,
we must use construction cost data that is only available annually. All construction cost data
are from the R.S. Means Company (2008). We use their series for a modest quality, single
family home that meets all building code requirements in each area.11
These construction cost data only capture the cost of putting up the improvements.
The total price of a home also should reflect land and land assembly costs, plus a profit for the
builder. What we term the minimum profitable production cost (MPPC) in each metropolitan
area is computed as the sum of the following three components: (a) physical construction
costs (CC), which represent the cost of putting up the improvements; (b) land and land
assembly costs; and (c) the gross margin needed to provide normal profits for the
homebuilder entrepreneur.
We calculate constructions costs, using the R.S. Means data for an 1,800ft2 economyquality home. Land costs are much less readily available, as there is very little data on
residential land sales. Hence, we assume that these costs amount to one-fifth of the total value
of the house (land plus improvements). This assumption seems likely to be conservative in the
sense that true land costs probably are lower in many of the Sunbelt markets and exurbs, but it

10

Permit data are available at the following URL: http://censtats.census.gov/bldg/bldgprmt.shtml.
This series is for an ‘economy’ quality home. It is the most modest of four different qualities of homes whose
construction costs the R.S. Means Company tracks over time. We have used these data in previous work.
Glaeser and Gyourko (2003, 2005) report more detail on this series.

11

21

certainly understates land value in many urban cores and in the constrained markets on both
coasts. We assume that the typical gross profit margin for a homebuilder is 17%, as this yields
net profits of 9%-11%, depending upon the overhead structure of the firm. Thus, minimum
profitable production cost (MPPC) is computed as MPPC = [(Construction Cost per Square
Foot*1,800)/0.8]*1.17.12
Our primary measure of supply side conditions is taken from Saiz (2008). Using GIS
software and satellite imagery, Saiz (2008) measured the slope and elevation of every 90
square meter parcel of land within 50 kilometers of the centroid of each metropolitan area.
Because it is very difficult to build on land with a slope of 15 degrees or more, we use the
share of land within the 50 kilometer radius area that has a slope of less than 15 degrees as our
proxy for elasticity conditions. Saiz (2008) first determines the area lost to oceans, the Gulf of
Mexico, and the Great Lakes using data from the United States Geographic Service (USGS).
Land area lost to rivers and lakes is not excluded in these calculations. The USGS’ Digital
Elevation Model then is used to determine the fraction of the remaining land area that is less
steeply sloped than 15 degrees. This measure of buildable land is based solely on the physical
geography of each metropolitan area, and so is independent of market conditions.13
Given the literature on endogenous zoning, the more plausibly exogenous nature of
Saiz’s physical constraint measure leads us to favor it over the other primary supply-side
proxy we experimented with, the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index (WRLURI)

12

The greatest measurement error in this rough estimate of the minimum cost at which housing could be
produced almost certainly arises from our underlying land value assumption. Data on residential land prices
across markets is very scarce in the cross section and is unavailable over time. Our assumption is based on a rule
of thumb used in the building industry, but conditions do vary substantially across markets as noted just above,
and they also could have over time. We discuss this issue more below when this variable is used in our empirical
analysis.
13
The use of geography in this context follows in the tradition of Hoxby (2000). In the urban field, see also
Duranton, et. al. (2008), Holmes and Lee (2008) and Strange and Rosenthal (2008).

22

from Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008).14 This is a measure of the strictness of the local
regulatory environment based on results from a 2005 survey of over 2,000 localities across the
country. It was created as an index using factor analysis and is standardized to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of one, with a higher value of the index connoting a more
restrictive regulatory environment. While we prefer the geographic constraint for our
purposes, the two variables are highly (negatively) correlated, so that a city with a smaller
share of developable land tends to have a higher Wharton index value.15
We work with annual house price and quantity data from 1982-2007, with 1982 being
the first year we are able to reliably match series across our metropolitan areas. Table 1
reports recent values on these variables. The first column provides 2007 prices of the median
quality home (as of 2000) in each metropolitan area. As expected, there is a wide range of
price conditions across markets. The mean value is $234,168, with a relatively large standard
deviation of $141,822. The price at the top of the interquartile range is double that at the
bottom ($275,101 versus $134,276), but even that does not capture the extreme values in the
tails. The metropolitan area in the 10th percentile of the distribution had a home price of
$116,205 versus $447,962 for the area in the 90th percentile. The minimum price is $103,013,
and the maximum price is $721,694.

14

The literature on whether zoning is endogenous is a lengthy one. See McDonald and McMillan (1991) and
Wallace (1988) for two early influential pieces on this topic.
15
The simple correlation between the index and the geographic constraint variables across the 78 metropolitan
areas for which we have at least one community response to the Wharton survey is -0.40. For metropolitan areas
with multiple communities responding to the survey, we use the mean index value across those communities
when computing this correlation. Given the strong correlation, it is not very surprising that our regression results
reported below are qualitatively similar whether we use the geography- or regulation-based variable below. [The
signs are reversed, of course.] Those results are available upon request, and the underlying micro data from the
Wharton survey can be accessed at
http://real.wharton.upenn.edu/~gyourko/Wharton_residential_land_use_reg.htm.. We also examined data from
Saks (2008), which created another index of supply-side restrictiveness based on other previous research mostly
surveys. Her series also is strongly correlated with Saiz (2008) and Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008), but it
covers many fewer metropolitan areas (about 40).

23

Minimum profitable production costs, also as of 2007, are reported in the second
column of Table 1. There are only five metropolitan areas for which this value exceeds
$200,000, and the maximum value is only $224,641.16 The mean is $166,386 and the standard
deviation is a relatively small $20,032, so production costs do not vary across areas nearly as
much as prices do. Obviously, there are many markets in which prices are far above our
calculated MPPC values.
Figure 1 illustrates some of the time series variation in these data in its plot of the
average ratio of price-to-MPPC across the 79 metropolitan areas in our sample. This plot
indicates that the prices were significantly below our estimate of minimum profitable
production costs for much of the 1980s. Indeed, it was only during the recent boom that
average prices rose above construction costs.
Because the OFHEO-based repeat sales index measures appreciation on existing
homes that sell, while our estimate of production costs is for a new house, the comparison is of
prices on older homes with the costs of new product. Hence, it is not so surprising to see prices
below our estimate of MPPC. While this bias is unavoidable in any comparison of new home
costs to those based on repeat sales indexes, it does suggest that any positive gap between
prices and production costs is a conservative measure of that difference. That a large gap
clearly developed between 1996-2005 suggests that the recent boom may have been different
in certain respects.17

16

The New York metropolitan area has the highest construction costs. The four other areas with costs above
$200,000 are in the Boston and San Francisco Bay areas.
17
Obviously, we can mechanically have the price-to-cost ratio be near one in the early 1980s if we were to
assume that land constituted a lesser than 20 percent share of overall property value. But, as just noted, there is
no reason to believe that this ratio could not ever be less than one. Our focus here is on the time series pattern,
and we do not believe there is any reasonable chance the upward slope could be explained by errors in our
underlying assumptions for the MPPC.

24

With respect to the supply side, there is considerable dispersion in Saiz’s series on the
fraction of developable land area. The sample mean for this variable is 81.6%, with a standard
deviation of 19.8%. The 10th percentile value is only 51%, compared to a 90th percentile value
of 100% developable land. The most physically constrained metropolitan area is OxnardThousand Oaks-Ventura (20.7% developable land), while 13 markets are completely
unconstrained by this measure (e.g., Dayton, OH, and Wichita, KS, which are off the coasts
and have no steeply sloped land parcels within 50 kilometers of their centroids).
To gain initial insight into how house prices and quantities vary with supply elasticity
conditions over our full sample period, we estimated specifications (3) and (4) below, which
allow us to see whether national price and quantity cycles generate differential local impacts
depending upon local supply elasticity conditions. After controlling for metropolitan area and
time (year) fixed effects in the price and quantity specifications, the local effects can be seen
in the coefficients on the interaction of the developable land share variable in each market
(DevShri) with the (log) average annual national house price across the 79 areas in our sample
(PriceUS,t). Specifically, we estimate
(3) log Pricei,t = α + β*Yeart + γ*MSAi + δ*(DevShri*Log[PriceUS,t]) + εi,t
(4) log Permitsi,t = α’ + β’*Yeart + γ’*MSAi + δ’*(DevShri*Log[PriceUS,t]) + ε’i,t ,
where i indexes the metropolitan areas, t represents each year from 1982-2007, and ε is the
standard error term.
The coefficients δ and δ’ indicate how price and quantity vary with the degree of
supply side elasticity, controlling for the state of the cycle (with average prices), as well as
general year and market effects. The results from equation (3) yield a negative value for δ (of

25

-0.0228; std. err. = 0.0009), which implies that prices move much less over the national cycle
in more elastic markets. The results from equation (4) yield δ’=0.0124 (std. err. = 0.0028),
indicating that permits move much more over the national cycle in more elastic places.18
These basic results both suggest that our geographic constraint variable is proxying for supply
side conditions as we had intended and that price and quantity responses vary as our model
predicts. We now turn from these summary statistics to analyses of specific boom and bust
periods in the housing market.

IV.

The 1982-1996 Cycle

The bulk of variation in housing prices is local, not national, but there still are periods
when there is enough co-movement across areas that there are recognizable national housing
cycles. Between 1982 and 1989, three-quarters of our metropolitan areas had nominal price
growth greater than 21% over the eight year period. Inflation was relatively high during the
1980s, but real appreciation throughout the sample still averaged 14.6% over this time span.
As Figure 2 shows, 1989 was the peak of average housing prices in our sample
between 1982 and 1996, so it is the natural peak of a housing cycle. Averaged across all of
our markets, prices only started to rise consistently again in 1997, so we will define the 19891996 period as the housing bust on the other side of this cycle. Over this latter time period,
half of our markets (40 out of 79) experienced real price declines, although barely 10 percent
(10 out of 79) experienced nominal price drops. Table 2 reports more detail on the
distribution of real and nominal price growth over time.19

18

Each specification is estimated using 2,212 observations (79 metro areas over 28 year). For the price equation,
the R2=0.91; for the quantity equation, the R2=0.85.
19
Even over this national boom-bust cycle, the bulk of year-to-year variation in price changes was local. For
example, if we regress annual percentage real price growth in each market on year dummies, we find that those

26

Accompanying the boom and bust of housing prices is an analogous change in housing
production. Figure 3 depicts the movement in new residential permits issue over time. The
plot is of the yearly sum of all housing permits issued in our 79 market sample. This quantity
series shows the same basic rise, decline and rise as the price series, although permits seem to
peak and trough earlier than prices. Perhaps this is because builders are able forecast price
changes, but that is an issue for future research.
Was the boom-bust cycle in housing prices a bubble or a response to fundamentals?
The national economy was doing reasonably well in the mid- to late 1980s, and interest rates
and inflation had fallen from their dramatic heights during the early 1980s. While there were
observers in the 1980s who called the price gains a bubble, the fact that real conditions were
changing dramatically made any such claims highly debatable. The best case for a bubble, at
least in some markets, was that prices fell so dramatically over a short period of time after the
boom without any obviously comparable changes in fundamentals.
For example, real prices in the Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale metropolitan area
rose by 67 percent between 1984 and 1989. Over the next five years, real values then declined
33 percent. We understand those who find it hard to look at Los Angeles’ prices in both 1989
and 1994 and to think that these dramatic changes in prices were actually driven by changes in
real features of southern California.20 In retrospect, it is just as possible to take the view that
1994 was unduly pessimistic as it is to take the view that 1989 was unduly optimistic. In
either case, something seems to have been amiss with standard rational pricing models, as
discussed in the Introduction.
dummies explain only 14% of the variation in housing price appreciation. Still, this implies there is a meaningful
amount of national variation, possibly driven by changes in interest rates, the national economy, demographics
and perhaps even nationwide beliefs about the future of the housing market.
20
See Case (1994) and Case and Mayer (1995) for early investigations into this issue for the Los Angeles and
Boston markets.

27

While one cannot know for sure whether there was a bubble during this time period (in
at least some markets), we can determine whether the data are consistent with the key
implications of the theory presented above. One of the key predictions of our models is that
markets with highly elastic supply sides are much less likely to have ‘bubbles’. We will
examine this implication first by comparing the price gains over the 1982-1989 period in
elastic and inelastic cities. Dividing the sample in two at the median value for the share of
developable land based on geographic constraints (which is 88%) finds a large difference in
real price appreciation between the less versus more elastic areas. On average, the relatively
inelastic markets appreciated nearly five times more in real terms (23.2% versus 5.0%) than
the relatively elastic markets over this period.
Regressing each metropolitan area’s price appreciation on our supply side proxy finds
a statistically and economically significant relationship in which a more elastic supply side is
associated with materially lower real price growth during this boom. These results are
presented in column one of Table 3. The coefficient value of -0.67 (std. err. = 0.17) implies
that a one standard deviation change in the share of developable land (which equals 20
percentage points and corresponds to a move from the 25th to 50th or the 50th to 75th percentiles
of the distribution for this variable) is associated with about a 13 percentage point reduction in
real appreciation during this time period. This finding is consistent with the model’s
implication that more inelastic places will have bigger price changes during bubbles, but it is
also compatible with the view that the rise in prices in the 1980s was driven by fundamentals.
Inelasticity should produce bigger price increases, whether the inelasticity is driven by rational
or irrational forces.

28

Perhaps the biggest challenge to the implication of this simple bivariate regression is
that it reflects demand-side rather than supply-side differences across markets. To investigate
this further, we include different measures of housing demand as controls. Two amenity
variables—warmth (mean January temperature) and dryness (mean annual precipitation)—
were used. While these particular variables don’t change over time, demand for them might
have, so they provide a natural way of controlling for changes in demand. We also explored a
variety of economic variables including the share of the population with college degrees in
1980, the level of real income in 1980 as measured by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and
the growth in that income (between 1982 and 1989 for this particular regression). The initial
level of educational achievement and 1980 income are static, of course, and should only
matter if they are correlated with changes in local economies over the 1980s. Change in BEA
real income gives us a measure of income growth.
Column 2 of Table 3 reports coefficient estimates on our supply side proxy based on a
specification that includes these demand controls. The coefficient falls to -0.52 (std. err. =
0.17), but remains statistically significant.21 There was much heterogeneity in house price
growth across markets during the 1980s boom. Supply side conditions certainly do not
explain all that cross sectional variation, but they can account for a significant fraction.
Essentially, a one standard deviation change in the degree of supply-side constraint is
associated with a 0.3 standard deviation change in real price appreciation during the boom.
The last two regressions reported in Table 3 examine quantity, using the logarithm of
the number of permits between 1982 and 1989 as the dependent variable. In this case, we also
control for the logarithm of the number of homes in the area in 1980 and the logarithm of the
21

It is the economic variables, both 1980 income and its growth from 1982-1989, which are the most highly
significant and account for the attenuation of the coefficient on the developable land share. All results are
available upon request.

29

land area of the metropolitan area. The logarithmic formulation means that we can interpret
these results as representing permits relative to the initial stock of housing or permits relative
to land area. In general, the relationship between the increase in the number of housing units
and the supply side proxy is less robust. The baseline regression finds a statistically
insignificant coefficient of the wrong sign (column 3). Adding in controls in the next
specification, changes the coefficient to 0.007 (std. err. = 0.003), which means that a one
standard deviation higher fraction of developable land is associated with a 0.14 log point
increase in our permitting variable, which amounts to just over 0.16 standard deviations for
that variable. Thus, there is modest evidence consistent with Proposition 3, which suggests
that more elastic places build more housing during the boom.
These results indicate that the more inelastic markets experienced a much larger price
response and a somewhat smaller quantity response during the boom period of the 1980s. The
distributional data reported in Table 4 yield more insight into the full extent of the ability of
elasticity to explain price growth variation during this time period. We split the sample into
three groups based on our developable land proxy for elasticity.22
The mean differences across the groups are very large, as expected. Being relatively
inelastic certainly is no guarantee of high price growth. One always needs strong demand for
that, and not all areas with relatively low shares of developable land have growing demand.
However, being relatively elastic really does seem to have limited the ability of a market to
experience a truly large price boom during this period. The data in Table 4 show that almost
none of the most elastic metropolitan areas experienced real price appreciation of at least 33%,

22

The most elastic third of markets is slightly larger because of lumpiness at the cut-off margin for the share of
developable land. Nothing is affected if we move those marginal metros into the middle group.

30

which is the lower bound for the top quartile of markets. During this decade, really high price
growth over a long period of time required some type of constraint on development.

The 1989-1996 Bust
The case for interpreting 1982-1989 as a bubble in those inelastic places is made
stronger by the enormous mean reversion over the next seven years. Figure 4 plots the price
changes between 1990 and 1996 on the price growth between 1982 and 1989.23 Overall, the
correlation is -59 percent. Whatever was pushing prices up in the 1980s seems to have
disappeared in the 1990s, and it is challenging to identify real economic factors that can
explain that change.
Mean differences in price appreciation between relatively inelastic and elastic areas
were much smaller during the housing bust. The forty markets with developable land shares
below the sample median did suffer larger real price declines on average, but the gap is not
particularly large: -7.9% for the relatively constrained markets versus -2.7% for the
unconstrained group. There are more extreme declines among the inelastic set. One quarter
of them suffered real price declines of at least -26%. The analogous figure for the elastic
markets is only -9%.
The regression results are not nearly as robust as those for the boom period. These are
reported in Table 5, which replicates Table 3 for the 1989-1996 time frame and then adds two
specifications. The baseline bivariate regression reported in column one yields a small,
positive coefficient. However, including the demand controls reduces its magnitude and
eliminates all statistical significance (column 2). In the third specification, we include a
control for price growth during the 1982-1989 boom period and the interaction between the
23

We use non-overlapping years to minimize the mean reversion that would be created by pure measurement
error in 1989 prices.

31

degree of price growth during the boom and the amount of available land. This makes the
supply elasticity proxy highly statistically significant (t=-5.8), so that on average, the extent of
real price changes falls with supply elasticity. The coefficient on the interaction term is small
enough so that the marginal effect of an added percentage point of developable land is
negative throughout most of the range of the data.24
While there is substantial mean reversion on average, the positive coefficient on the
interaction term indicates that there is less mean reversion in more elastic markets. The
coefficient magnitudes imply that there is mean reversion even in markets with 100%
developable land shares, but this still is consistent with the implications of the model above
that the post-bubble drops in house prices should be greater in the more inelastic markets.
The first two permit regressions for this time period yield results similar to those
reported in Table 3. There is modest evidence in favor of more elastic markets experiencing a
larger quantity response during the bust. The last permit regression again controls for price
growth during the previous boom and its interaction with the share of developable land. On
average, as the model predicts, greater real price appreciation in a metropolitan area during the
boom is associated with less permitting intensity during the bust. However, the positive
coefficient on the interaction term indicates that this negative impact is weakened the greater
is the elasticity of supply.25
While the average effect of the supply side is very small (and negative), the combined
effect with the interaction term finds that the derivative of permitting intensity during the bust
with respect to the share of developable land is positive as long as real appreciation during the
24

The relevant derivative turns positive only if price growth during the previous boom was above 58.6%. That is
near the 90th percentile of the distribution for that variable.
25
The marginal effect actually turns positive for markets with developable land shares above 88%, which is near
the sample median for that variable. Hence, in the more elastically supplied markets, a small increase in the
previous boom is associated with more, not less, permitting.

32

boom exceeded 5.4%. This is well below sample average price growth of 14.6%
(median=8.2%, with a 25th percentile value of -5.4%) for that period, so this specification
indicates that the quantity response was higher the more elastic the market, as long as the
market has enough underlying demand growth that its prices actually rose in real terms during
the boom period.

V.

The Post-1996 Boom

In some ways, the years after 1996 mirrored the boom of the 1980s. However, the
post-1996 boom was bigger and more widespread. Every one of our 79 markets experienced
real price gains between 1996 and 2006. Mean real price growth over this period was 57.9%.
However, the price gains continued to be much higher in more inelastic places on average.
The average price appreciation difference between areas above or below the sample median
amount of developable land is a whopping 47 percentage points. Real price appreciation
averaged 81% in the relatively inelastic markets and 34% in the relatively elastic markets.
Table 6’s breakdown of the distribution of real price growth for each third of our metropolitan
areas based on their share of developable land further confirms this picture.
Table 7’s regression results for this period show a very strong negative relation
between price appreciation and our supply side proxy. The coefficient from the second
specification that includes all our demand controls is one quarter larger than that reported in
Table 3 for the 1980s boom. Supply elasticity correlates strongly with the extent of price
growth in booms. The findings in the final two columns of this table again show there is more
construction in elastic places in booms. The magnitudes also are similar to those reported in
Table 3 from the 1980s boom.

33

However, there is one striking way in which the post-1996 boom differed from the
boom of the 1980s: there was exceptional price growth in a modest number of relatively or
highly elastic places. Of the 19 metropolitan areas that experienced at least a doubling of real
prices (100%+) over this period, one (Orlando-Kissimmee) is in the most elastic group and
five are in the middle group (Fresno, Phoenix-Mesa-Scottsdale, Stockton, Tampa-St.
Petersburg-Clearwater, and Washington-Arlington-Alexandria).
One possible explanation of this fact is that supply had become much less elastic in
some of the areas that we classified as elastic based on Saiz’s (2008) data. To check this, we
look at permitting intensity. Figure 5 plots the sample average across our 79 metropolitan
areas of annual permits as a share of their 1990 housing stocks. Permitting intensity clearly
cycles, with permits as a fraction of the stock in the middle of our sample period being as low
as 1.1% in the depth of a bust and as high as 2.6% in 2005.
Figures 6-11 then plot the analogous data for the six aforementioned markets that
experienced huge real price growth in the recent boom, but are not constrained by our supply
side measure. In each market other than Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, permitting
intensity was as high or higher in the recent boom than in the 1980s boom. In the Phoenix and
Orlando areas, annual permitting reached as high as 6% of the 1990 stock. And, permitting
intensity did not fall until late in the recent boom, even for the Washington market. While
permitting intensity was not high by national standards in the Washington market, it was in the
others. Hence, it is difficult to make a case that anyone reasonably thought these markets were
becoming inelastic in nature.
Figure 12 then plots the mean real house price-to-MPPC ratio for the Orlando
metropolitan area. For two decades prior to 2003 when this ratio hit 1.22, prices in this market

34

hovered within 10-15% of our estimate of minimum profitable production costs. It then
proceeded to grow by another 39% before peaking at 1.70 in 2006. As Figure 7 above shows,
Orlando’s permitting intensity had fallen between 1999-2001, but was increasing sharply
between 2001 and 2003 and would reach its all-time high in 2005. Thus, land in this and a
few other similar markets looks to be becoming increasingly expensive at the same time that
new supply is accelerating. This well may be a more profound signal of a bubble than any
other of which we are aware.
Proposition 5 above predicts that booms, to the extent they exist at all in elastic
markets, will be shorter than in inelastic markets. To see whether the data are consistent with
this implication of the model, we measured the length of a market’s boom in the 1996-2006
period as follows. The start of the boom is defined by the first year subsequent to 1996 in
which the area’s price-to-MPPC ratio had increased by at least 20% over its 1996 value. The
20% number was chosen because we believe it is large enough to ensure that house prices
really have risen substantially relative to fundamental production costs in a way that cannot be
accounted for by measurement error. The length of the boom is then determined by the
number of years before the price-to-MPPC ratio begins to turn down.
Among the most elastic third of markets with the highest shares of developable land,
eleven saw their price-to-MPPC ratio rise at least 20% above its 1996 level for at least one
year. The mean number of years before that ratio began to decline was 1.7 for this group. By
this definition, booms last for less than two years in the most elastic markets. Naturally, a
greater share of the most inelastic third of markets experienced a boom according to this
metric. Among the 20 that did, the mean number of years before a downturn in this ratio was

35

4.1. Thus, booms last much longer in the more inelastic markets, as predicted by Proposition
5.26
VI.

Conclusion

Housing price volatility can be quite high, and in some cases it appears to be too high
to be explained by changes in the fundamentals of the housing market. This seems to suggest
that financial market wisdom regarding bubbles and overoptimism can be imported into
housing economics. However, it is critical to incorporate the supply side when analyzing
housing markets. As a factual matter, the supply of housing is not fixed, and the possibility of
oversupply of housing during a boom is one of the primary ways in which housing bubbles
may create substantial welfare losses.
In this paper, we presented a simple model of housing bubbles with endogenous
housing supply. On some matters, the model gave clear predictions. Housing prices should
increase more during bubbles in places where housing supply is inelastic. Bubbles should be
more common and longer in places where supply is inelastic. On other issues, the
implications of the model were less clear, including with respect to the impact of bubbles on
the amount of new construction and social welfare.
We then examined price and quantity increases during the two large national price
swings of the past 25 years. During both price booms, price increases were higher in places
where housing supply was more inelastic because of steep topography, just as the model
suggests. Moreover, most elastic places seem to have avoided having a bubble entirely during
the 1980s. Over the last decade, there were more modestly elastic places that also experienced

26

The mean length of boom for the 15 markets from the middle third of the developable land share distribution
that experienced at least a 20% rise in their price-to-MPPC ratio is 3.3 years, in between the most and least elastic
markets.

36

big price increases, but as the model suggests, the housing price booms in elastic places were
much shorter in duration than those in inelastic places.
The empirical results on quantities built during booms were more ambiguous, just like
the model’s predictions. During the 1980s, once we controlled for other area-level
characteristics, more elastic places built more. The same thing is even more true over the past
ten years.
Our results on elasticity were weakest during the bust period. While the level of mean
reversion during the bust is enormous, there is little correlation between price declines during
the bust and the degree of elasticity. Places with bigger price growth during the 1980s had
less construction in the early 1990s, but this effect was muted in more elastic areas. More
generally, it is hard to really predict what will happen to elastic areas that experienced price
booms over the last five years. In the past, places that elastic did not experience price booms.
However, a reasonable expectation might be that prices in these elastic areas are likely to
continue their fall downward, returning to minimum profitable production cost levels, which
have been the historical norm in these areas.

37

References

Barberis, N., Ming H., Santos, T., 2001. Prospect Theory and Asset Prices. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 116, 1-53.
Case, K., 1994. A Decade of Boom and Bust in the Prices of Single-Family Homes: Boston
and Los Angeles: 1983-1993. New England Economic Review, March 1994.
Case, K., Mayer, C., 1995. The Housing Cycle in the Boston Metropolitan Area: The Boom,
the Bust, and the Recovery. New England Economic Review, March/April 1995.
Case, K., Shiller, R., 1989. The Efficiency of the Market for Single-Family Homes. American
Economic Review 79 (1), 125-137.
Delong, J. B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L., Waldmann, R., 1990. Noise Trader Risk in Financial
Markets. Journal of Political Economy 98 (4), 703-738.
Duranton, G., Combes, P-P., Gobillon, L., Roux, S., 2008. Estimating Agglomeration
Economies with History, Geology and Worker Effects. Working paper, University of
Toronto, January 30, 2008.
Flood, R., Hodrick, R., 1990. On Testing for Speculative Bubbles. Journal of Economic
Perspectives 4 (2), 85-101.
Glaeser, E., Gyourko, J., 2003. The Impact of Zoning on Housing Affordability. Economic
Policy Review 9 (2), 21-39.
Glaeser, E., Gyourko, J., 2005. Urban Decline and Durable Housing. Journal of Political
Economy 113 (2), 345-375.
Glaeser, E., Gyourko, J., 2006. Housing Dynamics. NBER Working Paper 12787, revised
February 2008.
Glaeser, E., Gyourko, J., 2008. Arbitrage in Housing, in: Glaeser, E., Quigley, J. (Eds.),
Housing and the Built Environment: Access, Finance, Policy. Lincoln Land Institute
of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA, forthcoming.
Glaeser, E., Gyourko, J., Saks, R., 2005. Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up? American
Economic Review 95 (2) 2005: 329-333.
Gyourko, J., Saiz, A., Summers, A., 2008. A New Measure of the Local Regulatory
Environment for Housing Markets. Urban Studies 45 (3), 693-729.
Hansen, L., Scheinkman, J., 1995. Back to the Future: Generating Moment Implications for
Continuous-Time Markov Processes. Econometrica 63 (4), 767-804.

38

Himmelberg, C., Mayer, C., Sinai, T., 2005. Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles,
Fundamentals, and Misperceptions. Journal of Economic Perspectives 19 (4), 67-92.
Holmes,T., Lee, S., 2008. Cities as Six-by-Six-Mile Squares: Zipf’s Law. Mimeo.
University of Minnesota, 2008.
Hong, H., Scheinkman, J., Xiong, W., 2008. Advisors and Asset Prices: A Model of the
Origin of Bubbles. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
Hong, H., Scheinkman, J., Xiong, W., 2006. Asset Float and Speculative Bubbles. Journal of
Finance 61 (3), 1073-1117.
Hoxby, C., 2000. Does Competition among Public Schools Benefit Students and Taxpayers?,
American Economic Review 90 (5), 1209-38.
Linneman, P., 1986. An Empirical Test of the Efficiency of the Housing Market. Journal of
Urban Economics 20, 140-154.
Mayer, C., Sinai, T., 2007. Housing and Behavioral Finance, mimeo, September 25, 2007.
McMillan, D., McDonald, J., 1991. Urban Land Value Functions with Endogenous Zoning.
Journal of Urban Economics 29, 14-27.
Meese, R., Wallace, N., 1994. Testing the Present Value Relation for House Prices: Should I
Leave My House in San Francisco? Journal of Urban Economics 35, 245-266.
Ofek, E., Richardson, M., 2003. Dotcom mania: The rise and fall of internet stock prices.
Journal of Finance 58, 1113–1137.
R.S. Means Company, 2008. Assemblies Cost Data 2008. R.S. Means Company, Kingston,
MA.
Rosenthal, S., 1989. Residential Building and the Cost of Construction: New Evidence on the
Efficiency of the Housing Market. Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 288-302.
Rosenthal, S., Strange, W., 2008. The Attenuation of Human Capital Externalities, Journal of
Urban Economics, forthcoming.
Saiz, A., 2008. On Local Housing Supply Elasticity, mimeo, The Wharton School,
University of Pennsylvania.
Saks, R., 2008. Job Creation and Housing Construction: Constraints on Metropolitan Area
Employment Growth. Journal of Urban Economics 64, 178-195.
Shiller, R., 1981. Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
Dividends? American Economic Review 71 (3), 421-436.
39

Shiller, R., 2005. Irrational Exuberance, second ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Shleifer, A., 1985. Do Demand Curves for Stocks Slope Down? Journal of Finance 41 (3),
579-590.
Topel, R., Rosen, S., 1988. Housing Investment in the United States. Journal of Political
Economy 96 (4), 718-740.
Wallace, N., 1988. The Market Effects of Zoning Undeveloped Land: Does Zoning Follow
the Market? Journal of Urban Economics 23, 307-326.

40

Table 1: House Prices and Production Costs, 2007
Metropolitan Area

State

Akron
Albuquerque
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton
Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Marietta
Austin-Round Rock
Bakersfield
Baltimore-Towson
Baton Rouge
Birmingham-Hoover
Boston-Quincy
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk
Buffalo-Niagara Falls
Charlotte-Gastonia-Concord
Chicago-Naperville-Joliet
Cincinnati-Middletown
Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor
Colorado Springs
Columbia
Columbus
Dallas-Plano-Irving
Dayton
Denver-Aurora
Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn
Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach-Deerfield Beach
Fort Wayne
Fort Worth-Arlington
Fresno
Gary
Grand Rapids-Wyoming
Greensboro-High Point
Harrisburg-Carlisle
Houston-Sugar Land-Baytown
Indianapolis-Carmel
Jacksonville
Kansas City
Las Vegas-Paradise
Little Rock-North Little Rock-Conway
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale
Louisville-Jefferson County
Memphis
Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall
Milwaukee-Waukesha-West Allis
Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington
Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin
Newark-Union
New Orleans-Metairie-Kenner
New York-White Plains-Wayne

OH
NM
PA
GA
TX
CA
MD
LA
AL
MA
CT
NY
NC
IL
OH
OH
CO
SC
OH
TX
OH
CO
MI
FL
IN
TX
CA
IN
MI
NC
PA
TX
IN
FL
MO
NV
AR
CA
KY
TN
FL
WI
MN
TN
NJ
LA
NY

41

House Price

Production Costs

$130,611
$208,903
$215,976
$187,799
$180,222
$219,291
$275,101
$143,864
$136,861
$322,721
$498,022
$122,500
$173,802
$259,812
$143,263
$139,847
$203,942
$137,075
$149,531
$136,368
$120,640
$217,760
$107,097
$303,956
$103,013
$115,798
$244,810
$140,650
$131,518
$134,276
$166,348
$125,962
$135,988
$199,607
$135,415
$283,653
$120,840
$514,650
$133,783
$114,848
$330,573
$190,099
$216,199
$176,949
$395,231
$159,207
$720,863

$165,975
$153,136
$176,832
$154,493
$137,373
$181,320
$159,190
$145,516
$153,345
$200,214
$187,479
$175,997
$138,626
$194,682
$159,086
$172,134
$159,295
$137,478
$161,904
$144,680
$155,954
$162,739
$180,485
$151,988
$154,180
$140,714
$184,452
$172,656
$143,219
$137,478
$166,393
$152,405
$160,860
$145,098
$176,414
$174,013
$147,916
$185,287
$157,520
$149,378
$155,432
$176,310
$192,594
$150,735
$193,325
$151,570
$224,641

Table 1: House Prices and Production Costs, 2007 (continued)
Metropolitan Area

State

Oakland-Fremont-Hayward
Oklahoma City
Omaha-Council Bluffs
Orlando-Kissimmee
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura
Philadelphia
Phoenix-Mesa-Scottdale
Pittsburgh
Providence-New Bedford-Fall River
Raleigh-Cary
Richmond
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario
Rochester
St. Louis
Salt Lake City
San Antonio
San Diego-Carlsbad-San Marcos
San Francisco-San Mateo-Redwood City
San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara
Seattle-Bellevue-Everett
Stockton
Tacoma
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater
Toledo
Tucson
Tulsa
Vallejo-Fairfield
Warren-Troy-Farmington Hills
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria
West Palm Beach-Boca Raton-Boynton Beach
Wichita
Wilmington

CA
OK
NE
FL
CA
PA
AZ
PA
RI
NC
VA
CA
NY
MO
UT
TX
CA
CA
CA
WA
CA
WA
FL
OH
AZ
OK
CA
MI
DC
FL
KS
DE

42

House Price

Production Costs

$514,768
$110,531
$125,899
$230,099
$513,529
$219,469
$258,467
$116,960
$264,245
$203,291
$198,628
$332,515
$122,900
$143,323
$273,874
$118,524
$447,962
$721,694
$678,274
$417,512
$264,884
$289,587
$192,969
$116,206
$222,790
$107,404
$342,161
$176,499
$403,374
$295,560
$105,162
$245,042

$209,922
$141,549
$156,894
$154,597
$182,886
$196,665
$154,180
$170,360
$182,051
$137,895
$153,762
$182,364
$170,673
$178,084
$150,944
$142,384
$181,216
$209,922
$209,922
$178,919
$186,018
$176,101
$158,668
$168,689
$149,378
$138,313
$194,055
$174,118
$170,255
$155,432
$144,785
$181,007

Table 2: Summary Statistics on Percentage Price Changes Over Time
79 Metropolitan Area Sample
Mean
Std. Dev.
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

1982-1989
Nominal Real($07)
47.2%
14.6%
42.0%
32.6%
-1.7%
-23.5%
21.5%
-5.4%
39.1%
8.2%
70.9%
33.0%
114.8%
67.1%

1989-1996
Nominal
Real($07)
19.8%
-5.3%
19.3%
16.5%
-6.8%
-28.3%
4.6%
-17.8%
21.7%
-3.7%
32.5%
5.8%
40.7%
12.8%

43

1996-2006
Nominal
Real(*$07)
100.0%
57.9%
60.2%
47.9%
40.7%
11.0%
49.8%
18.0%
69.5%
33.9%
146.1%
94.3%
203.3%
140.1%

Table 3: Real Price Appreciation, Building, and Supply Conditions: 1980's Boom

Share of Buildable Land

Real Price Appreciation
1982-1989

Real Price Appreciation
1982-1989

Log of Total Permits
1982-89

Log of Total Permits
1982-89

-0.67
(0.17)

-0.52
(0.17)

-0.005
(0.003)

0.007
(0.003)

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1982-89
Precipitation

Log Land Area
Log 1980 Stock

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1982-89
Precipitation
Log Land Area
Log 1980 Stock

79
0.58

79
0.58

79
0.79

Other Covariates

N
R-Squared

79
0.17

Table 4: Distribution of Real Price Growth in the 1980s Boom
by Degree of Supply Constraint
Mean
Std. Dev.
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

n=26
Most Inelastic
28.6%
36.8%
-9.0%
-2.3%
23.2%
64.1%
86.1%

n=25
Middle Third
12.5%
28.2%
-24.0%
-5.4%
8.7%
33.8%
50.8%

44

n=28
Most Elastic
3.4%
28.2%
-30.5%
-18.3%
5.0%
12.5%
33.0%

Table 5: Real Price Appreciation, Building, and Supply Conditions: 1990's Bust

Share of Buildable Land

Real Price Appreciation
1989-1996

Real Price Appreciation
1989-1996

Real Price Appreciation
1989-1996

Log of Total Permits
1990-96

Log of Total Permits
1990-96

Log of Total Permits
1990-96

0.24
(0.09)

-0.05
(0.09)

-0.41
(0.07)

0.0037
(0.0028)

0.0065
(0.0037)

-0.0020
(0.0036)

Real Price Growth
1982-1989

-0.86
(0.12)

-0.0328
(0.0063)

Interaction of 1982-89
Price Growth and
Buildable Land Share

0.007
(0.001)

0.00037
(0.00008)

Other Covariates

N
R-Squared

79
0.09

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1989-96
Precipitation

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1989-96
Precipitation

Log Land Area
Log 1990 Stock

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1989-96
Precipitation
Log Land Area
Log 1990 Stock

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1989-96
Precipitation
Log Land Area
Log 1990 Stock

79
0.47

79
0.82

78
0.65

78
0.68

78
0.77

Table 6: Distribution of Real Price Growth in the 1996-2006 Boom
by Degree of Supply Constraint
Mean
Std. Dev.
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th

n=26
Most Inelastic
93.9%
50.4%
13.5%
49.4%
98.6%
140.2%
146.5%

n=25
Middle Third
53.8%
39.7%
15.3%
24.7%
36.2%
86.6%
115.1%

45

n=28
Most Elastic
28.2%
26.3%
6.2%
12.6%
18.4%
30.1%
67.0%

Table 7: Real Price Appreciation, Building, and Supply Conditions: 1996-2006 Boom

Share of Buildable Land

Real Price Appreciation
1996-2006

Real Price Appreciation
1996-2006

Log of Total Permits
1997-2006

Log of Total Permits
1997-2006

-1.54
(0.21)

-0.77
(0.23)

0.0040
(0.0030)

0.0071
(0.0035)

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1996-06
Precipitation

Log Land Area
Log 1990 Stock

Percent College Grads
January Temperature
Personal Income 1980
Income Growth 1996-06
Precipitation
Log Land Area
Log 1990 Stock

79
0.63

78
0.67

78
0.79

Other Covariates

N
R-Squared

79
0.40

46

1.6

Figure 1: Price-to-Cost Ratio, 79 Metro Average

.8

1

Price-to-Cost Ratio
1.2
1.4

2005
2006
2004
2007
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
1998
1989 1991
1997
1990 1992
1993 1995
1988
1994 1996
1987
1986
1985
1982
1984
1983

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Real 2007$
140000 160000 180000 200000 220000 240000

Year

Figure 2: RealAverage Prices, 79 Metro Average
2006
2005
2007

2004

2003
2002
2001
2000
1989
1999
1988
1998
1987
1990
1986
1991
1992
1993 1995 1997
1994 1996
1985
1984
1983
1982

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

47

1200000

Figure 3: Aggregate Permits Over 79 Metros
2005
2004

Total Permits
800000
1000000

1986
1985
1984

2003
2006

1983

1999
2002
2001
1998 2000

1987
1988

2007

1997
1996

1989

600000

1995
1994
1993
1990

1982

1992

400000

1991

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

60

Figure 4: Mean Reversion in Prices, 79 Metro Average
1990-1996 Real Price Appreciation
-20
0
20
40

Salt Lake City

-40

Colorado Springs
Denver-Aurora
Austin-Round Rock
Albuquerque
Detroit-Livonia-Dearborn
Warren-Troy-Farmington
Hills
New Orleans-Metairie-Kenner
Louisville-Jefferson
County
Akron
Milwaukee-Waukesha-West
Allis
Omaha-Council
Bluffs
Baton Rouge
Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin
Tucson
Gary
Birmingham-Hoover
Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor
Grand
Rapids-Wyoming
Tacoma
Columbus
Raleigh-Cary
Miami-Miami Beach-Kendall
Oklahoma Little
City
Toledo
Phoenix-Mesa-Scottdale
Minneapolis-St.
Paul-Bloomington
Rock-North
Little
Rock-Conway
Cincinnati-Middletown
Tulsa
Indianapolis-Carmel
Dayton
Charlotte-Gastonia-Concord
Kansas
City
Pittsburgh
San Antonio
Chicago-Naperville-Joliet
Memphis
Wichita
St.
Louis
FortHarrisburg-Carlisle
Wayne
Greensboro-High
Point
Atlanta-Sandy
Springs-Marietta
Columbia
Jacksonville
Seattle-Bellevue-Everett
Vegas-Paradise
Richmond Beach
Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater
FortLas
Lauderdale-Pompano
Beach-Deerfield
Fort
Worth-Arlington
Dallas-Plano-Irving
Houston-Sugar
Land-Baytown
Buffalo-Niagara Falls
Baltimore-Towson
Orlando-Kissimmee
West Palm Beach-Boca
Raton-Boynton Beach
Boston-Quincy
Wilmington
Newark-Union
Fresno
Rochester
Philadelphia
New York-White
Plains-Wayne
Bridgeport-Stamford-Norwalk
Washington-Arlington-Alexandria
Allentown-Bethlehem-Easton
San
Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa
Clara
Bakersfield
Providence-New
Bedford-Fall
San Francisco-San
Mateo-Redwood
CityRiver
Oakland-Fremont-Hayward
San
Diego-Carlsbad-San
Marcos
Vallejo-Fairfield
Stockton
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura
Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario
Los Angeles-Long Beach-Glendale

-50

0
50
1982-1989 Real Price Appreciation

100

48

2005
2004
2003
2006

1984 1986
1985
1983

1999
1998

2002
2001
2000

1996
1997

1987
1988

2007
1994
1995

1989

1993
1990 1992
1982

1991

.01

Annual Permits as a Share of 1990 Stock
.015
.02
.025

Figure 5: Average Permitting Intensity, 79 Metro Sample

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

Figure 6: Average Permitting Intensity, Fresno
Annual Permits as a Share of 1990 Stock
.01
.015
.02
.025
.03

1985

2005
2004

1989
1984

1983
1986

2003
1990

1987

2006
1992
1994

1991
1988

1993 1995
2002
2001
2007

1996

2000
1998
1999
1997

1982

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

49

.02

Annual Permits as a Share of 1990 Stock
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07

Figure 7: Average Permitting Intensity, Orlando
2005
2004
2006
1999
2003

1985
1998
1984
1983

1989
1988
1986

2002
2000
2001

1997

1990

1987
2007
1994
1993
1996
1995
1991
1992
1982

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

2005
2004
1984
2003
1985
1983

1982

2002
1998
1999
2001
2000

1997
1996
1995
1994

1986

1987
1988

2006
2007

1993
1992

1991
1989
1990

0

Annual Permits as a Share of 1990 Stock
.02
.04
.06
.08

Figure 8: Average Permitting Intensity, Phoenix

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

50

Figure 9: Average Permitting Intensity, Stockton
2004
2002
2005
2000
1984

1999

1989

1985

2001

1988

1983

2006
1998

1990
1987
1986

1992
1993

1982
1991

1997
1996
1994
1995

2007

.01

Annual Permits as a Share of 1990 Stock
.02
.03
.04

2003

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

1984
1985
1983

2005

1986
2004
2003

1987

1999

1988

2002
2001

1997
1989

1994 1996
1995
1993
1991
1992

1990

1982

2006

1998 2000

1982

.01

Annual Permits as a Share of 1990 Stock
.02
.03
.04

Figure 10: Average Permitting Intensity, Tampa

1987

1992

1997

2007

2002

2007

Year

51

.01

Annual Permits as a Share of 1990 Stock
.015
.02
.025
.03

Figure 11: Average Permitting Intensity, Washington DC
1987
1986

1988
2002 2004
2005
2000
1999 2001 2003
1998

1989
1985
1984

1994 1996
1993
1997
1995

1983

2006

1990 1992
2007

1991
1982

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

1.8

Figure 12: Orlando Price-to-MPPC Ratio
2006

Price-to-MPPC Ratio
1.2
1.4
1.6

2005

2007
2004

2003
2002
2001

1

2000
1999
1989
1998
1993
1990
1991
1992
1988
1987
1985
1986
1997
1984
1995
1994 1996
1983

.8

1982

1982

1987

1992

1997

2002

2007

Year

52

Appendix 1: Proofs of Propositions

Proof of Proposition 1: If P (t + j ) > c0 + ε for all positive j, then there construction
levels will be greater than ε / c1 for all positive j, which implies an infinite amount of
construction and an infinite city size which means that there will be more homes for sale
than buyers and the equilibrium price will be zero which contradicts the initial
assumption.
Proof of Proposition 2: During the bubble:
⎛ a + v0 − rc0
⎞
λθ
⎟
+
H (t + j ) = e −γj H (t ) + (1 − e −γj )⎜⎜ 0
⎟
(
)
+
+
v
λ
γ
(
r
λ
)
c
v
1
1
1 ⎠
⎝
⎛ a + v0 − rc0
⎞
λθ
I (t + j ) = e −γj ⎜⎜ γ 0
+
− γH (t ) ⎟⎟
v1λ
(r + λ )c1 + v1
⎝
⎠
⎛ a + v0 − rc0
⎞
λθ
+
− H (t ) ⎟⎟
P (t + j ) = c0 + c1γe −γj ⎜⎜ 0
γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )
v1λ
⎝
⎠

∂H (t + j )
e − γj λ
(1 − e −γj )λ
∂I (t + j )
=
=
> 0 and
> 0 and
γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ
∂θ
c1e −γj λ
∂P(t + j )
=
> 0 , all of which are unambiguously positive. As the length of
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ
the bubble increases, the impact of the shock on investment and prices declines, but the
impact of the shock on the size of the housing stock increases. Differentiation gives us
∂ 2 I (t + j )
− γe −γj λ
e −γj λ
∂ 2 H (t + j )
=
< 0 and
=
> 0 and
(r + λ )c1 + v1
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ ∂j
∂θ ∂j

For j < k ,

− c1γ 2 e −γj λ
− c1γe −γj λ
∂ 2 P(t + j )
=
=
< 0.
γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 ) (r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ ∂j

After the bubble, for all i ≥ 0 ,
⎛ a + v − rc0
⎞ e −γi (1 − e −γk )λθ
− H (t ) ⎟⎟ −
I (t + k + i ) = γ e −γ ( k +i ) ⎜⎜ 0 0
v1λ
⎝
⎠ (r + λ )c1 + v1
H (t + k + i ) = e

−γ ( k + i )

H (t ) + (1 − e

−γ ( k + i )

⎛ a + v0 − rc 0
)⎜⎜ 0
v1λ
⎝

⎞ e −γi (1 − e −γk )λθ
⎟⎟ +
⎠ γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )

and

53

⎛ a + v 0 − rc 0
⎞
e −γi (1 − e −γk )λθ
P (t + k + i ) = c0 + c1γ e −γ ( k +i ) ⎜⎜ 0
− H (t ) ⎟⎟ − c1
v1λ
(r + λ )c1 + v1
⎝
⎠
∂I (t + k + i )
∂H (t + k + i )
e −γi (1 − e −γk )λ
e −γi (1 − e −γk )λ
=−
=
< 0 and
> 0 and
γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ
∂θ

∂P(t + k + i )
e −γi (1 − e −γk )λ
= −c1
< 0.
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ

The cross partial derivatives with respect to the duration of the bubble are
e −γi e −γk γλ
e −γi e −γk λ
∂ 2 I (t + k + i )
∂ 2 H (t + k + i )
=−
< 0 and
=
> 0 and
(r + λ )c1 + v1
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ ∂k
∂θ ∂k
e −γi e −γk γλ
∂ 2 H (t + j )
= −c1
< 0.
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ ∂k
e − γj λ
∂I (t + j )
=
> 0,
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂θ
c1γe −γj λ
∂P(t + j )
∂H (t + j )
(1 − e −γj )λ
=
> 0 and
=
> 0 . Since
γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )
γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )
∂θ
∂θ

Proof of Proposition 3: For j ≤ k , differentiation yields:

γ = .25r 2 +

− λ (r + λ ) 2 v1
∂γ
λ (r + λ )v1
=
< 0 and
− .5 r ,
(r + λ )c1 + v1
∂c1 (2γ + r )((r + λ )c1 + v1 )2

γ (2γ + r )((r + λ )c1 + v1 ) (r + λ )c1 + v1 ⎛⎜ 2
λ (r + λ )v1
λ (r + λ )v1
.5r + 2
=
− r .25r 2 +
⎜
λ (r + λ )v1
λ (r + λ )v1 ⎝
(r + λ )c1 + v1
(r + λ )c1 + v1

⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

⎞
⎟ >1
⎟
⎠
c ∂γ
(r + λ )c1
(r + λ )c1
λ (r + λ )v1
=
<
, we know that − 1
.
γ ∂c1 γ (2γ + r )((r + λ )c1 + v1 ) (r + λ )c1 + v1 (r + λ )c1 + v1
= 1+

(r + λ )c1 + v1 ⎛ 2
λ (r + λ )v1
λ (r + λ )v1
⎜ .5r +
− r .25r 2 +
⎜
(r + λ )c1 + v1
(r + λ )c1 + v1
λ (r + λ )v1 ⎝

Further differentiation then yields that:
∂γ −γj
−
e jλ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 ) − (r + λ )e −γj λ
2
∂c1
∂ I (t + j )
=
∂θ ∂c1
((r + λ )c1 + v1 )2

This is negative if and only if

(r + λ )c1 + v1
λ (r + λ )v1
> j.
.25r 2 +
λ (r + λ )v1
(r + λ )c1 + v1

The cross partial effect on the housing supply equals

54

∂H (t + j )
=λ
∂θ ∂c1

−

c1 ∂γ
(r + λ )c1
(1 − e −γj − jγe −γj ) − (1 − e −γj )
(r + λ )c1 + v1
γ ∂c1
c1γ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )

which is always negative because

∂ P(t + j )
=λ
∂θ ∂c1
2

The impact on prices is

(r + λ )c1
c ∂γ
>− 1
γ ∂c1
(r + λ )c1 + v1

v1e −γj − c1e −γj j ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )

((r + λ )c1 + v1 )2

∂γ
∂c1

> 0.

After the bubble at time k,
⎛ ∂γ ⎞
⎟⎟λ ((r + λ )c1 + v1 ) + (1 − e −γk )λ (r + λ )
e −γk k ⎜⎜ −
2
∂ I (t + k )
⎝ ∂c1 ⎠
=
> 0 , and
∂θ ∂c1
((r + λ )c1 + v1 )2

⎛ ∂γ ⎞
⎟⎟ − v1 (1 − e −γk )
ke −γk c1 ((r + λ )c1 + v1 )⎜⎜ −
∂ P(t + k )
⎝ ∂c1 ⎠
=λ
∂θ ∂c1
((r + λ )c1 + v1 )2
2

λ (r + λ ) 2
e γk − 1
. As c1
>
k
⎛
λ (r + λ )v1
v1 ⎞
2
⎜⎜ r + λ + ⎟⎟ .25r +
(r + λ )c1 + v1
c1 ⎠
⎝
goes to zero, the right hand side of the expression also goes to zero so the condition must
λ (r + λ )
hold. As c1 gets arbitrarily large, the right hand side of the equation goes to 2
r
and the left hand side of the equation goes to zero so the equation must fail.
which is negative if and only if

This equation must hold for high enough values of k, since

e γk − 1
goes to infinity as k
k

gets sufficiently large.
At time k, the impact on housing supply must be positive, since the housing supply is still
determined by investment during the boom. The change in price when the bubble ends,
c1λθ
, which is increasing in θ and c1 . The cross effect
denoted ΔP is equal to
(r + λ )c1 + v1
is also positive.

55

Proof of Proposition 4: During a period when beliefs about the future are held constant,
the equilibrium is characterized by the three equations for housing stock, investment and
prices:
H I (t + j ) = e

−

λv1 j
rc1 + v1

and P(t + j ) = c 0 +

H I (t ) + (1 − e
λc1 e

λv1 j
rc1 + v1

rc1 + v1

and time one will equal
greater than ε or

−

−

−

λv1 j
rc1 + v1

)

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )

λc1e

−

λe
g (t )
⎛ g (t )
⎞
, I (t + j ) =
− v1 H I (t ) ⎟
⎜
(r + λ )v1
rc1 + v1 ⎝ r + λ
⎠

⎛ g (t )
⎞
− v1 H I (t ) ⎟ .
⎜
⎠
⎝r +λ

ελc1e

λv1
rc1 +v1

(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )

> 1.

λv1 j
rc1 + v1

The price increase between time zero

. The bubble will persist if and only if this is
The expression

λc1 e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )

is montonically

increasing with c1 and equals zero when c1 equals zero. As c1 grows arbitrarily large,
r2
λ
λ
. If
, then the bubble can never
the expression approaches
< 1 or λ <
1− r
r (r + λ )
r (r + λ )
r2
λ
persist. If
, then the bubble can persist if c1 is sufficiently large. If
> 1 or λ >
1− r
r (r + λ )
λ>

r2
, then by continuity and monotonicity there exists a value of c1 where
1− r

λc1 e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )

= 1 . Monotonicity ensures that for values of c1 above this amount, then

prices will continue to rise while for prices of c1 below this amount, price growth will be
lower than expectations and the bubble will start to unravel.
At the end of the second period, assuming that prices continue to rise, prices will equal
c0 +

(λc1 )

−

2 λv1
rc1 + v1

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

e
ε
λc e
(1 − e
)ε
− 1
. The price increase in the second
2
2
(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )
(rc1 + v1 ) (r + λ )
2

period will be greater than the price increase in the first period if and only if

λc1e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )

+e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

> 3 . The left hand side of the equation is again monotonically

increase in c1 and the inequality certainly fails when c1 equals zero. Assuming 1 − 2r > 0 ,
the left hand side of the equation approaches

λ
r (r + λ )

2
+ 1 > 3 , or λ > 2r as c1 grows.

1 − 2r

Again, this means that there exists of value of c1 such that the inequality holds with
56

equality and for values of c1 above (below) this amount the inequality holds (fails)
strictly. Since 3 − e

λc1e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )

λc1e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(rc1 + v1 )(r + λ )

+e

−

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

λv1
rc1 + v1

is greater than one, then the value of c1 that causes

= 3 must be higher than the value of c1 that causes

= 1.

Proof of Proposition 5: If c1 < c1* , then the bubble will only last one period and the total
−

amount of housing built over the course of the bubble will equal

λv1
rc1 + v1

(1 − e
)ε
, which is
(r + λ )v1

monotonically decreasing with c1 .
If c1* < c1 < c1** , so that the bubble lasts exactly two periods then the amount of housing
built over the course of the bubble will equal
−

e

λv1
rc1 + v1

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(1 − e
(r + λ )v1
−

λv1
rc1 + v1

)ε ⎛ (r + λ )(rc1 + v1 ) + λc1 ⎞
⎟⎟ . The derivative of this with respect to c1 is
⎜⎜
⎝ (r + λ )(rc1 + v1 ) ⎠

λv1
λv1
−
−
⎛
⎜ r (1 − 2e rc1 + v1 )⎛⎜ r + λ + λc1 ⎞⎟ + 1 − e rc1 + v1
⎜
(rc1 + v1 ) ⎟⎠
(r + λ ) 2 (rc1 + v1 ) 2 ⎜⎝
⎝

e

λε

and only if 2e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

> 1+

1− e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

⎛
λc1 ⎞
⎟
r ⎜⎜ r + λ +
(rc1 + v1 ) ⎟⎠
⎝

⎞
⎟ , which is negative if
⎟
⎠

.

57

If the bubble ends at period one, then prices will fall from c 0 +

c0 −

λ (1 − e

−

λv1 j
rc1 + v1

λc1 e

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

ε

rc1 + v1 r + λ

to

λv1
−
⎞
⎛
rc1 + v1
⎟
⎜
(
2
)
rc
v
e
+
1
λε
1
1
, so the total price drop is
⎜
− ⎟ which is
r+λ⎜
r (rc1 + v1 )
r⎟
⎟
⎜
⎠
⎝

)ε

r (r + λ )

increasing with c1 .
If the bubble ends at period two, the prices will fall from

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

λv1
⎛ − rcλv+1v
⎞
−
rc1 + v1
1
1
⎜
⎟ to
−
−
+
+
c0 +
e
λ
c
(
1
e
)(
rc
v
)(
r
λ
)
1
1
1
⎟
(rc1 + v1 ) 2 (r + λ ) 2 ⎜⎝
⎠

λc1εe

c0 −

λe

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

(1 − e
r (r + λ )
−2

)ε ⎛ (r + λ )(rc1 + v1 ) + λc1 ⎞
⎜⎜
⎟⎟ . The total price drop will equal
(
r
λ
)(
rc
v
)
+
+
1
1
⎝
⎠

λv1

λv
λv
−
−
λε
e rc + v λc12
rc + v
rc + v
times
(1 − e
+e
(r + λ ) 2
(rc1 + v1 ) 2
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

⎛ v (r + λ ) + λc1 ⎞
⎟⎟ . The derivative of this
)⎜⎜ 1
⎝ r (rc1 + v1 ) ⎠

with respect to c1 will be positive if and only if:

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

−

λv1
rc1 + v1

λv1
λv1
⎛
⎞
⎛
⎞
−
−
λc1 2r e
λ2 c12
2re
rc1 + v1 ⎟⎛ v1 (r + λ ) + λc1 ⎞
rc1 + v1 ⎟
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎟
(r(r + λ ) − λ )
+
+
−
λ
>
1
−
e
r
1
2
e
⎜
⎟⎜⎝ (rc1 + v1 ) ⎟⎠ ⎜
⎟
(rc1 + v1 )
(rc1 + v1 ) 2
⎝
⎠
⎝
⎠
2

This inequality will always hold if r is sufficiently small. As v1 becomes arbitrarily
large, the inequality converges to λr (1 − 2e − λ )(r + λ ) > (r (r + λ ) − λ )(1 − e − λ ) , which can
certainly fail.

58

