NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHICH CEO CHARACTERISTICS AND ABILITIES MATTER?
Steven N. Kaplan
Mark M. Klebanov
Morten Sorensen
Working Paper 14195
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14195

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

We thank Geoff Smart and Randy Street of ghSMART & Company for providing the data and for
very helpful discussions and comments. We thank David Altman, Carola Frydman, Malcolm Baker,
Mike Jensen, Leslie Pratch, David Yermack and seminar participants at the 2008 AFA Meetings, Duke,
Harvard Business School and Economics Department, NBER Corporate Finance, NBER Private Equity
Conference, NBER Summer Institute, SIFR Conference 2007, and Wharton for helpful comments.
We thank Xu Da, Sol Garger, Cristina Iftimie, Ingrid Tang, Phoebe Tse, and Jaclyn Yamada for research
assistance. This research has been supported by the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation and the Olin
Foundation through grants to the Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State, the Center
for Research in Security Prices, the Kauffman Foundation, and Kathryn Gould. Address correspondence
to Steve Kaplan or Morten Sorensen, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, 5807 South
Woodlawn Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 or e-mail at skaplan@uchicago.edu or sorensen@uchicago.edu.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Steven N. Kaplan, Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Which CEO Characteristics and Abilities Matter?
Steven N. Kaplan, Mark M. Klebanov, and Morten Sorensen
NBER Working Paper No. 14195
July 2008
JEL No. D21,D23,G24,G3
ABSTRACT
We study the characteristics and abilities of CEO candidates for companies involved in buyout (LBO)
and venture capital (VC) transactions and relate them to hiring decisions, investment decisions, and
company performance. Candidates are assessed on more than thirty individual abilities. The abilities
are highly correlated; a factor analysis suggests there are two primary factors with intuitive characterizations
– one for general ability and one that contrasts team-related, interpersonal skills with execution skills.
Both LBO and VC firms are more likely to hire and invest in CEOs with greater general abilities,
both execution- and team-related. Success, however, is more strongly related to execution skills than
to team-related skills. Success is, at best, only marginally related to incumbency, holding observable
talent and ability constant.

Steven N. Kaplan
Graduate School of Business
The University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steven.kaplan@gsb.uchicago.edu
Mark M. Klebanov
Ziff Brothers Investments
mark.m.klebanov@gmail.com

Morten Sorensen
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
101 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
msorense@chicagogsb.edu

I.

Introduction
Given their leadership positions and compensation, CEOs likely have a significant impact on the

their companies’ success. And, of course, there is a great deal of anecdotal evidence about what CEOs do
and how they matter, particularly in the popular press. Surprisingly, economic theorists provide little
guidance, and there is very little systematic, large sample, empirical work in the economics, finance and
management literatures on how and why CEOs matter.
There are many economic theories that model CEOs or agents running firms. Some theorists, like
Holmstrom (1979) treat all agents or CEOs as being the same and focus on effort provision. In these
theories, however, the individual CEO does not matter. Some theorists do model CEOs with different
talents and abilities, and assume those abilities map into firm performance. For example, Rosen (1981)
models talent or ability with an index, q. The talent distribution is assumed fixed and costlessly
observable. Murphy and Zabojnik (2004) assume that CEOs have ability, ai. And Gabaix and Landier
(2007) assume that managers and CEOs have talent, T(m). While these theorists assume CEOs have
different ability or talent, and assume the ability is observable, they provide no guidance whatsoever
concerning what those abilities or talents are.
A recent exception is a paper by Bolton et al. (2008) who model CEOs as trading off the ability to
coordinate employees’ actions with the ability to react to new information. CEOs vary in being more or
less resolute which the authors define as a type of overconfidence. In their model, more resolute CEOs
are more successful because the increased coordination benefits from being resolute outweigh the costs of
not fully reacting to new information. Also, see Van den Steen (2005) for a closely related paper.
Similarly to the theoretical literature, empirical work in economics and finance suggests that
CEOs matter, but that work is just beginning to consider what particular abilities or skills are important.
For example, Bertrand and Schoar (2003) study managers who move from one firm to another, and find
evidence consistent with different managers having different styles, different behavior, and different
performance. Bloom and Van Reenen (2006) use survey data to find that different management practices

1

are related to firm performance. Bennedsen et al. (2007) find that firm performance is negatively related
to CEO focus. These papers are silent, however, on what defines the different styles and characteristics.
More recently, several papers have begun to consider what characteristics might be important.
Schoar (2008) finds that CEO actions are related to whether they join the labor market in a downturn or a
boom. Graham and Narasimhan (2004) find specific effects on leverage for managers going through the
great depression. One might interpret both papers as using measures of conservatism. Malmendier and
Tate (2004, 2007), Ben-David et al. (2007) and Graham et al. (2008) find that CEO decisions and
outcomes are related to measures of CEO overconfidence, optimism and risk aversion.
The empirical management literature, like the most of the economics and finance literature,
focuses on directly observable characteristics, such as CEOs’ “education,” “functional background,” and
“age.” Hambrick and Mason (1984) stress that these observable characteristics are, at best, proxies for
underlying psychological factors, but they also recognize the difficulties of gathering data with these
underlying factors for CEOs.
This paper adds to the empirical literature by providing new evidence on CEO characteristics and
abilities, and their relation to hiring, investment decisions, and firm performance. We rely on detailed
assessments of 316 CEO candidates for positions in firms funded by private equity (PE) investors – both
buyout (LBO) and venture capital (VC) investors. The assessments are based on four-hour structured
interviews performed from 2000 to 2006 by ghSmart, a firm that assesses CEO candidates. The data
include quantitative and qualitative information about the candidate’s education and employment history
as well as assessments of a wide range of personal skills and attributes. We complement the assessment
data with data on hiring, investment and success from the PE firms and from public sources.
With these data, we make three contributions. First, we extend the set of measured CEO
characteristics and abilities.
Second, existing empirical work is primarily concerned with the relation between CEO identity
(i.e., fixed effects) and investment policy, financial policy, and performance (see Bertrand, Schoar, 2003
and Bennedsen et al., 2007). This paper takes a first step towards understanding why a particular CEO

2

might have those effects by studying the relation of particular CEO candidate characteristics and abilities
to CEO hiring decisions, to investor investment decisions, and, conditional on hiring, to firm
performance. The data also allow us to consider whether different abilities matter for different companies
or investments (i.e., companies funded by VC versus LBO firms).
Finally, we consider the related question of the importance of firm-specific knowledge or ability
versus general ability by comparing inside and outside CEO candidates. Several theories about the tradeoff between firm-specific ability and general ability predict that outside candidates have higher abilities,
on average, but there is very limited evidence about whether this is true in practice, nor is there any
evidence on the particular dimensions where this trade-off is more relevant (see Frydman (2006) and
Murphy and Zabonjik (2004)). In the management literature, Khurana (2002) takes the opposite side and
argues that firms should shy away from outsiders, particularly charismatic outsiders.
In this paper, we focus on the 30 specific characteristics or abilities that ghSMART assessed for
the candidates in our sample. Because many of the individual characteristics are correlated, we also use a
factor analysis to extract the main patterns of variation in the characteristics. We find two factors that are
particularly important and have intuitive interpretations: the first loads positively on all abilities and,
thus, appears to measure overall talent; the other loads positively on team-related abilities (“teamwork,”
“listening skills,” “open to criticism,” and “treats people with respect”), and negatively on executionrelated capabilities (“aggressive,” “fast mover,” “persistent,” and “proactive”). We also separate the
second factor into its team-related and execution-related components to investigate the absolute effects of
these types of abilities rather than their relative effects that are picked up in the initial factor analysis.
Ratings for outsider CEOs are generally higher than ratings for incumbent CEOs although the
differences are largely driven by candidates from LBO-funded firms. This is consistent with investors and
firms trading off general skills and ability against firm-specific skills and knowledge.
We then consider determinants of hiring and investment decisions. PE firms – both LBO and VC
firms – are more likely to hire and invest in more highly rated / talented CEOs, particularly for outsider
hires. We also find that insider CEOs are significantly more likely to remain in their positions or be

3

hired, holding their skill constant. Firms appear to trade off general or observable abilities against firmspecific skills and knowledge.
Next, we consider the relation between a CEO’s ratings and subsequent success. We measure
success using evaluations from the PE firms (when we can obtain them) and our own assessments of
success from publicly available data.
For LBO firms, success is significantly positively related to a number of individual abilities.
They tend to be the execution-related measures (“efficient,” “organized,” “detailed,” “follows through,”
“persistent,” “proactive,” “sets high standards,” and “holds people accountable”), rather than the
interpersonal, team-related ones. Consistent with this, we find that success is significantly positively
related to the general talent factor and to the execution-related factor in regressions that include the
separated factors. We find no relation between incumbency and success controlling for ability.
For VCs, success is negatively (not positively) related to some of the individual measures of
talent, including execution-, neutral and team-related measures. The relations become positive (although
not significant) when we control for time, likely reflecting the fact that many of the VC-funded
companies in the sample were funded during the tech boom in the late 1990s and early 2000s when many
of those businesses were not viable. When we move to a regression framework, we find a significantly
negative relation between success and the team-related factor and a positive (but not significant) relation
between success and the execution-related factor. We find mixed evidence for a positive relation between
incumbency and success (controlling for ability).
Together, the results for LBOs and VCs suggest that execution-related abilities are positively
related to success while team-related abilities are negatively related to success. Holding ability constant,
incumbency is only marginally related to success.
Finally, we explore whether the success results are sensitive to observables or to sample selection
issues. We do not find that the results are sensitive to the inclusion of observables like age, education,
and industry. We also attempt to address the problem of endogenous matching of candidates and
companies that arises when unobservable characteristics affect which candidates particular firms hire.

4

While we cannot completely reject a sample selection bias, we report two analyses that are not consistent
with one. We find no systematic correlation between outcomes and the qualities of candidates who are
not hired for a particular job. If selection were a problem, we would expect candidates who are not hired
as the CEO of a particular company to have similar characteristics to the hired candidates. We also
consider a Heckman selection model in which the first stage is the hiring decision and the second stage is
the performance relation. We include the insider dummy or an overall recommendation in the hiring
decision, but exclude it in the performance regressions. We obtain similar results to our basic
specifications.
Overall, we believe the analysis and results are novel and suggestive. The results on success are
generally consistent with the predictions of Bolton et al. that “resolute” CEOs are more successful than
“good listeners.”
The results also are related to studies of the five factor model (of personality) in the psychology
literature. According to the model, personalities consist of five factors: extraversion, emotional stability,
agreeableness, conscientiousness, and openness to experience. Studies that relate personality to
performance tend to find conscientiousness has the most explanatory power. This is consistent with our
findings that execution-related skills of CEOs are related to performance. To our knowledge, there are no
such personality studies for individuals at the CEO level. See Barrick, Mount and Judge (2001) for a
summary of this literature (and Morgeson et al. (2007) for a skeptical view).
This research is also closely related to Collins (2001) who studies a sample of eleven CEOs of
companies with outstanding performance. He identifies them as “Level 5” leaders who build “enduring
greatness” and share the traits of: compelling modesty; giving credit to others and taking blame on
themselves; showing unwavering resolve and workmanlike diligence; and building strong teams. The
primary concerns with his study are the small sample size and the potential for ex-post selection bias,
because he chooses his sample of CEOs based on superior past performance. Our analysis uses a larger
sample of CEO candidates chosen ex-ante. Our results for LBO CEOs are consistent with important roles

5

for unwavering resolve and workmanlike diligence. They are not consistent, however, with important
roles for the other traits Collins identifies.
Interestingly, our results, particularly those for buyout CEOs, seem most consistent with those
described in Drucker (1967). According to Drucker, effective executives “differ widely in their
personalities, strengths, weaknesses, values and beliefs. All they have in common is they get the right
things done.” To get things done, effective executives: “utilize time efficiently”; “focus on
contribution”; “make strengths productive”; “do first things first”; and “make effective decisions.” These
appear to be the execution-related skills we find are most correlated with success.
We add one last caveat to interpreting the results. The people we study are CEOs of buyout and
VC-funded companies that may have special needs. As a result, it is not possible to know whether the
results generalize to CEOs of other firms, particularly public companies. However, we believe the
similarity of our results to those of Drucker (1967) is suggestive in that Drucker’s work was based on
personal observations of many executives in many different types of firms.

II.

Data
A.

Assessments

We rely on detailed assessments of 316 CEO candidates for positions in firms funded by private
equity (PE) investors, consisting of both VC and LBO investors. The assessments are performed from
2000 to 2006 by ghSMART, a firm that specializes in assessing top management candidates. The
assessments are requested by the PE investors, typically at the time the PE firm is considering an
investment or considering hiring a new CEO.
The assessments are typically 20 to 40 page documents that include detailed information on the
candidates’ life, from childhood through current job experiences. They are based on structured interviews
with the candidates that are of roughly four hours in duration and are performed by professional
interviewers. The data include quantitative and qualitative information about the managers’ education
and employment histories as well as assessments of a wide range of personal skills and characteristics.

6

The typical assessment classifies the CEO candidate on 30 dimensions in five general areas:
“leadership,” “personal,” “intellectual,” “motivational,” and “interpersonal.” Table 1 presents
ghSMART’s descriptions as well as guides for high and low scores for the assessed characteristics. The
characteristics are organized in the general areas used by ghSMART.
The candidates are also typically assessed on abilities specific to the particular deal. Because
these abilities are not consistent across candidates, we do not include them in our analyses. The results
are qualitatively similar when we include them although the number of observations is reduced.
In the discussion, we informally refer to characteristics as interpersonal / team-related, neutral,
and execution-related. Based largely on the factor analysis we describe below, we refer to “Develops
People,” “Treats People with Respect,” “Calm,” “Flexibility,” “Listening,” “Open to Criticism,” and
“Teamwork” as interpersonal or team-related skills. We view “Removes Underperformers,”
“Efficiency,” “Aggressive,” “Moves Fast,” “Persistence,” “Sets High Standards,” “Proactive,” “Work
Ethic,” “Holds People Accountable” as execution-related skills. We classify “Network,” “Hires A
Players,” “Follows through on Commitments,” “Organization,” “Brainpower,” “Analytical,” “Strategic,”
“Creative,” “Attention to Details,” “Integrity,” “Enthusiasm,” “Writing,” “Oral Communication,” and
“Persuasion” as neutral or mixed.
For each of the characteristics ghSMART assigns a letter grade to the CEO candidate, ranging
from D (lowest) to A+ (highest). We rescale these grades into four categories. We classify grades of B
or below as 1. ghSMART reports that such grades are quite negative. We combine these grades because
there are relatively few below B. We classify grades of A and A+ as 4. ghSMART reports that such
grades are very positive. We combine them because there are relatively few A+’s. We classify grades of
B+ as 2 and grades of A- as 3. We obtain qualitatively similar results when we do not combine grades.
ghSMART structures the interviews in a systematic way to generate as much consistency as
possible across interviews. All interviews follow the same specified structure, and are conducted by
trained, professional interviewers. The interviewers generally either hold doctoral degrees or have
degrees from top MBA programs and have worked at strategy consulting firms (such as McKinsey & Co.,

7

Bain, and Boston Consulting Group). According to ghSMART, internal testing has found a high degree
of consistency across assessments performed by different interviewers. Our results are qualitatively
identical when we use interviewer fixed effects in some of our analyses (not reported).
When asked whether it is possible for executives to “game” the interview by providing answers
that the candidates believes are “right,” ghSMART provided two main reasons why this is difficult. First,
VC and LBO investors almost always conduct detailed reference checks on the CEO candidates of their
portfolio companies to verify the information in the assessments. A candidate who gives misleading
answers in the assessments risks exposure through comparison with the information from the reference
checks. Candidates are aware that reference checks are conducted, and this provides some motivation to
be truthful. Second, ghSMART has found that it is difficult to “game” the questions consistently in the
course of a four-hour interview with an experienced interviewer.
Personality assessments have been used and studied in the management psychology literature.
That literature finds that the assessments generally provide reliable information. For example, industrial
organization psychologists find that self-reported questionnaires are robust to gaming and are
substantially consistent (John and Srivastava, 1999). And external assessments (by supervisors, coworkers and customers) are typically found to be more reliable than self-assessments (Mount, Barrick and
Strauss, 1994). We believe that four-hour interviews by professional interviewers are likely to be at least
as informative as the self-reported questionnaires and external assessments in those psychology studies.
There are two other reasons we believe that these assessments are informative. First (and
anecdotally), at least two PE firms told us they do not make an investment without a CEO assessment of
the type ghSMART provides. Second, the assessments are costly for the PE firms. They require at least
four hours of a CEO’s time and a payment to ghSMART.
While we believe the assessments are informative, it is worth stressing that if the assessments are
subject to gaming, this would make the assessments noisy and create a bias against finding any relation of
characteristics to outcomes. In fact, characteristics are systematically related to outcomes in ways that are
difficult to reconcile with gaming. We discuss this in more detail below.

8

We also record track information in the assessments in addition to ratings. When provided, we
record observables about the CEO including age, college and graduate degrees, industry, and test scores.
We note if the candidate is the incumbent CEO or is an outsider. In a few cases, the candidate works for
the company but not as CEO. We include these candidates with outsiders. Our results are identical if we
include these candidates as incumbents. We note if the PE firm has already invested in the company at
the time of the assessment. We collect information on the PE firms, particularly assets under
management (a measure of size and prominence) at the time of the assessment. Because young
companies may require executives with different skills than more mature companies, we distinguish
between assessments made by VC and by buyout investors.

B.

Corporate Decisions and Performance

In addition to information about the candidates, we coded three outcome measures, whether: (1)
the CEO candidate is hired; (2) the PE firm invests in the firm; and (3) the CEO who is hired succeeds.
We collected this post-assessment information in two ways. First, either ghSMART or we approached
the PE firms. We asked each PE firm whether it invested; if the firm invested, whether the candidate was
hired; and if the PE firm invested and one of the candidates was hired, whether the CEO was successful.
We also asked if the investment itself had been successful or unsuccessful, as well as for any available
quantitative success measures. We obtained responses from PE firms for 146 of the 316 CEO candidates
in our sample.
We complemented the PE firms’ information by using public sources to assess whether the
investment was made, the CEO was hired, and the hired CEO was successful. These sources included
CapitalIQ, Zoominfo.com, VentureOne, Lexis-Nexis, company websites and the PE firms’ websites.
Using the public sources, we created two additional measures of success. The first we call the
public measure and the second we call the broad public measure. For both measures, we used PE firm
responses if they were available. For the first measure, we studied the hired CEOs for whom we did not
get PE firm responses. We classified a CEO as successful, if the CEO led the company or another

9

company to a clearly favorable exit such as an IPO or sale to another company. We classified the CEO as
unsuccessful if the company went bankrupt, the company was sold to another firm under distress or at a
substantial loss, or the CEO was removed as CEO before any exit occurred. In a few cases, we classified
the CEO as having mixed success. For example, we did this if the investors exited, but earned only a
modest return.
For the broad public measure, we began with the first public measure. We then classified
additional CEOs as successful if the company received positive press regarding its operations or received
additional financing at higher valuations. Similarly, we classified CEOs as unsuccessful, if the company
had unfavorable press regarding its operations or subsequent financing. We also classified the CEO as
mixed if the company that the CEO ran had not exited in any form (IPO, sale, liquidation, etc.) and the
company had not received any informative press.
While we recognize that the two public success measures are somewhat coarse, they are similar to
(and perhaps less coarse than) the success measures of IPO or IPO and sale used in many studies of
venture capital. (E.g., see Gompers et al. (2006) or Hochberg et al. (2007).) When we compare the three
measures of success, we view the PE measure as the most precise and the broad public measure as the
least precise. While the results are generally consistent using all three measures, the explanatory power of
the regressions declines as we move from the most precise to least precise measure.

C.

Summary sample descriptive statistics.

Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the sample. Panel A presents information on
incumbency and hiring, and the relation of the two. In our sample of 316 candidates, 224 are hired.
There is a large difference in hiring rates for incumbents and outsiders. Of 171 incumbents, 159 (or 93%)
are hired; of 145 outsiders, only 65 (or 45%) are hired. The reason for this discrepancy is that in many
cases, the CEO candidate was a founder and was extremely likely to remain with the company whether or
not the PE firm invested.

10

Panel B presents information on hiring, PE firm investment, LBO and VC representation,
incumbency, and the relation of those three variables. Of the 316 candidates, 148 are assessed for LBO
firms and 168 are assessed for VC firms, a roughly equal representation.
Panel C presents information by firm. The 316 CEO candidates are assessed for 258 different
companies. The PE firms invested in 181 of these 258 firms. The panel shows that the PE firms tended
to assess fewer outsiders in the firms in which they eventually did not invest. It also shows that a larger
fraction of incumbents remained CEO in firms in which the PE investors did not invest. Again, this is
consistent with the incumbents in a number of firms being founders and wishing to remain as CEOs.
Panels D and E summarize our success variables for the 224 CEO candidates who are hired. The
PE firms provided performance assessments for 81. Of these, 37 (46%) were considered successful; (30)
37%, not successful; and 14 (17%), either of mixed or uncertain success. Using the first, more certain
public measure, we can rate 126 candidates and estimate that 54 (43%) are successful, 67 (53%) are
unsuccessful, and 5 (4%) are mixed. Finally, using the broad public measure, we can rate 208 candidates
and estimate that 92 (44%) are successful, 84 (40%) are unsuccessful, and 32 (16%) are mixed.
Panel F describes the number of CEO candidates assessed per company. Only one candidate was
assessed in 219 of 258 companies; multiple candidates were assessed in the other 39 firms.

III.

Distribution and Aggregation of Managerial Characteristics
Panel A of table 3 presents the average ratings of the characteristics for all 316 CEO candidates.

Panel A indicates that there is a fair amount of variation in the ratings of the different CEO candidates.
The standard deviations for most of the characteristics exceed 1 suggesting a wide spread in
measurements for those characteristics. Interestingly, the variables with the highest means and lowest
standard deviations are “work ethic” and “integrity,” suggesting most individuals who reach the CEO
candidate phase are perceived to have high integrity and a strong work ethic.
Panel B presents the average ratings separately for LBO and VC candidates and for incumbents
and outsiders. The LBO candidates are rated more highly than the VC candidates on 20 of 30

11

characteristics, significantly so on seven. Those seven are a mix of team-related, interpersonal, and
neutral skills – “Attention to Details,” “Open to Criticism,” “Respect,” “Listening Skills,” and
“Persistence,” “Flexibility,” and “Follow Through on Commitments.” The VC candidates are rated more
highly on only two characteristics at the 10% level – “brainpower” and “strategic vision”.
Because of the large number of included characteristics, one should be cautious in interpreting a
few of those as being statistically significant. Even if the data were random, some characteristics would
be significant by chance. Nevertheless, the patterns are suggestive. Buyout CEOs score higher on
characteristics related to a broader range of managerial and executive functions while VC CEOs appear to
score higher only on characteristics related to intelligence and vision. To the extent that entrepreneurs are
over represented relative to professional managers in the VC-funded firms, these results suggest that
entrepreneurs require less general management ability, but more knowledge-related skills than the
professional managers.
The second half of panel B of table 3 compares insider and outsider CEO candidates. There are
large ratings differences. Outside candidates score higher than insiders on 19 of 30 characteristics. In 8
cases – “hires A players,” “develops people,” “efficiency,” “network,” “organization,” “analytical skills,”
“oral communication,” and “holds people accountable” – the differences are significant. In only one case,
“creativity,” do insiders outscore outsiders at the 10% significance level.
Panel C compares insiders and outsiders for LBO and VC firms separately. This panel shows that
the outsider / insider differences are strongly driven by the LBO candidates. Outsider LBO candidates
outscore insiders in 21 of 30 abilities, significantly so in 7. Insiders outscore outsiders at the 10% level
on only one ability. For VC candidates, outsiders and insiders are rated more highly on 15 characteristics
each. Insiders’ scores are significantly higher on brainpower and creativity while outsiders’ are
significantly higher on the management-related skills of “efficiency” and “hiring A players.”
These results, particularly those for the LBO candidates, are consistent with a number of
explanations. First, it is possible, that outside candidates are considered when internal candidates are not
performing well. Second, the results support the view that an important function of PE firms is to

12

upgrade the managerial talent in the firms in which they invest. (See Hellmann and Puri (2002) and
Kaplan and Stromberg (2004).) Third, in some cases the incumbent manager may have control over who
can invest in the company. As a result, a private equity investor must maintain the incumbent
management, even if this management is not ideal, or not invest at all. Finally, concerns about employee
moral and political turmoil may prompt investors to keep the incumbent management. All of these
explanations are consistent with outsiders being more talented than insiders / incumbents.

B.

Correlations and Aggregation

The individual ratings are highly correlated. On average, when a candidate scores well on one
characteristic, the candidate tends to score well on all the others. Over 85% of the pair-wise correlations
of the individual characteristics are significant at the 10% level. To conserve space, we do not report
these correlations. The strong correlations suggest that talent, ability, or skill have some kind of general
characteristic or quality that is spread across many dimensions.
The large number of highly correlated characteristics relative to the number of candidates is
potentially problematic. The resulting multicollinearity means that including all the individual
characteristics as explanatory variables in a regression model leads to results that are difficult to interpret.
To address this problem, we perform a factor analysis (see Fabrigar, Wegener, MacCallum, and Strahan
(1999) and Jolliffe (2004)). This analysis extracts the main variation in the candidates’ characteristics and
calculates the loadings on these characteristics.
Table 4 reports the results of this analysis. The first four factors have eigenvalues greater than one
and explain cumulative 93% of the variation. The first two factors turn out to be more important and have
natural interpretations. The first and most important factor is a general factor, explaining 53% of the
variation in the ratings. All individual characteristics load positively on this factor, ranging from a
loading for “integrity” of 0.33 to a loading for “efficiency” of 0.68. It is natural, therefore, to interpret
this factor as capturing general talent or ability. This pattern in the first factor is common in factor
analysis, and reflects the fact that all the characteristics tend to move together.

13

The second factor is perhaps more interesting. Candidates who score higher on this factor have
higher ratings on interpersonal and team-related skills like “treats people with respect,” “open to
criticism,” “listening skills,” and “team work.” Candidates with a lower (negative) score on this factor
have higher ratings on execution-related skills like “moves fast,” “aggressive,” “proactive,” and
“persistent.” Interpreting these characteristics, the factor appears to sort the candidates such that a larger
positive loading corresponds to a candidate with stronger “interpersonal / team player” abilities whereas a
negative loading corresponds to a candidate who is best characterized as “fast, aggressive, and persistent.”
This second factor, therefore, also can be interpreted as measuring agreeableness versus conscientiousness
in the context of the five factor model of the psychology literature. One might expect Jack Welch – the
General Electric’ former CEO who was often referred to as “Neutron Jack” – to have a negative score on
this factor while his successor, Jeff Immelt, cited in Fast Company (2005) for “holding ‘dreaming
sessions’ with customers and developing ‘imagination breakthrough’ teams,” would likely have a positive
score.1 This second factor explains 20% of the variation in the ratings.
The third factor is more difficult to interpret. It explains only 11% of the variation, and it plays a
smaller role below. Candidates with higher loadings on this factor score higher on “analytical skills,”
“organization,” “attention to detail,” and “written communication.” A candidate with a negative loading
on this factor scores higher on “enthusiasm” and “persuasion.” The first set of characteristics evokes a
sense of deliberate analytic ability and organizational talent; whereas the second set of characteristics
evokes a sense of being emotional and inspirational.
Given the difficulty of interpreting increasingly marginal factors, we limit the analysis to the
initial three factors and primarily the first two. In factor analysis, each factor’s eigenvalue is often taken
as a measure of the amount of aggregate information captured by the factor, and it is usually argued that
factors must have eigenvalues greater than one to capture meaningful patterns in the data. Consistent
with this, the initial three factors have eigenvalues of 7.7, 3.0, and 1.7.

1

See also “Running G.E., Comfortable in his Skin,” by Joe Nocera, New York Times, June 9, 2007.

14

We also perform a second factor analysis to isolate the distinction captured by the second factor.
We estimate an alternative factor specification using only the characteristics “fast,” “aggressive,”
“persistent,” “efficiency,” “proactive,” and “high standards” to capture the negative loadings and
“respect,” “open to criticism,” “listening skills” and “team work” to capture the positive loadings. By
design, this analysis finds two strong factors, with the first factor loading positively on the first set of
characteristics and the second factor loading positively on the second set. Although it does not affect the
loadings dramatically, we also use an oblique quartimin transformation to emphasize the differences. The
resulting loadings on the two alternative factors are presented in Panel B of Table 4. Again, in the context
of the five factor personality model, the first factor appears to capture conscientiousness; the second
factor, agreeableness.
Cronbach’s alpha is used to measure the degree to which a set of characteristics are internally
consistent. The characteristics we have included in the two factors in the second factor analysis maximize
this measure and largely coincide with the characteristics with the largest absolute factor loadings on the
second factor in the first factor analysis. The six characteristics in the first alternative factor have a
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.85, and the four characteristics in the second alternative factor have an alpha of
0.84, strongly suggesting that the two sets of characteristics capture internally consistent underlying traits.

IV.

Managerial Characteristics and Hiring Decisions
In this section, we study the relation between the characteristics and the decision to hire the

candidate.

A.

Average ratings

We compare the average ratings of hired candidates to those of non-hired candidates. We
distinguish between candidates assessed for LBO and VC firms and between incumbent and outside
candidates. Distinguishing between incumbent and outside CEOs is important because in some
investments, the PE firm does not have the ability to choose an outside CEO.

15

Panel A compares hired versus non-hired candidates overall. The hired candidates are more
highly rated on 27 of 30 characteristics; in 12 cases, the differences are significant. The three
characteristics for which non-hired candidates score higher, the difference are small and insignificant.
Panel B looks at VC and LBO candidates separately. For LBO candidates, the hired candidates
are rated more highly on 24 of 30 characteristics; 10 of those differences are statistically significant. The
significant differences include execution-related, neutral, and team-related characteristics. Non-hired
candidates are significantly higher on only once characteristic, “analysis,” and only at the 10% level.
For VC candidates, the hired candidates are rated more highly on all but three characteristics.
“Brainpower,” “creativity,” “written communication” and “integrity” are statistically significant.
Panel C looks at incumbents and outsiders separately. Hired outsiders are more highly rated on
every characteristic and significantly so on 20 of 30. While hired incumbents are rated more highly on
20 of 30 characteristics, only two differences are statistically significant. This partially reflects the fact
that most of the incumbents assessed are hired or remain CEOs of their companies. Again, this suggests
that for some companies, the CEO and the company are inseparable or, in other words, the PE firm must
keep the incumbent CEO if it wants to make the investment.
Panel D restricts the sample to only those companies that assessed more than one candidate. For
these companies, the PE firm presumably had some choice in the hiring decision. The hired candidates
are rated more highly on 28 of 30 characteristics; 14 are significant. Again, the significant differences
include all types of characteristics.
Overall, these patterns strongly suggest that abilities can be measured and that hiring decisions
are based on those perceived abilities.

B.

Factor regressions

Table 6 presents linear regressions that estimate the relation of the likelihood of being hired to the
CEO candidate’s ratings on each the three primary factors and, also, on the two alternative factors. Most

16

of the regressions also include a dummy variable for whether the candidate is the incumbent CEO. All of
the regressions include year dummies to control for any time variation.
The first two regressions use the full sample of 316 candidates. The first regression uses the three
factors from the factor analysis where the first factor appears to measure general talent and the second
factor, “team player versus fast and aggressive.” The regression indicates that the likelihood of being
hired is strongly related to the first, general talent factor. The likelihood of being hired also is much
greater if the candidate is already the CEO, holding talent or skill constant.
The second regression uses the alternative factors in which the first factor loads on executionrelated abilities and the second factor on interpersonal and team-related abilities. Hiring is positively
related to both of these factors, but only the first is statistically significant. Again, incumbents are
significantly more likely to be hired.
The next set of regressions restricts the observations to companies in which the PE firms actually
invested. We do this to increase the focus on companies in which the PE firms had a choice in the hiring
decision. We first estimate three regressions using the first three factors. In regression 3, we consider
only outsider hires. The PE firms undoubtedly chose to hire these candidates. The results are similar to
those for all candidates. The likelihood of being hired is strongly related to the first, general talent factor.
The likelihood of being hired is marginally negatively related to the third factor.
Regressions 4 and 5 consider LBO and VC candidates separately. The results, however, are
similar. The general talent factor is strongly significant in both regressions. And, again, incumbents are
significantly more likely to be hired, holding talent constant.
In the last three regressions, we use the two alternative factors as independent variables. The
coefficients on the execution-related factor are positive and significant in all three regressions. The
coefficients on the interpersonal and team-related factor are positive in all three, significantly so for the
LBO candidates. As in the previous regressions, incumbents are significantly more likely to be hired.
Overall, then, the regressions strongly suggest that hiring is strongly related to greater general
talent. Hiring is not significantly related to the second, “team player” versus “fast aggressive” factor,

17

although the “fast aggressive” factor comes in more strongly for VC candidates. The regressions also
indicate that incumbents are more likely to be hired by both LBO and VC-funded companies, holding
talent equal. This is consistent with companies placing substantial value on firm- and position-specific
skills relative to general talent or skills.

V.

Managerial Characteristics and Investment Decisions
We next look at the relation of investment decisions to CEO candidate characteristics. Again, we

distinguish between buyout and VC candidates, incumbent and outside CEO candidates. We also
distinguish whether or not the CEOs were hired.

A.

Average ratings

Panel A of table 7 presents the average ratings of CEO candidates in companies in which the PE
firms chose to invest compared to the ratings of CEO candidates in companies in which the PE firms did
not invest. The first part of the panel looks at all candidates; the second part at incumbents only. In the
full sample, invested candidates score higher than non-invested candidates on 28 of 30 characteristics; 9
are significant. The significant variables are of all three types, with “efficiency” and “teamwork” having
the greatest differences. The results are qualitatively similar, albeit not so strong for incumbents only.
Panel B considers LBO and VC candidates separately. Invested candidates score higher than
non-invested candidates for both LBO and VC; 25 of 30 differences are positive for LBO while 26 of 30
differences are positive for VC. Both “efficiency” and “teamwork” are significantly higher for both LBO
and VC.
These results suggest that buyout and VC investors condition their investment decision on
management quality.

B.

Factor regressions

18

In table 8, we present regressions that estimate the likelihood of investment as a function of the
CEO candidate’s ratings on the three factors and, then, the two alternative factors. Again, the regressions
include a dummy variable for whether the candidate is the incumbent CEO and year dummies.
For the full sample, investment is positively and significantly related to the first general talent
factor. This relation is positive both for LBO and VC candidates, but significant only for VC candidates.
The other two factors are not significant. For the entire sample, investment is marginally less likely for
incumbents, although this, too, is driven by the VC candidates.
The three regressions using the two alternative factors yield positive coefficients on all six
coefficients. The “team player” factor is significant for the full sample while the “fast aggressive” factor
is significant only for the VC candidates. The pattern for incumbents is the same as in the regression
using the three basic factors.
Overall, then, investment decisions are conditioned on management quality, but not so strongly as
the hiring decisions.

VI.

Managerial Characteristics and Performance
In this section, we compare the CEO characteristics to CEO and investment success. We restrict

the analysis to CEOs who were actually hired. As described earlier, we use three measures of success.
First, we rely on direct appraisals of CEO success by the PE firms that invest and hire the CEOs.
We code a successful CEO at a rating of 1; a mediocre or mixed CEO at 0.5; and an unsuccessful CEO at
0. We obtained PE firm appraisals for 81 of the 234 CEOs hired.
Second, we supplement the PE appraisals with information from public sources. We classify a
CEO as successful, if the CEO led the company or another company to a clearly favorable exit such as an
IPO or sale to another company. We classify the CEO as unsuccessful if the company went bankrupt, the
company was sold to another firm under distress or at a substantial loss, or the CEO was removed as CEO
before any exit occurred. In a very few cases, we classify the CEO as having mixed success.

19

Third, we create a broad public measure. This measure begins with the previous measure and
then classifies additional CEOs as successful if their company has experienced positive press regarding its
operations or has received additional financing at higher valuations. Similarly, we classify CEOs as
unsuccessful, if the company has unfavorable press regarding its operations or subsequent financing. We
also classify the CEO as mixed if the company that the CEO ran has not had an exit in any form (IPO,
sale, liquidation, etc.) and there is no company informative about its success.
We also considered, but do not report, two measures of financial success. Again, we first used
direct appraisals of financial success of 68 investments by the PE firms. The PE firms classify the deals
as not successful (the firm lost money), unclear, successful (the investment returned up to two times its
costs) and very successful (the investment returned more than two times its cost). Second, we
supplemented the PE firm answers with information we could obtain from publicly available sources. We
only included financial returns if the CEO remained CEO through the exit. The financial success
measures are highly correlated with the CEO success measures and generate qualitatively similar results.
Accordingly, we do not report these results in the tables.

A.

Average ratings

Panel A of table 9 compares the ratings of successful CEOs to unsuccessful CEOs using the PE
measure and the first public measure of success. We do not report ratings for mixed CEOs in the average
ratings tables. (We do include the observations for mixed CEOs in the factor regressions.) The
successful CEOs tend to be more highly rated, but few of the differences are significant. It is more
informative to look at the LBO and VC candidates separately.
Panel B presents ratings for LBO and VC candidates using the PE success measure. For LBOs,
successful CEOs are rated more highly on 24 of 30 characteristics; 9 are statistically significant. The
significant variables are entirely execution-related or neutral. Not one of the significant variables is teamrelated. The magnitudes of the significant variables are economically meaningful. For example, the
success rate of CEOs with a rating of 4 (the top rating) on “efficiency” are 93% and 88% using the PE

20

and public success measures; the analogous success rates for CEOs rated below 4 on “efficiency” are only
50% and 33%.
Surprisingly, for VC candidates, successful CEOs are rated higher on only 6 of 30 characteristics.
Five of the characteristics are significantly negative with “teamwork” and “flexibility” being the most
negative. This negative result appears to be strongly related to the technology bust. When we estimate
the differences between successful and unsuccessful candidates in a regression framework that includes
year dummies, successful CEOs are rated more highly on 20 of 30 characteristics. The coefficients on
“efficiency” and “attention to details” switch from being negative to positive while the coefficients on
“teamwork,” “respect,” and “flexibility” remain negatively related to success. These results are
confirmed in the factor regressions that include year dummies in the section that follows. (The results for
LBO CEOs in panel B are not affected by including year dummies.)
Panel C of table 9 uses the first public success variable. For LBOs, again, successful CEOs are
more highly rated on 27 of 30 characteristics. Again, none of the interpersonal or team-related variables
is statistically significant. Instead, the execution-related and neutral abilities, particularly “efficiency,”
“organization,” “commitments,” “persistence,” and “proactive” are highly statistically significant.
For VC CEOs, the results are qualitatively similar to those using the PE success measure. The
results also are similarly affected by controlling for year. When year dummies are included, 24 of the 30
coefficients become positive. Again, it is the team-related coefficients that remain negative.
Panel D of table 9 uses the broad public success measure. The results are qualitatively similar to
those for the first public success measure.
Overall, then, table 9 strongly suggests that more talented CEOs are more successful in LBO
transactions. The results for CEOs of VC firms are more difficult to interpret as they appear to be
affected by the technology bust of the early 2000s. Both the results for LBOs and VCs suggest, however,
that execution-related skills are more strongly related to success than team-related skills.

B.

Factor regressions

21

In table 10, we present regressions that estimate the likelihood of success as a function of the
CEO candidate’s ratings on the three factors and the two alternative factors. In these regressions, we
include observations in which CEO success is mixed as 0.5. (The results are qualitatively identical if we
exclude the mixed observations and estimate probit regressions.) Again, the regressions include year
dummies and, in most cases a dummy variable for whether the candidate is the incumbent CEO.2
The regressions in panel A of table 10 combine the entire sample, both LBO and VC CEOs.
Using the PE measure and the more precise public measure, success is significantly positively related to
the first “general talent” factor and negatively related to the second, “team player versus execution”
factor. Both relations are significant. When we use the broader public success measure, “team player
versus execution” factor remains significantly negative while the “general talent” factor does not.
The coefficients in these regressions are economically meaningful. A one standard deviation
increase (0.97) in general talent increases the likelihood of both the PE and public success measures by
almost 10%. A one standard deviation increase (0.93) in the “team player versus execution” factor
reduces the likelihood of PE and public success by almost 19% and 10%, respectively.
When we estimate the regressions using the alternative factors that separate the “fast aggressive,”
execution-related and “interpersonal and team-related” factors, we find that the execution-related
(alternative 1) factor is strongly and significantly positively related to success for all three measures of
success. The team-related factor is negatively related to success, although the coefficient is significant
only using the PE success measure. The coefficients for the execution-related factor are also
economically meaningful. A one standard deviation increase (0.93) in the execution-related factor
increases the likelihood of PE and public success by almost 18% and 14%, respectively
Overall, then the results in panel A suggest that success is related to execution-related talent
rather than team-related talent. Given that the first factor is significantly related to hiring decisions while

2

The results also are qualitatively unchanged when we include other observables such as CEO age, CEO test scores,
gender, and industry. We do not include them in the regressions that we report because we do not have data on all
observables for all CEOs. Including all of the observables in the regressions would substantially reduce the number
of observations.

22

the second factor is not, this result also suggests that firms and investors may overweight team-related
attributes in hiring and investment decisions.
The incumbent variable is not significantly related to success in any of the specifications. One
interpretation of the insignificant relation of incumbency to performance is that the firm-specific skills did
not have any impact on ultimate success controlling for CEO talent.
Panel B of table 10 estimates the success regressions separately for LBO and VC CEOs. For
LBO CEOs, all three success measures are significantly positively related to the general talent factor. All
three success measures are negatively related to the “team player versus execution” factor with the
coefficient on PE success being statistically significant. All three success measures are significantly
positively related to the “execution-related” alternative factor and unrelated to the “team-related”
alternative factor. As with the regressions in panel A, the coefficients are economically meaningful. A
one standard deviation increase (0.93) in the execution-related factor increases the likelihood of PE and
public success, respectively, by more than 30% and 25%.
The patterns are somewhat different for the VC CEOs. The “general talent” factor is not
significantly related to any of the success variables. The “team player versus execution” factor is
negatively related to all three success measures, significantly so for the PE and public success measures.
In the alternative factor regressions, success is positively related to the “execution-related” factor and
negatively related to the “team-related” factor. The coefficients for the “team-related” factor are
significant for the two public measures. The positive coefficients on the “execution-related” factors
contrast with the negative results in the univariate analysis in table 9. This confirms the importance of
controlling for years in the VC analysis. The regressions also indicate a marginally positive role for
incumbents holding abilities constant. The incumbent variable is positive in all of the regressions and is
marginally significant using the two public measures.
The results in panel B are broadly consistent with the results in panel A. Success tends to be
positively related to execution-related skills, particularly for LBO CEOs, and tends to be unrelated or
negatively related to team-related skills, particularly for the VC CEOs.

23

Panel C of table 10 estimates success regressions separately for incumbent and outsider CEOs.
The patterns are qualitatively similar for both types of CEOs and consistent with the conclusions from
panels A and B. The PE and public success measures are positively related to the general talent factor
and negatively related to the “team player versus execution” factor. The relations with general talent are
stronger for outsiders. Similarly, the PE and public success measures are positively significantly related
to the execution-related alternative factor for both incumbents and outsiders. The PE success measure is
negatively significantly related to the team-related alternative factor.
Again, success tends to be positively related to execution-related skills and negatively to teamrelated skills.

VII.

Selection Issues
It is important to acknowledge the potential selection issues with our analysis. The candidates in

our sample have been selected as CEO candidates by the firms in our sample. As a result, it is possible
the certain types of companies look for certain types of people or certain characteristics for their CEOs.
This is the problem of endogenous matching of candidates and companies that arises when unobservable
characteristics affect which CEOs are hired by particular firms. For example, if the most promising
companies hire fast and aggressive CEOs, then we will find that fast and aggressive CEOs perform better.
We think this type of selection is unlikely to drive our results for several reasons. First, we think
it is implausible economically that the most promising firms hire execution oriented CEOs while
struggling firms hire team and interpersonally oriented candidates. One might, in fact, expect the
opposite, in which case our results reasonably could be expected to underestimate the true effect.
Second, we consider a Heckman selection model in which the first stage is the hiring decision and
the second stage is the performance relation. In one specification, we include the incumbent dummy in
the hiring decision, but exclude it in the performance regressions. To the extent that the incumbent
dummy is unrelated to performance (which is plausible for the sample overall and for LBOs), this
provides exogenous variation in the hiring decision. When we do this, the results in the performance

24

regressions are qualitatively unchanged. If selection were a problem, we would expect to see a
diminution in the performance-characteristic relation.
In another specification, we use the aggregate ghSMART hiring recommendation in the hiring
regression. This helps explain the hiring decision, and, to the extent that it does not contain any more
information than is in the individual ratings, this also provides exogenous variation in the hiring decision
not related to performance. Again, the results in the performance regressions are qualitatively unchanged.
Third, for companies for which we have more than one CEO assessment, we consider the relation
of the non-hired CEO candidate(s) characteristics to company performance. If selection were a problem,
we would expect the characteristics of candidates who are not hired as the CEO of a particular company
to be similar to those of the hired candidates and, therefore, to help explain performance. However, we
find no systematic relation between the qualities of candidates who are not hired for a particular job and
subsequent outcomes.
The sample also is selected in that the sample firms are LBO- and VC-funded firms. These may
differ in some ways from public, family owned, and other companies. While we do not have the data to
address this issue, we discuss the likelihood that our results generalize in the summary and conclusions.

VIII.

Summary and Conclusion
Using a novel dataset of assessments of CEO candidates of companies involved in private equity

transactions (PE), we study how CEO characteristics and abilities relate to hiring decisions, PE firms’
investment decisions, and subsequent performance. The candidates are assessed on more than 30
individual characteristics. To our knowledge, this is the first systematic study with this level of detail on
CEOs’ specific characteristics, skills and abilities.
First, when studying the characteristics and abilities, we find that CEO ratings are strongly
positively correlated across characteristics and abilities. A factor analysis of these characteristics
generates two strong factors that can be characterized as a general talent factor and a factor that contrasts

25

interpersonal and team-related skills with execution-related skills. We also find that outsiders are rated
more highly than incumbents, particularly for buyout firms.
Next, we relate the abilities and characteristics to hiring and investment decisions. CEOs appear
to be hired based on general ratings or talent. Many individual abilities are significant, particularly for
outsider hires. Those abilities can be characterized as interpersonal / team-related, execution-related, and
neutral. There is a strong tendency to hire incumbent CEOs, holding ratings or talent constant. We also
find that both LBO and VC investors tend to invest in more highly rated CEOs.
Finally, we relate the characteristics and abilities to subsequent performance or success. Success
tends to be positively related to execution-related skills, particularly for LBO CEOs, and tends to be
unrelated or negatively related to team-related skills, particularly for the VC CEOs. Success is not related
to incumbency for LBO CEOs and, at best, only marginally for VC CEOs.
We believe our results have several implications. First, it is possible to measure individual CEO
talents and skills over and above the usual observable variables like age, industry and college SAT scores.
Second, the CEO talents and skills appear to matter in that they are consistently correlated with
hiring, investment, and performance.
Third, success and performance are more strongly correlated with execution-related skills than
with interpersonal and team-related skills, conditional on hiring a CEO. In other words, CEOs with the
execution-related skills of a Jack Welch appear more successful than CEOs with the more team-related
skills of Jeff Immelt. This is consistent with the prediction in Bolton et al. (2008) that more “resolute,
steadfast CEOs who stick to their guns tend to be better leaders than ‘good listeners’.” It also is
consistent with results in the psychology literature that tend to find “conscientiousness” is the best
predictor of performance. Our results are consistent with Collins’ (2001) findings that “Level 5” CEOs
have unwavering resolve, are fanatically driven, and exhibit workmanlike diligence. At the same time,
our results do not support Collins’ findings that successful CEOs exhibit compelling modesty, build
strong teams, and give credit to others / take blame on themselves.

26

Fourth, while team-related skills are significantly related to hiring and investment decisions, they
are not related to success and performance. This suggests that, on the margin, team-related skills may be
overweighted in hiring decisions. It is worth addressing the fact that this suggests that firms do not
always make optimal hiring decisions. This may occur because an ideal candidate is not available or
because private benefits (e.g., of a founder) affect the decision. It also may occur because investors and
companies do not have the right information or decision rules to compare candidates and need to learn.
Fifth, incumbent or insider CEOs are no more successful than outside candidates, holding talent
constant, particularly for LBOs. This is consistent with the predictions of Murphy and Zabonjik (2004)
and others, and less consistent with the admonition in Khurana (2002) to focus on insiders and avoid
outsiders. Our results suggest that investors should hire the CEO candidate with the most talent.
Finally, we recognize that the data and analysis have limitations. First, the results reflect buyout
and VC-funded companies. While these are two quite different groups, these types of companies may
have specific needs and, therefore, the results may not generalize to all companies. Second, the
performance data are coarse and potentially noisy.
That said, the correlation of our results with the description of the “Effective Executive” in
Drucker (1967) is suggestive. Drucker based his work on personal observation of all types of executives,
but, particularly, public company executives. According to Drucker, effective executives “differ widely
in their personalities, strengths, weaknesses, values and beliefs. All they have in common is they get the
right things done.” Those “right things,” detailed in separate chapters, include utilizing time efficiently,
focusing on contribution, making strengths productive, doing first things first, and making effective or
rational decisions. The attributes are largely execution-related and appear to correspond well to the
“efficient,” “persistent,” “proactive,” “commitment,” and “analytical” skills in our study.

27

References
Adams, Renee, Heitor Almeida, and Daniel Ferreira, 2006, “Powerful CEOs and their impact on
corporate performance” Review of Financial Studies.
Barrick, Murray, Michael Mount, and Timothy Judge, 2001, “Personality and Performance at the
Beginning of the New Millennium: What do We Know and Where Do We Go Next?”
International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 9.
Barsade, S., A. Ward, J. Turner and J. Sonnenfeld, 2001, “To your heart’s content: A model of affective
diversity in top management teams,” Administrative Science Quarterly, December, 802-836.
Ben-David, I., J. Graham, and C. Harvey, 2008, “Mangerial Overconfidence and Corporate Policies,”
working paper, Duke University.
Bennedsen, Morten, Francisco Pérez-González, and Daniel Wolfenzon, 2007, “Do CEOs Matter?”
Working paper, Columbia University.
Bertrand, Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, “Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm
policies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (4), 1169-1208.
Bloom, Nick and John Van Reenen, 2006, “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
Firms and Nations” working paper.
Bolton, Partick, Markus Brunnermeier and Laura Veldkamp, 2008, “Leadership, Coordination and
Mission-Driven Management,” working paper Columbia University.
Collins, Jim, 2001, Good to great: Why some companies make the leap and others don’t, Harper
Business: New York.
Drucker, Peter, 1967, The Effective Executive, Harper Collins: New York.
Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., MacCallum, R. C., and Strahan, E. J., 1999, “Evaluating the use of
exploratory factor analysis in psychological research,” Psychological Methods, 4, 272-299.
Fast Company, 2005, “The Fast Company Interview: Jeff Immelt,” Fast Company, 96, 60.
Frank, Murray and Vidhan Goyal, 2007, “How Much Do Managers Really Matter?” working paper.
Frydman, Carola, 2006, “Rising through the ranks: The evolution of the market for corporate executives,
1936-2003,” working paper, MIT.
Gabaix, Xavier and Augustin Landier, 2006, “Why Has CEO Pay Increased So Much?” working paper,
New York University.
Gompers, P., A. Kovner, J Lerner, and D. Scharfstein, 2006, “Skill vs. Luck in Entrepreneurship and
Venture Capital: Evidence from Serial Entrepreneurs,” working paper, Harvard Business School.
Graham, J., C. Harvey, and M. Puri, 2008, “Managerial Attitudes and Corporate Actions,” working paper,
Duke University.

28

Graham, J. and K. Narasimhan, 2004, “Corporate Survival and Managerial Experiences During the Great
Depression,” working paper, Duke University.
Guthrie, James, and Deepak Datta, 1997, “Contextual Influences on Executive Selection: Firm
Characteristics and CEO Experience” Journal of Management Studies, 34, 4.
Hambrick, Donald C. and Phyllis A. Mason, 1984, “Upper Echelons: The Organization as a Reflection of
Its Top Managers” Academy of Management Review, 9, 2, 193-206.
Hellmann, Thomas and Manju Puri, 2002, “Venture capital and the professionalization of start-up firms:
Empirical evidence,” Journal of Finance.
Hochberg, Y., A. Ljungqvist, and Y. Lu, 2007, “Venture Capital Networks and Investment Performance,”
Journal of Finance, 62, 1.
John, O. P., and S. Srivastava, 1999, “The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and theoretical
perspectives,” In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research
(2nd ed., pp. 102-138), Guilford: New York.
Jolliffe, I., 2004, Principal Component Analysis, 2nd. ed., Springer: New York.
Kaplan, Steven, Berk Sensoy and Per Stromberg, forthcoming, “What are Firms? Evolution from Early
Business Plans to Public Companies,” Journal of Finance.
Kaplan, Steven and Per Stromberg, 2004, “Characteristics, Contracts, and Actions: Evidence From
Venture Capitalist Analyses,” Journal of Finance, 59, 2177-2210.
Khurana, Rakesh, 2002, Searching for a Corporate Savior: The Irrational Quest for Charismatic CEOs,
Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ.
Lazear, Edward P. and Sherwin Rosen, 1981, “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts,”
Journal of Political Economy, 89, 5, 841-864.
Malmendier, Ulrike and G. Tate, 2006, “CEO overconfidence and Corporate Investment,” Journal of
Finance.
Morgeson, F., M. Campion, R. Dipboye, J. Hollenbeck, K. Murphy, and N. Schmitt, forthcoming, “Are
We Getting Fooled Again? Coming to Terms with Limitations in the Use of Personality Tests for
Personnel Selection,” Personnel Psychology.
Mount, M., M. Barrick, and J. P. Strauss, 1994, “Validity of Observer Ratings of the Big Five Personality
Factors,” Journal of Applied Psychology 79, 2, 272-280.
Murphy, Kevin J., and Jan Zabojnik, 2004, “CEO Pay and Turnover: A Market Based Explanation for
Recent Trends,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 94, 192-196.
Rosen, Sherwin, 1981, “The Economics of Superstars,” American Economic Review, 71, 5, 845-858.
Schoar, A., 2007, “CEO Careers and Styles,” working paper, MIT.

29

Smart, Bradford, 1999, Topgrading: How Leading Companies Win by Hiring, Coaching, and Keeping the
Best People, Penguin Group: New York.
Van Den Steen, E., 2005, “Organizational Beliefs and Managerial Vision,” Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization, 21(1), 256-283.
Zarutskie, Rebecca, 2007, “Do Venture Capitalists Affect Investment Performance? Evidence from FirstTime Funds,” working paper, Duke University.

30

TABLE 1: This table contains descriptions of the characteristics assessed by ghSMART for 316 CEO candidates.

Leadership:
Hires A Players
Develops People

Removes Underperformers

Treats People with Respect
Efficiency
Network of Talented People
Flexible/Adaptable

Description of Characteristic

Description of a Candidate with a
high score on this characteristic

Description of a Candidate with a
low score on this characteristic

Sources, recruits,hires A Players.
Coaches people in their current roles to
improve performance, and prepares them
for future roles.
Removes C Players within 180 days.
Achieves this through coaching-out,
redeployment, demotion, or termination.
Values others, treating them fairly and
showing concern for their views and
feelings.
Able to produce significant output with
minimal wasted effort.
Possesses a large network of talented
people.
Adjusts quickly to changing priorities and
conditions. Copes with complexity and
change.

Hires A Players 90% of the time.
Teams say that Candidate gives a lot
of coaching / development. Many
team members go on to bigger roles.
Removes C Players within 180 days
of taking a new role or hiring the
person.
Teams would say Candidate is fair
and respectful. Candidate describes
performance in terms of team efforts.
Candidate gets a lot done in a short
period of time.
Candidate has a proven ability to
build a network very quickly.
Candidate is not bothered by new or
changing circumstances. Faces
change in a matter-of-fact manner.

Hires A Players 25% of the time.
Teams do not say on Candidate gives a
lot of coaching. Team members do not
go on to do better things.

Does not cut corners ethically. Earns
trust and maintains confidences.
Plans, organizes, schedules, and budgets
in an efficient, productive manner.
Maintains stable performance when under
heavy pressure or stress.
Moves quickly and takes a forceful stand
without being overly abrasive.
Takes action quickly without getting
bogged down by obstacles.
Lives up to verbal and written
agreements, regardless of personal cost.

Takes pride in always doing what is
right.
Job accomplishments closely match
goals. Candidate sets priorities.
Performs under a wide variety of
circumstances, regardless of stress.
Candidate sticks neck out with words
and actions, even if upsets others.
Candidate takes action and gets a lot
done in a short period of time.

May remove occasional C Player, but
keeps most of them, often for years.
Candidate is self-absorbed. Team
members might call Candidate
abrasive, rough around the edges.
Candidate’s output is unimpressive. He
is a “thinker” with poor execution.
Candidate does not have big network
and shows limited ability to build one.
Candidate bristles when changes take
place, often blames others for not doing
their jobs.

Personal:
Integrity
Organization and Planning
Calm Under Pressure
Aggressive but respectful
Moves Fast
Follows through on
Commitments

Gets the job done, no matter what.

Cuts corners, unaware of how actions
are borderline unethical.
Candidates’ accomplishments do not
match goals, and individual meanders.
Overreacts to high pressure situations.
Fails to accomplish goals under stress.
Candidate takes a wait-and-see attitude,
moving more slowly to minimize risk.
Candidate is slow to accomplish
results.
Does not live up to verbal or written
agreements.

Intellectual:
Brainpower
Analytical Skills
Strategic Thinking/Visioning
Creative/Innovative
Attention to Detail

Learns quickly. Demonstrates ability to
quickly understand and absorb new info.
Structures and processes qualitative or
quantitative data and draws conclusions.
Able to see and communicate the big
picture in an inspiring way.
Generates new and innovative approaches
to problems.
Does not let important details slip through
the cracks or derail a project.

High GPA and SAT scores, ability to
pick-up new job details quickly.
Cites multiple examples of problem
solving skills.
Holds a big vision for current and
future roles. Inspires others vision.
Offers new and innovative solutions to
intractable problems many times.
Makes time to review the details. Asks
penetrating questions.

Low GPA and SAT scores. May remain
in same role for a long time.
Rarely solves problems through analysis.
Heavy reliance on gut.
Does not have a vision for current or
future roles. Does not value planning.

Exhibits passion and excitement over work.
Has a “can do” attitude.
Demonstrates tenacity and willingness to go
the distance to get something done.
Acts without being told what to do. Brings
new ideas to company.
Possesses a strong willingness to work hard
and long hours to get the job done.
Expects personal performance and team
performance to be the best.

Displays high energy and a passion for
the work..
Never gives up. Sticks with
assignments until they are done.
Regularly brings new ideas into an
organization. Self directed.
Works long, hard hours to get the job
done.
Expects top performance from himself
and from others around him.

Displays low energy and limited passion
for the work.

Lets others speak and seeks to understand
their viewpoints.
Often solicits feedback and reacts calmly to
receiving criticism.
Writes clearly and articulately using correct
grammar.
Speaks clearly and articulately without
being overly verbose or talkative.
Reaches out to peers and cooperates with
supervisors to establish relationship.
Able to convince others to pursue a course
of action
Sets goals for team and follows-up to ensure
progress toward completion.

Displays ability to listen to others to
understand meaning.
Responds to criticism by finding ways
to grow and become better.
Demonstrates ability to write clearly in
all forms of communication.
Speaks clearly, articulately, and
succinctly.
Recognizes the power of a strong team,
and works collaboratively.
Convinces others to take a course of
action, even if initially in opposition.
Sets goals, follows-up, and holds
people accountable for shortfalls.

Cuts people off, does not address
questions, misunderstands.
Reacts to criticism by blaming others and
becoming bitter.
Does not offer any evidence of being a
strong writer.
Speaks too quickly or too slowly,
mumbles, uses a lot of jargon, etc.
Prefers to operate in isolation. May not
work harmoniously with others.
Fails to or never tries to convince others
to take a course of action.
Does not set goals, follow-up, or hold
people accountable.

Rarely offers creative solutions.
Makes many mistakes because of
ignoring small, but important details.

Motivational:
Enthusiasm
Persistence
Proactive /Initiative
Work Ethic
Sets High Standards

Has a track record of giving up.
Never brings in new ideas. Takes
direction / does not act until being told.
Does just enough to get the job done.
Allows himself to do 80% of the job /
lets poor performance from others slide

Interpersonal:
Listening Skills
Open to Criticism and Ideas
Written Communication
Oral Communication
Teamwork
Persuasion
Holds People Accountable

TABLE 2: Descriptive tabulations of 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART with respect to whether
assessed candidates are hired or not, incumbents or outsiders, assessed by LBO or VC investors, successful
or not, and the number of candidates assessed for each company.

Panel A: Hiring and Incumbency
Full Sample
Hired
1
Incumbent 0
65
0 80
1 12
159
Total 92
224

Total
145
171
316

Panel B: Hiring and Investments by Investor Type and Incumbency
Full Sample
Hired
1
Total
Invest 0
26
56
82
0
1
66
168
234
Total
92
224
316
Buyout Investors
Hired
0
16
33
49

1
18
81
99

Total
34
114
148

Venture Capital Investors
Hired
1
Invest
0
10
38
0
1
33
87
Total
43
125

Total
48
120
168

Outsiders (Incumbent = 0)
Hired
1
Invest 0
25
4
0
1
55
61
Total
80
65

Total
29
116
145

Insiders (Incumbent = 1)
Hired
1
Invest 0
1
52
0
1
11
107
Total
12
159

Total
53
118
171

Invest
0
1
Total

Panel C: Incumbency and Hiring Decisions by Investment
PE Firm Invested (181 Companies)
Hired
0
1
Total
Incumbent
0 55
61
116
1 11 107
118
Total 66 168
234

PE Firm Not Invested (77 Companies)
Hired
0
1
Total
Incumbent
0 25
4
29
1
1
52
53
Total 26
56
82

Panel D: PE and Public Success Measures
Success
Success (PE Measure)
(Public
Measure)
0
0.5
1
.
0
30
4
0
33
0.5
0
3
0
2
1
0
2
37
15
.
0
5
0
93
Total
30
14
37
143

Total
67
5
54
98
224

Panel E: Broad and Public Success Measures
Success
Success (Broad Measure)
(Public
Measure)
0
0.5
1
.
0
64
2
0
1
0.5
0
4
1
0
1
0
0
54
0
.
20
26
37
15
Total
84
32
92
16

Total
67
5
54
98
224

Panel F: Candidates Assessed Per Company
Candidates
Interviewed
Freq.
1
219
2
26
3
9
4
2
5
2
Total
258

TABLE 3: Mean rating, standard deviation, minimum and maximum ratings for each individual
characteristic for 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART. A higher number reflects a better rating.
Panel A: Distribution of Individual Ratings
Hires A Players
Develops People
Removes Underperformers
Respect
Efficiency
Network
Flexibility
Integrity
Organization
Calm
Aggressive
Fast
Commitments
Brainpower
Analysis
Strategic
Creative
Attention to Details
Enthusiasm
Persistence
Proactive
Work Ethics
High Standards
Listening Skills
Open to Criticism
Written Communication
Oral Communication
Teamwork
Persuasion
Accountable

Mean
2.201
2.248
1.914
2.910
2.868
2.619
2.603
3.594
2.752
3.188
3.136
3.023
3.340
2.865
2.579
2.562
2.671
2.170
3.016
3.425
3.354
3.564
2.961
2.534
2.287
2.672
2.961
2.707
2.955
2.545

Obs.
[314]
[315]
[314]
[310]
[311]
[312]
[310]
[308]
[311]
[309]
[308]
[309]
[312]
[312]
[311]
[313]
[313]
[312]
[313]
[294]
[308]
[312]
[311]
[313]
[307]
[244]
[311]
[311]
[313]
[308]

Std. Dev.
1.139
1.138
1.131
1.233
1.158
1.197
1.212
0.851
1.183
1.055
1.037
1.115
0.966
1.103
1.239
1.226
1.142
1.162
1.079
0.909
0.993
0.795
1.106
1.214
1.192
1.210
1.034
1.200
1.097
1.189

Min
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Max
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

Panel B: Comparison of Buyout and Venture Capital deals and Incumbents and Outsiders.
Venture Capital
Buyout
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.143 [147]
2.251 [167]
-0.108 0.400
Develops People
2.257 [148]
2.240 [167]
0.017 0.894
Removes Underperformers 1.932 [147]
1.898 [167]
0.034 0.792
2.755 [163]
0.327 0.019 **
Respect
3.082 [147]
2.921 [165]
-0.113 0.391
Efficiency
2.808 [146]
2.576 [165]
0.091 0.504
Network
2.667 [147]
[146]
2.476
[164]
0.271 0.049 **
Flexibility
2.747
3.546 [163]
0.102 0.293
Integrity
3.648 [145]
2.739 [165]
0.028 0.837
Organization
2.767 [146]
3.262 [164]
-0.159 0.187
Calm
3.103 [145]
3.154 [162]
-0.038 0.749
Aggressive
3.116 [146]
3.030 [164]
-0.016 0.896
Fast
3.014 [145]
3.212 [165]
0.271 0.013 **
Commitments
3.483 [147]
2.964 [165]
-0.209 0.096 *
Brainpower
2.755 [147]
2.635 [167]
-0.121 0.392
Analysis
2.514 [144]
2.687 [166]
-0.265 0.056 *
Strategic
2.422 [147]
2.681 [166]
-0.021 0.872
Creative
2.660 [147]
1.945 [165]
0.477 0.000 ***
Attention to Details
2.422 [147]
2.933 [165]
0.175 0.153
Enthusiasm
3.108 [148]
3.281 [153]
0.301 0.004 ***
Persistence
3.582 [141]
[145]
3.276
[163]
0.165 0.145
Proactive
3.441
3.536 [166]
0.060 0.509
Work Ethics
3.596 [146]
2.878 [164]
0.176 0.161
High Standards
3.054 [147]
2.388 [165]
0.308 0.025 **
Listening Skills
2.696 [148]
2.130 [162]
0.332 0.014 **
Open to Criticism
2.462 [145]
2.718 [117]
-0.088 0.571
Written Communication
2.630 [127]
2.957 [164]
0.009 0.941
Oral Communication
2.966 [147]
2.618 [165]
0.190 0.164
Teamwork
2.808 [146]
2.909 [165]
0.098 0.432
Persuasion
3.007 [148]
2.454 [163]
0.194 0.153
Accountable
2.648 [145]

Incumbents
Mean
Obs.
2.012 [169]
2.088 [170]
1.834 [169]
2.929 [169]
2.740 [169]
2.497 [169]
2.518 [168]
3.588 [165]
2.619 [168]
3.137 [168]
3.222 [167]
3.060 [168]
3.320 [169]
2.935 [168]
2.462 [169]
2.618 [170]
2.781 [169]
2.113 [168]
3.035 [170]
3.484 [159]
3.395 [167]
3.521 [167]
2.869 [168]
2.482 [170]
2.204 [167]
2.677 [130]
2.846 [169]
2.675 [169]
2.971 [170]
2.361 [166]

Outsiders
Mean
Obs.
2.421 [145]
2.434 [145]
2.007 [145]
2.887 [141]
3.021 [142]
2.762 [143]
2.704 [142]
3.601 [143]
2.909 [143]
3.248 [141]
3.035 [141]
2.979 [141]
3.364 [143]
2.785 [144]
2.718 [142]
2.497 [143]
2.542 [144]
2.236 [144]
2.993 [143]
3.356 [135]
3.305 [141]
3.614 [145]
3.070 [143]
2.594 [143]
2.386 [140]
2.667 [114]
3.099 [142]
2.746 [142]
2.937 [143]
2.761 [142]

Means P-value
-0.409 0.001 ***
-0.346 0.007 ***
-0.173 0.178
0.042 0.763
-0.281 0.032 **
-0.265 0.051 *
-0.186 0.178
-0.014 0.890
-0.290 0.031 **
-0.111 0.357
0.186 0.117
0.081 0.527
-0.044 0.688
0.150 0.232
-0.257 0.069 *
0.121 0.385
0.239 0.065 *
-0.123 0.352
0.042 0.730
0.129 0.227
0.090 0.427
-0.093 0.305
-0.201 0.111
-0.112 0.417
-0.182 0.183
0.010 0.947
-0.252 0.032 **
-0.072 0.599
0.034 0.788
-0.399 0.003 ***

Panel C: Comparison of Incumbents and Outsiders for Buyout and Venture Capital Deals.
Buyout
Incumbents
Outsiders
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
1.868
[68]
2.380
[79]
-0.512 0.005 ***
Develops People
2.029
[69]
2.456
[79]
-0.427 0.026 **
Removes Underperformers 1.735
[68]
2.101
[79]
-0.366 0.049 **
[68]
3.038
[79]
0.094 0.620
Respect
3.132
Efficiency
2.706
[68]
2.897
[78]
-0.192 0.303
Network
2.500
[68]
2.810
[79]
-0.310 0.128
[68]
2.872
[78]
-0.269 0.179
Flexibility
2.603
Integrity
3.652
[66]
3.646
[79]
0.006 0.964
[68]
3.000
[78]
-0.500 0.009 ***
Organization
2.500
Calm
3.030
[67]
3.167
[78]
-0.137 0.428
[67]
3.063
[79]
0.116 0.505
Aggressive
3.179
Fast
3.059
[68]
2.974
[77]
0.085 0.662
[68]
3.392
[79]
0.196 0.190
Commitments
3.588
Brainpower
2.676
[68]
2.823
[79]
-0.146 0.434
[68]
2.803
[76]
-0.611 0.003 ***
Analysis
2.191
Strategic
2.377
[69]
2.462
[78]
-0.085 0.667
[68]
2.633
[79]
0.058 0.766
Creative
2.691
Attention to Details
2.338
[68]
2.494
[79]
-0.155 0.437
[69]
3.038
[79]
0.150 0.390
Enthusiasm
3.188
Persistence
3.708
[65]
3.474
[76]
0.234 0.078 *
[68]
3.455
[77]
-0.028 0.859
Proactive
3.426
[67]
3.671
[79]
-0.163 0.221
Work Ethics
3.507
High Standards
2.912
[68]
3.177
[79]
-0.265 0.142
[69]
2.722
[79]
-0.055 0.780
Listening Skills
2.667
Open to Criticism
2.309
[68]
2.597
[77]
-0.289 0.142
[57]
2.771
[70]
-0.315 0.126
Written Communication
2.456
Oral Communication
2.794
[68]
3.114
[79]
-0.320 0.054 *
[68]
2.872
[78]
-0.137 0.482
Teamwork
2.735
Persuasion
3.029
[69]
2.987
[79]
0.042 0.817
[67]
2.872
[78]
-0.484 0.014 **
Accountable
2.388

Incumbents
Mean
Obs.
2.109 [101]
2.129 [101]
1.901 [101]
2.792 [101]
2.762 [101]
2.495 [101]
2.460 [100]
3.545
[99]
2.700 [100]
3.208 [101]
3.250 [100]
3.060 [100]
3.139 [101]
3.110 [100]
2.644 [101]
2.782 [101]
2.842 [101]
1.960 [100]
2.931 [101]
3.330
[94]
3.374
[99]
3.530 [100]
2.840 [100]
2.356 [101]
2.131
[99]
2.849
[73]
2.881 [101]
2.634 [101]
2.931 [101]
2.343
[99]

Venture Capital
Outsiders
Mean
Obs.
2.470
[66]
2.409
[66]
1.894
[66]
2.694
[62]
3.172
[64]
2.703
[64]
2.500
[64]
3.547
[64]
2.800
[65]
3.349
[63]
3.000
[62]
2.984
[64]
3.328
[64]
2.738
[65]
2.621
[66]
2.538
[65]
2.431
[65]
1.923
[65]
2.938
[64]
3.203
[59]
3.125
[64]
3.545
[66]
2.938
[64]
2.438
[64]
2.127
[63]
2.500
[44]
3.079
[63]
2.594
[64]
2.875
[64]
2.625
[64]

Means P-value
-0.361 0.050 **
-0.280 0.112
0.007 0.969
0.099 0.638
-0.409 0.031 **
-0.208 0.267
-0.040 0.837
-0.001 0.992
-0.100 0.602
-0.141 0.414
0.250 0.136
0.076 0.662
-0.190 0.239
0.372 0.030 **
0.022 0.909
0.244 0.221
0.411 0.020 **
0.037 0.831
-0.007 0.969
0.126 0.444
0.249 0.133
-0.015 0.902
-0.098 0.587
-0.081 0.679
0.004 0.982
0.349 0.151
-0.198 0.247
0.040 0.839
0.056 0.754
-0.282 0.140

TABLE 4 Panel A presents factors loadings on the four main factors based on 30 characteristics for 316
CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART. Panel B presents factors loadings on the two concentrated factors
after an oblique quartimin rotation. Loadings with absolute values less than 0.1 are left blank.
Panel A: Factor Loadings for Individual Characteristics
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Hires A Players
0.552
0.206
Develops People
0.512
0.274
Removes Underperformers
0.452
-0.135
0.244
Respect
0.355
0.651
-0.179
Efficiency
0.683
-0.135
Network
0.582
Flexibility
0.535
0.246
-0.108
Integrity
0.329
0.322
Organization
0.516
0.427
Calm
0.373
0.258
Aggressive
0.482
-0.481
-0.231
Fast
0.504
-0.535
-0.241
Commitments
0.629
-0.125
Brainpower
0.483
-0.182
0.260
Analysis
0.461
-0.106
0.503
Strategic
0.529
-0.199
0.110
Creative
0.468
-0.133
Attention to Details
0.341
0.149
0.351
Enthusiasm
0.440
0.156
-0.463
Persistence
0.564
-0.347
-0.288
Proactive
0.657
-0.332
-0.273
Work Ethics
0.430
-0.278
High Standards
0.664
-0.267
Listening Skills
0.450
0.599
Open to Criticism
0.441
0.616
Written Communication
0.444
0.139
0.306
Oral Communication
0.521
0.237
-0.124
Teamwork
0.514
0.519
-0.145
Persuasion
0.553
-0.405
Accountable
0.548
-0.218
0.291
Panel B: Factor loadings for Concentrated Factors
Alt. Factor 1 Alt. Factor 2
Fast
0.780
Aggressive
0.731
Persistence
0.706
Efficiency
0.594
Proactive
0.771
High Standards
0.636
Respect
0.734
Open to Criticism
0.774
Listening Skills
0.761
Teamwork
0.720

Factor 4
-0.108
-0.180
-0.236
-0.104
0.110
-0.117

-0.213
0.434
0.251
0.474
0.386
-0.231

-0.252

0.316
0.156
0.123
-0.385

TABLE 5 Characteristics and Hiring Decisions. Mean ratings of hired and non-hired candidates from 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART.
Panel A: Comparison of Hired and Non-hired Candidates.
Hired
Not Hired
Diff. means
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
P-value
Hires A Players
2.221
[222]
2.152
[92]
0.069
0.628
Develops People
2.287
[223]
2.152
[92]
0.135
0.340
1.955
[222]
1.815
[92]
0.140
0.320
Removes Underperformers
Respect
2.950
[219]
2.813
[91]
0.137
0.375
[219]
2.793
[92]
0.106
0.462
Efficiency
2.900
[221]
2.659
[91]
-0.058
0.700
Network
2.602
[219]
2.549
[91]
0.076
0.615
Flexibility
2.626
[219]
3.461
[89]
0.188
0.079 *
Integrity
3.648
[219]
2.652
[92]
0.142
0.334
Organization
2.795
[219]
3.167
[90]
0.030
0.823
Calm
3.196
[217]
2.923
[91]
0.303
0.019 **
Aggressive
3.226
[219]
2.833
[90]
0.267
0.056 *
Fast
3.100
[222]
3.100
[90]
0.337
0.005 ***
Committments
3.437
Brainpower
2.914
[220]
2.750
[92]
0.164
0.233
[220]
2.604
[91]
-0.036
0.815
Analysis
2.568
[221]
2.413
[92]
0.211
0.165
Strategic
2.624
[221]
2.446
[92]
0.319
0.024 **
Creative
2.765
[220]
2.033
[92]
0.195
0.178
Attention to Details
2.227
[222]
2.736
[91]
0.394
0.003 ***
Enthusiasm
3.131
Persistence
3.502
[209]
3.235
[85]
0.267
0.022 **
[216]
3.185
[92]
0.241
0.051 *
Proactive
3.426
[220]
3.511
[92]
0.075
0.445
Work Ethics
3.586
[220]
2.879
[91]
0.116
0.400
High Standards
2.995
[222]
2.462
[91]
0.102
0.503
Listening Skills
2.563
[217]
2.111
[90]
0.248
0.097 *
Open to Criticism
2.359
[167]
2.468
[77]
0.299
0.073 *
Written Communication
2.766
[221]
2.889
[90]
0.102
0.431
Oral Communication
2.991
[220]
2.495
[91]
0.301
0.044 **
Teamwork
2.795
[222]
2.758
[91]
0.278
0.042 **
Persuasion
3.036
[218]
2.567
[90]
-0.030
0.841
Accountable
2.537

Panel B: Comparison of Hired and Non-hired Candidates for Buyout and Venture Capital deals.
Buyout
Hired
Non-Hired
Hired
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.112
[98]
2.204
[49]
-0.092 0.638
2.306 [124]
Develops People
2.273
[99]
2.224
[49]
0.048 0.814
2.298 [124]
[98]
1.857
[49]
0.112 0.571
1.944 [124]
Removes Underperformers 1.969
Respect
3.163
[98]
2.918
[49]
0.245 0.222
2.777 [121]
[97]
2.776
[49]
0.049 0.802
2.959 [122]
Efficiency
2.825
Network
2.653
[98]
2.694
[49]
-0.041 0.850
2.561 [123]
Flexibility
2.845
[97]
2.551
[49]
0.294 0.163
2.451 [122]
[97]
3.625
[48]
0.035 0.803
3.639 [122]
Integrity
3.660
Organization
2.753
[97]
2.796
[49]
-0.043 0.833
2.828 [122]
[97]
3.062
[48]
0.061 0.738
3.254 [122]
Calm
3.124
Aggressive
3.227
[97]
2.898
[49]
0.329 0.071 *
3.225 [120]
[96]
2.776
[49]
0.360 0.077 *
3.073 [123]
Fast
3.135
Commitments
3.636
[99]
3.167
[48]
0.470 0.003 ***
3.276 [123]
[98]
2.837
[49]
-0.122 0.536
3.074 [122]
Brainpower
2.714
Analysis
2.385
[96]
2.771
[48]
-0.385 0.080 *
2.710 [124]
[98]
2.367
[49]
0.082 0.696
2.764 [123]
Strategic
2.449
Creative
2.755
[98]
2.469
[49]
0.286 0.167
2.772 [123]
[98]
2.184
[49]
0.357 0.090 *
1.975 [122]
Attention to Details
2.541
[99]
2.714
[49]
0.589 0.001 ***
2.992 [123]
Enthusiasm
3.303
Persistence
3.713
[94]
3.319
[47]
0.394 0.005 ***
3.330 [115]
Proactive
3.542
[96]
3.245
[49]
0.297 0.073 *
3.333 [120]
[97]
3.510
[49]
0.129 0.360
3.545 [123]
Work Ethics
3.639
High Standards
3.102
[98]
2.959
[49]
0.143 0.456
2.910 [122]
Listening Skills
2.737
[99]
2.612
[49]
0.125 0.548
2.423 [123]
[97]
2.229
[48]
0.348 0.094 *
2.183 [120]
Open to Criticism
2.577
Written Communication
2.634
[82]
2.622
[45]
0.012 0.956
2.894
[85]
[98]
2.918
[49]
0.071 0.685
2.992 [123]
Oral Communication
2.990
[97]
2.571
[49]
0.356 0.081 *
2.691 [123]
Teamwork
2.928
Persuasion
3.111
[99]
2.796
[49]
0.315 0.096 *
2.976 [123]
[97]
2.708
[48]
-0.090 0.670
2.471 [121]
Accountable
2.619

Venture Capital
Non-Hired
Mean
Obs.
2.093
[43]
2.070
[43]
1.767
[43]
2.690
[42]
2.814
[43]
2.619
[42]
2.548
[42]
3.268
[41]
2.488
[43]
3.286
[42]
2.952
[42]
2.902
[41]
3.024
[42]
2.651
[43]
2.419
[43]
2.465
[43]
2.419
[43]
1.860
[43]
2.762
[42]
3.132
[38]
3.116
[43]
3.512
[43]
2.786
[42]
2.286
[42]
1.976
[42]
2.250
[32]
2.854
[41]
2.405
[42]
2.714
[42]
2.405
[42]

Means P-value
0.213 0.302
0.229 0.248
0.176 0.384
0.086 0.710
0.145 0.495
-0.058 0.782
-0.097 0.656
0.371 0.023 **
0.339 0.111
-0.032 0.870
0.273 0.143
0.171 0.381
0.253 0.160
0.423 0.026 **
0.291 0.183
0.299 0.177
0.354 0.072 *
0.115 0.549
0.230 0.241
0.199 0.284
0.217 0.238
0.033 0.814
0.124 0.536
0.137 0.532
0.207 0.331
0.644 0.014 **
0.138 0.473
0.286 0.193
0.261 0.188
0.066 0.756

Panel C: Comparison of Hired and Non-Hired Candidates for Incumbents and Outsiders.
Incumbent
Hired
Non-Hired
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.057 [157]
1.417
[12]
0.641 0.064 *
Develops People
2.089 [158]
2.083
[12]
0.005 0.988
Removes Underperformers 1.885 [157]
1.167
[12]
0.719 0.030 **
Respect
2.917 [157]
3.083
[12]
-0.166 0.658
2.583
[12]
0.168 0.651
Efficiency
2.752 [157]
Network
2.490 [157]
2.583
[12]
-0.093 0.804
Flexibility
2.506 [156]
2.667
[12]
-0.160 0.661
Integrity
3.584 [154]
3.636
[11]
-0.052 0.849
Organization
2.641 [156]
2.333
[12]
0.308 0.406
Calm
3.121 [157]
3.364
[11]
-0.243 0.495
Aggressive
3.226 [155]
3.167
[12]
0.059 0.851
Fast
3.064 [156]
3.000
[12]
0.064 0.850
3.000
[11]
0.342 0.267
Commitments
3.342 [158]
Brainpower
2.955 [156]
2.667
[12]
0.288 0.388
Analysis
2.503 [157]
1.917
[12]
0.587 0.113
Strategic
2.646 [158]
2.250
[12]
0.396 0.294
3.250
[12]
-0.505 0.135
Creative
2.745 [157]
Attention to Details
2.109 [156]
2.167
[12]
-0.058 0.873
Enthusiasm
3.044 [158]
2.917
[12]
0.128 0.695
Persistence
3.480 [148]
3.545
[11]
-0.066 0.803
3.250
[12]
0.156 0.601
Proactive
3.406 [155]
Work Ethics
3.535 [155]
3.333
[12]
0.202 0.429
High Standards
2.891 [156]
2.583
[12]
0.308 0.382
Listening Skills
2.500 [158]
2.250
[12]
0.250 0.496
Open to Criticism
2.194 [155]
2.333
[12]
-0.140 0.693
Written Communication
2.713 [122]
2.125
[8]
0.588 0.215
2.750
[12]
0.104 0.749
Oral Communication
2.854 [157]
Teamwork
2.682 [157]
2.583
[12]
0.098 0.789
Persuasion
2.968 [158]
3.000
[12]
-0.032 0.927
Accountable
2.377 [154]
2.167
[12]
0.210 0.570

Hired
Mean
2.615
2.769
2.123
3.032
3.274
2.875
2.921
3.800
3.175
3.387
3.226
3.190
3.672
2.812
2.730
2.571
2.812
2.516
3.344
3.557
3.475
3.708
3.250
2.719
2.774
2.911
3.328
3.079
3.203
2.922

Obs.
[65]
[65]
[65]
[62]
[62]
[64]
[63]
[65]
[63]
[62]
[62]
[63]
[64]
[64]
[63]
[63]
[64]
[64]
[64]
[61]
[61]
[65]
[64]
[64]
[62]
[45]
[64]
[63]
[64]
[64]

Outsider
Non-Hired
Mean
Obs.
2.263
[80]
2.163
[80]
1.913
[80]
2.772
[79]
2.825
[80]
2.671
[79]
2.532
[79]
3.436
[78]
2.700
[80]
3.139
[79]
2.886
[79]
2.808
[78]
3.114
[79]
2.763
[80]
2.709
[79]
2.438
[80]
2.325
[80]
2.013
[80]
2.709
[79]
3.189
[74]
3.175
[80]
3.538
[80]
2.924
[79]
2.494
[79]
2.077
[78]
2.507
[69]
2.910
[78]
2.481
[79]
2.722
[79]
2.628
[78]

Means P-value
0.353 0.051 *
0.607 0.001 ***
0.211 0.275
0.260 0.210
0.449 0.010 ***
0.204 0.282
0.389 0.056 *
0.364 0.009 ***
0.475 0.010 ***
0.248 0.124
0.340 0.050 **
0.383 0.040 **
0.558 0.000 ***
0.050 0.786
0.021 0.919
0.134 0.507
0.487 0.011 **
0.503 0.007 ***
0.635 0.000 ***
0.368 0.029 **
0.300 0.075 *
0.170 0.162
0.326 0.057 *
0.225 0.269
0.697 0.001 ***
0.404 0.057 *
0.418 0.010 ***
0.598 0.002 ***
0.482 0.006 ***
0.294 0.117

Panel D: Comparison of Hired and Non-Hired candidates for companies assessing more than one candidate.
Non-Hired
Diff.
Hired
Means
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
P-value
Hires A Players
2.310
[42]
2.204
[54]
0.106 0.650
Develops People
2.524
[42]
2.222
[54]
0.302 0.201
Removes Underperformers 2.214
[42]
1.907
[54]
0.307 0.214
Respect
3.195
[41]
2.981
[53]
0.214 0.384
Efficiency
3.381
[42]
2.796
[54]
0.585 0.007 ***
Network
2.810
[42]
2.755
[53]
0.055 0.819
Flexibility
3.024
[42]
2.547
[53]
0.477 0.043 **
Integrity
3.810
[42]
3.547
[53]
0.262 0.110
Organization
2.929
[42]
2.667
[54]
0.262 0.283
[40]
3.208
[53]
0.167 0.419
Calm
3.375
Aggressive
3.585
[41]
3.019
[53]
0.566 0.004 ***
Fast
3.381
[42]
2.865
[52]
0.516 0.019 **
Commitments
3.732
[41]
3.075
[53]
0.656 0.000 ***
Brainpower
2.929
[42]
2.630
[54]
0.299 0.211
Analysis
2.619
[42]
2.685
[54]
-0.066 0.799
Strategic
2.561
[41]
2.333
[54]
0.228 0.359
Creative
2.927
[41]
2.315
[54]
0.612 0.009 ***
Attention to Details
2.548
[42]
1.963
[54]
0.585 0.010 ***
Enthusiasm
3.390
[41]
2.679
[53]
0.711 0.001 ***
Persistence
3.821
[39]
3.137
[51]
0.683 0.001 ***
Proactive
3.488
[41]
3.167
[54]
0.321 0.126
[42]
3.481
[54]
0.352 0.025 **
Work Ethics
3.833
High Standards
3.268
[41]
2.811
[53]
0.457 0.034 **
Listening Skills
2.268
[41]
2.491
[53]
-0.222 0.394
Open to Criticism
2.659
[41]
2.115
[52]
0.543 0.033 **
Written Communication
2.688
[32]
2.295
[44]
0.392 0.174
Oral Communication
3.244
[41]
3.019
[53]
0.225 0.294
[42]
2.774
[53]
0.203 0.402
Teamwork
2.976
Persuasion
3.415
[41]
2.736
[53]
0.679 0.002 ***
Accountable
2.951
[41]
2.491
[53]
0.461 0.055 *

TABLE 6: This table presents marginal effects of probit estimates of hiring decisions for 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART. The endogenous
variable is one if the candidate is hired and zero if not. Independent variables include three main factors from factor analysis and two alternative factors from
concentrated factor analysis described in table 4. P-values are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **,
and *, respectively. All standard errors are robust.
Full Sample
Outsider
Incumbent
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3

0.503 ***
(0.000)
0.099 ***
(0.000)
0.004
(0.864)
-0.006
(0.849)

0.487 ***
(0.000)
0.186 ***
(0.001)
0.004
(0.941)
-0.106 *
(0.082)

Buyout
0.295 ***
(0.001)
0.149 ***
(0.002)
0.014
(0.739)
-0.090 *
(0.087)

0.074 ***
(0.004)
0.045
(0.120)

Alt. Factor 1
Alt. Factor 2

Only invested deals
VC
Outsider
0.444 ***
(0.000)
0.102 **
(0.015)
-0.030
(0.430)
0.036
(0.438)
0.166 ***
(0.003)
0.081
(0.150)

Buyout
0.289 ***
(0.001)

VC
0.426 ***
(0.000)

0.136 ***
(0.003)
0.098 **
(0.044)

0.078 *
(0.069)
0.011
(0.824)

Year Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

316

316

116

114

120

116

114

120

TABLE 7 Characteristics and Invesment Decisions. Mean ratings of invested and non-invested candidates for 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART.
Panel A: Comparison of Candidates assessed for deals where Investor invests or not
Full Sample
Incumbents
Invest
Non-Invest
Diff.
Invest
Non-Invest
Diff.
Means P-value
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.227 [233]
2.123
[81]
0.104 0.480
1.949 [117]
2.154
[52]
-0.205 0.288
Develops People
2.321 [234]
2.037
[81]
0.283 0.053 *
2.102 [118]
2.058
[52]
0.044 0.816
1.815
[81]
0.134 0.360
1.829 [117]
1.846
[52]
-0.017 0.927
Removes Underperformers 1.948 [233]
Respect
2.939 [229]
2.827
[81]
0.112 0.484
2.949 [117]
2.885
[52]
0.064 0.759
Efficiency
2.987 [230]
2.531
[81]
0.456 0.002 *** 2.846 [117]
2.500
[52]
0.346 0.093 *
2.469
[81]
0.202 0.192
2.573 [117]
2.327
[52]
0.246 0.237
Network
2.671 [231]
Flexibility
2.683 [230]
2.375
[80]
0.308 0.050 **
2.647 [116]
2.231
[52]
0.416 0.040 **
Integrity
3.664 [229]
3.392
[79]
0.271 0.014 **
3.652 [115]
3.440
[50]
0.212 0.150
Organization
2.766 [231]
2.712
[80]
0.054 0.727
2.564 [117]
2.745
[51]
-0.181 0.383
3.123
[81]
0.087 0.525
3.138 [116]
3.135
[52]
0.003 0.986
Calm
3.211 [228]
Aggressive
3.150 [227]
3.099
[81]
0.051 0.705
3.200 [115]
3.269
[52]
-0.069 0.693
Fast
3.052 [230]
2.937
[79]
0.115 0.428
3.103 [117]
2.961
[51]
0.142 0.454
Commitments
3.416 [231]
3.123
[81]
0.292 0.019 **
3.385 [117]
3.173
[52]
0.212 0.198
2.852
[81]
0.018 0.898
3.026 [116]
2.731
[52]
0.295 0.112
Brainpower
2.870 [231]
Analysis
2.621 [232]
2.456
[79]
0.165 0.307
2.556 [117]
2.250
[52]
0.306 0.138
Strategic
2.558 [233]
2.575
[80]
-0.017 0.915
2.619 [118]
2.615
[52]
0.003 0.988
Creative
2.681 [232]
2.642
[81]
0.039 0.792
2.795 [117]
2.750
[52]
0.045 0.812
Attention to Details
2.220 [232]
2.025
[80]
0.195 0.196
2.137 [117]
2.059
[51]
0.078 0.699
2.864
[81]
0.205 0.142
3.085 [118]
2.923
[52]
0.162 0.371
Enthusiasm
3.069 [232]
Persistence
3.461 [217]
3.325
[77]
0.136 0.259
3.545 [110]
3.347
[49]
0.199 0.170
Proactive
3.410 [229]
3.190
[79]
0.221 0.089 *
3.491 [116]
3.176
[51]
0.315 0.059 *
3.388
[80]
0.237 0.021 **
3.612 [116]
3.314
[51]
0.298 0.036 **
Work Ethics
3.625 [232]
High Standards
3.022 [231]
2.788
[80]
0.234 0.103
2.949 [117]
2.686
[51]
0.262 0.183
Listening Skills
2.578 [232]
2.407
[81]
0.170 0.278
2.534 [118]
2.365
[52]
0.169 0.409
Open to Criticism
2.314 [229]
2.205
[78]
0.109 0.485
2.214 [117]
2.180
[50]
0.034 0.866
Written Communication
2.630 [181]
2.794
[63]
-0.164 0.356
2.615
[91]
2.821
[39]
-0.205 0.410
Oral Communication
2.996 [230]
2.864
[81]
0.131 0.326
2.829 [117]
2.885
[52]
-0.056 0.757
Teamwork
2.819 [232]
2.380
[79]
0.439 0.005 *** 2.780 [118]
2.431
[51]
0.348 0.089 *
Persuasion
2.987 [232]
2.864
[81]
0.123 0.386
3.000 [118]
2.904
[52]
0.096 0.615
Accountable
2.620 [229]
2.329
[79]
0.291 0.061 *
2.426 [115]
2.216
[51]
0.210 0.309

Panel B: Comparison of Investments and Non-Investments for Buyout and Venture Capital deals.
Buyouts
Invest
Non-Invest
Invest
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.159 [113]
2.088
[34]
0.071 0.745
2.292 [120]
Develops People
2.316 [114]
2.059
[34]
0.257 0.261
2.325 [120]
1.676
[34]
0.332 0.132
1.892 [120]
Removes Underperformers 2.009 [113]
Respect
3.062 [113]
3.147
[34]
-0.085 0.705
2.819 [116]
2.382
[34]
0.555 0.011 **
3.034 [118]
Efficiency
2.938 [112]
Network
2.717 [113]
2.500
[34]
0.217 0.369
2.627 [118]
Flexibility
2.850 [113]
2.394
[33]
0.456 0.055 *
2.521 [117]
3.333
[33]
0.408 0.008 ***
3.590 [117]
Integrity
3.741 [112]
Organization
2.723 [112]
2.912
[34]
-0.189 0.412
2.807 [119]
3.176
[34]
-0.095 0.639
3.333 [117]
Calm
3.081 [111]
Aggressive
3.143 [112]
3.029
[34]
0.113 0.579
3.157 [115]
2.970
[33]
0.057 0.805
3.076 [118]
Fast
3.027 [112]
Commitments
3.540 [113]
3.294
[34]
0.246 0.164
3.297 [118]
2.794
[34]
-0.051 0.819
2.992 [118]
Brainpower
2.743 [113]
Analysis
2.527 [112]
2.469
[32]
0.058 0.817
2.708 [120]
2.333
[33]
0.114 0.629
2.664 [119]
Strategic
2.447 [114]
Creative
2.717 [113]
2.471
[34]
0.246 0.287
2.647 [119]
2.294
[34]
0.166 0.483
1.992 [119]
Attention to Details
2.460 [113]
3.029
[34]
0.102 0.623
3.008 [118]
Enthusiasm
3.132 [114]
Persistence
3.617 [107]
3.471
[34]
0.146 0.346
3.309 [110]
Proactive
3.464 [112]
3.364
[33]
0.101 0.591
3.359 [117]
3.412
[34]
0.240 0.127
3.600 [120]
Work Ethics
3.652 [112]
High Standards
3.142 [113]
2.765
[34]
0.377 0.077 *
2.907 [118]
Listening Skills
2.702 [114]
2.676
[34]
0.025 0.914
2.458 [118]
2.333
[33]
0.167 0.477
2.137 [117]
Open to Criticism
2.500 [112]
Written Communication
2.571
[98]
2.828
[29]
-0.256 0.295
2.699
[83]
2.882
[34]
0.109 0.581
3.000 [117]
Oral Communication
2.991 [113]
2.469
[32]
0.435 0.062 *
2.737 [118]
Teamwork
2.904 [114]
Persuasion
3.018 [114]
2.971
[34]
0.047 0.826
2.958 [118]
2.333
[33]
0.408 0.083 *
2.504 [117]
Accountable
2.741 [112]

Venture Capital
Non-Invest
Mean
Obs.
2.149
[47]
2.021
[47]
1.915
[47]
2.596
[47]
2.638
[47]
2.447
[47]
2.362
[47]
3.435
[46]
2.565
[46]
3.085
[47]
3.149
[47]
2.913
[46]
3.000
[47]
2.894
[47]
2.447
[47]
2.745
[47]
2.766
[47]
1.826
[46]
2.745
[47]
3.209
[43]
3.065
[46]
3.370
[46]
2.804
[46]
2.213
[47]
2.111
[45]
2.765
[34]
2.851
[47]
2.319
[47]
2.787
[47]
2.326
[46]

Means P-value
0.143 0.478
0.304 0.114
-0.023 0.906
0.223 0.319
0.396 0.055 *
0.180 0.373
0.160 0.447
0.155 0.326
0.242 0.247
0.248 0.181
0.008 0.966
0.163 0.385
0.297 0.087 *
0.098 0.599
0.262 0.219
-0.081 0.709
-0.119 0.537
0.166 0.378
0.264 0.163
0.100 0.577
0.294 0.102
0.230 0.093 *
0.102 0.599
0.245 0.247
0.026 0.902
-0.066 0.800
0.149 0.420
0.418 0.048 **
0.170 0.375
0.178 0.390

TABLE 8: Marginal effects of probit estimates for investment decisions for 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART. The endogenous variable is whether
the private equity firm invested or not. Independent variables include three main factors from factor analysis and two alternative factors from concentrated factor
analysis described in table 4. P-values are reported in parentheses. Statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels is indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively.
All standard errors are robust.
Full
sample
Incumbent
-0.095 *
(0.065)
Factor 1
0.058 **
(0.026)
0.015
Factor 2
(0.567)
-0.024
Factor 3
(0.394)
Alt. Factor 1

Buyout
0.013
(0.867)
0.063
(0.106)
0.010
(0.799)
0.002
(0.960)

Venture
Capital
-0.200 ***
(0.008)
0.081 **
(0.030)
0.017
(0.660)
-0.035
(0.404)

Alt. Factor 2

Full
sample
-0.095 *
(0.060)

Buyout
0.001
(0.990)

0.043
(0.106)
0.048 *
(0.090)

0.042
(0.248)
0.042
(0.325)

Venture
Capital
-0.203 ***
(0.006)

0.067 *
(0.100)
0.062
(0.129)

Year Controls

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Observations

316

148

160

316

148

160

TABLE 9 Comparison of successful and non-successful CEOs hired from 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART. PE success measure is based on
responses from PE firms. Public success measure supplements PE measure with public information on CEO and company outcomes. Broad public success
measure supplements public measure with public information on CEO and company progress.
Panel A: Comparison of successful and non-successful candidates for Public and PE success measures
PE Success Measure
Public Success Measure
Success
Non-Success
Success
Non-Success
Diff.
Diff.
Means
Means
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
P-val
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
P-val
Hires A Players
2.514
[37]
2.033
[30]
0.480 0.135
2.333
[54]
2.104
[67]
0.229 0.311
Develops People
2.351
[37]
2.633
[30]
-0.282 0.357
2.389
[54]
2.313
[67]
0.075 0.727
Rem Underperformers
2.324
[37]
1.833
[30]
0.491 0.116
2.185
[54]
1.985
[67]
0.200 0.372
Respect
2.972
[36]
3.367
[30]
-0.394 0.153
3.038
[53]
3.179
[67]
-0.141 0.518
Efficiency
3.054
[37]
3.067
[30]
-0.013 0.965
3.074
[54]
2.925
[67]
0.149 0.490
Network
2.703
[37]
2.567
[30]
0.136 0.679
2.722
[54]
2.597
[67]
0.125 0.592
Flexibility
2.432
[37]
2.931
[29]
-0.499 0.121
2.593
[54]
2.742
[66]
-0.150 0.502
Integrity
3.865
[37]
3.867
[30]
-0.002 0.983
3.778
[54]
3.682
[66]
0.096 0.456
Organization
2.892
[37]
2.833
[30]
0.059 0.836
2.889
[54]
2.642
[67]
0.247 0.256
Calm
3.139
[36]
3.267
[30]
-0.128 0.650
3.113
[53]
3.209
[67]
-0.096 0.654
Aggressive
3.389
[36]
3.167
[30]
0.222 0.360
3.377
[53]
3.239
[67]
0.139 0.446
Fast
3.278
[36]
3.033
[30]
0.244 0.355
3.358
[53]
3.106
[66]
0.252 0.214
Commitments
3.500
[36]
3.467
[30]
0.033 0.884
3.585
[53]
3.493
[67]
0.092 0.547
Brainpower
3.108
[37]
2.931
[29]
0.177 0.502
3.241
[54]
2.924
[66]
0.316 0.111
Analysis
2.703
[37]
2.600
[30]
0.103 0.746
2.741
[54]
2.552
[67]
0.189 0.420
Strategic
2.694
[36]
2.700
[30]
-0.006 0.986
2.755
[53]
2.612
[67]
0.143 0.535
Creative
2.917
[36]
2.833
[30]
0.083 0.753
3.000
[53]
2.716
[67]
0.284 0.165
Attention to Details
2.324
[37]
2.233
[30]
0.091 0.763
2.241
[54]
2.167
[66]
0.074 0.732
Enthusiasm
3.111
[36]
3.267
[30]
-0.156 0.523
3.189
[53]
3.209
[67]
-0.020 0.913
Persistence
3.697
[33]
3.500
[30]
0.197 0.303
3.760
[50]
3.530
[66]
0.230 0.093 *
Proactive
3.750
[36]
3.367
[30]
0.383 0.053 *
3.736
[53]
3.364
[66]
0.372 0.015 **
Work Ethics
3.757
[37]
3.567
[30]
0.190 0.227
3.759
[54]
3.652
[66]
0.108 0.363
High Standards
3.222
[36]
2.867
[30]
0.356 0.213
3.208
[53]
2.985
[66]
0.223 0.285
Listening Skills
2.500
[36]
2.767
[30]
-0.267 0.397
2.491
[53]
2.552
[67]
-0.062 0.786
Open to Criticism
2.472
[36]
2.500
[30]
-0.028 0.930
2.434
[53]
2.303
[66]
0.131 0.571
Written Comm.
3.040
[25]
2.929
[28]
0.111 0.729
3.000
[40]
2.625
[56]
0.375 0.148
Oral Communication
2.972
[36]
3.300
[30]
-0.328 0.194
2.849
[53]
3.045
[67]
-0.196 0.304
Teamwork
2.649
[37]
3.333
[30]
-0.685 0.016 ** 2.741
[54]
2.955
[67]
-0.214 0.330
Persuasion
3.000
[36]
3.133
[30]
-0.133 0.634
3.151
[53]
3.075
[67]
0.076 0.693
Accountable
2.694
[36]
2.667
[30]
0.028 0.930
2.635
[52]
2.591
[66]
0.044 0.851

Panel B: Comparison of successful and non-successful candidates for Buyout and VC deals using PE success measure.
Buyout
Venture Capital
Success
Non-Success
Success
Non-Success
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.667
[21]
1.875
[8]
0.792 0.145
2.312
[16]
2.091
[22]
Develops People
2.571
[21]
2.375
[8]
0.196 0.711
2.062
[16]
2.727
[22]
[21]
1.875
[8]
0.506 0.358
2.250
[16]
1.818
[22]
Removes Underperformers 2.381
Respect
3.190
[21]
3.250
[8]
-0.060 0.894
2.667
[15]
3.409
[22]
[21]
2.500
[8]
0.976 0.017 **
2.500
[16]
3.273
[22]
Efficiency
3.476
Network
2.952
[21]
2.125
[8]
0.827 0.146
2.375
[16]
2.727
[22]
Flexibility
2.905
[21]
3.250
[8]
-0.345 0.497
1.812
[16]
2.810
[21]
[21]
3.875
[8]
0.030 0.822
3.812
[16]
3.864
[22]
Integrity
3.905
Organization
3.143
[21]
2.125
[8]
1.018 0.042 **
2.562
[16]
3.091
[22]
[21]
2.750
[8]
0.583 0.209
2.867
[15]
3.455
[22]
Calm
3.333
Aggressive
3.571
[21]
3.000
[8]
0.571 0.132
3.133
[15]
3.227
[22]
[20]
3.000
[8]
0.500 0.215
3.000
[16]
3.045
[22]
Fast
3.500
Commitments
3.905
[21]
3.375
[8]
0.530 0.024 **
2.933
[15]
3.500
[22]
[21]
2.500
[8]
0.690 0.122
3.000
[16]
3.095
[21]
Brainpower
3.190
Analysis
2.905
[21]
1.750
[8]
1.155 0.033 **
2.438
[16]
2.909
[22]
[21]
2.625
[8]
0.232 0.652
2.467
[15]
2.727
[22]
Strategic
2.857
Creative
3.048
[21]
3.125
[8]
-0.077 0.876
2.733
[15]
2.727
[22]
[21]
1.500
[8]
1.310 0.008 ***
1.688
[16]
2.500
[22]
Attention to Details
2.810
[21]
3.625
[8]
-0.292 0.404
2.800
[15]
3.136
[22]
Enthusiasm
3.333
Persistence
4.000
[21]
3.500
[8]
0.500 0.004 ***
3.167
[12]
3.500
[22]
Proactive
4.000
[21]
3.625
[8]
0.375 0.024 **
3.400
[15]
3.273
[22]
[21]
3.625
[8]
0.280 0.271
3.562
[16]
3.545
[22]
Work Ethics
3.905
High Standards
3.667
[21]
2.875
[8]
0.792 0.018 **
2.600
[15]
2.864
[22]
Listening Skills
2.810
[21]
2.750
[8]
0.060 0.908
2.067
[15]
2.773
[22]
[21]
2.375
[8]
0.482 0.363
1.933
[15]
2.545
[22]
Open to Criticism
2.857
Written Communication
2.889
[18]
2.250
[8]
0.639 0.186
3.429
[7]
3.200
[20]
[21]
3.250
[8]
-0.345 0.432
3.067
[15]
3.318
[22]
Oral Communication
2.905
[21]
3.500
[8]
-0.310 0.429
1.938
[16]
3.273
[22]
Teamwork
3.190
Persuasion
3.238
[21]
3.125
[8]
0.113 0.800
2.667
[15]
3.136
[22]
[21]
2.000
[8]
1.000 0.036 **
2.267
[15]
2.909
[22]
Accountable
3.000

Means P-value
0.222 0.614
-0.665 0.105
0.432 0.300
-0.742 0.058 *
-0.773 0.064 *
-0.352 0.420
-0.997 0.021 **
-0.051 0.680
-0.528 0.144
-0.588 0.131
-0.094 0.788
-0.045 0.904
-0.567 0.115
-0.095 0.789
-0.472 0.256
-0.261 0.543
0.006 0.985
-0.812 0.037 **
-0.336 0.348
-0.333 0.303
0.127 0.693
0.017 0.937
-0.264 0.545
-0.706 0.107
-0.612 0.144
0.229 0.654
-0.252 0.462
-1.335 0.001 ***
-0.470 0.239
-0.642 0.161

Panel C: Comparison of successful and non-successful candidates for Buyout and VC deals using public success measure
Buyout
Venture Capital
Success
Non-Success
Success
Non-Success
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.419
[31]
1.833
[24]
0.586 0.072 *
2.217
[23]
2.256
[43]
Develops People
2.645
[31]
2.125
[24]
0.520 0.106
2.043
[23]
2.419
[43]
[31]
1.958
[24]
0.332 0.310
2.043
[23]
2.000
[43]
Removes Underperformers 2.290
Respect
3.258
[31]
3.375
[24]
-0.117 0.691
2.727
[22]
3.070
[43]
[31]
2.458
[24]
1.026 0.000 *** 2.522
[23]
3.186
[43]
Efficiency
3.484
Network
3.000
[31]
2.458
[24]
0.542 0.115
2.348
[23]
2.674
[43]
Flexibility
2.968
[31]
3.167
[24]
-0.199 0.503
2.087
[23]
2.500
[42]
[31]
3.542
[24]
0.297 0.140
3.696
[23]
3.762
[42]
Integrity
3.839
Organization
3.000
[31]
2.042
[24]
0.958 0.003 *** 2.739
[23]
2.977
[43]
[31]
3.000
[24]
0.226 0.465
2.955
[22]
3.326
[43]
Calm
3.226
Aggressive
3.484
[31]
3.083
[24]
0.401 0.134
3.227
[22]
3.326
[43]
[30]
3.125
[24]
0.308 0.299
3.261
[23]
3.095
[42]
Fast
3.433
Commitments
3.935
[31]
3.333
[24]
0.602 0.001 *** 3.091
[22]
3.581
[43]
[31]
2.667
[24]
0.527 0.084 *
3.304
[23]
3.071
[42]
Brainpower
3.194
Analysis
2.806
[31]
2.208
[24]
0.598 0.088 *
2.652
[23]
2.744
[43]
[31]
2.375
[24]
0.431 0.180
2.682
[22]
2.744
[43]
Strategic
2.806
Creative
3.097
[31]
2.792
[24]
0.305 0.329
2.864
[22]
2.674
[43]
[31]
2.042
[24]
0.507 0.122
1.826
[23]
2.238
[42]
Attention to Details
2.548
[31]
3.417
[24]
-0.094 0.701
3.000
[22]
3.093
[43]
Enthusiasm
3.323
Persistence
3.935
[31]
3.609
[23]
0.327 0.007 *** 3.474
[19]
3.488
[43]
Proactive
3.839
[31]
3.375
[24]
0.464 0.010 *** 3.591
[22]
3.357
[42]
[31]
3.625
[24]
0.214 0.265
3.652
[23]
3.667
[42]
Work Ethics
3.839
High Standards
3.516
[31]
2.833
[24]
0.683 0.017 **
2.773
[22]
3.071
[42]
Listening Skills
2.774
[31]
2.500
[24]
0.274 0.408
2.091
[22]
2.581
[43]
[31]
2.333
[24]
0.505 0.140
1.864
[22]
2.286
[42]
Open to Criticism
2.839
Written Communication
2.923
[26]
2.238
[21]
0.685 0.045 **
3.143
[14]
2.857
[35]
[31]
2.833
[24]
0.038 0.892
2.818
[22]
3.163
[43]
Oral Communication
2.871
[31]
3.000
[24]
0.194 0.535
2.130
[23]
2.930
[43]
Teamwork
3.194
Persuasion
3.355
[31]
3.000
[24]
0.355 0.189
2.864
[22]
3.116
[43]
[30]
2.167
[24]
0.767 0.020 **
2.227
[22]
2.833
[42]
Accountable
2.933

Means P-value
-0.038 0.908
-0.375 0.219
0.043 0.894
-0.342 0.302
-0.664 0.042 **
-0.327 0.327
-0.413 0.198
-0.066 0.705
-0.238 0.423
-0.371 0.237
-0.098 0.710
0.166 0.573
-0.490 0.040 **
0.233 0.396
-0.092 0.780
-0.062 0.857
0.189 0.508
-0.412 0.166
-0.093 0.744
-0.015 0.952
0.234 0.349
-0.014 0.926
-0.299 0.335
-0.490 0.135
-0.422 0.186
0.286 0.497
-0.345 0.214
-0.800 0.010 ***
-0.253 0.380
-0.606 0.071 *

Panel D: Comparison of successful and non-successful candidates for VC and Buyout deals using broad success measure
Buyout
Venture Capital
Success
Non-Success
Success
Non-Success
Means P-value
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Mean
Obs.
Hires A Players
2.349
[43]
1.967
[30]
0.382 0.173
2.327
[49]
2.278
[54]
Develops People
2.442
[43]
2.267
[30]
0.175 0.534
2.122
[49]
2.463
[54]
[43]
1.867
[30]
0.366 0.193
1.980
[49]
1.981
[54]
Removes Underperformers 2.233
Respect
3.047
[43]
3.333
[30]
-0.287 0.295
2.609
[46]
2.963
[54]
[42]
2.500
[30]
0.690 0.009 ***
2.809
[47]
3.204
[54]
Efficiency
3.190
Network
2.884
[43]
2.700
[30]
0.184 0.545
2.583
[48]
2.648
[54]
Flexibility
2.791
[43]
3.233
[30]
-0.443 0.104
2.396
[48]
2.642
[53]
[43]
3.633
[30]
0.111 0.542
3.551
[49]
3.774
[53]
Integrity
3.744
Organization
2.977
[43]
2.207
[29]
0.770 0.009 ***
2.604
[48]
2.963
[54]
[43]
3.033
[30]
0.153 0.551
3.255
[47]
3.389
[54]
Calm
3.186
Aggressive
3.349
[43]
3.100
[30]
0.249 0.283
3.244
[45]
3.315
[54]
[42]
3.067
[30]
0.171 0.523
3.184
[49]
3.019
[53]
Fast
3.238
Commitments
3.814
[43]
3.433
[30]
0.381 0.023 **
3.104
[48]
3.556
[54]
[43]
2.667
[30]
0.240 0.373
3.208
[48]
2.981
[53]
Brainpower
2.907
Analysis
2.581
[43]
2.233
[30]
0.348 0.252
2.694
[49]
2.741
[54]
[43]
2.300
[30]
0.258 0.356
2.792
[48]
2.778
[54]
Strategic
2.558
Creative
2.884
[43]
2.667
[30]
0.217 0.423
2.917
[48]
2.685
[54]
[43]
2.200
[30]
0.474 0.098 *
1.812
[48]
2.132
[53]
Attention to Details
2.674
[43]
3.533
[30]
-0.231 0.263
2.896
[48]
3.093
[54]
Enthusiasm
3.302
Persistence
3.900
[40]
3.586
[29]
0.314 0.008 ***
3.341
[41]
3.426
[54]
Proactive
3.721
[43]
3.467
[30]
0.254 0.105
3.340
[47]
3.358
[53]
[43]
3.567
[30]
0.294 0.064 *
3.429
[49]
3.642
[53]
Work Ethics
3.860
High Standards
3.419
[43]
2.933
[30]
0.485 0.050 **
2.812
[48]
3.000
[53]
Listening Skills
2.721
[43]
2.700
[30]
0.021 0.944
2.208
[48]
2.667
[54]
[43]
2.467
[30]
0.301 0.320
2.087
[46]
2.302
[53]
Open to Criticism
2.767
Written Communication
2.833
[36]
2.296
[27]
0.537 0.071 *
2.933
[30]
3.000
[40]
[43]
3.033
[30]
-0.126 0.611
2.833
[48]
3.222
[54]
Oral Communication
2.907
[43]
2.933
[30]
0.183 0.507
2.417
[48]
2.944
[54]
Teamwork
3.116
Persuasion
3.233
[43]
3.033
[30]
0.199 0.423
2.896
[48]
3.074
[54]
[42]
2.233
[30]
0.695 0.014 **
2.271
[48]
2.712
[52]
Accountable
2.929

Means P-value
0.049 0.838
-0.341 0.114
-0.002 0.993
-0.354 0.166
-0.395 0.094 *
-0.065 0.793
-0.246 0.315
-0.223 0.141
-0.359 0.121
-0.134 0.526
-0.070 0.727
0.165 0.458
-0.451 0.017 **
0.227 0.284
-0.047 0.843
0.014 0.957
0.231 0.284
-0.320 0.157
-0.197 0.357
-0.084 0.670
-0.018 0.929
-0.213 0.148
-0.188 0.423
-0.458 0.060 *
-0.215 0.368
-0.067 0.827
-0.389 0.057 *
-0.528 0.024 **
-0.178 0.414
-0.441 0.076 *

TABLE 10 Coefficients from OLS regressions for success of 316 CEO candidates assessed by ghSMART. The endogenous variable is the outcome of the deal.
PE success measure is based on responses from PE firms. Public success measure supplements PE measure with public information on CEO and company
outcomes. Broad public success measure supplements public measure with public information on CEO and company progress. Independent variables include
three main factors from factor analysis and two alternative factors from concentrated factor analysis described in table 4. P-values are reported in parentheses,
and statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% levels are indicated by ***, **, and *, respectively. All standard errors are robust.
Panel A All hired candidates with success outcomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
PE
Public
Broad
PE
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Incumbent -0.009
0.120
0.088
-0.041
Factor 1

(0.927)
0.100 *

(0.203)
0.106 **

(0.176)
0.042

Factor 2

(0.094)
-0.200 ***

(0.030)
-0.101 **

(0.189)
-0.067 **

Factor 3

(0.000)
0.050

(0.025)
0.036

(0.042)
0.026

(0.376)

(0.462)

(0.461)

Alt. Factor
1

0.189 ***

Alt. Factor
2
Constant

(0.712)

0.182

0.162

(0.124)
Obs.
81
R-squared
0.339

(0.539)
126
0.165

0.420 **
(0.014)
208
0.080

(5)
Public
Measure
0.081

(6)
Broad
Measure
0.087

(0.398)

(0.175)

0.147 ***

0.079

(0.002)
-0.127 **

(0.004)
-0.030

(0.026)
-0.028

(0.019)
0.217 *

(0.511)
0.237

(0.385)
0.428

(0.069)
81
0.301

(0.302)
126
0.155

(0.008)
208
0.074

Panel B: Factors and success measures by PE firm type
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Buyout
Buyout
Buyout
Buyout
Buyout
Buyout
VC
VC
PE
Public
Broad
PE
Public
Broad
PE
Public
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
0.125
0.173
0.088
-0.094
-0.009
0.036
0.088
0.217
Incumbent
(0.407)
(0.176)
(0.353)
(0.550)
(0.941)
(0.703)
(0.573)
(0.103)
0.280 **
0.309 ***
0.146 ***
0.056
0.014
Factor 1
(0.001)
(0.005)
(0.499)
(0.861)
(0.050)
Factor 2 -0.212 *
-0.064
-0.051
-0.156 **
-0.100 *
(0.405)
(0.340)
(0.012)
(0.086)
(0.062)
Factor 3
0.125
0.079
0.069
0.005
0.008
(0.266)
(0.210)
(0.958)
(0.915)
(0.131)
Alt.
0.352 ***
0.272 ***
0.155 **
Factor 1
(0.004)
(0.001)
(0.011)
Alt.
-0.132
0.071
0.034
Factor 2
(0.276)
(0.378)
(0.533)
0.261 *
-0.060
0.372 **
0.410
-0.206 ***
0.389 **
0.144
0.083
Constant
(0.534)
(0.011)
(0.297)
(0.009)
(0.029)
(0.318)
(0.740)
(0.100)
Year
Controls
Obs.
R-squared

(9)
VC
Broad
Measure
0.141
(0.116)
-0.021
(0.611)
-0.067
(0.115)
0.007
(0.892)

0.362 *
(0.055)

(10)
VC
PE
Measure
0.088
(0.571)

(11)
VC
Public
Measure
0.216 *
(0.099)

(12)
VC
Broad
Measure
0.148 *
(0.091)

0.112
(0.184)
-0.117
(0.118)
0.159
(0.275)

0.056
(0.486)
-0.094 *
(0.088)
0.106
(0.650)

0.023
(0.618)
-0.071 *
(0.086)
0.359 *
(0.052)

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

32
0.480

57
0.346

88
0.177

32
0.350

57
0.297

88
0.142

49
0.303

69
0.138

120
0.091

49
0.289

69
0.143

120
0.091

Panel C: OLS Regressions with factors and success measures by incumbency
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Incumbent
Incumbent Incumbent Incumbent Incumbent Incumbent Outsider
Outsider Outsider
Outsider
Outsider Outsider
Public
Broad
PE
Public
Broad
PE
Public
Broad
PE
Public
Braod
PE
Measure Measure
Measure
Measure Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
Measure
0.071
0.077
0.022
-0.094
-0.009
0.036
0.228 *
0.292 ** 0.123
0.088
0.216 *
0.148 *
Factor 1
(0.285)
(0.163)
(0.551)
(0.550)
(0.941)
(0.703)
(0.093)
(0.024)
(0.138)
(0.571)
(0.099)
(0.091)
-0.182 ***
-0.119 **
-0.069 *
-0.480 *** -0.032
-0.074
Factor 2
(0.019)
(0.085)
(0.002)
(0.788)
(0.260)
(0.004)
0.056
0.043
0.029
0.034
-0.069
0.008
Factor 3
(0.426)
(0.484)
(0.802)
(0.570)
(0.923)
(0.361)
0.079
0.069
0.154 **
0.126 **
0.060
0.005
0.008
0.007
0.452 *** 0.234 ** 0.153 *
0.125
Alt.
Factor 1
(0.131)
(0.266)
(0.210)
(0.030)
(0.038)
(0.139)
(0.958)
(0.915)
(0.892)
(0.004)
(0.023)
(0.057)
Alt.
-0.066
-0.039
-0.300 **
0.092
-0.002
-0.142 **
Factor 2
(0.036)
(0.209)
(0.314)
(0.039)
(0.438)
(0.971)
Const.
0.192
0.271
0.383 **
0.180 *
0.310
0.402 ** 1.272 *** -0.141
0.667 *** 1.213 *** -0.104
0.671 ***
(0.229)
(0.026)
(0.084)
(0.105)
(0.015)
(0.000)
(0.337)
(0.000)
(0.000)
(0.257)
(0.000)
(0.108)
Year
Controls
Obs.
R-squared

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

56
0.317

89
0.185

144
0.084

56
0.294

89
0.169

144
0.076

25
0.636

37
0.304

64
0.124

25
0.517

37
0.297

64
0.123

