                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          HOW HAS THE EURO CHANGED THE MONETARY TRANSMISSION?

                                            Jean Boivin
                                          Marc P. Giannoni
                                           Benoît Mojon

                                        Working Paper 14190
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14190


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Olivier Blanchard, Andrea Ferrero, Jordi Galí, Bruce Preston, Veronica
Rappoport, Kenneth Rogoff, Chris Sims, Frank Smets, Michael Woodford, and our discussants Lucrezia
Reichlin and Harald Uhlig for valuable discussions and comments. We also benefited from the comments
of participants at the 2008 NBER Macroeconomics Annual Conference, the NY Area Workshop on
Monetary Policy, and seminar participants at the Bundesbank, CREI, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
European Central Bank, HEC Montréal, Universität Münster. Boivin and Giannoni are grateful to
the National Science Foundation for financial support (SES-0518770). The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jean Boivin, Marc P. Giannoni, and Benoît Mojon. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
How Has the Euro Changed the Monetary Transmission?
Jean Boivin, Marc P. Giannoni, and Benoît Mojon
NBER Working Paper No. 14190
July 2008
JEL No. C3,D2,E31,E4,E5,F4

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper characterizes the transmission mechanism of monetary shocks across countries of the euro
area, documents how this mechanism has changed with the introduction of the euro, and explores some
potential explanations. The factor-augmented VAR (FAVAR) framework used is sufficiently rich
to jointly model the euro area dynamics while permitting the transmission of shocks to be different
across countries. We find important heterogeneity across countries in the effect of monetary shocks
before the launch of the euro. In particular, we find that German interest-rate shocks triggered stronger
responses of interest rates and consumption in some countries such as Italy and Spain than in Germany
itself. According to our estimates, the creation of the euro has contributed 1) to a greater homogeneity
of the transmission mechanism across countries, and 2) to an overall reduction in the effects of monetary
shocks. Using a structural open-economy model, we argue that the combination of a change in the
policy reaction function -- mainly toward a more aggressive response to inflation and output -- and
the elimination of an exchange-rate risk can explain the evolution of the monetary transmission mechanism
observed empirically.


Jean Boivin                                         Benoît Mojon
HEC Montreal                                        Banque de France
3000, chemin de la Cote-Sainte-Catherine            39 rue Croix des Petits Champs
Montreal (Quebec)                                   75001 Paris
Canada H3T 2A7                                      France
and NBER                                            benoit.mojon@gmail.com
jean.boivin@hec.ca

Marc P. Giannoni
Columbia Business School
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 824
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
mg2190@columbia.edu
1        Introduction

On January 1st, 1999, the euro o¢ cially became the common currency for 11 countries of continental

Europe, and a single monetary policy started under the authority of the European Central Bank.1

The European Monetary Union2 (EMU) followed decades of monetary policies set by national

central banks to serve domestic interests, even though these national policies were constrained

by monetary arrangements such as the European Monetary System which was designed to limit

exchange rate ‡uctuations. Approaching the tenth anniversary of the EMU, we begin to have

su¢ cient data to potentially observe e¤ects of the monetary union on business cycle dynamics.

        This paper has three objectives. The …rst is to characterize the transmission mechanism of

monetary policy in the Euro Area (EA) and across its constituent countries. The second is to

document how this transmission might have changed since the creation of the euro. The third

objective consists of providing a set of explanations, based on a structural open-economy model,

for the observed di¤erences over time and across countries in the responses of key macroeconomic

variables.

        Our …rst two objectives require an empirical model that captures empirically the EA-wide

macroeconomic dynamics, while allowing us to estimate the potentially heterogenous transmission

of EA shocks within individual countries. The factor-augmented VAR model (FAVAR) proposed

by Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005) is a natural framework in this context. By pooling together

a large set of macroeconomic indicators from individual countries, it allows us to identify area-

wide factors, quantify their importance in the country-level ‡uctuations, and trace out the e¤ect of

identi…ed aggregate shocks on all country-level variables. It also allows us to measure the spillovers

between individual countries and the EA.

        Many papers have attempted to characterize the dynamics of European economies. One com-

mon strategy has been to modeling the EA economy using only EA aggregates. Examples include

evidence based on VARs (Peersman and Smets, 2003), more structural models (the ECB Area Wide
    1
     At that date, the conversion rates of the national currencies of the Eurozone were …xed irrevocably, and a three-
year transition period started until the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins, in January 2002. Since then
other countries such as Greece, Slovenia, Malta and Cyprus have adopted the euro.
   2
     We refer to the EMU as the stage III of the European Monetary Union, which involves the launch of the euro in
January 1999.




                                                          1
Model; Fagan, Henry and Mestre, 2005) and optimization-based macroeconomic models (Smets and

Wouters, 2003, Christiano et al., 2007; the New AWM; Coenen et al., 2007). Alternatively, authors

have estimated models using country-level data either to analyze the e¤ects of various macroeco-

nomic shocks or for forecasting, using models of national central banks (Fagan and Morgan, 2006)

or VARs (e.g., Mihov, 2001; Mojon and Peersman, 2003).

   An important feature of the FAVAR is that it allows us to model jointly the dynamics of

EA-wide variables and country-level variables within a single consistent empirical framework. In

that respect, we see our empirical strategy as an improvement over the numerous papers that

have compared impulse responses to shocks on the basis of models estimated separately for each

country (e.g., Angeloni, Kashyap, and Mojon, 2003. chap. 3 and 5). The estimated model suggests

that a signi…cant fraction of country-level variables such as the components of output and prices,

employment, productivity and asset prices, can be explained by EA-wide common factors.

   In order to characterize the monetary transmission mechanism, we identify unexpected mon-

etary policy shocks, and estimate their dynamic e¤ects on the national macroeconomic variables.

We are particularly interested in documenting di¤erences over time and across countries in the

sensitivity of national economies to such shocks. (In Appendix C, we also document the e¤ects of

identi…ed oil price shocks.) It is important to note that it is not because we believe that monetary

policy shocks constitute an important source of business cycle ‡uctuations that we are interested in

documenting the e¤ects of such shocks. In fact, much of the empirical literature …nds that monetary

shocks contribute relatively little to business cycle ‡uctuations (e.g., Sims and Zha, 2006). Instead,

monetary policy a¤ects importantly the economy through its systematic reaction to economic con-

ditions. The impulse response functions to monetary policy shocks provide a useful description of

the e¤ects of a systematic monetary policy rule, by tracing out the responses of various macroeco-

nomic variables following a surprise interest-rate change, and assuming that policy is conducted

subsequently according to that particular policy rule.

   The estimated monetary transmission mechanism is largely consistent with conventional wis-

dom. A monetary policy tightening in the EA as a whole or in Germany triggers an appreciation

of the exchange rate, a downward adjustment of demand and eventually of prices. For the period

preceding the EMU, we …nd considerable heterogeneity in the transmission of these shocks across


                                                  2
countries. In particular, we …nd larger responses of long-term interest rates in Italy and in Spain,

which contribute to larger contractions of consumption in these two countries. Also, restrictive

monetary policy in the EA tended to trigger a depreciation of the lira and the peseta, and a smaller

decline of exports of these countries than in the rest of the EA.

   The creation of the euro has contributed to an widespread reduction in the e¤ect of monetary

shocks. In particular, long-term interest rates, as well as consumption, investment, output and em-

ployment respond less to short-term interest rate shocks in the new monetary policy regime, while

trade and the e¤ective real exchange rate respond more strongly. While the monetary transmission

mechanism has become more homogenous along the yield curve, some striking asymmetries per-

sist, for instance in the response of national monetary aggregates to common interest rate shocks,

suggesting pervasive di¤erences in national savings practices.

   We use a structural open-economy model to explore some potential explanations for this evo-

lution of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. More precisely, we extend the model of

Ferrero, Gertler and Svensson (2007) with, among others, a risk premium on intra-area exchange

rates for the period prior to the EMU. This deviation from the uncovered interest rate parity is

necessary to replicate a larger response of Italian and Spanish interest rates to German monetary

shocks. Using a calibrated version of this model, we show that the combination of two ingredients

can replicate the evolution of the estimated transmission mechanism since the start of the EMU:

the elimination of the exchange-rate premium that plagued some of the European countries by …x-

ing the intra-area exchange rates, and a shift in monetary policy, mainly toward a more aggressive

response to in‡ation and output. This latter …nding suggests that the change in the transmission

mechanism comes not only from the adoption of a single currency, but also from the ECB policy.

   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the econometric framework. It

discusses the formulation and estimation of the FAVAR and its relation to the existing literature.

In Section 3, we discuss the empirical implementation, describing the data used in our estimation,

our preferred speci…cation of the FAVAR as well as its basic empirical properties. Section 4 studies

the e¤ects of monetary shocks in the EA and in individual countries, and discusses their changes

since the creation of the EMU in 1999. Section 5 attempts to explain the cross-country di¤erences

as well as the changes over time in the monetary transmission mechanism. Section 6 concludes.


                                                 3
2     Econometric Framework

We are interested in modeling empirically the EA wide macroeconomic dynamics, while allowing

heterogeneity in the transmission of EA shocks within individual countries. A natural framework

to achieve this goal is the factor-augmented vector autoregression model (FAVAR) described in

Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005) (BBE). The model is estimated using indicators from individual

European economies as well as from the EA. The general idea behind our implementation is to

decompose the ‡uctuations in individual series into a component driven by common European

‡uctuations, and a component that is speci…c to the particular series considered. EA-wide common

shocks can then be identi…ed from the multi-dimensional common components. The FAVAR also

allows us to characterize the response of all data series to macroeconomic disturbances, such as

monetary policy shocks or oil price shocks. Importantly, by modeling jointly EA and country-level

dynamics, this framework allows each country’s sensitivity to EA shocks to be di¤erent.


2.1    Description of the FAVAR model

We only provide here a general description of our implementation of the empirical framework and

refer the interested reader to BBE for additional details. We assume that the economy is a¤ected

by a vector Ct of common EA-wide components to all variables entering the data set. Since we will

be interested in characterizing the e¤ects of monetary policy, this vector of common components

includes a short-term interest rate, Rt ; to measure the stance of monetary policy. Our speci…cation

also includes the growth rate of an oil price index,           oil ,   as an observable factor. Both of these
                                                               t

variables are allowed to have pervasive e¤ect throughout the economy and will thus be considered

as common components of all variables entering the data set. The rest of the common dynamics is

captured by a K      1 vector of unobserved factors Ft ; where K is relatively small. These unobserved

factors may re‡ect general economic conditions such as “economic activity,” the “general level of

prices,” the level of “productivity,” which may not easily be captured by a few time series, but

rather by a wide range of economic variables.3 We assume that the joint dynamics of                  oil ,
                                                                                                     t       Ft ; and
   3
     As long as a su¢ cient number of unobserved factors are included, the inclusion of oil-price in‡ation as an
observable factor should not a¤ect our results. It does however allow us to identify oil price shocks and document
their e¤ects. We report such results in Appendix C.




                                                        4
Rt are given by

                                               Ct =    (L)Ct          1   + vt                                (1)

where                                                   2             3
                                                                oil
                                                       6        t     7
                                                       6              7
                                                  Ct = 6
                                                       6 Ft
                                                                      7;
                                                                      7
                                                       4              5
                                                         Rt

and      (L) is a conformable lag polynomial of …nite order which may contain a priori restrictions,

as in standard structural VARs. The error term vt is iid with mean zero and covariance matrix Q:

      The system (1) is a VAR in Ct . The additional di¢ culty, with respect to standard VARs,

however, is that the factors Ft are unobservable. We assume that the factors summarize the

information contained in a large number of economic variables. We denote by Xt this N                    1 vector

of “informational” variables, where N is assumed to be “large,” i.e., N > K + 2: We assume

furthermore that the large set of observable “informational” series Xt is related to the common

factors according to

                                                  Xt = Ct + et                                                (2)

where       is an N    (K + 2) matrix of factor loadings, and the N              1 vector et contains (mean-zero)

series-speci…c components that are uncorrelated with the common components Ct . These series-

speci…c components are allowed to be serially correlated and weakly correlated across indicators.

Equation (2) re‡ects the fact that the elements of Ct ; which in general are correlated, represent

pervasive forces that drive the common dynamics of Xt : Conditional on the observed short-term

interest rate Rt ; the variables in Xt are thus noisy measures of the underlying unobserved factors

Ft : Note that it is in principle not restrictive to assume that Xt depends only on the current values

of the factors, as Ft can always capture arbitrary lags of some fundamental factors.4

      The empirical model (1) and (2) provides a convenient decomposition of all data series into

components driven by the EA factors Ct (i.e., the short-term interest rate, oil prices and other

latent dimensions of aggregate dynamics, such as real activity and in‡ation) and by series-speci…c

components unrelated to the general state of the economies, et : For instance, (2) speci…es that
  4
      In fact, Stock and Watson (1999) refer to (2) as a dynamic factor model.



                                                            5
indicators of country-level economic activity or in‡ation are driven by a European interest rate,

EA latent factors Ft ; and a component that is speci…c to each individual series (representing,

e.g., measurement error or other idiosyncrasies of each series). The dynamics of the EA common

components are in turn speci…ed by (1).

    As in BBE, we estimate our empirical model using a variant of a two-step principal component

approach. In the …rst step, we extract principal components from the large date set Xt to obtain

consistent estimates of the common factors.5 Stock and Watson (2002) and Bai and Ng (2006)

show that the principal components consistently recover the space spanned by the factors when

N is large and the number of principal components used is at least as large as the true number

of factors. In the second step, we add the oil price in‡ation and the short-term interest rate to

the estimated factors, and estimate the structural VAR (1). Our implementation di¤ers slightly

from that of BBE as we impose the constraint that the observed factors (                     oil   and Rt ) are among
                                                                                             t

the factors in the …rst-step estimation.6 This guarantees that the estimated latent factors recover

dimensions of the common dynamics not captured by the observed factors.7

    This procedure has the advantages of being computationally simple and easy to implement. As

discussed by Stock and Watson (2002), it also imposes few distributional assumptions and allows for

some degree of cross-correlation in the idiosyncratic error term et : Boivin and Ng (2005) document

the good forecasting performance of this estimation approach compared to some alternatives.8
    5
      While alternative strategies to the estimation of factor models with a large set of indicators exist (see, among
others, Forni, Lippi, Hallin and Reichlin, 2000; Kose, Otrok and Witheman 2003; BBE; Boivin and Giannoni, 2006b;
Doz, Giannone and Reichlin, 2007), the evidence suggests that they perform similarly in practice.
    6
      In contrast to the approach adopted here, BBE do not impose the constraint that the observed factors are among
the common components in the …rst step. They instead remove these observed factors from the space covered by the
principal components, by peforming a transformation of the principal components exploiting the di¤erent behavior
of what they call “slow-moving” and “fast-moving” variables, in the second step. Our approach here follows Boivin
and Giannoni (2007) and Boivin, Giannoni and Mihov (2007).
    7
      More speci…cally, we adopt the following procedure in the …rst step of the estimation. Starting from an initial
                                (0)
estimate of Ft , denoted by Ft and obtained as the …rst K principal components of Xt ; we iterate through the
                                          (0)
following steps: (1) we regress Xt on Ft and the observed factors Yt = [ oil          0
                                                                              t ; Rt ] to obtain
                                                                                                 ^ (0)
                                                                                                   Y ; (2) we compute

X~ t(0) = Xt ^ 0(0)                      (1)
                 Y Yt ; (3) we estimate Ft   as the …rst K principal components of X ~ t(0) ; (4) we repeat steps (1)-(3)
multiple times.
     8
       Note that this two-step approach implies the presence of “generated regressors” in the second step. According
to the results of Bai (2003), the uncertainty in the factor estimates should be negligible when N is large relative to
T . Still, the con…dence intervals on the impulse response functions used below are based on a bootstrap procedure
that accounts for the uncertainty in the factor estimation. As in BBE, the bootstrap procedure is such that 1) the
factors can be re-sampled based on the observation equation, and 2) conditional on the estimated factors, the VAR
coe¢ cients in the transition equation are bootstrapped as in Kilian (1998).




                                                           6
2.2    Interpreting the FAVAR structure

Various approaches have been used in the literature to model macroeconomic dynamics in the EA.

As we illustrate in this section, these approaches can be interpreted as special cases of the FAVAR

framework. Our approach thus merges some of the strengths of these existing approaches and

allows to answer a broader set of questions.

    As in Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005) and in Boivin and Giannoni (2006b), we interpret

the common component Ct as corresponding to the vector of theoretical concepts or variables

that would enter a structural macroeconomic model of the EA. For instance, the structural open-

economy model that we consider in section 5.1 fully characterizes the equilibrium evolution of

in‡ation, output, interest rates, net exports and other variables in two regions. In terms of the

notation in our empirical framework, all of these variables would be either included in Ct ; or linear

combinations of the elements of Ct . The dynamic evolution of these variables can be approximated

by a VAR of the form (1).9

    The existing approaches that model the dynamics of EA variables can be interpreted as special

cases of the FAVAR model, in the case that the elements of Ct are perfectly observed, so that the

system (1)–(2) boils down to a VAR. Interpreted in this way, the various existing empirical models

di¤er about the assumptions they make about: the variables included in Ct , the indicators used to

measure Ct , and the restrictions imposed on the coe¢ cients of (1)–(2).

    One approach is to assume that the element of Ct are observed and correspond to EA aggre-

gates.10 Such model can be estimated directly using a VAR on EA aggregates only (e.g. Peersman

and Smets, 2003), or a constrained version of a VAR corresponding, e.g., to the ECB Area Wide

Model (Fagan, Henry and Mestre, 2005), or even optimization-based macroeconomic models (Smets

and Wouters, 2003, Christiano et al., 2007; the New AWM; Coenen et al., 2006). Models estimated

only on EA aggregates are silent about the regional e¤ects of a shock.

    A second approach is to assume that the elements of Ct are observed and correspond to variables
   9
     For a formal description of the link between the solution of a DSGE model in state-space form and a VAR
see, e.g., Sims (2000), and Fernández-Villaverde, Rubio-Ramírez, Sargent and Watson (2007). Boivin and Giannoni
(2006b) establish formally the link between DSGE models and the FAVAR representation (1)–(2) in the context of a
data-rich environment.
  10
     The estimation of aggregate models for the EA has a relatively short history since there did not exist su¢ ciently
long historical time series of consistent EA national accounts before the launch of the euro and the publication of
Fagan, Henry and Mestre (2005). National accounts for the EA, published by Eurostat, start only in 1995.


                                                          7
of di¤erent regions. In that case, the FAVAR boils down to multi-country VARs and could be

estimated directly, as in, e.g., Eichenbaum and Evans (1995), Scholl and Uhlig (2006).

       A third approach is to assume that elements of Ct are observed and correspond to variables

of a speci…c country. A large literature has in fact analyzed the cross-country di¤erences in the

response of monetary policy using country-level models that are estimated separately (see Guiso

et al. 1999, Mojon and Peersman, 2003, Ciccarelli and Rebucci, 2006 and references therein). By

construction these models focus on country-speci…c shocks and do not explicitly identify the e¤ects

of EA-wide shocks such as changes in the stance of monetary policy that would a¤ect all countries

simultaneously. The transmission of such shocks could potentially be ampli…ed through trade and

expectation spillovers.11

       Importantly, in all these cases, since the variables necessary to capture the EA dynamics are

observed, there is no need to use the large set of indicators Xt . However, there are reasons to

believe that some relevant macroeconomic concepts are imperfectly observed. First, some concepts

are simply measured with error.12 Second, some of the macroeconomic variables which are key for

the model’s dynamics may be fundamentally latent. For instance, the concept of “potential output”

often critical in monetary models cannot be measured directly. By using a large data set, one is

able to extract empirically the components that are most important in explaining ‡uctuations in

the entire data set. While each common component does not need to represent any single economic

concept, the common components Ct should constitute a linear combination of all of the relevant

latent variables driving the set of noisy indicators Xt to the extent that we extract the correct

number of common components from the data set.

       An advantage of this empirical framework is that it provides summary measures of the state

of these economies at each date, in the form of factors which may summarize many features of

the economy. We thus do not restrict ourselves to summarizing the state of the economies with

particular measures of in‡ation and of output. Another advantage, as BBE argue, is that this

framework should lead to a better identi…cation of the monetary policy shock than standard VARs,
  11
     van Els et al. (2003) show that spillovers across countries tend to reinforce the e¤ects of monetary policy on
output and on prices. See also Fagan and Morgan (2006).
  12
     Boivin and Giannoni (2006b) argue, for example, that in‡ation is imperfectly measured by any single indicator,
and that it is important to use multiple indicators of it for proper inference.




                                                        8
because it explicitly recognizes the large information set that the central bank and …nancial market

participants exploit in practice, and also because, as just argued, it does not require to take a

stand on the appropriate measures of prices and real activity which can simply be treated as latent

common components. Moreover, for a set of identifying assumptions, a natural by-product of the

estimation is to provide impulse response functions for any variable included in the data set. This

is particularly useful in our case, since we want to understand the e¤ects of macroeconomic shocks

on a wide range of economic variables across EA countries.

   Other papers have in fact followed a similar route. Sala (2001) estimates the e¤ects of German

and EA composite interest-rate shocks using a factor model. He stresses large asymmetries in

the response of either output or prices to this shock. Favero et al. (2005) compare the e¤ects of

monetary policy shocks on output and in‡ation in Germany, France, Italy and Spain for alternative

speci…cations of factor models. They …nd largely homogenous e¤ects on output gaps and in‡ation

rates across countries. Eickmeier and Breitung (2006) and Eickmeier (2006) characterize the e¤ects

of common shocks on GDP and in‡ation in 12 countries of the EA and in new European Union

members that will adopt the euro in the future. They conclude that these common shocks transmit

rather homogeneously across countries so that the remaining heterogeneity across EA countries

seems to originate in idiosyncratic shocks.

   In contrast, in this paper we seek to better understand the role of the monetary policy regime in

explaining di¤erent monetary transmissions across countries of the EA. In that regard, we believe

that countries of the EA, and their move toward a common currency, provide a unique experiment

for monetary economists. For this reason our focus is not strictly on the response of countries’

GDPs and in‡ation rates, but on many relevant dimensions of the economy. We thus seek to

take full advantage of the FAVAR structure to document the e¤ect of various shocks on various

measures of real activity, such as GDP and its components, employment and unemployment, various

in‡ation measures and …nancial variables. Although our scope is broader, our approach is similar to

McCallum and Smets (2007), who use a similar FAVAR to study the role national and sectoral labor

market characteristics imply wage rigidities that in‡uence the monetary transmission mechanism.




                                                 9
3     Empirical Implementation

3.1   Data

The data set used in the estimation of our FAVAR is a balanced panel of 245 quarterly series, for

the period running from 1980:1 to 2007:3. We limited the sample to the six largest economies of

the EA, i.e., Germany, France, Italy, Spain the Netherlands and Belgium for which we could gather

a balanced panel of 33 economic quarterly time series that are available back to 1980. Given these

countries account for 90% of the EA population and output, we deem unlikely that the inclusion

of other EA countries would alter our estimates EA business cycle characteristics.

    The 33 economic variables that we gathered for each country and the EA include two interest

rates, M1, M3, the e¤ective exchange rate, an index of stock prices, GDP and its decomposition by

expenditure, the associated de‡ators, PPI and CPI indices, the unemployment rate, employment,

hourly earnings, unit labor cost measures, capacity utilization, retail sales and number of cars sold.

In addition to these 231 country-level and EA-level variables, we also include an interest rate and

real GDP for the UK, the U.S. and Japan, the euro/dollar exchange rate, an index of commodity

prices and the price of oil. The database was mostly extracted from Haver. In a number of cases

the Haver data were backdated using older vintages of OECD databases. The de…nition of the

variables, the source, and details about the data construction are given in Appendix A. The graphs

of the data are available in the appendix of the worker paper version of this paper.

    We take year-on-year (yoy) growth rates of all time series except for interest rates, unemploy-

ment rates and capacity utilization rates. The yoy transformation is preferred to limit risks of noise

due to improper or lack of seasonal adjustment in the data.


3.2   Sample period

The choice of the sample period is delicate. On the one hand, our interest lies in characterizing

the monetary transmission in the period since the start of the monetary union, in January 1999.

We therefore have about 9 years of data that correspond to the strict monetary union. However,

the objective of stabilizing exchange rates within what would become the EA started much earlier.

In fact, already in the seventies, European governments set up mechanisms that aimed at limiting


                                                 10
exchange rate ‡uctuations within Europe.13 The march to the monetary union has been gradual and

each country has progressed at its own speed. The pegs of Austria, Belgium and the Netherlands

to the Deutsche mark were not realigned after the early 1980’s. The last realignment of the

French franc to core EMS currencies (the Deutsche mark, the Belgian Franc and the Dutch Crown)

took place in January 1987. Ex post, we know that the parity between the French Franc, the

Belgian Franc, the Dutch Guilder and the Deutsche Mark hardly changed at all since January

1987. However, a signi…cant risk premium for fear of realignment plagued the French currency

until 1995. Finally, countries such as Italy and Spain — as well as Greece, Portugal, Ireland and

Finland, which are not in our sample — saw their currency ‡uctuate vis-à-vis their future partners

in the monetary union well into the 1990s. Although interest rates remained much higher in Italy

and Spain, than in Germany up until the mid 1990’s because of risk premia, changes in the interest

rates set by the Bundesbank would be echoed in domestic monetary conditions because of the

o¢ cial peg to the Deutsche Mark.

       Another key aspect of the process of monetary integration is the degree of nominal convergence.

In‡ation rates were much further apart in the 1970’s and early 1980’s than ever since.

       For all these considerations, and to avoid capturing the large changes on nominal variables that

have occurred in the early 1980s, we propose to describe the e¤ects of standard common shocks

starting in 1988. We will also contrast the results with estimates for a sample corresponding to the

strict monetary union regime starting in 1999.


3.3      Preferred speci…cation of the FAVAR

For the model selection, the short sample size severely constrains the class of speci…cations we

can consider, especially the number of lags in (1), as well as the number of latent factors. We

were thus forced to consider models with no more than 8 factors and 3 lags. Among those, our

approach has been to search for the most parsimonious model for which the key conclusions that

we emphasize below are robust to the inclusion of additional factors and lags. Based on this, our

preferred speci…cation is one with a vector of common components Ct containing 5 latent factors
  13
    Major steps in this process include the start of the EMS in 1979, the entrance of Spain and Portugal into the
EMS in 1986, the post-reuni…cation exchange rate crisis of 1992-1993 and the announcement of the parities between
national currencies and the euro in May 1997.



                                                       11
in addition to the short-term interest rate and oil price in‡ation, and a VAR equation (1) with

one lag. As we show below, these common factors explain a meaningful fraction of the variance of

country-level variables.


3.4      European factors and EA-countries’dynamics

To assess whether our FAVAR model provides a reasonable characterization of the individual series,

we now determine the importance of area-wide ‡uctuations for individual countries. Note that from
                                                                                                         0
equation (2), each of the variables Xit of our panel can be decomposed into a component                  i Ct   which

characterizes the e¤ects of EA-wide ‡uctuations, and a component eit which is speci…c to the series

considered:
                                                        0
                                               Xit =    i Ct   + eit :                                            (3)

It is important to note that each variable may be a¤ected very di¤erently by the multidimensional

vector Ct summarizing EA-wide ‡uctuations, as the estimated vectors of loadings                      i   may take

arbitrary values. We …rst start by determining the extent to which key European variables are

correlated with EA factors over three samples. We then discuss how the importance of these factors

has changed over time. In the next section, we document how monetary shocks get transmitted to

the EA, and across the di¤erent countries.

       Several studies have recently attempted to determine the degree of comovement of a few macro-

economic series across countries.14 Forni et al. (2000) and Favero et al. (2005) show that a small

number of factors provides an e¢ cient information summary of the main economic time series both

at the EA level and for the 4 largest countries of the EA. Eickmeier (2006) and Eickmeier and

Breitung (2006) con…rm these results but also stress that country-level in‡ation and output ‡uc-

tuations are somewhat less correlated with EA-wide common factors than their EA counterparts.

However, Agresti and Mojon (2003) show that the comovement of either consumption or invest-

ment across EA countries is smaller than the comovement of GDP. Hence the possibility that the

tightness of economic variables with the EA business cycle may be uneven across countries and
  14
    For instance Kose, Otrok, Whiteman (2003), Stock and Watson (2005) study the comovement of output, con-
sumption and investment, respectively for a large panel of countries, and for G7 countries. Giannone and Reichlin
(2006) analyze the comovement of output across EA countries. In addition, the ECB is carefully monitoring real and
nominal heterogeneity across countries (Benalal et al, 2006).



                                                       12
                                          Euro Area                 Average R2 over countries
                                   1987:1  1987:1   1999:1         1987:1    1987:1   1999:1
                                   –2007:3 –1998:4 –2007:3         –2007:3 –1998:4 –2007:3
       Short-term interest rate     1.00    1.00     1.00            0.97     0.97     1.00
       Bond yield                   0.96    0.96     0.95            0.94     0.94     0.95
       Stock price                  0.65    0.71     0.91            0.61     0.77     0.88
       REX                          0.78    0.82     0.93            0.73     0.79     0.93
       M1                           0.43    0.65     0.73            0.42     0.65     0.53
       M3                           0.70    0.92     0.74            0.50     0.71     0.69
       De‡ator GDP                  0.88    0.89     0.88            0.73     0.81     0.84
       De‡ator PCE                  0.88    0.90     0.72            0.77     0.90     0.83
       De‡ator investment           0.89    0.93     0.88            0.63     0.71     0.75
       De‡ator exports              0.86    0.80     0.97            0.72     0.71     0.94
       De‡ator imports              0.93    0.89     0.99            0.82     0.78     0.97
       CPI                          0.94    0.97     0.90            0.78     0.91     0.83
       Real GDP                     0.94    0.97     0.96            0.79     0.84     0.90
       Consumption                  0.88    0.92     0.90            0.71     0.75     0.81
       Public consumption           0.54    0.71     0.54            0.42     0.59     0.63
       Investment                   0.92    0.93     0.94            0.65     0.76     0.78
       Exports                      0.70    0.71     0.93            0.67     0.68     0.88
       Imports                      0.84    0.95     0.93            0.74     0.81     0.89
       Employment                   0.85    0.90     0.97            0.78     0.85     0.85
       Unemployment rate            0.92    0.97     0.96            0.86     0.93     0.96
       Hourly earnings              0.94    0.97     0.69            0.79     0.92     0.74
       Unit labor costs             0.89    0.96     0.88            0.81     0.92     0.89
       CAP                          0.86    0.92     0.95            0.67     0.80     0.77
       Retail                       0.73    0.80     0.60            0.53     0.67     0.60

                  Table 1: R2 for regressions of selected series on common factors


across variables of di¤erent kinds. This is why we consider a large number of economic variables,

rather than a couple of macroeconomic indicators in our analysis.


3.5   Comovements between European variables and EA factors

Table 1 reports the fraction of the volatility in the series listed in the …rst column, that is explained

by the 7 EA-wide factors Ct (i.e., 5 latent factors, the log change of the oil price, and the EA

short-term interest rate). This corresponds to the R2 statistics obtained by the regressions of these

variables on the appropriate set of factors.

   The three columns labeled Euro Area report the R2 statistics obtained by regressing the re-

spective EA-wide series on the common factors for our entire sample, a subsample representing the


                                                   13
period preceding the monetary union, and the sample starting in 1999 representing the period in

which the EMU is in place. These numbers indicate that most of the variables listed are strongly

correlated with the common factors, both before and after the monetary union.15 While the short-

term interest rate is a common factor by assumption, other key variables such as EA real GDP

growth, CPI in‡ation, bond yields and the unemployment rate all have R2 statistics above 0.9. The

common factors therefore summarize quite well the information contained in these EA series. Not

all series are however as strongly correlated with the common factors. For instance the growth rate

of the monetary aggregate M1 and public consumption for the EA, with R2 statistics of only 0.43

and 0.54, display much less comovement with the common factors.

      Instead of estimating latent factors from our large data set, we could alternatively impose

key EA macroeconomic variables such as GDP, consumption, in‡ation, exchange rate, bond yield,

and unemployment as observed factors. Our proposed approach dominates, however, as the latent

factors explain a substantially larger share of the variance of our sample than intuitive combinations

of EA aggregates. The additional explanatory power of the latent factors amounts on average to

10 % of the variables’variance.

      The last three columns of Table 1 report the average across countries of the R2 statistics for the

relevant variables. The R2 statistics are overall lower than those for the entire EA area, as expected,

to the extent that each country has country-speci…c features not summarized by the common factors

Ct ; and which tend to average out when considering the EA as a whole. Nonetheless, the table

shows that on average over the six European countries, most of the variables are also strongly

correlated with the common factors. Again, for the entire sample, country-level measures of GDP

growth, short and long interest rates, in‡ation, employment and unemployment all show on average

high degrees of comovement with the common factors, while growth rates of M1, M2 and public

consumption show much lower degrees of comovement.

      One might think that the relatively low R2 statistics for M1 and M3 re‡ect the fact that our

panel includes a relatively small number of series of monetary aggregates. This intuition is however

incorrect. If monetary aggregates constituted an important source of ‡uctuations for a wide range

of variables in our panel, then the R2 for the monetary aggregate series should be high even if
 15
      Camacho et al. (2006) argue however that the EA business cycle largely re‡ects the world business cycle.



                                                         14
                                   1987:1-2007:3    1987:1–1998:4   1999:1–2007:3
                   Euro-Area           0.83             0.88            0.87
                   Germany             0.69             0.77            0.82
                   France              0.76             0.84            0.87
                   Italy               0.73             0.82            0.79
                   Spain               0.76             0.84            0.78
                   Netherlands         0.64             0.74            0.86
                   Belgium             0.68             0.79            0.84

               Table 2: Average R2 for regressions of selected series on EA factors


no such series was used for the estimation of the latent factors. In this case, the estimated latent

factors should be capturing the common movements in the data that are generated by ‡uctuations

in the monetary aggregates. So in theory, provided that we allow for a su¢ ciently large number of

latent factors, the composition of the panel should not matter for the estimation of latent factors.

   Looking across countries reveals that the correlation with the common factors is broadly similar

across countries in each of the subsamples. Table 2 reports the average R2 statistic for each country,

across the variables listed in the previous table. It shows that country-level R2 vary between 0.64

and 0.77 for the entire sample, between 0.74 and 0.84 in the …rst subsample, and between 0.78 and

0.87 in the post-EMU sample.

   Table 2 also shows that in the case of Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium, the R2 are

sensibly lower for the entire sample than for each of the subsamples considered. This suggests that

the relationship between the variables in those countries and the common factors must have changed

between the pre-99 and post-99 period. Finally, we observe that Italian and Spanish variables have

become somewhat less tied to EA-wide developments over time. This comes essentially from the

growth rates of real variables. This is particularly clear for Spain, as its GDP has grown at a faster

pace than the rest of the EA since 1995, but is less clear-cut for Italy which has grown slightly less

rapidly than the rest of the EA.




                                                   15
4     Monetary Policy Regimes and the Monetary Transmission Mech-

      anism

In the last section, we have documented that the variables of each individual country have been on

average fairly highly correlated with the EA-wide common factors. Nonetheless, aggregate shocks

a¤ecting the entire EA may have di¤erent implications on each individual country. To assess

this, we use our estimated FAVAR to characterize the e¤ects of monetary policy shocks, which we

measure here as an unanticipated increase in the EA short-term interest rate of 100 basis points

(bp), on the national economies considered. Our empirical model is well suited for this as it allows

us to determine simultaneously the e¤ects of such shocks on all country-level variables.

    As mentioned above, the data reveal changes over time in the degree of comovement of key

European variables with EA-wide common factors. A natural implication of such changes is that the

transmission of monetary policy may have evolved over time. We thus report the e¤ects of monetary

policy shocks both for our benchmark sample and for the post-EMU period. The description of the

e¤ects of this shock is a natural starting point in a context where several countries have chosen to

adopt a common currency and therefore to submit their economy to a single monetary policy.


4.1   Identi…cation

To identify monetary policy shocks, we proceed similarly to Bernanke, Boivin and Eliasz (2005) by

assuming in the spirit of VAR analyses, that the latent factors Ft and the oil price in‡ation      oil
                                                                                                   t

cannot respond contemporaneously to a surprise interest-rate change, while the short-term rate

Rt can respond to any innovation in the factors Ft or in oil prices. Of course, we don’t restrict

in any way the response of factors Ft and      oil   in the periods following the monetary shock. This
                                               t

constitutes a minimal set of restrictions needed to identify monetary policy shocks. We also impose

that all prices and quantity series respond to monetary policy only through its lagged e¤ect on Ft

(and potentially   oil ).   This guarantees that none of these variables responds contemporaneously
                   t

to unexpected monetary shocks, as is often assumed. These restrictions do however not prevent

any of the …nancial variables such as bond yields, stock prices and exchange rates from responding

contemporaneously to the short-term interest rate.


                                                     16
   In the next section, we present a theoretical model that is designed provide some explanations

for the monetary transmission mechanism. We note at this point that this model is consistent with

the identifying assumptions made here. In particular, both the theoretical model and the FAVAR

have the property that output, consumption, and in‡ation do not respond contemporaneously to

monetary shocks.

   Our assumption that the monetary policy instrument is the short-term EA interest-rate is

certainly appropriate for the post-EMU period during which the ECB has set the short-term EA

interest rate. It may be less appropriate however for the pre-EMU period, during which each

national central bank could in principle choose its own interest rate. As in Peersman and Smets

(2003), Smets and Wouters (2003) and many others, during the pre-EMU period, our monetary

policy shock is a …ctitious shock that we estimate would have been generated by the ECB, had it

existed.

   In the pre-EMU period, the German central bank, i.e., the Bundesbank, assumed a central

role in setting the level of interest rates for all countries participating to the European Monetary

System. Given the Exchange Rate Mechanism in place, which limited ‡uctuations in nominal

exchange rates, most of the other national central banks had to respond to changes in interest rates

by the Bundesbank. For this reason, we veri…ed the robustness of our results for the pre-EMU

period by identifying a monetary policy shock as a surprise increase in the German short-term

interest rate. The results obtained are brie‡y described in section 4.5 that discusses the robustness

of our results, and are reported in Appendix B.


4.2   E¤ects of monetary policy shocks in the Euro Area in the 1988-2007 period

Figures 1a–1c report the estimated impulse responses to an unexpected 100 basis-point increase in

the EA short-term interest rate. While the dark solid lines plot the responses of the variables in

each country for the full sample of 1988-2007 along with the 90% con…dence intervals (dotted lines),

the dashed lines plot the responses for the post-EMU period starting in 1999. The …gures plot in

column the responses of a particular variable. The …rst …ve plots in each column show the impulse

responses in the euro area, Germany, France, Italy and Spain. The bottom two plots combine the

responses for all countries in the two di¤erent samples. They reveal the di¤erences across regions


                                                  17
in each sample.

       We …rst start by describing the response of the EA economy in the 1988-2007 period, by focusing

on the plots in the …rst row. These plots show that faced with an unanticipated monetary tightening

of 100 bp, bond yields overall increase on impact by even more than 100 bp, the EA real exchange

rate appreciates by about 2% in the quarter of the shock and is expected to continue appreciating

for more than 2 years, and the growth rate of the monetary aggregate M3 fall. The real GDP yoy

growth rate falls by about 1% after a year and a half and does not revert to positive value before

three years. Our point estimate of the impact of monetary policy on output tends to be larger than

in Smets and Wouters (2003) and various estimates reported in Angeloni et al. (2003). The large

drop in output re‡ects a broad-based decline in aggregate consumption, investment, and exports.16

The decline in overall economic activity is furthermore clearly re‡ected in a fall in employment

reaching about 0.7% after 6 quarters and a subsequent increase in the unemployment rate. It is

followed by a reduction in hourly earnings and in CPI in‡ation.


4.3      Cross-country di¤erences in the 1988-2007 period

The transmission of monetary policy disturbances on the EA just described hides however hetero-

geneity across the countries’responses. Looking at the other panels, we observe in Figure 1a that a

surprise increase in the EA short-term interest rate results in much larger interest-rate increases in

countries such as Italy and Spain than in the other countries.17 This heterogeneity gets ampli…ed

when looking at long-term yields. In fact, the Italian and Spanish bond yields rise almost twice as

much as the yields of some other countries such as Germany, France or the Netherlands.

       Consistent with the larger rise in bond yields in Italy and Spain over the whole sample and with

the interest-rate parity condition, the Italian and Spanish currencies depreciate with respect to the

other countries’s currencies in pre-EMU period. The Italian and Spanish real e¤ective exchange

rates depreciate on impact and in subsequent quarters, while the price levels remain unchanged
  16
     Among the reponses not reported in the …gures, the growth rate of M1 also falls and the stock market drops by
10% on impact. Public consumption however remains unchanged for about a year and starts falling only after that.
  17
     The responses of the variables in Belgium and the Netherlands (not reported) are very similar to those of the
EA and countries such as Germany and France, but di¤erent from the responses in Italy and Spain. The responses
of Belgium and the Netherlands are available from the authors upon request.




                                                       18
in the period of the shock (Figures 1a and 1c).18 Instead, all of the other countries see their real

exchange rates appreciate on impact and for several quarters after the shock, in response to the

monetary tightening.

       Following the increase in interest rates and the movements of the exchange rate, we observe a

decline in the growth rate of GDP. While the GDP responses appear rather homogenous across

countries, the responses of GDP components are not. Importantly, consumption falls by about

twice as much in Italy and Spain than in the other countries, and investment also falls more. The

depreciation of the Italian and Spanish real exchange rates however mitigates the fall in exports thus

contributing to a more homogenous output response. These …gures thus clearly reveal how diverse

responses of bond yields and exchange rates a¤ect di¤erently the various European economies,

when we consider economic adjustments in the pre-EMU period.

       We note that the responses of CPI in‡ation reveal a temporary “price puzzle” in Germany

and Italy, following a tightening of the arti…cial EA interest rate. While the price increases may be

explained in Italy by the exchange rate depreciation — a feature that the model we present below is

able to replicate — the price increase in Germany is more di¢ cult to rationalize. One possibility is

that the arti…cial EA interest rate may not properly capture surprise monetary shocks for Germany.

In fact, when we identify monetary shocks as surprise increases in the German interest rate, for the

sample starting in 1988, we obtain almost no price puzzle for Germany (see …gures Appendix B).

It is reassuring, however, that all other responses appear to be very similar to the ones reported in

our benchmark speci…cation, in Figures 1a-1c.

       Finally, it should be stressed that the e¤ects of interest rate shocks on M3 (as well as on M1)

are quite di¤erent across countries. We have seen in section 3.5 that the monetary aggregates are

markedly more loosely related to the common factors than most other variables under consideration.

This may re‡ect the pervasive di¤erences in the national habits and in the availability of savings

instruments across countries of the EA. The ECB (2007) report on …nancial integration points

to, inter alia, the large di¤erences in …nancial assets of household sectors across countries (from

four times annual consumption in Belgium and Italy to only twice in France and Germany), large
  18
    Recall that the variables in the FAVAR are expressed in yoy growth rates. The impulse response functions of yoy
growth rates and (log) levels are identical for the …rst 4 quarters following the shock.




                                                        19
di¤erences in the composition of …nancial wealth, and di¤erent pass-through of the market interest

rate to deposit interest rates (see Kok Sørensen and Werner, 2006, and references therein).

   As we noted, the responses that we have documented reveal much larger increases in interest

rates and sharper drops in consumption in Italy and Spain than in the other EA countries. Italy,

for instance, has however been subject to considerable speculative attacks in the early 1990s. That

forced the Bank of Italy to increase short-term rates considerably more than, e.g., in Germany,

in order to defend its currency — thereby leading to a more important contraction of economic

activity — until it had to abandon the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) in September 1992. One

might thus wonder whether the e¤ects that we uncovered are due to this unusual event that was

the crisis of the ERM. To investigate this question, we re-estimated the impulse response functions

for the entire sample, except that we excluded the observations from the third quarter of 1992 to

the second quarter of 1993. We …nd that the responses of short- and long-term interest rates are

almost identical to the one reported in Figures 1a. The only notable di¤erence is that the response

of consumption is slightly smaller in all countries, but we still observe a much larger contraction

of consumption in Italy and Spain than in the other EA countries. So the facts that we have

documented do not appear to be simply an artifact of a few observations around the ERM crisis.


4.4   Has the transmission changed with the EMU?

To determine whether the monetary transmission has changed since the start of the EMU, we re-

estimate the e¤ects of a monetary policy shock using the 37 quarterly observations that correspond

to the post-1999 period corresponding to the EMU. The scarcity of degrees of freedom implies

that we should be extremely cautious in interpreting the results. We nevertheless trust that the

estimates provide an indication on the direction of evolution of the e¤ects of monetary policy with

respect to the full sample estimates.

   Several results are worth underlying for the post-99 period, again in the face of a 100 bp increase

in the short-term interest rate. First, the short-term interest rate responses are indistinguishable

for all countries, given that they refer to the same currency. Second, the rise in bond yields in the

EMU period is almost half of the one estimated for the entire sample, and the large di¤erences

across countries that were observable prior to the EMU vanish entirely. The EA e¤ective exchange


                                                 20
rate appreciates considerably more than it did over the full sample. One reason for this is that real

exchange rates uniformly appreciate in EA countries, including in Italy and in Spain.19

       Given the relatively small change in bond yields, measures of economic activity such as real

GDP, consumption, investment fall much less, if at all in the EMU period. As a result, employment

falls much less, and the unemployment rate’s increase is sensibly smaller.

       Altogether, it appears that a major characteristic of the new monetary policy regime is the lack

of response of long-term interest rates to surprise increases in the short-term interest rate.20 We

illustrate this evolution by comparing in Figure 2 the response of the long-term interest rate (dashed

lines) to the response an arti…cial long-term interest rate excluding a term premium (crosses). The

latter obtained by appealing to the expectations hypothesis and computed as the average response

of the short-term interest rate over the subsequent 28 quarters, i.e. a theoretical bond of 7-year

maturity. A striking di¤erence between the full sample and the post-1999 regime is that, since the

launch of the euro, the response of long-term interest rates displays a smaller term premium (i.e., a

smaller di¤erence between the market long-term rate and the arti…cial rate). The responses of these

interest rates are represented in the lower right plot of Figure 2 for the EA, but they are almost

identical for all individual countries in the post-1999 period. Moreover, over the entire sample, the

term premium gap is the largest in Italy and in Spain, which suggests that prior to the launch of the

euro, the premium for the risk of devaluation or depreciation of the peseta and the lira increased

markedly following a tightening of the monetary policy stance in the euro area.

       While most measures of economic activity appear to fall less in the EMU period, presumably

in part because of smaller bond yield responses, much of the remaining output adjustment appears

to be driven by international trade. This may be an important feature of the new monetary policy

regime characterized by more stable long-term interest rates and a sharper responses of the EA-wide

real exchange rate to monetary policy shocks.

       Finally, the responses of several variables (some not reported) remain heterogenous across coun-
  19
     The real exchange rate response is larger for the EA than for each of the individual countries as much of the
trade of the individual countries is with other European economies, whereas the EA real exchange rate measures
appreciations and depreciations solely relative to countries outside of the EA.
  20
     This result is consistent with the ones of Ehrmann et al. (2007) who use daily interest rates to compare the
responses of French, German, Italian and Spanish long-term yields to news in France, Germany, Italy and Spain
before and after 1999.




                                                       21
tries, in the EMU period. To name a few, the responses of M1 are twice as negative in Spain and

Belgium than in France, Germany and Italy. M3 increases in all countries, though to a di¤erent

extent. Relatively larger responses of German exports and investment carry through to a larger

GDP response than in other EA countries. Public consumption responses range from positive in

Belgium and Italy — the two countries with the largest stock of government debt — to sharply

negative in the Netherlands. We also note some di¤erences in labor market dynamics, aspects

analyzed in depth in McCallum and Smets (2007).


4.5   Robustness

In view of the small number of degrees of freedom we have available to estimate the above set of

results, we have conducted a series of robustness checks with respect to the econometric speci…cation

of the FAVAR. In particular, we estimated the above impulse response functions with models that

admit additional lags, additional latent factors, quarter-on-quarter growth rates, and considering

shocks to the German interest rate instead of the EA average interest rate.

   Most of the results described above are robust. In particular the larger response of the Italian

and Spanish interest rates and of their consumption are common outcomes of all these alternative

speci…cations when estimated over the full sample. Interestingly, Italy and Spain also stand out

in response to an unexpected oil-price increase, with Italian and Spanish bonds yields increasing

more that in the other countries of the EA, and consumption falling more (see Appendix C). This

provides further evidence that bond markets and credibility issues may contribute to the di¤erent

responses of European economies to various shocks prior to the EMU.

   In all speci…cations considered, we observe a smaller response of consumption after 1999 than

in the full-sample estimates, following a monetary tightening. However, the speci…cation with

quarter-on-quarter growth rates and several lags shows that, due to a large response of exports,

GDP declines as much in the post-1999 period as in the full sample. These impulse responses

functions are however much less precisely estimated than in our benchmark speci…cation.

   In the case in which the monetary policy shock is de…ned in terms of the German short-term

interest rate, nearly all the results reported in Figure 1 carry through. As mentioned above, however,

the price puzzle for German CPI is very much attenuated. This re‡ects that the identi…cation of


                                                 22
area-wide monetary shocks in the period prior to the euro is di¢ cult. However, except for the

response of German prices, nearly all other impulse responses are strikingly similar for a German

or an area-wide monetary policy shock.



5         Explaining the Evolution of the Transmission Mechanism: The

          Role of Monetary Regimes and Interest-Rate Parity

As discussed in the previous section, the empirical characterization of the transmission of monetary

policy in the EA displays a rich picture. In the pre-EMU period, interest-rate surprises in Germany

or in the EA as a whole are found to cause larger responses of short-term rates in Italy and Spain,

relatively large increase in long-term bond yields, depreciations of the Italian and Spanish currencies

(both in nominal and real terms), a sharp contraction in consumption and investment in these

countries. Such reductions in activity are o¤set by a relatively strong improvement in net exports,

thereby resulting in a moderate contraction of real GDP. In the EMU period, however, a similar

increase in the EA interest rate results in a much more homogenous response of individual EA

countries, and a quantitatively smaller reduction in economic activity measures.

         While the European economy has changed in many dimensions since the monetary union, we

now attempt to determine to what extent the monetary regime in place can explain both the

di¤erences in the transmission of monetary policy across countries and over time. To do so, we

use an open-economy DSGE monetary model along the lines of Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2002, 2005),

Clarida, Galí and Gertler (2002), Corsetti and Pesenti (2005), Altissimo et al. (2004), Benigno

and Benigno (2006), and Ferrero, Gertler and Svensson (2007) (henceforth FGS) and others.21

The speci…c variant considered here builds on FGS. This framework, while stylized, is su¢ ciently

rich to generate a nontrivial e¤ect of monetary policy variables such as output, consumption, net

exports, and in‡ation measures. It also allows for di¤erent consumption responses across regions,

and a switching of expenditures in consumption and net exports in response to real exchange rates

movements.

         We proceed by presenting the model. The model is explained in details in FGS, so we merely
    21
         For a larger-scale model, see, e.g., Faruquee, Laxton, Muir, and Pesenti (2007).



                                                              23
summarize it here, emphasizing the changes relative to FGS. We next discuss the calibration of the

model parameters, including those characterizing monetary policy. Finally, we analyze the model’s

implications, attempting to provide an explanation for the stylized facts just described.


5.1    A stylized two-country model

The model involves two large countries, Home (H) and Foreign (F), of equal size. Each country is

populated by a representative household that consumes tradable and nontradable goods and that

contains a continuum of workers who supply labor to intermediate-goods …rms. Each of these …rms

hires one worker and produces either tradable or non-tradable goods which it sells on a monopolisti-

cally competitive market. These …rms optimally reset their prices at random time intervals. In each

sector, we also have competitive …nal-goods …rms which combine the di¤erentiated intermediate

goods into a homogenous consumption good. In addition, to …t the evidence on imperfect pass-

through (e.g., Campa and Goldberg, 2006), we assume as in Monacelli (2005) that monopolistically

competitive importers of foreign tradable goods resell them to residents at prices set in domestic

currency in a staggered fashion.22 In order to account for di¤erent consumption behavior across

countries, we assume incomplete …nancial markets across countries (even though the household

provides perfect insurance within each country), by assuming that a single bond is traded inter-

nationally. As in FGS, one simpli…cation is that we treat as nondurable consumption all domestic

interest-rate sensitive expenditures, including what is commonly labeled as investment. However,

as mentioned in Woodford (2003, chap. 5), to the extent that we are not interested in distinguish-

ing consumption and investment, this should not a¤ect importantly the model’s predictions for the

other variables.23

    We will consider two monetary regimes. The pre-EMU regime is characterized by distinct

central banks in each country, each setting short-term interest rates according to a generalized
  22
     Corsetti and Dedola (2005) propose an alternative model of limited pass-through in which distributing imported
goods requires nontradables.
  23
     In fact, macroeconomic models that successfully explain the behavior of investment often assume adjustment
costs in investment (e.g., Basu and Kimball, 2003; Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans, 2005). As shown in Woodford
(2003), such adjustment costs yield a log-linearized Euler equation for investment that is very similar to the one for
consumption in the presence of internal habit formation. It follows that the intertemporal allocation of aggregate
expenditures can be approximated by a similar Euler equation, in which the degree of habit formation also serves as
a proxy for investment adjustment costs. Nonetheless, in treating investment similarly to non-durable expenditures,
we do abstract from the e¤ects of investment on future production capacities.



                                                         24
Taylor rule which may include responses to exchange-rate ‡uctuations. Area-wide variables are

obtained by aggregating the relevant variables across the two countries. In the post-EMU regime,

instead, a supra-national authority — the European Central Bank — is assumed to set an EA wide

interest rate, according to a generalized Taylor rule involving area-wide variables.

   In order for the model to be consistent with the identifying assumptions made in our empirical

FAVAR to identify the monetary policy shocks, we assume in contrast to FGS but similarly to

Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) that the households’

aggregate consumption decisions and all …rms’pricing decisions are made prior to the realization

of exogenous shocks, so that prices and consumption respond do not respond contemporaneously

to the monetary shock. In addition, we allow households to form habit in consumption, and the

…rms who don’t reoptimize their prices to index them to past in‡ation. Such deviations from FGS

allow the model to generate responses of consumption and in‡ation to shocks that are more in line

with the FAVAR estimates.

   As a last departure from FGS, we allow for a wedge in the uncovered interest rate parity

(UIP) condition. This wedge, assumed to be exogenous here, is meant to capture deviations from

the UIP, argued by Devereux and Engel (2002) to be needed in order to explain the disconnect

between ‡uctuations in exchange rates and other macroeconomic variables. Empirical evidence

for such deviations from UIP have also often been reported in the empirical literature, whether

unconditionally (e.g., Bekaert and Hodrick, 1993; Engel, 1996; Froot and Thaler, 1990; Mark and

Wu, 1998; Rossi, 2007), or conditionally on monetary policy shocks (Eichenbaum and Evans, 1995;

Scholl and Uhlig, 2006). While Bekaert, Wei, and Xing (2007) …nd smaller departures from the

UIP than reported previously, when adjusting for small sample bias, they …nd evidence of a time-

varying risk premium displaying a highly persistent component in expected exchange rate changes.

As discussed below, such a wedge will prove to be important in explaining the di¤erential responses

of consumption and investment across countries, in the pre-EMU period.

   We now describe the environment, following closely FGS.




                                                 25
5.1.1       Households

We assume that in each country, the representative household maximizes a lifetime expected utility

of the form
            (1                "                                            Z                                 Z                               !#)
             X                    (Ct+s   !Ct+s          1)
                                                           1
                                                                                    LHt+s (f )1+'                    1
                                                                                                                         LN t+s (f )1+'
  Et    1             t+s 1                                                                       df +                                  df         (4)
                                          1                                 0          1+'                                   1+'
                s=0


where Et         1   is the expectation operator, conditional on the information up to the end of period t 1;

Ct denotes aggregate consumption, ! 2 (0; 1] is the degree of internal habit persistence,                                                      1   >0

would correspond to the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in the absence of habit formation,

' is the inverse of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, Lkt (f ) represents hours worked by worker

f 2 [0; 1] in an intermediate-goods …rm, in sector k; i.e., either the home tradable sector H (with

measure ) or the domestic nontradable sector N (with measure 1                                                       ). As in FGS, the discount

factor      t   evolves according to         t   =       t t 1;   and          t     e t= 1 +       log Ct               #   where Ct corresponds

to the household’s consumption level but is treated by the household as exogenous, and where                                                         t

is a preference shock.24

       The consumption index Ct is an aggregate of tradable CT t and nontradable CN t consumption

goods
                                                                                 1
                                                                           CT t CN t
                                                                  Ct
                                                                            (1       )

with        2 [0; 1] representing the share of tradable goods. The consumption of tradable goods

combines in turn home-produced goods CHt ; and foreign-produced goods CF t as follows

                                                 h   1                 1                 1           1   i       1
                                      CT t               (CHt )            + (1         ) (CF t )                    :


The coe¢ cient             2 (0:5; 1] denotes home bias in tradables, and                                is the elasticity of substitution

among domestically produced and imported tradables. The home consumer price index (CPI)
  24
     This formulation of the discount factor incorporates — in the case that the representative household stands for a
continuum of households — the stimulative e¤ect on individual consumption of an increase in average consumption,
as in Uzawa (1968). However, as emphasized in FGS, the parameter is calibrated to such a small value that this
e¤ect is negligible. It merely serves as a technical device to guarantee a unique steady state in the case of incomplete
…nancial markets across countries. One can alternatively obtain a such a unique steady state by assuming a constant
discount factor , but introducing a debt-elastic interest rate premium in the budget constraints (7) and (10) below,
as in Benigno (2001), Kollmann (2002), Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2003), and Justiniano and Preston (2006).



                                                                               26
which minimizes cost of consumer expenditures is given by


                                                            Pt = PT t PN1 t

                                                                   h                                       i       1
                                                                        1
                                                                                                ) PF1 t
                                                                                                               1
where the price of tradables is given by PT t =                        PHt + (1                                         : In the foreign country,

we assume symmetric preferences, consumption aggregates, and price indices which we denote by

starred (*) variables and coe¢ cients.25

       Optimal behavior on the part of each household requires …rst an optimal allocation of consump-

tion spending across di¤erentiated goods. While we assume that households choose their level of

total consumption on the basis of information available at date t                                     1; we let them choose the allo-

cation of their consumption basket after the contemporaneous shocks have realized. The optimal

allocation of (domestically- and foreign-produced) tradables goods as well as nontradable goods

takes then the usual form

                                                      1                                                            1
                                           PT t                                                     PN t
                        CT t =                            Ct ;         CN t = (1            )                          Ct ;                  (5)
                                           Pt                                                        Pt
                                           PHt                                                       PF t
                        CHt =                             CT t ;            CF t = (1           )                        CT t :              (6)
                                           PT t                                                      PT t

       As in FGS, we assume that there is a single internationally traded one-period bond. We denote

by Bt the nominal holdings at the beginning of period t + 1; denominated in units of the home

currency. The household’s budget constraint in the home country is then given by

                                               Z                                        Z   1
                Pt Ct + Bt = It   1 Bt 1   +          WHt (f ) LHt (f ) df +                    WN t (f ) LN t (f ) df +            t        (7)
                                                  0


where It    1   is the gross nominal interest rate in domestic currency between period t 1 and t; Wkt (f )

is the nominal wage obtained by worker f in sector k; and                               t   combines aggregate dividends, lump

sum taxes and transfers. Maximizing the utility function (4) subject to (7) yields the following
  25
   One notable di¤erence with respect to the home economy is that the foreign household consumption of tradable
                          h       1         1    1         1
                                                             i 1
goods is of the form CT t   (1   ) (CHt )     +    (CF t )       :




                                                                       27
optimal choice of expenditures


                      Et   1 f t Pt g   = Et   1    (Ct       !Ct    1)         !   t (Ct+1        !Ct )                          (8)


where   t   is the household’s marginal utility of additional nominal income at date t: This expression

makes clear that the plan for aggregate consumption at date t is made on the basis of information

available at date t    1: The marginal utilities of income must in turn satisfy the Euler equation


                                                                     t    t+1
                                                   1 = Et It                    :                                                 (9)
                                                                          t


Furthermore, the optimal choice of labor supply equalizes the real wage with the marginal rate of

substitution between consumption and leisure.

   The representative household in the foreign country is very similar. One di¤erence, however,

between the two countries is that the foreign bond is not traded internationally. The foreign

household’s budget constraint, expressed in units of the foreign currency is then

                                                      Z                                  Z    1
            B                       It 1 Bt 1
 Pt Ct +Dt + t = It        1 Dt 1 +           +               WF t (f ) LF t (f ) df +            WN t (f ) LN t (f ) df +   t   (10)
            Et                       Et e t 1             0


where the labor income indicates that foreign workers and …rms operate in either the foreign

tradable sector or the nontradable sector, Dt represents the foreign household’s holdings of the

foreign debt while Bt denotes the foreign household’s holdings of the domestic bond, issued in the

home currency, and Et is the nominal exchange rate, i.e., the amount of home currency needed in

exchange for a unit of foreign currency. In contrast to FGS, but as in McCallum and Nelson (2000)

or Justiniano and Preston (2006) we introduce an exogenous term e                                 t 1   which can be interpreted

as a risk premium shock, or a bias in the foreign household’s expectation of the period-t revenue

from holding home bonds. This shock can alternatively be interpreted as a bias in the foreign

household’s date t     1 forecast of the date t exchange rate, Et ; as in Kollmann (2002).

   The foreign household choice of consumption plans is also characterized by optimal conditions

of the form (8) and (9). In addition, given that foreign citizen may hold bonds of both countries,

they must be indi¤erent between holding home and foreign bonds. This results in the following


                                                                28
uncovered interest-rate parity (UIP) condition

                                                Et          t       t+1                  t   t+1
                                     Et It                                   = Et It                     :                          (11)
                                             Et+1 e     t
                                                                    t                        t


5.1.2   Firms

We have three types of …rms: …nal-goods …rms, intermediate-goods …rms, and importing retailers.


Final-goods …rms.           In each sector H and N; …nal goods …rms, which are acting on a competitive

market, combine intermediate goods to produce output

                            Z                               1
                                                                                                 Z   1                          1
                       1                       1                                             1                       1
             YHt                 YHt (f )          df           ;       YN t       (1    )               YN t (f )       df
                             0


where   > 1 is the elasticity of substitution among intermediate goods. Cost minimization for the

…nal-goods …rms implies the following demand functions for intermediate-goods producing …rms


                                 1    PHt (f )                                                   1       PN t (f )
               YHt (f ) =                                YHt ;          YN t (f ) = (1       )                           YN t       (12)
                                       PHt                                                                PN t

where the price indices PHt and PN t aggregate underlying prices Pkt (f ) :

   Each intermediate …rm f in sector k = H; N produces output Ykt (f ) by hiring labor Lkt (f )

and using the production function

                                                        Ykt (f ) = At Lkt (f )

where the total factor productivity term At = Zt eat ; and Zt =Zt                            1   = 1 + g describes trend produc-

tivity, while eat denotes temporary ‡uctuations in total factor productivity. As the …rm competes

to attract labor, its nominal marginal cost is M Ckt (f ) = Wkt (f ) =At :


Intermediate …rms.              Intermediate …rms are assumed to set prices on a staggered manner. A

fraction 1      of …rms (chosen independently of the history of price changes) can choose a new price

in each period. Our informational assumptions imply that the …rms that get to reset their prices

must do so using information available at period t                             1: In addition, we assume that if a price is not



                                                                        29
re-optimized, it is indexed to lagged in‡ation in sector k = H; N according to the rule

                                                                                   Pk;t      1
                                              Pkt (f ) = Pk;t            1 (f )                       ;                                              (13)
                                                                                   Pk;t      2


for some      2 [0; 1] : Given that the problem is the same for all …rms of sector k which reset their
                                                   o that maximizes
price at date t; they all choose an optimal price Pk;t

                            (1                    "                                                          #                   )
                             X                                 Pk;t+s 1
                                      s                o
                   Et   1                 t;t+s       Pkt                              M Ck;t+s (f ) Yk;t+s (f )
                                                                Pk;t 1
                             s=0


subject to the demand for their good (12). In the previous expression,                                           t;t+s       =   t;t+s   t+s = t    is the
                                                                                                          s 1
stochastic discount factor between periods t and t + s;                                t;t+s     =        j=0 t+j ;      for s       1; and   t;t   = 1:

   The price index then satis…es

                                  2                                                                        !1    3       1
                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                           Pk;t   1
                        Pkt = 4(1                  o 1
                                               ) (Pkt )             +      Pk;t    1
                                                                                                                 5           :
                                                                                           Pk;t   2



Importing retailers.             To model the imperfect pass-through found in the data, we assume that

monopolistically competitive retailers import foreign tradables goods and sell them to domestic

consumers, as in Monacelli (2005). These retailers also set their prices in a staggered fashion so

that the law of one price does not hold at the consumer level. As for the intermediate …rms, a

fraction 1     ~ of retailers choose a new price in each period, on the basis of information available

at period t    1: Again, if a price is not re-optimized, it is indexed to lagged in‡ation in that sector,

according to the rule (13). Since the problem is identical for retailers which reset their price at
                                          o in domestic currency that maximizes
date t; they all choose an optimal price PF;t

                                 (1                    "                               ~                    #                )
                                  X       s                             PF;t+s 1
                        Et   1
                                          ~    t;t+s        PFo t                            Et PF;t+s CF;t+s
                                                                         PF;t 1
                                   s=0


subject to the demand for the imported good (6). In the above expression, PF;t denotes the price of

foreign tradable goods in foreign currency. The price index of imported goods in domestic currency




                                                                         30
satis…es
                                                                                             ~
                                                  ~ (P o ) + ~PF;t             PF;t      1
                                   PF t = 1           Ft               1                         :
                                                                               PF;t      2


5.1.3      Monetary Policy

We consider two distinct monetary regimes, one referring to the pre-EMU period in which each

national central banks sets its own interest rate according to a generalized forward-looking Taylor

rule, and one referring to the monetary union, in which a supra-national central bank sets common

short-term interest rates.

     More speci…cally, in the pre-EMU regime, we assume that the home national central banks sets

its short-term riskless interest rate according to


                         it = it   1   + (1   )      Et   t+h   +   y yt   +    i it   +     e       et + "t                   (14)


where it     log (It =I) corresponds to the deviations of the interest rate from its steady-state value,

 t    log (Pt =Pt   4)   denotes deviations of year-over-year CPI in‡ation around the steady state (as-

sumed to be zero), yt represents percent deviations of output from trend,                                       et = log (Et =Et   1)

denotes percent nominal depreciation of the home currency, and the iid shock "t measures unex-

pected interest-rate disturbances. The foreign central bank follows a similar rule


                     it =     it   1   + (1   )      Et   t+h   +    y yt   +     i it   +       e    et + "t                  (15)


where, again, the stars refer to foreign variables or coe¢ cients. Note that we allow for cross-country

interactions as the national central banks may respond to ‡uctuations in the exchange rate or to

the other country’s interest rate. Clarida, Galí and Gertler (1998) and Angeloni and Dedola (1999)

argue that such rules provide a good characterization of monetary policy in a number of countries,

including Germany and Italy, before the monetary union.

     In the EMU regime, a single common short-term rate prevails, so that it = it = iea
                                                                                     t where ea

stands for Euro-area variables, and           et = 0 in all periods. We assume that the common central




                                                          31
bank — corresponding to the ECB — sets interest rate according to the interest-rate rule


                        iea
                         t =
                                 ea ea
                                   it 1   + (1   ea
                                                      )    ea
                                                                Et      ea
                                                                        t+h   +   ea ea
                                                                                  y yt    + "ea
                                                                                             t                          (16)


where area-wide in‡ation and output are de…ned as                  ea   =(        +             ytea = (yt + yt ) =2:
                                                                   t          t       t ) =2;



5.1.4    Equilibrium characterization

To close the model, we use equilibrium conditions stating that supply of tradables and nontradable

goods must be equal to the respective demands in each country, and that international …nancial

markets clear. To characterize the response of various variables to monetary shocks, we solve

a log-linear approximation to the model’s equilibrium conditions around a deterministic state,

using standard techniques. We thus implicitly assume that the shocks are small enough for the

approximation to be valid. In the steady state, both economies are symmetric, the trade balance

and foreign debt are equal to zero, output in each sector grows at the constant trend productivity

growth rate g, the relative prices of all goods, including the real exchange rate

                                                           Et Pt
                                                 Qt
                                                            Pt

are equal to 1, in‡ation is equal to zero, and the real interest rate is equal to (1 + g) = ; where

the steady-state value of   t:

   The log-linearized equilibrium conditions are described in Appendix D.


5.2     Model calibration

We calibrate the model’s parameters in order to provide its quantitative predictions, and to deter-

mine whether we can replicate at least some of the stylized facts mentioned above. In particular we

focus our attention on changes in responses of key macroeconomic variables between the pre-EMU

and EMU period. We also focus on the di¤erence in responses across countries in the pre-EMU

period, especially the di¤erences between Italy and Spain on the one hand, and Germany along

with other EA countries on the other hand. We assume that Home (H), stands for Italy or Spain,

and Foreign (F) stands for Germany along with the other EA countries.

                                                          32
       We calibrate the structural parameters describing the behavior of the private sector similarly

to earlier studies such as FGS or Obstfeld and Rogo¤ (2005), and use estimated coe¢ cients for the

policy rules. While the calibration of the structural parameters sacri…ces somewhat the model’s

ability to replicate the empirical responses, we did check that the model’s predictions are not too

sensitive the chosen parameter values. However, as we will see below, coe¢ cients of the policy rules

do play an important role on the shape of the responses to various shocks.


5.2.1      Structural parameters

As mentioned, most structural parameters are taken from FGS and are roughly in line with values

chosen in other studies (e.g., Obstfeld and Rogo¤, 2005) and with some microeconomic data. We

set the same values for both countries. The steady-state growth rate of the economy g is set

to 0.5%, so that annual growth is 2%. The steady-state discount factor                     is set to 0.99. The

parameters describing the evolution of the discount factor # =               1000 and       = 7:2361 10      6   are

chosen so that ‡uctuations in       t   have no noticeable implications on the economy dynamics.26 The

Frisch elasticity of labor supply is '       1   = 0:5: The elasticity of substitution among intermediate

goods       = 11 results in a steady-state markup of 10% in the tradable and nontradable sectors.

We set the probability that intermediate-goods …rms and importing retailers do not re-optimize

their price to     = ~ = 0:66; corresponding to a mean duration between price re-optimizations of 3

quarters. Smets and Wouters (2002) …nd evidence that import prices display a similar degree of

price stickiness as domestic prices on the basis of estimated responses to monetary shocks in the

EA. For the parameters that determine the openness of the economies, we set the share of tradables

in the consumption basket          to 0:25; the preference share for home tradables             = 0:7 (it would

be 0.5 in the absence of home bias), and the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign

tradables is     = 2; as in FGS.

       FGS assume a log utility function of consumption, and no habit persistence or in‡ation in-

dexing. This yields however sharp responses in in‡ation and consumption to monetary shocks, in

contrast to the empirical evidence. To generate more realistic hump-shaped responses of consump-
  26
    As mentioned above, the assumption of a variable discount factor is merely a technical device yielding a unique
steady state.




                                                        33
tion expenditures and output of the model economy we assume some degree of habit persistence

!.27 We calibrate this parameter at 0.59 which corresponds to the (median) estimate obtained by

Smets and Wouters (2003), in their model of the EA. We similarly use the estimates of Smets and

Wouters (2003) to calibrate the curvature of the utility of consumption and the degree of in‡ation

indexing to respectively        = 1:37 and          = ~ = 0:47:


5.2.2    Policy rule coe¢ cients

We calibrate the policy rule coe¢ cients for the home and foreign country, in the pre-EMU period

using estimates of Angeloni and Dedola (1999, Table 9b). These authors estimate interest rate

rules of the form (14)-(15) jointly for Italy and Germany, for the period 1988-1997, which covers

nearly entirely our pre-EMU sample. Their preferred speci…cation involves horizons on in‡ation

expectations of h = h = 0; so that the central banks set interest rates in response to in‡ation that

has occurred over the past year. As the estimates are obtained using monthly data, we convert

them for application to quarterly data.28 We thus have                   = 0:79;   = 1:22;    y   = 0:30;   i   = 0:41

for Italy,29 and     = 0:82;          = 1:41;   y   = 0:30;    i   = 0 for Germany. Angeloni and Dedola (1999)

do not include a bilateral DM/Lira exchange rate in their policy rules, but they include the $/DM

exchange rate. Since we abstract form the world outside of the EA in the model, we assume that

German monetary policy does not respond to the exchange rate (                     e   = 0), while the annualized

Italian interest rate responds with a short-run coe¢ cient of 0.4 to the exchange rate depreciation.

This is meant to capture the fact that the Italian central bank was required to maintain its exchange

rate within narrow bands, as long as it took part in the exchange rate mechanism. This results in

a long-run coe¢ cient      e   = 5:

    For the post-EMU period, we estimate an interest-rate rule of the form (16) on EA data, using

GMM, similarly to Clarida, Galí and Gertler (1998). We use as instruments: the current value of
   27
      The degree of habit persistence also proxies for investment adjustment costs in the case that consumption ex-
penditures include also investment expenditures.
   28
      For the conversion, we assume that monthly values of (annualized) short term interest rates are constant in
a given quarter, and equal to the corresponding (annualized) quarterly rate. In that case, the coe¢ cient on the
quarterly lagged interest rate is = m = (3 2 m ) where m is the policy coe¢ cient on the monthly lagged interest
rate. The long-run coe¢ cients on in‡ation, output, and the foreign interest rate remain unchanged at the quarterly
frequency.
   29
      Angeloni and Dedola (1999)’s estimated policy rule for Spain is similar to that estimated for Italy.




                                                              34
in‡ation and detrended output as well as three latent factors extracted from the EA indicators.

Our preferred horizon is h = 2: As the estimated coe¢ cient on the lagged interest rate is relatively

high,   ea   = 0:93; the implied long-run responses to expected in‡ation and output ‡uctuations are
                           ea                 ea
also quite strong:              = 13:03 and   y    = 8:01:30 Nonetheless, we verify that our conclusions remain

robust to smaller values of these coe¢ cients.


5.2.3    Wedge in uncovered interest-rate parity

The remaining parameters that we need to calibrate refer to the process describing the wedge in

the uncovered interest-rate parity,           t:   The UIP condition (11) can be log-linearized to yield


                                               it          it = Et et+1 +      t:                                  (17)


We assume that         t   follows an AR(1) process which is allowed to respond to monetary shocks


                                                   t   =      t 1   + "t + "    t



where "t are foreign monetary policy shocks and "                    t   denotes other possible shocks to that wedge.

By allowing      t   to respond to monetary shocks, we hope to capture in an arguably reduced form

the e¤ect of monetary shocks on the risk premium emphasized by Scholl and Uhlig (2006). We

assume that this wedge is very persistent, setting                       = 0:98; and will consider di¤erent values of

the parameter :


5.3     Model’s quantitative predictions: Explaining the changes in the monetary
        transmission mechanism

Having calibrated the model, we can now determine whether it can replicate the stylized facts

mentioned above, namely the cross-country di¤erences in responses as well as their changes with

the introduction of the euro that we report in Figures 1a–1c.
  30
    While this representation of the policy rule appears very aggressive, it is important to realize that this is due to
the large coe¢ cient on the lagged interest rate. The policy rule may equivalently be written in terms of changes of
the interest rate: iea            ea
                     t = 0:91 Et t+2 + 0:56 yt
                                               ea
                                                   0:07iea      ea
                                                        t 1 + "t :




                                                                35
5.3.1      Pre-EMU cross-country di¤erences

Figures 3a-3d indicate the responses of key variables to an unexpected interest-rate increase of 100

bp in the foreign economy — which stands for Germany — in the case that both economies set

their interest-rates according to the estimated policy rules (14) and (15). This is meant to replicate

the e¤ects of a monetary policy tightening in the pre-EMU period, reported in Figures 1a-1c.

     Figure 3a shows the responses of the home economy (i.e., Italy or Spain, solid lines) and the

foreign economy (i.e., Germany, dashed lines) in the absence of a wedge in the UIP condition ( = 0;

so   t   = 0). The unexpected increase in the foreign short-term rate is associated with a rise in the

long-term rate, a drop in output, consumption, and in‡ation. As the domestic currency depreciates

more than prices adjust, the domestic real exchange rate (qt ) also depreciates, and home terms of

trade (TOT, measuring foreign prices relative to domestic prices, in domestic currency) increase.

This stimulates an increase in net exports of home goods. Note that investors in the internationally

traded security do not require as large an increase in the home interest rate as that observed for

the foreign interest rate. The reason is that the domestic currency is expected to have depreciated

beyond its long term value, so that it is expected to appreciate slightly in subsequent periods.

     The response of home interest rates just described is however at odds with the interest-rate

responses that we had documented for countries such as Spain and Italy in Figure 1a. In fact, in

pre-EMU data, these short and long-term rates increased signi…cantly more than those estimated for

Germany and other countries. They were also associated with sharp contractions in consumption

and employment in those countries. Instead, the model-based responses display a milder response of

the home variables. One might think that by letting the home country’s central bank respond more

to exchange rate ‡uctuations (i.e., a larger             e ),   we may generate stronger responses of interest

rates and consumption at home. However, even for very large values of                       e;   we cannot produce

larger responses of the home interest-rate, output and consumption than in the foreign economy.

As shown in Figure 3c, in the limit, as         e   ! +1; the nominal exchange rate is perfectly stabilized,

the variables have identical responses in both countries, and thus corresponds to those of a single

closed economy.31 In addition, changes in structural parameters don’t generically modify the picture
  31
     Recall that our calibration is such that apart from the policy rules, the home and foreign economies are perfectly
symmetric.



                                                           36
presented.

   The basic version of the model cannot replicate the transmission of monetary policy observed in

a low-credibility regimes as long-term rates are tightly tied to expected future riskless short-term

rates. One key parameter, however, that allows us to deviate from the standard case and that

seems to explain the stylized facts reported in Figure 1a-1c is : Figure 3b reports the model-based

responses of the same variables in the case that      = 0:6: In that case, an unexpected increase in the

foreign short-term rate triggers a much larger increase in the home interest rate — as observed in the

data — as the wedge    t   suddenly rises in response to an interest-rate increase in the foreign country.

This wedge suggests that in response to the foreign monetary shock, international investors require

a higher return on domestic (internationally traded) bonds than they do on foreign securities, even

after accounting for the rational expectation of nominal exchange rate changes.

   Such an exchange-rate risk premium appears important to explain the stylized facts reported

above. In fact, in Figure 3b, not only do short- and long-term rates respond more strongly at

home than in the foreign country, but these interest-rate responses do also generate a larger drop

in the home country consumption. As in the data, output falls less than consumption due to the

fact that home-country net exports increase. Note also that while monetary policy reduces activity

in both regions, prices do increase in the home country as a result of the currency depreciation.

Interestingly, prices aggregated for both regions (dashed-dotted line) can also increase following the

monetary tightening, to the extent that in‡ation in the depreciating country more than o¤sets the

in‡ation reduction in the other region. This can explain an apparent “price puzzle” in the home

country or in the area as a whole, in response to monetary tightening.

   The exercise just performed thus suggests that conditional on EA-wide (or German) monetary

shocks, changes in the risk premium on Italian and Spanish securities may provide an important

explanation for the large observed responses in bond yields, and the fact that consumption and

investment used to fall considerably more in those countries than in the rest of the EA.


5.3.2   Monetary union and changes in the monetary transmission mechanism

By adopting the euro as their currency, all EMU countries essentially eliminated exchange-rate

risks relative to the other member countries. Figure 3c reports the responses of the same variables


                                                    37
in the case of a monetary union, when monetary policy is conducted according to the estimated

rule (16). Since both countries are symmetric in the calibration, they both respond identically to

the EA interest-rate shock.

   Comparing Figures 3a-3b on one hand with Figure 3c on the other hand reveals important

di¤erences in the responses to an unexpected increase in the interest rate set by the foreign central

bank in the pre-EMU regime, and the common central bank in the EMU regime. The model

predicts that the home economy bene…ts in many respects from participating to the monetary

union, in response such a shock. In particular, by removing exchange-rate risks in the EMU

regime, home (short- and long-term) interest-rates increase by less, as we observed in the empirical

responses. As a result, home consumption falls by less and output remains more stable.

   According to the model, removing exchange-rate risks may have helped stabilize not only coun-

tries such as Italy and Spain but also the entire EA. To isolate the e¤ect of the exchange-rate risk,

we report in Figure 3d the model-based responses of the EA variables obtained by aggregating the

home and foreign responses, following a monetary shock in the foreign country. The …gure reveals

that the responses of short- and long-term interest rates, output, consumption and in‡ation are all

more muted when we remove the risk-premium shock         t:

   The EMU has not only contributed to smaller responses by removing exchange-rate risks. The

model predicts that a monetary policy that has more consistently aimed at stabilizing in‡ation

and output in the EA, since the start of the EMU, should result in a smaller observed response of

aggregate economic activity and in‡ation to monetary shocks, as observed in the data. To illustrate

this, Figure 3e shows the model-based responses of EA variables to a monetary tightening (of 100

bp) assuming two di¤erent policy rules: the one estimated for the ECB (solid lines) and the one

estimated previously (by Angeloni and Dedola, 1999) for the Bundesbank (dashed lines). The

…gure indicates that stronger responses by the ECB to in‡ation and output ‡uctuations, essentially

stemming from a very inertial rule, have resulted in smaller responses of economic activity and

in‡ation. It is important to stress, however, that the smaller response of output and in‡ation is

not due to the fact that the economy is less sensitive to monetary policy. All elasticities describing

the behavior of the private sector, such as the intertemporal elasticity of substitution and so on

are maintained constant in this experiment. It is only the stronger commitment to in‡ation and


                                                 38
output stabilization that results in such an outcome.32



6    Conclusion

In this paper, we have provided an empirical characterization of the monetary transmission mech-

anism in key European economies, exploiting the richness of the cross-country di¤erences and the

fact that a major change in monetary regime has occurred in 1999 with the adoption of the euro by

11 European countries. The combination of the cross-country heterogeneity and the changes over

time provides a unique laboratory for the analysis of numerous macroeconomic indicators.

    Focusing on six major European economies, we have argued that a large fraction of the ‡uc-

tuations in these economic variables can be captured by a low-dimensional vector of common

components. This …nding is useful to the extent that it allows us to characterize the e¤ects of

monetary shocks on all variables of interest, despite the fact that we have extremely short samples

with a relatively stable regime.

    Looking at the EA as a whole, in the 1988-2007 sample, we have found that the responses

of key macroeconomic variables to monetary disturbances conceal important heterogeneity across

countries. Such responses can be rationalized by a two-country model, provided that we allow

for a disturbance in the uncovered-interest-rate parity condition, which may be interpreted as a

risk-premium shock. In addition despite the short samples, we have detected preliminary evidence

of important changes in the transmission of monetary policy since the start of the EMU.

    We have argued that some of the changes since 1999 can be explained by the change in the

monetary regime. In particular, our model predicts that by removing an exchange-rate risk through

the monetary union, and by having a central bank more decisively focused on in‡ation and output

stabilization, the impact of monetary disturbances on measures of economic activity has been

reduced, as observed in the data. While private consumption and investment in Italy and Spain

appear to have been especially hard hit by German monetary policy disturbances in the pre-EMU

period, the new monetary regime has contributed to stabilizing them more e¤ectively, in part
   32
      Boivin and Giannoni (2006a) argue that a stronger commitment to in‡ation stabilization in US monetary policy
since the early 1980s can similarly explain the observed reduction in estimated responses of in‡ation and output in
the US economy in the post-1980 period.




                                                        39
because long-term interest rate have become much more e¤ectively anchored in such countries

since the start of the monetary union.

   We have also found that the exchange rate channel has become relatively more powerful in the

monetary union period, than in the previous decade and that national monetary aggregates appear

much less driven by euro area common shocks and show more heterogenous responses to monetary

policy shocks than most other macroeconomic variables.




References
 [1] Agresti Anna-Maria and Benoît Mojon (2003), “Some Stylized Facts on the Euro Area Business
     Cycle,” in I. Angeloni, A. Kashyap and B. Mojon (eds., op cited).

 [2] Altissimo, F., P. Benigno, D. Rodriguez-Palenzuela (2004), “In‡ation Di¤erentials in a Cur-
     rency Area: Facts, Explanations and Policy,” NBER working paper.

 [3] Angeloni, Ignazio, and Luca Dedola (1999), “From the ERM to the Euro: New Evidence on
     Economic and Policy Convergence Among EU Countries,” ECB working paper 4.

 [4] Angeloni, Ignazio, Anil Kashyap and Benoît Mojon (2003), Monetary Transmission in the
     Euro Area, Cambridge University Press.

 [5] Bai, Jushan (2003), “Inferential Theory for Factor Models of Large Dimensions,”Econometrica
     71(1): 135-72.

 [6] Bai, Jushan and Serena Ng (2006), “Con…dence Intervals for Di¤usion Index Forecasts and
     Inference for Factor-Augmented Regressions,” Econometrica 74(4): 1133-1150.

 [7] Basu, Susanto, and Miles S. Kimball (2003), “Investment Planning; Costs and the E¤ects of
     Fiscal and Monetary Policy,” manuscript, University of Michigan.

 [8] Bekaert, Geert, Robert J. Hodrick (1993), “On Biases in the Measurement of Foreign Exchange
     Risk Premiums,” Journal of International Money and Finance 12 (2): 115-138.

 [9] Bekaert, Geert, Min Wei and Yuhang Xing (2007), “Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and the
     Term Structure,” Journal of International Money and Finance 26(6): 1038-1069.

[10] Benalal, Nicholai, Juan Luis Diaz del Hoyo, Beatrice Pierluigi and Nick Vidalis (2006), “Output
     Growth Di¤erentials Across the Euro Area Countries: Some Stylised Facts,” ECB Occasional
     Paper 45.

[11] Benigno, Gianluca, and Pierpaolo Benigno (2006), “Exchange Rate Determination under In-
     terest Rate Rules,” manuscript, London School of Economics.

[12] Benigno, Pierpaolo (2001), “Price Stability with Imperfect Financial Integration,”manuscript.



                                                40
[13] Bernanke, Ben S., Jean Boivin and Piotr Eliasz (2005), “Measuring Monetary Policy: A Fac-
     tor Augmented Vector Autoregressive (FAVAR) Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
     120(1): 387-422.

[14] Blanchard Olivier, and Jordi Galí (2008), “The Macroeconomic E¤ects of Oil Shocks: Why
     are the 2000s So Di¤erent from the 1970s?”forthcoming in Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (eds.),
     International Dimensions of Monetary Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[15] Boivin, Jean and Marc P. Giannoni (2006a) “Has Monetary Policy Become More E¤ective?”
     The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3): 445-462.

[16] Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006b), “DSGE Models in a Data-Rich Environment,”
     NBER working paper no. 12772.

[17] Boivin, Jean, Marc P. Giannoni (2007), “Global Forces and Monetary Policy E¤ectiveness,”
     forthcoming in Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (eds.), International Dimensions of Monetary
     Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[18] Boivin, Jean, Marc P. Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov (2007), “Sticky Prices and Monetary Pol-
     icy: Evidence from Disaggregated U.S. Data,” NBER Working Paper no. 12824. (Revised,
     December 2007), forthcoming in The American Economic Review.

[19] Boivin, Jean, and Serena Ng (2005), “Understanding and Comparing Factor-Based Forecasts,”
     International Journal of Central Banking 1(3): 117-151.

[20] Camacho, M., G. Péréz-Quirós, L. Saiz (2006), “Are European Business Cycles Close Enough
     to Be Just One?”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 34: 538-563.

[21] Campa, José, and Linda Goldberg (2006), “Distribution Margins, Imported Inputs, and the
     Sensitivity of the CPI to Exchange Rates,” NBER working paper no. 12121.

[22] Cavallo Michele, and Tao Wu (2006), “Measuring Oil-Price Shocks Using Market-Based Infor-
     mation,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series, 2006-28.

[23] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities
     and the Dynamic E¤ect of a Shock to Monetary Policy,”Journal of Political Economy 113(1):
     1-45.

[24] Christiano, Lawrence J., Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno (2007),“Shocks, Structures or
     Monetary Policies? The Euro Area and US after 2001,” ECB working paper 774.

[25] Ciccarelli Matteo and Allessandro Rebucci (2006), “Has the Transmission Mechanism of Eu-
     ropean Monetary Policy Changed in the Run-Up to EMU,”European Economic Review 50(3):
     737-776.

[26] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (1998), “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice:
     Some International Evidence,” European Economic Review 42(5): 1033-1067.

[27] Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (2002), “A Simple Framework for International
     Monetary Policy Analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(5): 879-904.



                                               41
[28] Coenen, Günter, Peter McAdam and Roland Straub (2007), “Tax reform and labour-market
     performance in the euro area: a simulation-based analysis using the New Area-Wide Model,”
     ECB working paper 747, forthcoming in Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control.

[29] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola (2005), “A Macroeconomic Model of International Price
     Discrimination,” Journal of International Economics 67: 129-55.

[30] Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti (2005), “International Dimensions of Optimal Monetary
     Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 52(2): 281-305.

[31] Devereux, Michael B. and Charles Engel (2002), “Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange
     Rate Volatility, and Exchange Rate Disconnect,”Journal of Monetary Economics 49(5): 913-
     940.

[32] Doz, Catherine, Domenico Giannone and Lucrezia Reichlin (2007), “A Quasi-Maximum Like-
     lihood Approach for Large Approximate Dynamic Factor Models,” CEPR discussion paper
     5724.

[33] Ehrmann, Michael, Marcel Fratzscher, Refet S. Gürkaynak and Eric Swanson (2007), “Con-
     vergence and Anchoring of Yield Curves in the Euro Area,” ECB working paper 817.

[34] Eichenbaum, Martin and Charles L. Evans (1995), “Some Empirical Evidence on the E¤ects of
     Shocks to Monetary Policy on Exchange Rates,”The Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(4):
     975-1009.

[35] Eickmeier, Sandra (2006), “Comovements and Heterogeneity in the Euro Area Analyzed in a
     Non-Stationary Dynamic Factor Model,” Bundesbank discussion paper 31-2006.

[36] Eickmeier, Sandra and Jörg Breitung (2006), “How Synchronized are New EU Member States
     with the Euro Area? Evidence from a Structural Factor Model,” Journal of Comparative
     Economics 34: 538-563.

[37] van Els, Peter, Alberto Locarno, Julina Morgan and Jean-Pierre Villetelle (2003), “The E¤ects
     of Monetary Policy in the Euro Area: Evidence from Structural Macroeconomic Models”, in
     I. Angeloni et al (eds., op cited).

[38] Engel, Charles (1996), “The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: A Survey of
     Recent Evidence,” Journal of Empirical Finance 3 (2): 123-192.

[39] European Central Bank (2007), “Report on Financial Integration in the Euro Area,” March,
     www.ecb.int.

[40] Fagan, Gabriel, Jérôme Henry, and Ricardo Mestre (2005), “An Area-Wide Model (AWM) for
     the Euro Area,” Economic Modelling 22(1): 39-59.

[41] Fagan, Gabriel, and Julian Morgan (2006), Econometric Models of the Euro Area Central
     Banks, Edward Elgar.

[42] Faruquee, Hamid, Douglas Laxton, Dirk Muir, and Paolo A. Pesenti (2007), “Smooth Landing
     or Crash? Model-Based Scenarios of Global Current Account Rebalancing,” in Richard H.
     Clarida (ed.), G7 Current Account Imbalances, The University of Chicago Press, Chap. 10, pp.
     377-451.

                                               42
[43] Favero Carlo, Massimiliano Marcellino and Francesca Neglia (2005), “Principal Components
     at Work: The Empirical Analysis of Monetary Policy with Large Datasets,”Journal of Applied
     Econometrics 20:603-620.

[44] Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez, Sargent, Thomas J. and Mark W. Wat-
     son (2007) “ABCs (and Ds) of Understanding VARs,” American Economic Review 97(3):
     1021-26.

[45] Ferrero, Andrea, Mark Gertler, and Lars E.O. Svensson (2007), “Current Account Dynam-
     ics and Monetary Policy,” forthcoming in Jordi Galí and Mark Gertler (eds.), International
     Dimensions of Monetary Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[46] Forni, Mario, Marc Hallin, Marco Lippi, and Lucrezia Reichlin (2000), “The Generalized
     Dynamic Factor Model: Identi…cation and Estimation,” Review of Economics and Statistics
     82:4, 540–554.

[47] Forni, Mario and Lucrezia Reichlin (2001), “Federal Policies and Local Economies: Europe
     and the US,” European Economic Review 45(1): 109-134

[48] Froot, K.A., R.H. Thaler (1990), “Foreign Exchange,”Journal of Economic Perspectives 4 (3):
     179-192.

[49] Galí, Jordi and Mark Gertler (eds.) (2007), International Dimensions of Monetary Policy.
     Forthcoming, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

[50] Giannone, Domenico and Lucrezia Reichlin (2006), “Trends and Cycles in the Euro Area: How
     Much Heterogeneity and Should We Worry About It?,” ECB working paper 595.

[51] Guiso L., A. Kashyap, F. Panetta and D. Terlizzese (1999), “Will a Common European
     Monetary Policy Have Asymmetric E¤ects?” Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank
     of Chicago, pp. 56-75.

[52] Hamilton, James D. (2003), “What is an Oil Shock?” Journal of Econometrics 113: 363-398.

[53] Justiniano, Alejandro, and Bruce Preston (2006), “Can Structural Small Open Economy Mod-
     els Account for the In‡uence of Foreign Disturbances?” manuscript, Columbia University.

[54] Kilian, Lutz (1998), “Small-Sample Con…dence Intervals for Impulse Response Functions,”
     Review of Economics and Statistics 80(2): 218-230.

[55] Kilian, Lutz (2008), “A Comparison of the E¤ects of Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks on Output
     and In‡ation in G7 Countries,” Journal of the European Economic Association 6(1): 78-121.

[56] Kollmann, Robert (2002), “Monetary Policy Rules in the Open Economy: E¤ects on Welfare
     and Business Cycles,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(5): 989-1015.

[57] Kok Sørensen, Christo¤er and Thomas Werner (2006), “Bank Interest Rate Pass-Through in
     the Euro Area: A Cross Country Comparison,” ECB working paper series 580.

[58] Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles H. Whiteman (2003), “International Business
     Cycles: World, Region, and Country Speci…c Factors,” American Economic Review 93(4):
     1216–39.

                                              43
[59] Mark, Nelson C., Yangru Wu (1998), “Rethinking Deviations From Uncovered Interest Parity:
     The Role of Covariance Risk and Noise,” The Economic Journal 108 (451): 1686-1706.

[60] McCallum, Andrew, and Frank Smets (2007), “Real Wages and Monetary Policy Transmission
     in the Euro Area,” Kiel working paper 1360.

[61] McCallum, Bennett and Edward Nelson (2000), “Monetary Policy for an Open Economy:
     An Alternative Framework with Optimizing Agents and Sticky Prices,” Oxford Review of
     Economic Policy 16, 74–91.

[62] Mihov, Ilian (2001), “Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the European
     Monetary Union,” Economic Policy 16(33): 369-406.

[63] Mojon, Benoît and Gert Peersman (2003), “A VAR Description of the E¤ects of Monetary
     Policy in the Individual Countries of the Euro Area,” in Angeloni et al., op cited.

[64] Monacelli, Tommaso (2005), “Monetary Policy in a Low Pass-Through Environment,”Journal
     of Money, Credit, and Banking 37(6): 1047-1066.

[65] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth S. Rogo¤ (2002), “Global Implications of Self-Oriented Na-
     tional Monetary Rules,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 503-536.

[66] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth S. Rogo¤ (2005), “The Unsustainable US Current Account Po-
     sition Revisited,”in Richard H. Clarida (ed.), G7 Current Account Imbalances, The University
     of Chicago Press.

[67] Peersman, Gert (2005), “What Caused the Early Millennium Slowdown? Evidence Based on
     Vector Autoregressions,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 20(2): 185–207.

[68] Peersman, Gert, and Frank Smets (2003), “The Monetary Transmission Mechanism in the
     Euro Area: More Evidence From VAR Analysis,” in Monetary Policy Transmission in the
     Euro Area, I. Angeloni, A. Kashyap and B. Mojon (eds), Cambridge University Press.

[69] Rossi, Barbara (2007), “Expectations Hypotheses Tests at Long Horizons,”Econometrics Jour-
     nal 10: 554-579.

[70] Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization-Based Econometric
     Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 297-346.

[71] Sala, Luca (2001), “Monetary Transmission in the Euro Area: A Factor Model Approach,”
     ECARES mimeo.

[72] Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martin Uribe (2003), “Closing Small Open Economy Models,”
     Journal of International Economics 61: 163-195.

[73] Scholl, Almuth and Harald Uhlig (2006), “New Evidence on the Puzzles: Monetary Policy and
     Exchange Rates,” Computing in Economics and Finance 2006(5), Society for Computational
     Economics.

[74] Sims, Christopher A. (2000), “Solving Linear Rational Expectations Models,” manuscript,
     Princeton University.


                                               44
[75] Sims, Christopher A. and Tao Zha (2006), “Does Monetary Policy Generate Recessions?,
     Macroeconomic Dynamics 10(2): 231-272.

[76] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2002), “Openness, Imperfect Exchange Rate Pass-Through
     and Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 49(5): 947-981.

[77] Smets, Frank, and Raf Wouters (2003), “An estimated Stochastic DSGE model of the euro
     area” Journal of Economic Association 1(5): 1123-1175.

[78] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1999), “Forecasting In‡ation,” Journal of Monetary
     Economics 44: 293-335.

[79] Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2002), “Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Di¤usion
     Indexes,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 20(2): 147-162.

[80] Stock James H., and Mark W. Watson (2005), “Understanding Changes in International Busi-
     ness Cycle Dynamics,” Journal of the European Economic Association 3(5): 968–1006.

[81] Uzawa, Hirofumi (1968), “Time Preference, the Consumption Function and Optimum Asset
     Holdings,” in James Wolfe (ed.), Value, Capital and Growth: Papers in Honor of Sir John
     Hicks, Edinburgh: The University of Edinburgh Press.

[82] Woodford, Michael (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
     Princeton, Princeton University Press.




                                              45
                       1.5                              1.5                              6                                2
                         1                                1                              4                                1
                       0.5                              0.5                              2                                0
                         0                                                               0
                      -0.5                                0                                                              -1
                                                                                        -2
                             0       5     10      15         0   5       10      15         0      5      10      15         0     5        10     15
                       1.5                              1.5                              6                                2
                         1                                1                              4                                1
                       0.5                              0.5                              2                                0
                         0                                                               0                               -1
                      -0.5                                0




Germany Euro Area
                                                                                        -2
                             0       5     10      15         0   5       10      15         0      5      10      15         0     5        10     15
                       1.5                              1.5                              6                                2
                         1                                1                              4                                1
                       0.5                              0.5                              2                                0
                         0                                                               0




France
                      -0.5                                0                                                              -1
                                                                                        -2
                             0       5     10      15         0   5       10      15         0      5      10      15         0     5        10     15
                       1.5                              1.5                              6                                2
                         1                                1                              4                                1
                       0.5                                                               2                                0




Italy
                         0                              0.5                              0
                      -0.5                                0                                                              -1
                                                                                        -2
                             0       5     10      15         0   5       10      15         0      5      10      15         0     5        10     15
                       1.5                              1.5                              6                                2
                         1                                1                              4                                1
                       0.5                              0.5                              2                                0
                         0




Spain
                      -0.5                                0                              0                               -1
                                                                                        -2
                             0       5     10      15         0   5       10      15         0      5      10      15         0     5        10     15
                       1.5                              1.5                              6                                2
                         1                                1                              4                                1
                       0.5                              0.5                              2                                0
                         0                                                               0                               -1
                      -0.5                                0
                                                                                        -2
                             0       5     10      15         0   5       10      15         0      5      10      15         0     5        10     15
                       1.5                              1.5                              6                                2
                         1                                1                              4                                1
                       0.5                              0.5                              2                                0
                         0                                                               0                               -1
                      -0.5                                0
                                                                                        -2




1999 2007 1988 2007
                             0      5      10      15         0    5     10       15         0      5      10      15         0     5        10     15
                                 Short-term rate                  Bond rate                  Real Effective X rate                      M3
                                               Figure 1a: Impulse response functions to a monetary tightening in EA
                       (shock = 100 bp increase in short-term rate; responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates except for interest rates)
                       0.5                                                            1                                2
                         0                              0                             0                                0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                            -1
                                                       -1                            -2                               -2
                        -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5     10     15         0     5      10      15          0    5    10    15
                       0.5                                                            1                                2
                         0                              0                             0                                0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                            -1
                                                                                     -2                               -2




Germany Euro Area
                        -1                             -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5     10     15         0     5      10      15          0    5    10    15
                       0.5                                                            1                                2
                         0                              0                             0                                0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                            -1




France
                                                       -1                            -2                               -2
                        -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5     10     15         0     5      10      15          0    5    10    15
                       0.5                                                            1                                2
                         0                              0                             0                                0




Italy
                      -0.5                           -0.5                            -1
                                                                                     -2                               -2
                        -1                             -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5     10     15         0     5      10      15          0    5    10    15
                       0.5                                                            1                                2
                         0                              0                             0                                0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                            -1




Spain
                                                                                     -2                               -2
                        -1                             -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5     10     15         0     5      10      15          0    5    10    15
                       0.5                                                            1                                2
                         0                              0                             0                                0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                            -1
                                                                                     -2                               -2
                        -1                             -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5     10     15         0     5      10      15          0    5    10    15
                       0.5                                                            1                                2
                         0                              0                             0                                0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                            -1
                                                                                     -2                               -2
                        -1                             -1




1999 2007 1988 2007
                             0   5         10   15          0     5     10     15         0     5     10       15          0    5     10   15
                                     GDP                        Consumption                   Investment                        Exports
                                             Figure 1b: Impulse response functions to a monetary tightening in EA
                                 (shock = 100 bp increase in short-term rate; responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates)
                                                        0.5                              1                             0.5
                         0                                0
                      -0.5                                                               0                                0
                                                       -0.5
                        -1                               -1                             -1                             -0.5
                             0     5      10      15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10      15          0     5      10     15
                                                        0.5                              1                             0.5
                         0                                0
                      -0.5                                                               0                                0
                                                       -0.5
                        -1                                                              -1




Germany Euro Area
                                                         -1                                                            -0.5
                             0     5      10      15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10      15          0     5      10     15
                                                        0.5                              1                              0.5
                         0                                0
                      -0.5                                                               0                                0
                                                       -0.5




France
                        -1                               -1                             -1                             -0.5
                             0     5      10      15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10      15          0     5      10     15
                                                        0.5                              1                             0.5
                         0                                0
                      -0.5                                                               0                                0




Italy
                                                       -0.5
                        -1                               -1                             -1                             -0.5
                             0     5      10      15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10      15          0     5      10     15
                                                        0.5                              1                             0.5
                         0                                0
                      -0.5                                                               0                                0
                                                       -0.5




Spain
                        -1                               -1                             -1                             -0.5
                             0     5      10      15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10      15          0     5      10     15
                                                        0.5                              1                             0.5
                         0                                0
                      -0.5                                                               0                                0
                                                       -0.5
                        -1                               -1                             -1                             -0.5
                             0     5      10      15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10      15          0     5      10     15
                                                        0.5                              1                             0.5
                         0                                0
                      -0.5                                                               0                                0
                                                       -0.5
                        -1                               -1                             -1                             -0.5




1999 2007 1988 2007
                             0     5    10        15          0     5       10     15        0     5       10     15          0    5        10    15
                                 Employment                       Wage inflation                 PPI inflation                    CPI inflation
                                                Figure 1c: Impulse response functions to a monetary tightening in EA
                                    (shock = 100 bp increase in short-term rate; responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates)
               1.5                             1.5                                1.5



                 1                               1                                  1



               0.5                             0.5                                0.5
   Euro Area




                                     Germany




                                                                      France
                 0                               0                                  0



               -0 .5                           -0 .5                              -0 .5



                -1                               -1                                -1
                  0    5   10   15                 0   5    10   15                  0    5    10       15




                                                                                          1999-2007Q3
               1.5                             1.5                                1.5



                 1                               1                                  1



               0.5                             0.5                                0.5
                                                                      Euro Area
                                     Spain
   Italy




                 0                               0                                  0



               -0 .5                           -0 .5                              -0 .5



                -1                               -1                                -1
                  0    5   10   15                 0   5    10   15                  0    5    10       15

     Figure 2. Responses of short and long-term interest rates to monetary shock in EA


   Notes: First …ve subplots represent responses of interest rates in 1998-2007 sample. Bot-
tom right plot contains reponses for EMU period. Solid line: short-term interest rate;
Dashed line: bond yield; Crossed line: theoretical bond yield without term premium, based
on expectations hypothesis.




                                                       49
                                                                 Home (Italy/Spain)
                                                                 Foreign (Germany)
                                                                 EA



             Short-term int. rate                                 Output                           Inflation (GDPD)
    1                                            0.1                                   0.05

                                                                                          0
                                                   0
  0.5
                                                                                      -0.05
                                                -0.1
                                                                                       -0.1
    0
                                                -0.2
                                                                                      -0.15

 -0.5                                           -0.3                                   -0.2
        0       4       8        12       16           0     4         8   12    16           0    4          8          12     16

                    Bond yield                                Consumption                           Inflation (CPI)
  0.2                                            0.1                                    0.1

 0.15
                                                   0                                      0
  0.1
                                                -0.1                                   -0.1
 0.05
                                                -0.2                                   -0.2
    0

-0.05                                           -0.3                                   -0.3
        0       4       8        12       16           0     4         8   12    16           0    4          8          12     16

            NER depreciation ( ∆e )                    Net Exports, current account           TOT ( τ =p -p            ); RER (q )
                                      t                                                             Ht   Ft       Ht            t
                                                0.03
  0.8                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                                          TOT
  0.6                                           0.02                                    0.6                               RER

  0.4                                                                                   0.4
                                                0.01
  0.2                                                                                   0.2
                                                   0
    0                                                                                     0

 -0.2                                          -0.01                                   -0.2
        0       4       8        12       16           0     4         8   12    16           0    4          8          12     16

Figure 3a: Model-based responses to a 100bp monetary tightening in foreign country
                               (pre-EMU, = 0).

                                                                  50
                                                               Home (Italy/Spain)
                                                               Foreign (Germany)
                                                               EA



            Short-term int. rate                                Output                          Inflation (GDPD)
   2                                           0.3                                   0.3

 1.5                                           0.2                                   0.2
                                               0.1
   1                                                                                 0.1
                                                 0
 0.5                                                                                   0
                                              -0.1
   0                                          -0.2                                  -0.1

-0.5                                                                                -0.2
       0       4       8        12       16          0     4       8     12    16          0    4          8          12     16

                   Bond yield                               Consumption                          Inflation (CPI)
 0.6                                           0.5                                   0.4


 0.4                                                                                 0.2
                                                 0

 0.2                                                                                   0

                                              -0.5
   0                                                                                -0.2


-0.2                                           -1                                   -0.4
       0       4       8        12       16          0     4       8     12    16          0    4          8          12     16

           NER depreciation ( ∆e )                   Net Exports, current account          TOT ( τ =p -p            ); RER (q )
                                     t                                                           Ht   Ft       Ht            t
                                               0.6
   4                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                       TOT
   3                                           0.4                                                                     RER
                                                                                       3
   2
                                               0.2                                     2
   1
                                                 0                                     1
   0

 -1                                           -0.2                                     0
       0       4       8        12       16          0     4       8     12    16          0    4          8          12     16

       Figure 3b: Model-based responses to a 100bp monetary tightening in foreign
                             country (pre-EMU, = 0:6).

                                                                 51
                                                               Home (Italy/Spain)
                                                               Foreign (Germany)
                                                               EA



            Short-term int. rate                                Output                          Inflation (GDPD)
   2                                           0.3                                   0.3

 1.5                                           0.2                                   0.2
                                               0.1
   1                                                                                 0.1
                                                 0
 0.5                                                                                   0
                                              -0.1
   0                                          -0.2                                  -0.1

-0.5                                                                                -0.2
       0       4       8        12       16          0     4        8    12    16          0    4          8          12     16

                   Bond yield                               Consumption                          Inflation (CPI)
 0.6                                           0.5                                   0.4


 0.4                                                                                 0.2
                                                 0

 0.2                                                                                   0

                                              -0.5
   0                                                                                -0.2


-0.2                                           -1                                   -0.4
       0       4       8        12       16          0     4        8    12    16          0    4          8          12     16

           NER depreciation ( ∆e )                   Net Exports, current account          TOT ( τ =p -p            ); RER (q )
                                     t                                                           Ht   Ft       Ht            t
                                               0.6
   4                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                       TOT
   3                                           0.4                                                                     RER
                                                                                       3
   2
                                               0.2                                     2
   1
                                                 0                                     1
   0

 -1                                           -0.2                                     0
       0       4       8        12       16          0     4        8    12    16          0    4          8          12     16

Figure 3c: Model-based responses to a 100bp monetary tightening in common area
                        (monetary union case, = 0:6).

                                                               52
           Short-term int. rate                         Output                         Inflation (GDPD)
 1.5                                      0.1                                0.1
                   EA no µ shock
                                         0.05
                   EA w/ µ shock                                            0.05
   1
                                            0

                                        -0.05                                  0
 0.5
                                         -0.1                              -0.05
                                        -0.15
   0
                                                                            -0.1
                                         -0.2

-0.5                                    -0.25                              -0.15
       0     4       8        12   16           0   4        8   12   16           0   4       8      12   16


                 Bond yield                         Consumption                         Inflation (CPI)
 0.4                                      0.1                                0.1


 0.3                                        0                               0.05


 0.2                                     -0.1                                  0


 0.1                                     -0.2                              -0.05


   0                                     -0.3                               -0.1


-0.1                                     -0.4                              -0.15
       0     4       8        12   16           0   4        8   12   16           0   4       8      12   16
Figure 3d: Model-based responses of aggregate EA variables to a 100bp monetary tightening
              in foreign economy (solid lines: = 0; dashed lines: = 0:6).




                                                        53
            Short-term int. rate                           Output                         Inflation (GDPD)
  1.2                                       0.1                                0.05
                       ECB policy
    1                  Buba policy         0.05
                                                                                  0
  0.8                                         0

  0.6                                     -0.05                               -0.05

  0.4                                      -0.1                                -0.1
  0.2                                     -0.15
                                                                              -0.15
    0                                      -0.2

 -0.2                                     -0.25                                -0.2
        0     4       8        12    16           0   4        8    12   16           0   4       8      12   16


                  Bond yield                          Consumption                          Inflation (CPI)
  0.2                                       0.1                                0.05

                                           0.05
 0.15                                                                             0
                                              0
  0.1                                     -0.05                               -0.05


 0.05                                      -0.1                                -0.1
                                          -0.15
    0                                                                         -0.15
                                           -0.2

-0.05                                     -0.25                                -0.2
        0     4       8        12    16           0   4        8    12   16           0   4       8      12   16
Figure 3e: Model-based responses of EA variables to a 100bp monetary tightening in EA under
 alternative policy rules (solid lines: ECB policy rule; dashed lines: Bundesbank policy rule).




                                                          54
A    Data description
The data were extracted from HAVER and their source is either the OECD’s Main Economic
Indicators (MEI) or Quarterly National Accounts (QNA) databases. The monetary aggregates
are obtained from the national central banks and from the ECB for the euro area. The national
accounts published in HAVER are available starting at di¤erent dates: 1978 in France, 1981 in
Italy, 1988 in the Netherlands, 1991 in Germany, 1995 in Spain and Belgium. Some de‡ators in the
euro area start in 1995. Missing data were backdated using yoy growth rates of an earlier vintage
of OECD and ECB data. Table A1 gives a full account of the data used and Figures A1-A5 plot
the data series.




                                               55
                                         Table A1: Data sources and definition of euro area and country-level data
       Haver Euro area Germany        France       Italy       Spain       Netherlands Belgium         Series description
   1   MEI    ECB 80-93                                                    ECB 80-85      ECB          Short-term interest rate (3-month, interbank offered rate, % p.a.)
   2   MEI                                         ECB 80-91                                           Government bond yields (10-year, % p.a.)
   3   MEI    AV 80-86                                                                                 National share price index (2000=100)
   4   MEI                                                                                             Real effective exchange rate (2000=100)
   5   QNA    AV 80-94    OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Implicit price deflator, GDP (SA, 2000=100)
   6   QNA    AV 80-94    OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   =CPI 80-87     OEO 80-94    Implicit price deflator, Private consumption (SA, 2000=100)
   7   QNA    AV 80-94    OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Implicit price deflator, Investment (gross cap. form., SA, 2000=100)
   8   QNA    AV 80-07    OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Implicit price deflator, Exports (SA, 2000=100)
   9   QNA    AV 80-07    OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Implicit price deflator, Imports (SA, 2000=100)
  10   QNA                OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Gross Domestic Product (SA, Mil.2000 euros)
  11   QNA                OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Private final consumption exp. (SA, Mil.2000 euros)
  12   QNA                OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Gov. final consumption exp. (SA, Mil.2000 euros)
  13   QNA                OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Investment (gross fixed capital formation, SA, Mil.2000 euros)
  14   QNA    AV 80-07    OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Exports of goods & services (SA, Mil.2000 euros)
  15   QNA    AV 80-07    OEO 80-90                OEO 80      OEO 80-94   OEO 80-87      OEO 80-94    Imports of goods & services (SA, Mil.2000 euros)
  16   MEI    AV 80-84                                                                                 Rate of capacity utilisation (mfg survey, SA, %)
  17   MEI    AV 80-89                                         =C 80-90                                Retail sales (volume, SA, 2000=100)
  18   MEI    AV 80-07                                                                                 Passenger cars registered (SA, 2000=100)
  19   MEI    AV 80-81                                                                                 PPI: Manufactured products (NSA, 2000=100)
  20   MEI    AV 80-90    CPI 80-94, CPI 80-89, CPI 80-89, CPI 80-90, CPI 80-90,          CPI 80-90,   European harmonized CPI (NSA, 2000=100)
                          HICP 95-07 HICP 90-07 HICP 90-07 HICP 91-07 HICP 91-07          HICP 91-07
  21   MEI    AV 80-90                                     =CPI 80-90                               CPI: Food (NSA, 2000=100)
  22   MEI    AV 80-90                                                                              CPI: Fuel & electricity (NSA, 2000=100)
  23   MEI    AV 80-95                                                                              CPI: All Items excl Food, Energy (NSA, 2000=100)
  24   MEI    AV 80-94                                                                    =C 80-83  CPI: Rent (NSA, 2000=100)
  25   MEI                                                                                =EA 06-07 Civilian employment (SA, Thous)
  26   MEI    AV 80-95                                                                              Standardized unemployment rate (SA, %)
  27   MEI                                                                                =EA 80-96 Hourly earnings: Manufacturing (SA, 2000=100)
  28   MEI                                                                                          Unit labor costs (Trend, 2000=100)
  29   MEI                                                                                          Unit labor costs: Manufacturing (Trend, 2000=100)
  30   MEI                                                                                          Unit labor costs: Construction (Trend, 2000=100)
  31   MEI                                                                                          Unit labor costs: Market services (Trend, 2000=100)
  32   NCB    ECB                                  ECB 80-96 ECB           ECB 80-81      ECB 80-96 Money aggregate M1 (SA, EOP, Mil. euros)
  33   NCB    ECB                                  ECB 80-96 NCB           ECB 80-81      ECB 80-96 Money aggregate M3 (SA, EOP, Mil. euros)

Notes: Haver indicates the default source; Other columns indicate the alternative source and definition of series. MEI = OECD Main Economic Indicators, QNA = OECD
Quarterly National Accounts, OEO = OECD Economic Outlook, NCB = National Central Bank, ECB = European Central Bank, AV = country average using current population
for weights. Merging two sources is done by applying y-o-y growth rates backward to data level available in most recent source. Shaded cells indicate the replacement of
missing observations with an alternative time series.
              Table A1 continued: Data sources and definition of international time series
Series #    Haver      backdating     Series description
    232     FRB                   U.S.: Federal Open Market Committee, Fed Funds Target Rate (EOP, %)
    233     BoJ                   Japan: Overnight call rate, uncollateralized (effective rate, EOP, %)
    234     BoE        BIS 80-83  United Kingdom: Base rate (Repo rate, EOP, %)
    235     FRB                   U.S.: 10-Year Treasury bond yield at constant maturity (AVG, %)
    236     JSDA       BIS 80-84  Japan: 10-year benchmark government bond yield (EOM, %)
    237     BoE        BIS 80-84  UK: Government bonds, 10-year nominal par yield (AVG, %)
    238     BEA                   U.S. Gross Domestic Product (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2000$)
    239     CAO        OECD 80-93 Japan: Gross Domestic Product (SAAR, Bil.Chn.2000.Yen)
    240     ONS                   U.K.: Gross Domestic Product (SA, Mil.Chained.2003.Pounds)
    241     OECD                  Euro Zone + GR in 2001 Exchange rate (average, Euro/US$)
    242     CRB                   KR-CRB Spot Commodity Price Index: All Commodities (1967=100)
    243     WSJ                   Spot Oil Price: West Texas Intermediate [Prior 82=Posted Price] ($/Barrel)

Note: Haver indicates the default source. Column "backdating" indicates the source used to backdate the data.
              S hort-term rate                                        B ond rate

                                                    20
20

15                                                  15


10                                                  10

 5                                                   5

      1985   1990   1995         2000   2005              1985   1990     1995     2000    2005

                S toc k pric e                                   Real E ffec tive X rate
100
                                                    10

50
                                                     0

 0
                                                    -10

-50
      1985   1990   1995         2000   2005              1985   1990     1995     2000    2005

                    M1                                                    M3


20                                                  15

                                                    10
10
                                                     5

 0                                                   0

                                                     -5
      1985   1990   1995         2000   2005              1985   1990     1995     2000    2005
         Figure A1: Main …nancial and monetary data series in EA and six countries
                    (year-over-year growth rates except for interest rates)




                                               58
             GDP deflator inflation                         Cons um ption deflator inflation

15                                                 15


10                                                 10

 5
                                                    5

 0
                                                    0
      1985    1990    1995     2000    2005              1985     1990     1995     2000      2005

         Inves tm ent deflator inflation                        E x port deflator inflation
20                                                 20

15
                                                   10
10
                                                    0
 5
                                                   -10
 0
      1985    1990    1995     2000    2005              1985     1990     1995     2000      2005

             Im port price inflation                                      GDP


20                                                  6

10                                                  4

 0                                                  2

-10                                                 0

-20                                                 -2

      1985    1990    1995     2000    2005              1985     1990     1995     2000      2005
              Figure A2: Main price data series and GDP in EA and six countries
                                (year-over-year growth rates)




                                              59
               Cons um ption                                     P ublic Cons um ption

                                                   10
 5

                                                    5
 0
                                                    0

 -5
      1985   1990     1995     2000   2005                1985    1990     1995      2000   2005

                Inves tm ent                                             E x ports

                                                   20
10

                                                   10
 0

-10                                                 0


-20                                               -10
      1985   1990     1995     2000   2005                1985    1990     1995      2000   2005

                    Im ports                                      Capac ity utilisation

20
                                                    5
10
                                                    0
 0
                                                    -5
-10

      1985   1990     1995     2000   2005                1985    1990     1995      2000   2005
                  Figure A3: Main activity series in EA and six countries
                (year-over-year growth rates except for capacity utilisation)




                                             60
                Retail s ales                                 P as s enger Cars regis tered
                                                   50
10

                                                    0
 0

                                                   -50
-10
      1985   1990    1995       2000   2005              1985    1990     1995    2000    2005

                P P I inflation                                      CP I inflation

                                                   15
10

                                                   10
 0
                                                    5

-10                                                 0
      1985   1990    1995       2000   2005              1985    1990     1995    2000    2005

             CP I inflation (food)                         CP I inflation (Food and E nergy)
15
                                                   20
10

 5                                                  0

 0
                                                   -20
 -5
      1985   1990    1995       2000   2005              1985    1990     1995    2000    2005
              Figure A4: Main activity and price series in EA and six countries
                               (year-over-year growth rates)




                                              61
             Core CP I inflation                                CP I inflation (Rents )


15                                                20

10                                                15

                                                  10
 5
                                                    5

                                                    0
     1985   1990    1995    2000   2005                  1985   1990     1995     2000    2005

               E m ploy m ent                                     Unem ploy m ent

 5

                                                  15

 0
                                                  10


                                                    5
-5

     1985   1990    1995    2000   2005                  1985   1990     1995     2000    2005

               W age inflation                                     Unit labor c os t

20
                                                  15
15
                                                  10
10
                                                    5
 5
                                                    0
 0
     1985   1990    1995    2000   2005                  1985   1990     1995     2000    2005
            Figure A5: Main price and labor market series in EA and six countries
                   (year-over-year growth rates except for unemployment)




                                             62
                                                       1.5                         4                               1
                       1                                 1                         2                               0
                                                       0.5                                                        -1
                       0                                                           0                              -2
                                                         0                                                        -3
                      -1                              -0.5                        -2




Euro Area
                           0       5     10      15          0   5     10    15        0      5      10     15         0   5        10   15
                                                       1.5                         4                               1
                       1                                 1                         2                               0
                                                       0.5                                                        -1
                       0                                                           0                              -2
                                                         0                                                        -3




Germany
                      -1                              -0.5                        -2
                           0       5     10      15          0   5     10    15        0      5      10     15         0   5        10   15
                                                       1.5                         4                               1
                       1                                 1                         2                               0
                                                       0.5                                                        -1
                       0                                                           0                              -2
                                                         0




France
                      -1                              -0.5                        -2                              -3
                           0       5     10      15          0   5     10    15        0      5      10     15         0   5        10   15
                                                       1.5                         4                               1
                       1                                 1                         2                               0
                                                       0.5                                                        -1
                       0




Italy
                                                         0                         0                              -2
                                                                                                                                              B Monetary shock: EA vs Germany




                      -1                              -0.5                        -2                              -3
                           0       5     10      15          0   5     10    15        0      5      10     15         0   5        10   15
                                                       1.5                         4                               1
                       1                                 1                         2                               0
                                                       0.5                                                        -1
                       0                                                           0                              -2




Spain
                                                         0                                                        -3
                      -1                              -0.5                        -2
                           0       5     10      15          0   5     10    15        0      5      10     15         0   5        10   15
                                                       1.5                         4                               1
                       1                                 1                         2                               0
                                                       0.5                                                        -1
                       0                                                           0                              -2
                                                         0                                                        -3
                      -1                              -0.5                        -2
                           0       5     10      15          0   5     10    15        0      5      10     15         0   5        10   15
                                                       1.5                         4                               1
                       1                                 1                         2                               0
                                                       0.5                                                        -1
                       0                                                           0                              -2
                                                         0                                                        -3




Belgium Netherlands
                      -1                              -0.5                        -2
                           0      5      10      15          0    5     10   15        0     5       10      15        0   5        10   15
                               Short-term rate                   Bond rate             Real Effective X rate                   M3
     Figure B1: Impulse response functions to a monetary tightening in EA (solid line) and Germany (dotted line)
(shock = 100 bp increase in short-term rate; responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates except for interest rates)
                       0.5                            0.5                           2                          2
                         0                              0                           0                          0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                                                     -2
                        -1                             -1                          -2




Euro Area
                             0   5         10   15          0     5    10     15        0    5     10    15        0    5     10      15
                       0.5                            0.5                           2                          2
                         0                              0                           0                          0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                                                     -2
                        -1                                                         -2




Germany
                                                       -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5    10     15        0    5     10    15        0    5     10      15
                       0.5                            0.5                           2                          2
                         0                              0                           0                          0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                                                     -2




France
                        -1                             -1                          -2
                             0   5         10   15          0     5    10     15        0    5     10    15        0    5     10      15
                       0.5                            0.5                           2                          2
                         0                              0                           0                          0




Italy
                      -0.5                           -0.5                                                     -2
                        -1                             -1                          -2
                             0   5         10   15          0     5    10     15        0    5     10    15        0    5     10      15
                                                      0.5                           2                          2
                       0.5
                         0                              0                           0                          0
                      -0.5                           -0.5




Spain
                                                                                   -2                         -2
                        -1                             -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5    10     15        0    5     10    15        0    5     10      15
                       0.5                            0.5                           2                          2
                         0                              0                           0                          0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                                                     -2
                        -1                             -1                          -2
                             0   5         10   15          0     5    10     15        0    5     10    15        0    5     10      15
                                                      0.5                           2                          2
                       0.5
                         0                              0                           0                          0
                      -0.5                           -0.5                                                     -2
                                                                                   -2




Belgium Netherlands
                        -1                             -1
                             0   5         10   15          0     5    10     15        0     5     10   15        0    5     10      15
                                     GDP                        Consumption                 Investment                  Exports
                        Figure B2: Impulse response functions to a monetary tightening in EA (solid line) and Germany (dotted line)
                               (shock = 100 bp increase in short-term rate; responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates)
                       0.5                          0.2                              1                               0
                         0                            0
                                                   -0.2                              0                            -0.2
                      -0.5                         -0.4                             -1                            -0.4
                        -1                         -0.6




Euro Area
                             0    5     10    15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.5                          0.2                              1                               0
                         0                            0
                                                   -0.2                              0                            -0.2
                      -0.5                         -0.4                             -1                            -0.4
                                                   -0.6




Germany
                        -1
                             0    5     10    15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.5                          0.2                              1                               0
                         0                            0
                                                   -0.2                              0                            -0.2
                      -0.5                         -0.4                             -1




France
                                                   -0.6                                                           -0.4
                        -1
                             0    5     10    15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.5                          0.2                              1                               0
                         0                            0
                                                   -0.2                              0                            -0.2




Italy
                      -0.5                         -0.4                             -1                            -0.4
                        -1                         -0.6
                             0    5     10    15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.5                          0.2                              1                               0
                         0                            0
                                                   -0.2                              0                            -0.2
                      -0.5                         -0.4




Spain
                                                   -0.6                             -1                            -0.4
                        -1
                             0    5     10    15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.5                          0.2                              1                               0
                         0                            0
                                                   -0.2                              0                            -0.2
                      -0.5                         -0.4                             -1                            -0.4
                        -1                         -0.6
                             0    5     10    15          0      5     10      15        0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.5                          0.2                              1                               0
                         0                            0
                                                   -0.2                              0                            -0.2
                      -0.5                         -0.4                             -1                            -0.4
                                                   -0.6




Belgium Netherlands
                        -1
                             0     5    10    15          0     5       10     15        0    5        10    15          0    5        10    15
                                 Employment                   Wage inflation                 PPI inflation                   CPI inflation
                        Figure B3: Impulse response functions to a monetary tightening in EA (solid line) and Germany (dotted line)
                               (shock = 100 bp increase in short-term rate; responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates)
C    E¤ects of oil price shocks
This section brie‡y describes the e¤ects of an unexpected increase in oil prices. Such a shock is an
ideal experiment in the sense that it a¤ects simultaneously all EA countries, and it is, arguably, an
exogenous source of economic ‡uctuations (see Hamilton, 2003; Cavallo and Wu, 2007; Blanchard
and Galí, 2008; and Kilian, 2008). The identi…cation of the oil price shock is similar to the one in
Blanchard and Galí (2008), although we implement it in the context of our FAVAR. Basically, the
oil price shock can a¤ect all other latent and observed factors instantaneously and through them,
all indicators. However, we assume that the oil price responds to other factors only after a one
quarter lag.
    Figures C1-C3 show the response of selected variables to a 10% increase in the yoy in‡ation of
oil prices, both for the 1988-2007 sample (solid lines) and for the post-1999 sample (dashed-dotted
lines).
    Interestingly, bond yields increase more in Italy and Spain than in the other countries or in
the EA as a whole, and consumption declines by more in Italy than in other countries as well.
This result is consistent with our …ndings in response to a monetary shock, and provides further
evidence that bond markets and credibility issues are the locus of an important asymmetry in
business cycle adjustments across countries prior to the EMU. In addition, CPI in‡ation increases
by about 0.1% percent, re‡ecting in the …rst few quarters an increase in the food and energy
component of CPI prices (not shown). We note that the responses of CPI in‡ation rates tend to
be slightly less persistent in the recent sample, both at the EA level and in the countries reported.
This is consistent with our …nding, in response to monetary shocks, that the ECB monetary policy
has better anchored in‡ation expectations than the national central banks had before the EMU.
Turning to quantities, we estimate that an increase in the price of oil reduces the yoy growth rate
of output by about 0.1% for the EA. This is broadly in line with Blanchard and Galí (2008) who
emphasize a reduction in the e¤ects of oil price shocks in the last two decades when compared with
samples that include the seventies.




                                                 66
                       0.05                                0.1                           0.5                               0.2
                           0                                 0                                                               0
                      -0.05                                                                0                              -0.2
                        -0.1                              -0.1                                                            -0.4
                      -0.15                               -0.2                          -0.5




Euro Area
                               0       5     10      15          0   5     10      15          0      5      10     15           0   5        10   15
                       0.05                                0.1                           0.5                               0.2
                           0                                 0                                                               0
                      -0.05                                                                0                              -0.2
                        -0.1                              -0.1                                                            -0.4




Germany
                      -0.15                               -0.2                          -0.5
                               0       5     10      15          0   5     10      15          0      5      10     15           0   5        10   15
                       0.05                                0.1                           0.5                               0.2
                           0                                 0                                                               0
                      -0.05                                                                0                              -0.2
                        -0.1                              -0.1




France
                                                                                        -0.5                              -0.4
                      -0.15                               -0.2
                               0       5     10      15          0   5     10      15          0      5      10     15           0   5        10   15
                       0.05                                0.1                           0.5                               0.2
                           0                                 0                                                               0
                      -0.05                                                                0                              -0.2




Italy
                        -0.1                              -0.1                                                            -0.4
                      -0.15                               -0.2                          -0.5
                               0       5     10      15          0   5     10      15          0      5      10     15           0   5        10   15
                       0.05                                0.1                           0.5                               0.2
                           0                                 0                                                               0
                      -0.05                                                                0                              -0.2




Spain
                        -0.1                              -0.1                                                            -0.4
                      -0.15                               -0.2                          -0.5
                               0       5     10      15          0   5     10      15          0      5      10     15           0   5        10   15
                       0.05                                0.1                           0.5                               0.2
                           0                                 0                                                               0
                      -0.05                                                                0                              -0.2
                        -0.1                              -0.1                                                            -0.4
                      -0.15                               -0.2                          -0.5
                               0       5     10      15          0   5     10      15          0      5      10     15           0   5        10   15
                       0.05                                0.1                           0.5                               0.2
                           0                                 0                                                               0
                      -0.05                                                                0                              -0.2
                        -0.1                              -0.1                                                            -0.4
                      -0.15                               -0.2                          -0.5




1999 2007 1988 2007
                               0      5      10      15          0    5     10     15          0     5       10      15          0   5        10   15
                                   Short-term rate                   Bond rate                 Real Effective X rate                     M3
                                                 Figure C1: Impulse response functions to a 10% increase in oil prices
                                             (responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates except for interest rates)
                                                         0.1                           0.2                            1
                       0.1                                                                                          0.5
                         0                                 0                             0
                                                        -0.1                          -0.2                            0
                      -0.1                                                            -0.4




Euro Area
                                                                                                                   -0.5
                             0   5         10      15          0     5    10     15          0    5     10    15          0   5    10    15
                                                         0.1                           0.2                            1
                       0.1                                                                                          0.5
                         0                                 0                             0
                                                        -0.1                          -0.2                            0
                      -0.1                                                            -0.4




Germany
                                                                                                                   -0.5
                             0   5         10      15          0     5    10     15          0    5     10    15          0   5    10    15
                                                         0.1                           0.2                            1
                       0.1                                                                                          0.5
                         0                                 0                             0
                                                        -0.1                          -0.2                            0




France
                      -0.1                                                            -0.4
                                                                                                                   -0.5
                             0   5         10      15          0     5    10     15          0    5     10    15          0   5    10    15
                                                         0.1                           0.2                            1
                       0.1                                                                                          0.5
                         0                                 0                             0




Italy
                                                        -0.1                          -0.2                            0
                      -0.1                                                            -0.4
                                                                                                                   -0.5
                             0   5         10      15          0     5    10     15          0    5     10    15          0   5    10    15
                                                         0.1                           0.2                            1
                       0.1                                                                                          0.5
                                                           0                             0
                         0                                                            -0.2                            0




Spain
                      -0.1                              -0.1                          -0.4
                                                                                                                   -0.5
                             0   5         10      15          0     5    10     15          0    5     10    15          0   5    10    15
                                                         0.1                           0.2                            1
                       0.1                                                                                          0.5
                         0                                 0                             0
                                                        -0.1                          -0.2                            0
                      -0.1                                                            -0.4
                                                                                                                   -0.5
                             0   5         10      15          0     5    10     15          0    5     10    15          0   5    10    15
                                                         0.1                           0.2                            1
                       0.1                                                                                          0.5
                                                           0                             0
                         0                                                            -0.2
                                                        -0.1                                                          0
                      -0.1                                                            -0.4
                                                                                                                   -0.5




1999 2007 1988 2007
                             0   5         10      15          0     5    10     15          0     5     10   15          0   5     10   15
                                     GDP                           Consumption                   Investment                   Exports
                                                Figure C2: Impulse response functions to a 10% increase in oil prices
                                                        (responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates)
                       0.1                             0.1                              0.4                            0.15
                                                      0.05                              0.2                             0.1
                         0                               0                                                             0.05
                                                     -0.05                                0                               0
                      -0.1                                                             -0.2




Euro Area
                             0     5    10      15           0      5     10      15          0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.1                             0.1                              0.4                            0.15
                                                      0.05                              0.2                             0.1
                         0                               0                                                             0.05
                                                     -0.05                                0                               0
                      -0.1




Germany
                                                                                       -0.2
                             0     5    10      15           0      5     10      15          0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.1                             0.1                              0.4                            0.15
                                                      0.05                              0.2                             0.1
                         0                               0                                                             0.05
                                                                                          0




France
                      -0.1                           -0.05                                                                0
                                                                                       -0.2
                             0     5    10      15           0      5     10      15          0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.1                             0.1                              0.4                            0.15
                                                      0.05                              0.2                             0.1
                         0                               0                                                             0.05




Italy
                                                     -0.05                                0                               0
                      -0.1                                                             -0.2
                             0     5    10      15           0      5     10      15          0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.1                             0.1                              0.4                            0.15
                                                      0.05                              0.2                             0.1
                         0                               0                                                             0.05




Spain
                                                     -0.05                                0                               0
                      -0.1                                                             -0.2
                             0     5    10      15           0      5     10      15          0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.1                             0.1                              0.4                            0.15
                                                      0.05                              0.2                             0.1
                         0                               0                                                             0.05
                                                     -0.05                                0                               0
                      -0.1                                                             -0.2
                             0     5    10      15           0      5     10      15          0     5      10     15          0     5      10     15
                       0.1                             0.1                              0.4                            0.15
                                                      0.05                              0.2                             0.1
                         0                               0                                                             0.05
                                                     -0.05                                0                               0
                      -0.1                                                             -0.2




1999 2007 1988 2007
                             0     5    10      15           0     5       10     15          0    5        10    15          0     5       10    15
                                 Employment                      Wage inflation                   PPI inflation                   CPI inflation
                                              Figure C3: Impulse response functions to a 10% increase in oil prices
                                                      (responses expressed in year-over-year growth rates)
D       Model’s log-linearized equilibrium conditions
We use lower-case variables to denote percent deviations from the deterministic steady state, except
when noted.
   The domestic household’s optimal plan of consumption (ct ) over time involves the log-linear
Euler equation
                                   t = t+1 + Et (it
                                                               ^
                                                        t+1 ) + t ;                             (18)
where it      log (It =I) corresponds to the deviation of the nominal interest rate from steady state,
 t  log  (P t =Pt 1 ) is the quarterly CPI in‡ation rate, the marginal utility of income t satis…es

                                 1              h                                                                                    i
 Et   1 t   = Et   1                                        1 + ! 2 ct + !ct                 1+       !ct+1          ! (1   !) ^ t       ; (19)
                       (1     !) (1        !)

and the percent deviations of the discount factor                          t   from steady state evolve according to
                                                            ^ =            ct +
                                                             t                      t:                                                        (20)

Note that in the absence of habit formation, the above expression reduces to: Et 1 t =                                                   Et   1 ct :
   Domestic output yt depends on home tradable (yHt ) and nontradable (yN t ) output:

                                                    yt = yHt + (1                   ) yN t                                                    (21)

where the demand for home tradables

              yHt = (1         )      (   Ht        F t)    + (1        ) [ xt + (1             ) xt ] + ct + (1            ) ct              (22)

depends on the terms of trade Ht log (PF t =PHt ) ; F t log (PHt =PF t ) ; as well as the home and
domestic relative prices of nontradables xt  log (PN t =PT t ) ; xt log (PN t =PT t ) ; and aggregate
consumption in both regions. The demand for home nontradables is given by

                                                            yN t =         xt + ct :                                                          (23)

The share of net exports in GDP is given by nxt (PHt YHt PT t CT t ) =(Yt Pt ) and is assumed to
have a steady-state value of 0. A …rst-order approximation yields

                                    nxt =       [yHt         ct    (1          )    Ht    (1         ) xt ] :                                 (24)

The terms of trade and the relative price of nontradables evolve according to

                              H;t    =      H;t 1       +    F;t        H;t                                                                   (25)
                              xt = xt           1   +    N;t         H;t       (1        )(    H;t       H;t 1 ) :                            (26)

    A log-linearization of the optimal price-setting condition for domestic intermediate producers
yields an extension of the standard New Keynesian Phillips curve

                         Et   1 ( k;t          k;t 1 )      = Et     1 mck;t       + Et       1 ( k;t+1         k;t )                         (27)

where         (1       ) (1         ) = ( (1 + ' )) > 0, in each of the sectors k = H; F; and the marginal



                                                                     70
cost in the domestic traded-goods sector satis…es

                    mcH;t = 'yHt                 (1 + ') at                    t   + (1             )        Ht   + (1         ) xt ;            (28)

while
                                      mcN;t = 'yN t                   (1 + ') at                     t            xt                             (29)
in the domestic nontraded-goods sector. In‡ation of the GDP de‡ator is given by

                                                     Yt    =      Ht      + (1             )     Nt                                              (30)

while CPI in‡ation is

                            t   =     Ht   + (1             )    Nt   + (1                     )(        H;t            H;t 1 ) ;                (31)

where the last term captures the e¤ects of imported goods.
   Given the imperfect pass-through, imported goods in‡ation                                                      F;t   (in domestic currency) is also
determined by a Phillips curve-type equation

                   Et   1       F;t
                                       ~       F;t 1       = ~ Et         1
                                                                               ^         + Et            1        F;t+1
                                                                                                                              ~     F;t          (32)
                                                                                   F;t


where ~       1 ~ 1        ~ =~ > 0, and ^
                                            F;t represents the percent deviation from steady state
(equal to 1) of the gap between the foreign price expressed in domestic currency and the domestic
price of the same goods. That price gap evolves in turn according to
                                           ^         = ^ F;t          +        et +                          Ft                                  (33)
                                               F;t                1                        Ft

where F t is the in‡ation of foreign tradable goods in foreign currency, while F t is in‡ation in the
prices of the same goods in the home country.
    While equations (18)–(33) determine home variables, a similar set of equations determines the
corresponding foreign variables. We also need a speci…cation of monetary policy in each region. As
mentioned in the text, we assume, in the pre-EMU case that the interest rate is set in each region
according to the linear interest-rate rules (14) and (15). Instead in the EMU case, we assume that
the nominal exchange rate is …xed, et = 0; that short-term interest rates are equal in both regions,
and that the EA-wide interest rate ieat is set according to the rule (16).
    Finally, to close the model, we use our linearized UIP condition

                                                     it     it = Et et+1 +                       t                                               (34)

and the linearized condition characterizing the evolution of foreign debt
                                                                      1
                                                          bt =            bt       1   + nxt :

For reference, the percent deviations of the real exchange rate from its steady-state value of 1 can
be expressed as follows

                            qt = ^ F t + (1                 )    Ft   +            Ht    + (1                ) (xt        xt ) :




                                                                          71
