                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             PROCYCLICAL FISCAL POLICY IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES:
                             TRUTH OR FICTION?

                                            Ethan Ilzetzki
                                           Carlos A. Vegh

                                        Working Paper 14191
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14191


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




We are grateful to Ari Aisen, Ugo Panizza, Roberto Rigobon, Martin Uribe, Guillermo Vuletin and
seminar participants at the University of Maryland, Universit? Libre de Bruxelles, and International
Economic Association Meetings (Istanbul) for helpful comments and suggestions and to Inci Gumus,
James John, Francisco Parodi, and Ioannis Tokatlidis for help in obtaining data. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Ethan Ilzetzki and Carlos A. Vegh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Procyclical Fiscal Policy in Developing Countries: Truth or Fiction?
Ethan Ilzetzki and Carlos A. Vegh
NBER Working Paper No. 14191
July 2008
JEL No. E62, F41

                                              ABSTRACT

A large empirical literature has found that fiscal policy in developing countries is procyclical, in contrast
to high-income countries where it is countercyclical. The idea that fiscal policy in developing countries
is procyclical has all but reached the status of conventional wisdom. This has sparked a growing theoretical
literature that attempts to explain such a puzzle. Some authors, however, have suggested that procyclical
fiscal policy could be more fiction than truth since, by and large, the current literature has ignored
endogeneity problems and may have simply misidentified a standard expansionary effect of fiscal
policy. To settle this issue of causality, we build a novel quarterly dataset for 49 countries covering
the period 1960-2006, and subject the data to a battery of econometric tests: instrumental variables,
simultaneous equations, and time-series methods. We find overwhelming evidence to support the
idea that procyclical fiscal policy in developing countries is in fact truth and not fiction. We also find
evidence that fiscal policy is expansionary -- a channel disregarded by the existing literature -- lending
empirical support to the notion that when "it rains, it pours."


Ethan Ilzetzki
Square Ambiorix 30
Boite 63
Bruxelles 1000
Belgium
ilzetzki@econ.umd.edu

Carlos A. Vegh
Department of Economics
Tydings Hall, Office 4118G
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
vegh@econ.bsos.umd.edu
                             1. INTRODUCTION

    Over the last 10 years, a large and growing literature has argued that
there is a fundamental di¤erence between how …scal policy is conducted in
developing countries compared to industrial countries. While …scal policy
in industrial countries is either acyclical or countercyclical, …scal policy in
developing countries is, by and large, procyclical. Gavin and Perotti (1997)
were the …rst to call attention to the fact that …scal policy in Latin America
appeared to be procyclical. Talvi and Végh (2005) then claimed that, far
from being a Latin-American phenomenon, procyclical …scal policy seemed
to be the rule in all of the developing world. In fact, in Talvi and Végh’s
(2005) study, the correlation between the cyclical component of government
consumption and GDP is positive for each of the 36 developing countries
in their sample (with an average of 0.53). In sharp contrast, the average
correlation for G7 countries is zero. By now, a large number of authors
have reached similar conclusions to the point that the procyclicality of
…scal policy in developing countries has become part of the conventional
wisdom.2
    Perhaps the more convincing evidence that this idea has indeed become
conventional wisdom is the explosion of theoretical models trying to explain
such a puzzle. In other words, why would developing countries pursue a
procyclical …scal policy that might exacerbate the business cycle? An all
too brief review of the literature reveals that explanations follow two main
strands: (a) imperfections in international credit markets that prevent de-
veloping countries from borrowing in bad times (Gavin and Perotti (1997),
Riascos and Végh (2003), Guerson (2003), Caballero and Krishnamurthy
(2004), Mendoza and Oviedo (2006), and Susuki (2006)); and (b) political
economy explanations typically based on the idea that good times encour-
age …scal pro‡igacy and/or rent-seeking activities: (Tornell and Lane (1998,
1999), Talvi and Végh (2005), Alesina and Tabellini (2005), and Ilzetzki
(2007)).
    But do we really know what we think we know? Put di¤erently, is it
really the case that government spending responds positively (in a causal
sense) to the business cycle in developing countries? While a positive cor-
relation between the cyclical component of government consumption and
GDP certainly gives no indication of causality, the literature has implicitly
assumed that the causality goes from the business cycle to …scal policy. But
is this a reasonable inference? No, according to the insightful comments
of Roberto Rigobon on Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Végh (2004). In fact,
Rigobon has argued that, if anything, the structure of shocks in developing
and industrial countries is such that it is more likely that reverse causal-
   2 See, among others, Mailhos and Sosa (2000), Braun (2001), Sanchez de Cima (2003),

Lane (2003), Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Végh (2004), Alesina and Tabellini (2005), Man-
asse (2006), Sturzenegger and Wernek (2006), Ilzetzki (2007), and Strawczynski and
Zeira (2007).



                                          2
ity explains the observed patterns in the data (i.e., …scal policy is driving
output). In a similar vein, the numerous papers that have purported to es-
tablish that …scal policy is procyclical by regressing some measure of …scal
policy on some measure of the business cycle – while controlling for other
factors – have essentially ignored the problem of endogeneity.3 What if
accounting for endogeneity were to make the procyclical results disappear?
This is precisely the argument made by Jaimovich and Panizza (2007) who
claim that, once GDP has been suitably instrumented for, causality runs in
the opposite direction (i.e., from …scal policy to GDP).4 But, surprisingly
enough, there is little systematic work in this area. This would seem to be a
major shortcoming, given that if …scal policy in developing countries is not
really procyclical, all the existing theory would be essentially irrelevant.
    In addition to the obvious academic interest of this question, its rele-
vance for public policy is hard to understate. In fact, the ability to transi-
tion from a procyclical …scal policy to an acyclical or countercyclical policy
is viewed as a badge of macroeconomic honor in the developing world and
as a sign that the country belongs to an exclusive club that relies on sound
…scal and monetary policies.5 If procyclical …scal policy just re‡ects reverse
causality, then clearly this way of thinking would be completely unfounded.
    The main purpose of this paper is thus to ask: is …scal policy really
procyclical in developing countries, or does causality run the other way so
that previous researchers have just misidenti…ed a standard expansionary
(Keynesian or neoclassical) e¤ect of …scal policy? To tackle this question
in depth, we turn to quarterly data (all the empirical literature in this area
has used annual data). While annual data may be su¢ cient to explore
the basic correlations and for some empirical approaches, we will see that
the identi…cation assumptions underlying our VAR regressions are valid for
quarterly, but not annual, data. To this e¤ect, we put together a database
with quarterly data that encompasses 49 (27 developing and 22 industrial)
countries and which, depending on the country in question, goes as far back
as 1960. After developing some simple econometric models, we subject our
data to a wide array of econometric tests aimed at disentangling causality.
While a particular methodology may not be fully convincing in and of itself,
we attempt to reach our conclusions by a preponderance of the evidence.
We thus resort to instrumental variables, GMM, simultaneous equations,
and time series techniques (Granger causality and impulse responses).6
   3 We note exceptions like Braun (2001), Lane (2003), Galí and Perotti (2003), and

Strawczynski and Zeira (2007).
   4 Notice that, theoretically, …scal policy is expansionary in both Keynesian and neo-

classical models. In the standard neoclassical model (see, for instance, Baxter and
King (1993)), an increase in government purchases is expansionary because the negative
wealth e¤ect reduces consumption and leisure, thus increasing labor and, by increasing
the marginal productivity of capital, investment.
   5 See Arellano (2006) for the case of Chile and Strawczynski and Zeira (2007) for the

case of Israel.
   6 As a reference point –and for the purposes of comparing with the existing literature




                                           3
    In addition to focusing on the issue of causality, our methodology will
allow us to identify empirically a critical channel underlying this literature,
which has been entirely disregarded so far. Implicit in all the literature is
the idea that procyclical …scal policy is sub-optimal because it would ex-
acerbate the business cycle – what Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2004)
have dubbed the “when it rains, it pours”phenomenon. Clearly, if changes
in …scal policy did not a¤ect output, then –at least from a purely macro-
economic point of view –procyclical …scal policy should not be a cause for
concern. As part of our econometric tests, we will be able to test whether
changes in government spending a¤ect output. In other words, we will
be able to ascertain whether the when-it-rains-it-pours idea is empirically
relevant or not.
    How do we proceed? After discussing some conceptual and methodolog-
ical issues in Section 2, Section 3 develops some simple empirical models
that illustrate some of the main ideas at stake and formalize the equations
that will be estimated in the following sections. Section 4 discusses our
datasets and variables of interest. Section 5 sets the empirical stage by
replicating (with quarterly data) existing results that are obtained by re-
gressing changes in (the log of) real government consumption on (the log of)
real GDP. Section 6 turns to instrumental variables as a way of dealing with
the endogeneity problem. We follow Jaimovich and Panizza (2007) in using
the weighted GDP growth of countries’trading partners as an instrument
for GDP (and also experiment with other instruments). Unlike Jaimovich
and Panizza, however, we conclude that a simple two-stage-least-squares
approach is inconclusive and does not allow us to extract any useful conclu-
sions regarding the existence (or lack thereof) of reverse causality. Section
7 then proceeds to use GMM to estimate the same system. Here we …nd
strong evidence of procyclical …scal policy in developing countries, while
we …nd that …scal policy is acyclical in high-income countries. Section 8
estimates a simultaneous system by OLS. Here we …nd evidence of both
the procyclicality of …scal policy in developing countries and of an expan-
sionary e¤ect of …scal policy. Section 9 develops our VAR estimations. For
starters, we conduct Granger causality tests that reject the hypothesis that
the business cycle does not Granger-cause government consumption. We
then show impulse responses which, again, are broadly consistent with the
idea that an output shock leads to higher government spending.
    After this exhaustive battery of econometric tests, we can summarize
our results as follows:

      There is ample econometric evidence to indicate that procyclical …s-
      cal policy in developing countries (de…ned as a positive response of
      government spending to an exogenous expansionary business cycle
      shock) is truth and not …ction. GMM estimations and (OLS) simul-
      taneous equations estimations, Granger-causality tests, and impulse
– we also carry out many of the estimations using an annual dataset.


                                          4
      responses all o¤er strong support for this proposition.
      The econometric evidence in high-income countries is mixed, and de-
      pends on the speci…cation. While our GMM estimations would sug-
      gest that …scal policy is acyclical in high-income countries, our OLS
      and VAR estimates appear to indicate that …scal policy is actually
      procyclical (contrary to the current conventional wisdom). While the
      focus of our paper is on …scal policy in developing countries, our re-
      sults on high-income countries suggest that further research may be
      warranted on the cyclicality of government spending in the industri-
      alized world.
      We also …nd evidence of an expansionary e¤ect of …scal policy on
      output in both developing and high income countries. The implied
      …scal multipliers peak at 0.63 for developing countries and 0.91 for
      high-income countries.7 At least for developing countries, then, this
      provides clear evidence that the when-it-rains-it pours phenomenon
      is empirically relevant (i.e., procyclical …scal policy ampli…es the un-
      derlying business cycle) and should indeed be a serious public policy
      concern.

         2. CONCEPTUAL AND METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES

    This section discusses some important methodological issues that arise
in this area.

                 2.1.    How do we measure …scal policy?
    Conceptually –and in line with Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2004) –
we think that it only makes sense to measure …scal policy by looking at pol-
icy instruments. After all, if one is interested in macroeconomic policy, one
should focus on instruments rather than outcomes (which lie outside the
policymakers’control). In theory, at least, the two key …scal policy instru-
ments are government consumption (as opposed to government spending,
which would include transfers and debt service) and tax rates (as opposed
to tax revenues, which respond endogenously to the business cycle). While
many studies in the literature look at the …scal de…cit (see, for example,
Alesina, Campante, and Tabellini (2008)), we feel that this not an appro-
priate measure of …scal policy precisely because of the cyclicality of tax
revenues. In other words, even if …scal policy were completely acyclical
   7 The …gure for high income countries is roughly consistent with the estimates of 0.90

and 1.29 (depending on the methodology) for the United States reported by Blanchard
and Perotti (2002, Table 4) and somewhat higher than the estimate of 0.52 for a panel
consisting of Australia, Canada, United Kingdom, and United States reported in Ravn,
Schmitt-Grohe, and Uribe (2007).




                                           5
(i.e., even if the path of government consumption and tax rates were in-
dependent of the business cycle), the …scal balance would be in surplus in
good times (as the tax base expands) and in de…cit in bad times (as the tax
base contracts). An econometrician looking at the …scal balance may thus
conclude that …scal policy is countercyclical (i.e., the government is trying
to actively smooth the business cycle) when in reality the government is
engaged in a completely neutral …scal policy and smoothing both govern-
ment consumption and tax rates, in the spirit of Barro’s (1979) neoclassical
prescriptions.
    Focusing on the …scal balance might also lead to erroneous conclusions
when comparing the cyclicality of …scal policy across countries. For in-
stance, several papers conclude that …scal policy is more procyclical in de-
veloping countries than in industrial counties because the correlation of the
…scal balance with the business cycle is positive in industrial countries and
less so – or negative – in developing countries (Gavin and Perotti (1997),
Alesina, Campante and Tabellini (2008)). This inference is not warranted,
however, because it might be the case that government consumption and
tax rates behave similarly but tax revenues are more procyclical in indus-
trial than in developing countries.
    Since, unfortunately, there is no readily available cross-country data
on tax rates, we will restrict our attention to the spending side. While,
for the above reasons, our main focus will be on government consumption,
we will also look at overall government spending for several reasons. First,
since much of the existing literature has focused on government spending, it
provides a useful reference point. Second –and as discussed below –looking
at government spending allows us to infer something about the cyclical
behavior of transfers which, while not the main focus of this paper, provides
insights into how much governments insure the private sector against the
business cycle.
    In terms of measuring government consumption, notice that if we had
a perfect price de‡ator for government consumption, cyclical changes in
relative prices would not a¤ect real government consumption. In practice,
of course, we do not have such re…ned price indices and it is thus likely that
changes in relative prices do a¤ect measured government consumption. For
instance, in developing countries the relative price of non-tradable goods
is typically procyclical. Since the public wage bill is a major component of
government consumption, de‡ating nominal government consumption by
the CPI index will most likely imply that measured government consump-
tion increases in good times and falls in bad times.
    For the purposes of this paper, and whenever available (mainly high-
income countries and large developing countries; see the data appendix
for more details), government consumption was de‡ated using a de‡ator
speci…c to government consumption. Elsewhere, we had no choice but to
use the CPI index. However, in those countries where several indices were
available, all of our results were robust to using either the government


                                      6
consumption de‡ator, the GDP de‡ator, or the CPI index.

              2.2.    Breaking down government spending
   For the purposes of our discussion, it proves useful to break down gov-
ernment spending as follows:


government spending = government consumption + public investment +transfers + debt service.

With this simple …scal accounting as background, a couple of points are
worth mentioning.8
    First, notice that this breakdown does not necessarily coincide with the
one used by, for example, Galí and Perotti (2003) in their study of …scal pol-
icy in the European Union. Their main breakdown is between cyclical (or
non-discretionary or automatic) and cyclically-adjusted (or discretionary)
government spending. They focus on the discretionary component on the
grounds that this is the better measure of the …scal stance. In our view,
however, the distinction between discretionary and non-discretionary is not
relevant for our purposes – and this seems to be the implicit stand taken
by almost all authors in this …eld. In other words, what matters is the ac-
tual response of government consumption to the cycle rather than whether
this response comes about as part of some explicit …scal policy rule (dis-
cretionary) or, say, some legal constraint that requires the government to
increase spending in some states of natures (e.g., to provide more school
lunches in bad times).
    Second, while not our main focus, whenever data are available we will
check the cyclicality of public investment and debt service and use that in-
formation to infer the cyclicality of transfers. Our conjecture is, of course,
that transfers will be countercyclical (the case, for instance, of unemploy-
ment insurance or food stamp programs), particularly in industrial coun-
tries or relatively well-o¤ developing countries with a social safety net in
place. In other words, even in cases in which …scal policy may not be ac-
tively used to smooth the business cycle, it is of course possible that the
government may be trying to insure the private sector from business cycle
‡uctuations. In such a case – and since we …nd that, on average, debt
service is acyclical and public investment is procyclical –the acyclicality or
countercyclicality of government spending must re‡ect the countercyclical
nature of transfers.
   8 It is important to keep in mind that, in country and international organizations

publications, goverment spending is often labeled di¤erently. In IFS, for instance, it is
referred to as “government expenditure.” (The reader is referred to the data appendix
for details.)




                                           7
    2.3.   Is it really the case that “when it rains, it pours”?
    As is apparent from the existing literature, the reason why …scal pro-
cyclicality in developing countries constitutes a puzzle in search of an ex-
planation lies in the fact that, from either a Keynesian or neoclassical
perspective, theoretical considerations clearly suggest that it cannot be op-
timal to reinforce the business cycle by expanding …scal policy in good
times and contracting it in bad times (i.e., what Kaminsky, Reinhart, and
Vegh (2004) have dubbed the “when it rains, it pours” phenomenon).
    In a Keynesian world –and due to sticky prices or wages –the economy
would not adjust immediately to its full-employment level of output in
response to output shocks. In such a model, an increase in government
consumption would increase aggregate demand and lead to higher output.
The optimal …scal policy is thus countercyclical. In this world, reducing
government consumption (the “pour” component) would reduce output
even further. For empirical purposes, we will capture this Keynesian world
in Models 1, 2, and 3 of next section.
    In a neoclassical world, an optimal …scal policy would imply constant
tax rates over the business cycle in the spirit of Barro (1979). In terms
of government consumption, the optimal policy would depend on the spec-
i…cation of the model. Clearly, if government consumption entered pref-
erences separably, then a smooth path would be optimal. On the other
hand, if government consumption were a substitute (complement) for pri-
vate consumption, then it would be optimally countercyclical (procyclical).
While, theoretically, one can indeed think of scenarios in which government
consumption could be a substitute (think of government-provided school
lunches) or complement (think of government-provided port services) to
private consumption, we believe that in practice the substitutability will
be mainly re‡ected in transfers (food stamps, unemployment insurance)
and the complementarity in public investment (providing better roads in
good times), neither of which are part of government consumption. Hence
–and to a …rst approximation –we will think of optimal government con-
sumption in a neo-classical world as being uncorrelated to the business
cycle. In this light, procyclical government consumption would also be
sub-optimal. A recurrent explanation in the literature for this sub-optimal
response is the presence of some political distortion, which leads to higher
government consumption as a second-best response. We will capture this
world in Model 4 below.
    According to standard neo-classical theory, an increase in government
consumption would also be expansionary. Consider, for example, the model
of Baxter and King (1993). An increase in government spending leads to
a short (and long) run increase in output because the resulting negative
wealth e¤ect induces consumer to consume less goods and less leisure (i.e.
labor supply goes up). The increase in labor supply increases the marginal
productivity of capital thus leading as well to an increase in investment.


                                     8
    Our econometric results could thus be capturing either a Keynesian
or neoclassical expansionary output e¤ect of government consumption. In
either case, however, this is evidence of a sub-optimal response. In a Keyne-
sian world, this output e¤ect would reinforce the shock hitting the economy
and in a neoclassical world it would represent an undesirable source of out-
put ‡uctuations. Both our simultaneous equations and VAR regressions
below will enable us to address the question of the expansionary impact of
government consumption.

                          3. EMPIRICAL MODELS

   This section lays out some simple empirical models that will provide a
useful guide to our empirical estimations.

            3.1.   Model 1: A contemporaneous …scal rule
    The simplest model to think about issues of reserve causality is the
following:
                                gt   =       y t + "t ;                            (1)
                                yt   =       gt + t ;                              (2)
where gt and yt are (the cyclical components of) government spending (or
consumption) and output; ( R 0) and (             0) are parameters; and "t
and t are i.i.d shocks with mean 0 and variance 2" and 2 , respectively,
and E t "t = 0. Equation (1) captures a …scal reaction function whereby
government spending responds to contemporaneous output, with the co-
e¢ cient representing the cyclical stance of …scal policy: if < 0, …scal
policy is countercyclical; if = 0, …scal policy is acyclical; and if > 0,
…scal policy is procyclical. Equation (2) allows for an expansionary e¤ect
of government consumption on output. The shocks "t and t capture …scal
and output (productivity) shocks, respectively. We assume that j j < 1.9
    We can interpret most of the current literature as having estimated
some version of equation (1). With some notable exceptions (Braun (2001),
Lane (2003), and Jaimovich and Panizza (2007)), problems related to the
endogeneity of yt have been cast aside. As Rigobon’s (2004) insightful
comments show, ignoring the problem of endogeneity can lead to a highly
misleading picture. To see this, solve for the reduced form of system (1)
and (2) to obtain:
                                           "t + t
                                yt   =              ;                              (3)
                                          1
                                             t + "t
                                gt   =              :                              (4)
                                          1
   9 As can be checked, this condition ensures that the ratio   2= 2   is an increasing
                                                                g  y
function of the ratio 2" = 2 .


                                         9
It follows that the covariance between gt and yt is given by
                                           1                  2            2
                    Cov(yt gt ) =                    2(       "   +            ):               (5)
                                    (1           )
                                                                                    2
To …x ideas, suppose that there were no output shocks (i.e.,                            = 0). Then,
                                                          2
                                                          "
                     Cov(yt gt )j   2 =0   =                      2    > 0.
                                    u
                                                (1                )

Hence, even if …scal policy were countercyclical ( < 0), the correlation
between yt and gt would be positive (as typically reported in the literature)
but the claim that this captures procyclical …scal policy would be clearly
false! In general – and as follows from equation (5) – the sign of the
covariance between yt and gt will depend on whether …scal or output shocks
dominate. If …scal shocks dominate, the covariance will be positive; if
output shocks dominate (and < 0), the covariance will be negative.
    For normative purposes, suppose that we think of this model as cap-
turing a Keynesian world where yt denotes deviations of output from the
full-employment level. What does the model tell us about the desirability
of countercyclical …scal policy? Let t       "t + t . Then E( t ) = 0 and
  2
    = 2 2" + 2 . It follows from (3) that

                            E(yt )       =      0;
                                                          2
                         V ar(yt )       =                            2:                        (6)
                                                (1                )

Take as given. Since, by assumption, j j < 1, the range of is given
by 2 ( 1= ; 1= ). Given that V ar(yt ) is a strictly increasing function
of in the range ( 1= ; 1= ), then a policymaker whose objective is to
minimize the variance of output will set a negative value of such that
   ! 1. In that case, the variance of output is given by
                                                              2
                             lim V ar(yt ) =                      :
                            ! 1=                              4

An acyclical policy ( = 0) would imply that V ar(yt ) = 2 and any pro-
cyclical …scal policy would imply that V ar(yt ) > 2 . This simple model
thus rationalizes the idea that procyclical …scal policy in developing coun-
tries is a puzzle to the extent that a countercyclical policy would be more
e¤ective in stabilizing (i.e., reducing the variability of) output.
    Notice, incidentally, that countercyclical …scal policy is optimal only if
government spending impacts output (i.e., > 0, which implies that the
when-it-rains-it-pours channel is present). If = 0, then …scal policy is
irrelevant and the procyclicality discussion would be devoid of macroeco-
nomic policy implications.

                                           10
    Naturally, from an econometric point of view, equation (1) cannot be
estimated by OLS because the covariance between yt and "t is not zero.
Indeed, by substituting (1) into (2), it follows that

                                                                     2
                              E ("t yt ) =                           "   > 0.                       (7)
                                              1
We will therefore proceed in the following way. In Section 6, we will esti-
mate equation (1) by instrumental variables. As instruments for output, we
will use the weighted growth of countries’trading partners and lagged-GDP
growth. In Section 7, we use these same instruments – and, in addition,
the real interest rate on U.S. treasury bills –to estimate equations (1) and
(2) as a system of simultaneous equations using GMM.10
    Finally, notice that since the model assumes in equation (1) that govern-
ment spending (the policy instrument) reacts to contemporaneous output,
it may be argued that this model would …t better annual rather than quar-
terly data. (We will estimate the model using data at both frequencies to
compare results.) When thinking about quarterly data, the next model
looks, in principle, more appropriate.

                    3.2.     Model 2: A lagged …scal rule
   Suppose now that (a) government spending responds to lagged, rather
than contemporaneous, output and (b) output is determined by lagged
output and government spending:


                              gt   =         yt    1 + "t ;                                         (8)
                              yt   =         yt    1 + gt +                 t;                      (9)
                                                                                 2         2
where "t and t are i.i.d with mean zero and variance                             "   and       , respec-
tively, and E t "t = 0.
    Substituting (8) into (9), we obtain

                               yt = ( +                )yt   1       +     t;                      (10)
where    t     "t +    t.   Assuming that j +                        j < 1, we can express (10) as
                                      1
                                      X                          j
                               yt =          ( +             )           t j:
                                       j=0

  1 0 We exploit that fact that, unlike Jaimovich and Panizza (2007), our system is overi-

denti…ed, allowing us to estimate all structural parameters. We also improve on their
results by using a GMM estimator. The 2-stage-least-squares estimator is a special case
of the GMM estimator, but not the most e¢ cient. We estimate the variance-covarience
matrix of the system using the method of Newey and West (1987), which takes into ac-
count both heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. See section 6 for further discussion.




                                                  11
Then,
                            E(yt )    =     0;
                                                            2
                         V ar(yt )    =                             2:
                                            1     ( +            )
Suppose that the policymaker’s objective is to minimize output variability
for given values of   and .11 This is tantamount to maximizing 1
         2
( + ) . The solution is
                                      opt
                                            =          .

By implementing this optimum, the variance of output is reduced to 2 .
An acyclical or procyclical policy is clearly suboptimal. Intuitively, sup-
pose that there is a negative shock to output. If …scal policy is neutral (i.e.,
acyclical), the autoregressive structure implies that output will be persis-
tently low for a while. But if …scal policy is countercyclical, the increase in
g will partly o¤set the fall in output.
   From an econometric point of view, notice that equations (8) and (9)
can be estimated by OLS since
                               E("t yt 1 )        =         0;
                               E ( t yt 1 )       =         0;
                                 E ( t gt )       =         0:
We will estimate this system for quarterly data in Section 7.

              3.3.   Model 3: An expectational …scal rule
    Now assume yet another – and highly plausible – …scal rule, in which
current government spending responds to the expectation of yt conditional
on yt 1 and gt . The idea is that since policymakers cannot observe today’s
output, they use their best forecast of today’s output in order to set …scal
policy. Formally:

                              gt = E [yt j        t]   + "t ;                   (11)
where E [yt j t ] denotes the expected value of yt conditional on the informa-
tion set t which, by assumption, contains lagged output and contempora-
neous government spending (i.e., t = fyt 1 , gt g). The output equation is
still given by (9), and we continue to assume that +         < 1 and j j < 1.
     If expectations are rational, E [yt j t ] will be computed using the true
model. Using (9), it follows that
                            E [yt j   t]   = yt    1       + gt .               (12)
 1 1 Asin model 1, notice that if = 0, then …scal policy cannot a¤ect the variability
of output and the issue of optimal …scal policy becomes moot.


                                            12
Substituting (12) into (11),

                                                                       "t
                         gt =                  yt      1   +                      .       (13)
                                 1                             1

The equations to be estimated would then be (9) and (13). While these
equations are econometrically the same as those to be estimated for Model
2 – given by (8) and (9) – in this case the coe¢ cient on yt 1 does not
capture . To recover , we need to compute the following (denoting by ~
the coe¢ cient on yt 1 in equation (13)):

                                                       ~
                                          =                    .
                                                   + ~

In sum, the coe¢ cient (which captures the stance of …scal policy) will
di¤er between Models 2 and Model 3. But note that > 0 if and only if
~ > 0; so our conclusions regarding the cyclicality of …scal policy would be
the same with both models.
   Assuming again that this model captures a Keynesian world, what is
the optimal …scal policy? Substituting (13) into (9) yields:
                                    1
                                    X                              j
                          yt =                                             t j;
                                    j=0
                                              1

where

                                t                      "t +            t.
                                      1
Hence,
                                                                       2
                                                  (1               )              2
                        V ar(yt ) =                        2                          :
                                          (1               )                2

It is easy to check that V ar(yt ) is a strictly increasing function of . Hence,
the optimal …scal policy will be to set a value of as low as possible; that
is, ! 1= , which implies that              ! 1.

             3.4.   Model 4: A political economy model
    Since there are several political economy explanations of procyclical
…scal policy in the literature (Tornell and Lane (1998, 1999), Talvi and
Végh (2005), Alesina, Campante, and Tabellini (2008), and Ilzetzki (2007)),
it will prove helpful to reinterpret a slight variation of Model 1 along such
lines. While the various models di¤er in the details, the basic idea is that
…scal surpluses are “bad”in the sense that they generate political pressures
or rent-seeking activities that tend to increase spending in good times.
    To capture this scenario, let the primary surplus be given by


                                               13
                                   St        yt     gt ;                           (14)
where yt are tax revenues, which are assumed to be proportional to output.
In turn, government spending is given by

                                 gt = g + St + "t ,                                (15)
where g is the (exogenously-given) level of government spending in the
absence of any political distortion and    denotes the magnitude of the
existing “political distortion.” We expect     0. Substituting (14) into
(15), we obtain:
                                 g                          "t
                         gt =           +           yt +       :                   (16)
                                1+          1+             1+
The second equation in this model would remain unchanged (relative to
Model 1) and remain given by equation (2).
    The system to be estimated (given by equations (2) and (16)) would be
the same as in Model 1 but, of course, the interpretation of the coe¢ cient on
y in equation (16) would be di¤erent. While we cannot “identify” , if the
estimated coe¢ cient is positive we would infer that > 0 since, in practice,
  > 0.12 A positive coe¢ cient would thus be interpreted as evidence of a
“political distortion”and a positive as evidence of an expansionary e¤ect
of government consumption.13

                       3.5.     Model 5: A simple VAR
3.5.1.   Set-up
    In Model 2, we assume that output follows an AR(1) process and that
government consumption can only respond to output with a one-quarter
lag. A natural extension is to allow for both output and government con-
sumption to follow a vector-autoregressive process including more lags. In
Section 8 we estimate the following system:
                                      j
                                      X
                              AYt =         Ck Yt   k   + But ;                    (17)
                                      k=1

                          gt
where the vector Yt =         includes the two variables of interest. The
                          yt
2x2 matrix Ck estimates the own- and cross-e¤ects of the k th lag of the
the variables on their current observation. The matrix B is diagonal, so
  1 2 See, for example, Ilzetzki (2007) and Talvi and Vegh (2005). The latter …nd a

correlation of 0.47 between (the cyclical components of) GDP and tax revenues in a
sample of 56 countries (industrial and developing).
  1 3 Notice, of course, that the question of what would the optimal value of    be does
not apply since, by construction, , is capturing some pre-existing political distortion.


                                            14
that the vector ut is a vector of orthogonal, i.i.d. shocks to government
consumption and output. Finally, the matrix A allows for the possibility
of simultaneous e¤ects between gt and yt .
    To …x ideas, notice that Model 2 is, in fact, a particular case of (17).
To see this, let j = 1 and A and C1 be given by


                                                 1         0
                                   A =                       ;
                                                a21        1
                                                0
                                  C1       =                ;
                                                0

with a21 =    . Then, the system (17) is identical to the one given by (8)
and (9). Following Blanchard and Perotti (2002), the assumption that in
the matrix A, a12 = 0 (re‡ecting the assumption that yt does not a¤ect gt )
is common in the VAR estimates of the e¤ectiveness of …scal policy.

3.5.2.    Impulse Responses
   In order to compare our VAR results with the results from our OLS, IV,
and GMM regressions, we need to be careful in interpreting the impulse
responses.14
   The impulse response of g to an output shock, , after one quarter is
de…ned as @gt+1 =@ t . Leading (8) and then substituting (9) into (8), we
obtain:
                  gt+1 =    yt 1 + gt + t + "t+1 .
Hence:
                                           @gt+1
                                                 = :                                          (18)
                                            @ t
In other words, the impulse response function (one period out, in the
VAR(1) system described above) captures precisely the coe¢ cient of the
…scal reaction function. The impulse response in period two (given by
@gt+2 =@ t ), however, is a complicated function of the structural parame-
ters. To see this, use (9) into (8) to obtain:
                          2
      gt+2 =         +        ( yt     1   + gt +     t)   +        "t+1 +   t+1   + "t+2 .

Hence:
                                   @gt+2                   2
                                         =          +           .                             (19)
                                    @ t
This gives us the full dynamic response of g to the output shock two periods
following a shock, which comprises the following two factors:
  1 4 While the logic that follows is not new (see, for instance, Blinder (2004)), it is worth

spelling it out in the context of our particular application.




                                               15
   1. The …scal “policy rule” response to additional changes in output in
      the following period due to the autoregressive process that output
      follows ( ).
   2. The second-order e¤ect of the …scal policy rule’s response to the …scal
      policy’s expansionary e¤ect in the …rst period 2 .

    Note that there is no direct e¤ ect of the output shock on government
consumption through the …scal policy rule in (19), stemming from our
assumption that the system is VAR(1). Fiscal policy’s direct response to
the t shock already occurred in the …rst period. If we wanted to capture
this entire e¤ect, we would look at the cumulative impulse response function
in period two, de…ned as:
                         @gt+1   @gt+2                       2
                               +       =          +      +       .
                          @ t     @ t

However –and to conserve space –we will not be plotting the cumulative
e¤ect. The second value of our impulse responses will therefore correspond
to (19).15

3.5.3.   Interpretation
    As equation (1) makes clear, when we perform IV/GMM estimations
and estimate the parameter , we are measuring how government consump-
tion reacts contemporaneously to all output movements, whether antici-
pated or not. In other words, IV/GMM estimations are able to address the
issue of causality but not of forecastability since, by de…nition, we would not
be able to forecast an unanticipated shock to output and hence the …scal re-
sponse. In contrast, in the VAR estimations, we will be isolating the e¤ects
of unanticipated output shocks on government consumption. As discussed
in McCallum (1999), whether this particular exercise is valuable depends
on the importance of unanticipated output shocks for government con-
sumption compared to the e¤ects of systematic (i.e., forecastable) changes
in output. Since this is clearly an open question at this point, we remain
agnostic on this issue and choose to use di¤erent techniques that allow us
to investigate the e¤ects on government consumption of both forecastable
and unforecastable changes in output.
   1 5 Needless to say, comparisons between the impulse responses and the other regressions

will be further complicated by the fact that we are running a VARs with more lags than a
VAR(1), for which all the above analysis is given. With a VAR(T) (T>3), the 4-quarter
lagged impluse response of g to (@gt+4 =@ t ) is a complex formula including 1 ::: 4 ,
  1 ::: 3 and 1 ::: 3 . But the key message remains the same: the impulse response in the
…rst period out captures , whereas all ensuing values capture a complicated combination
of structural parameters.




                                            16
                                  4. THE DATA

    In order to carefully explore the question of …scal cyclicality, we em-
ploy a data set of quarterly frequency, including government spending,
business cycle, and control variables. A detailed description of the data
appears in Appendix 1. The data comprises 27 developing countries and
22 high-income countries. Income groupings are primarily based on the
World Bank’s classi…cation in 2006.16 To ensure the integrity of quarterly
data, only developing countries who subscribe to the International Mon-
etary Fund’s (IMF’s) Special Data Dissemination Standard are included.
Only those years for which data was originally collected at quarterly fre-
quency are studied, and countries with less than 8 years (32 quarters) of
data have been excluded. The coverage spans from as early as Q1 of 1960
to as late as Q4 of 2006, but varies from country to country. Similar results
obtain when a balanced panel including the quarters 1996Q1 to 2006Q3 is
used. The main data source is the IMF’s International Financial Statistics
(IFS) database; we used national sources as well as the database of Agenor
et al (2000) to expand the coverage.
    The main variables of interest in exploring the cyclicality of …scal policy
are real central government spending, real general government consump-
tion, and real GDP. As mentioned earlier, an exploration of the cyclicality
of …scal policy should focus on indicators that are under direct control of
the …scal authorities: government spending and tax rates. Since time series
on tax rates are available for only a small number of countries, we focus on
government spending. The main results will be for the behavior of real gen-
eral government consumption. For comparison, we will occasionally report
results using central government real total spending as the …scal measure.
Estimations are less precise when using government spending since fewer
countries report this measure on a quarterly basis.17 Also, the overlap be-
tween quarterly measures of total spending of the central government and
GDP include very short time series for a number of countries.
    There is a trade-o¤ in the choice of the government spending measure.
While the use of a general government measure is more inclusive, including
both central and local governments, the use of central government spend-
ing is more in accordance with the principle of looking at …scal policy
instruments that are directly under the control of a single …scal agent. On
the other hand, total central government spending includes more spending
  1 6 Israel was classi…ed as a high-income country in 2006, but was a developing country

for some of the sample period. Korea graduated into the high-income category in 2001.
The Czech Republic became a high-income country in 2007. We classify these three
countries as "developing" since they met this criterion for much of the sample. The
exclusion of these three countries from the developing country sample or inclusion in the
high-income sample does not alter our results.
  1 7 In fact, the problem is more accute for high-income countries than for develop-

ing countries, as many European Union countries stopped reporting this measure on a
quarterly basis in the mid-1990s.



                                           17
categories, such as government investment and transfers, but also interest
payments, which makes this measure more noisy. Much of the literature
on the cyclicality of …scal policy has used real central government spending
(e.g. Kaminsky, Reinhart and Végh (2004), and Alesina, Campante and
Tabellini (2008)), while much of the literature on the e¤ectiveness of …scal
policy in high-income countries has looked at government consumption or
a combination of government consumption and investment (e.g. Blanchard
and Perotti (2002), and Perotti (2004)).

                           4.1.     Variables of interest
    Indices of real government spending and real government consumption
are created as follows. We obtain real data directly from national sources,
whenever available. For the remaining countries, we de‡ate nominal gov-
ernment spending measures with the consumer price index (CPI). Nominal
government spending variables, normalized to one in a base quarter, are
de‡ated using a CPI index with a similar base year. Measures of real
government spending and consumption de‡ated by the CPI, the GDP de-
‡ator, or reported directly from national sources are highly correlated for
countries where more than one of these variables are available.
    Real gross domestic product is taken directly from national accounts.
    As additional controls and instruments, we include exogenous shocks
that may drive the business cycle. We instrument GDP with international
…nancial conditions using a measure of global interest rates. Speci…cally,
we use the real return on 6-month Treasury bills.18 This interest rate is
weighted for each country based on its degree of …nancial openness. We
scale the interest rate using the measure of Chinn and Ito (2007), rescaled to
range between 0 and 1 and averaged over the relevant sample for each coun-
try (giving one index of …nancial openness per country). As in Jaimovich
and Panizza (2007), we also use an instrument representing real external
shocks, using an index of the real GDP growth of each country’s trading
partners. The construction of this variable is discussed in Appendix 1.
    All series (except for interest rates) are in logs and, when not reported
in seasonally-adjusted terms, seasonally-adjusted using the X-11 algorithm.
Seasonally adjusting the data using seasonal dummies yields similar results.

                                  4.2.   Annual data
    For estimations at the annual frequency, we use the dataset of Kamin-
sky, Reinhart, and Végh (2004). The data sources are di¤erent (primarily
the IMF’s World Economic Outlook). A detailed description of the data
can be found in Kaminsky, Reinhart and Végh (2004). The sample of coun-
tries (21 high-income and 81 developing countries) and years (1961-2003)
  1 8 We use an adaptive-expectations measure of real interest rates. Results are identical

with an ex-post measure of real interest rates.



                                            18
is larger. We sacri…ced consistency of data sources between the quarterly
and annual samples for the sake of a larger sample size.

                          5. STYLIZED FACTS

    Table 1 presents the basic stylized facts of our quarterly sample. The
table presents regressions of (changes in the logs of) measures of real govern-
ment spending against GDP. Results are of panel regressions with country
…xed e¤ects. The …rst column revisits the familiar stylized fact that gov-
ernment spending is procyclical in developing countries, regardless of the
spending measure studied. The results are statistically signi…cant at the 99
percent con…dence level. The second column presents the results of similar
regressions for high-income countries. While government consumption is
mildly procyclical, it is far less procyclical than in developing countries.
We can reject at the 99 percent con…dence level that the coe¢ cient is the
same for the two income groups. Total government spending, on the other
hand, is acyclical. The estimation is, however, very imprecise, due to the
smaller sample size. Appendix Table A1 repeats the OLS regression for
government spending, using industrial production as a proxy for output.
This increases our sample size. The estimated parameters are virtually
unchanged, but we can reject at the 99 percent con…dence level that the
cyclicality of government spending in the two income groups is the same.
    Table 2 shows similar results using annual data. All measures of gov-
ernment spending are highly procyclical in developing countries. In high-
income countries, total government spending is acyclical, but government
consumption and investment are procyclical. The main di¤erence be-
tween high-income countries and developing countries is in total govern-
ment spending, where we can establish that government spending is more
procyclical in developing countries (with 99 percent con…dence). There is
no statistically signi…cant di¤erence between the other measures in high-
income and developing countries.
    In the last row of this table, we provide evidence of the acyclicality
of interest payments, in both income categories. This indicates that the
cyclicality of debt service is not driving the cyclicality of total government
spending. We conjecture that, in high-income countries, government spend-
ing is less countercyclical than government consumption largely because of
transfers (i.e., the automatic stabilizers that are in place in high-income
countries).
    In summary, a basic OLS regression recon…rms that government con-
sumption and total spending are procyclical in developing countries. In
high income countries, government consumption is procyclical but govern-
ment spending is acyclical. With quarterly data, we can reject the hypoth-
esis that the cyclicality of government spending and consumption is the
same in the two income groups.



                                      19
          6. A TWO-STAGE-LEAST-SQUARES APPROACH

    We now turn to the question of causality. Is …scal policy procyclical in
developing countries, or is reverse causality driving these results? A natural
approach is a two-stage-least-squares (2SLS) regression. Such an approach
has been suggested by Rigobon (2004) and Jaimovich and Panizza (2007).
We …rst conduct a similar exercise as in Jaimovich and Panizza (2007),
using our quarterly data set. In a panel regression, with country …xed
e¤ects, we regress the change in (log) real government consumption on the
change in (log) real GDP, where the latter is instrumented for using the
contemporaneous value and three lags of the weighted GDP growth of each
country’s trading partners. In e¤ect, we are estimating in equation (1),
using 2SLS to correct for the potential bias suggested by (7).
    Jaimovich and Panizza (2007) argue that this instrument is valid. Trad-
ing partners’growth measure is correlated with output. There is no a priori
reason to suspect that external trade shocks have an e¤ect on government
spending except through the business cycle channel. Finally, it is unlikely
that government spending of smaller economies has an e¤ect on the growth
rates of their trading partners, which include mainly larger economies. This
latter critique may be valid for the larger economies in the sample, so that
our results for high-income countries should be taken with a grain of salt.
    The results are summarized in Table 3. The OLS regressions, shown in
the …rst row of the table, repeat the second row of Table 1. Real govern-
ment consumption is procyclical in both income groups, but far more so in
developing countries. The second row reports the results of the 2SLS regres-
sion. Standard errors are in parenthesis and F-statistics for the …rst stage
regressions are in brackets. While the point estimate for the cyclicality of
government consumption in developing countries is similar to that of the
OLS regression, the results are inconclusive. Like in Jaimovich and Panizza
(2007), the standard errors of the 2SLS estimates are large and the 2SLS
estimate is not statistically distinguishable from the OLS estimate. We
cannot reject that government consumption is highly procyclical, acyclical,
or even countercyclical in developing countries. In contrast to Jaimovich
and Panizza (2007), we cannot reject that the instrument we are using is
a weak instrument, based on the test proposed by Stock and Yogo (2002).
    For sake of comparison, we recreate Jaimovich and Panizza’s (2007) re-
sult in Table A2, using annual data. Table A3 reports results of regressions
using quarterly data, with total central government spending as the …scal
variable, which provides the quarterly-frequency analog of Jaimovich and
Panizza’s (2007) annual regressions. In both cases, the estimates are too
imprecise to make robust inferences about the cyclicality of …scal policy.
    Jaimovich and Panizza (2007) put forth these inconclusive estimates
as evidence that previous estimates of the cyclicality of …scal policy are
driven by reverse causality. In contrast, we view these inconclusive results
more literally. As we will see in the following sections, using quarterly data


                                     20
and di¤erent choices of instruments and estimation strategies yields more
precise estimates, allowing us to make more accurate inferences regarding
the cyclicality of …scal policy.
    In order to compare Jaimovich and Panizza’s (2007) results with some
of the other results obtained in the literature, we report in Table A4 an es-
timation using an alternative instrument. We use GDP growth in year t 1
as an instrument for growth in year t. This estimation strategy has been
used in this context by Braun (2001), Galí and Perotti (2003), and Lane
(2003). With this 2SLS strategy, our …nding of procyclical government
spending in developing countries and acyclical spending in high-income
countries are robust to an instrumental-variables estimation. Similar re-
sults obtain when lagged GDP growth and the weighted GDP growth of
each country’s trading partners are both used as instruments. It should
be noted, however, that the strong serial correlation of GDP may make
lagged-GDP an imperfect instrument, as GDP at time t 1 may still be
correlated with the error term at time t.
    In summary, the results using instrumental variables regressions give
mixed results, either providing support for the notion that …scal policy is
procyclical in developing countries or inconclusive results. The following
section attempts to provide more robust evidence.

                                   7. GMM

    We now propose an alternative estimation strategy, which uses a GMM
estimator. To formalize our estimation strategy, consider the estimation of
equation (1) using panel data:

                          gi;t =   1   + yi;t + "1i;t ;                  (20)
where yi;t is the output of country i in quarter t, gi;t is real government
consumption, and is the parameter of interest, which re‡ects the cycli-
cality of government consumption. Tables 1 and 2 estimate (20) using OLS
regressions and …nd that government consumption is procyclical in devel-
oping countries. However, as (7) indicates, this estimate may be biased.
    The typical procedure to correct for this bias when estimating the pa-
rameter is to …nd a set of instrumental variables Z that are correlated
with y, but such that EZj;i;t "1i;t = 0, where Zj;i;t is the tth observation
on instrumental variable j for country i. This is precisely the strategy
employed in the previous section, in Braun (2001), Lane (2003), Galí and
Perotti (2003), and Jaimovich and Panizza (2007).
    We propose two improvements on the methodology of the previous sec-
tion. First, we include an additional instrumental variable. Since the 2SLS
estimate of the previous section was ine¢ cient, in the sense that it provided
estimates with very large standard errors, e¢ ciency may be improved by
including an additional valid instrument. The instrument we propose is the


                                        21
real interest rate on six-month U.S. Treasury bills, weighted by a country-
speci…c measure of …nancial openness. We use this as a measure of global
liquidity conditions. A natural criticism of this instrument is that it might
be endogenous in the case of the United States. To address this concern,
all regressions reported in this section exclude the U.S. Results are virtu-
ally unchanged when the U.S. is included, or when all G7 countries are
excluded.
    A second improvement concerns the choice of estimator. It is well known
that a 2SLS estimator is not the most e¢ cient estimator in the class of
IV estimators. Speci…cally, the 2SLS estimator is a special case of the
GMM estimator, with the limitation that the variance-covariance matrix
is restricted to be diagonal. Since heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
are both distinct possibilities in a dynamic panel of the sort used here,
the 2SLS estimator is asymptotically less e¢ cient than a more generalized
GMM estimator. In our GMM estimations, we use a Newey-West (1987)
estimate of the covariance matrix, which addresses both heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation.
    The GMM estimates in quarterly frequency are summarized in Table
4, with the OLS estimates presented for comparison. Table 4 shows esti-
mates for the cyclicality of government consumption – in the discussion
above. In developing countries, government consumption is procyclical,
with a similar point estimate as in the OLS regression. We can reject with
95 percent con…dence that government consumption is acyclical or counter-
cyclical. We can also reject with 95 percent con…dence that the estimates
for high-income and developing countries are the same. From the results
for high-income countries, we conclude that the 95 percent con…dence in-
terval is [0.13, -0.35], indicating that government consumption is either
countercyclical or mildly procyclical.
    Both changes with respect to the speci…cation of the previous section are
important in improving the e¢ ciency of our estimates. Appendix Table A5
shows 2SLS estimates using the same two instruments. While the results
are similar, the estimates are less precise, and we can reject only at the
90 percent con…dence level that government consumption is acyclical in
developing countries.
    In Table A6, we repeat the same exercise using the annual sample.
In this case, the standard errors remain very large, making it di¢ cult to
draw inferences on the cyclicality of government consumption in developing
countries. On the other hand, these estimates do provide some evidence
that government consumption may be countercyclical at annual frequencies
in high income countries.

               8. SIMULTANEOUS EQUATIONS –OLS

   In Section 3, we proposed two models of the simultaneous interactions
between government consumption and output. In the previous two sections,


                                     22
we estimated the …rst model (Model 1), which assumed that government
consumption responds to output within the same period. As we suggested,
this approach makes sense with either annual data or with quarterly data
to the extent that government spending can react to business cycle con-
ditions within a quarter (if, for example, there is some form of automatic
stabilization).
    In this section, we estimate Model 2. We assume that government
consumption can only respond to business-cycle conditions with a one-
quarter lag. This is similar to the identifying assumption in Blanchard
and Perotti (2002), which we use in the VAR estimations of the following
section. We estimate equations (8) and (9), using OLS with …xed e¤ects.
As indicated in section 3, and unlike Model 1, OLS is not a biased estimator
of Model 2.
    The results are summarized in Table 5. Government consumption shows
a highly-statistically-signi…cant procyclical reaction (with a one-quarter
lag) to output. There is also evidence that, in developing countries, gov-
ernment consumption has an expansionary e¤ect on output.

                         9. A VAR APPROACH

    We now turn to a time series analysis. We conduct panel vector autore-
gressions in an attempt to obtain further evidence on the reaction of …scal
policy to the business cycle. In the regressions that follow, we estimate
Model 4:
                                 j
                                 X
                       AYi;t =         Ck Yi;t   k   + Bui;t ;          (21)
                                 k=1

where Yi;t is a vector of variables, reported for country i at quarter t. The
vector Y includes the cyclical components of real government consumption
and real GDP, as well as additional variables. Cyclical components are
measured as deviations from the linear-quadratic trend. We run bivari-
ate regressions, in which the vector Y includes only the two endogenous
variables of main interest. This speci…cation is helpful since in some cases
the two main variables are available for longer horizons than the other
variables. This is also closer to the simple speci…cation in Blanchard and
Perotti (2002). In separate regressions –and for comparison purposes –we
also control for the real return on 6-month U.S. Treasuries and the weighted
growth of each country’s trading partners.
    The matrix Ck measures the response of the variables, Y , to a k-quarter
lagged change in the model’s variables. For example, the appropriate el-
ement of the matrix Ck will be an estimate of the lagged …scal policy
response (in terms of government consumption) to changes in GDP. The
term "i;t = A 1 Bui;t is a vector of error terms re‡ecting one-period fore-
cast errors of Y . As is common, we decompose this error term into a vector


                                        23
of structural shocks ui;t . The matrix B is assumed to be diagonal, so that
each structural shock has a direct e¤ect on only one variable in Y . How-
ever, the matrix A re‡ects contemporaneous e¤ects of the variables on one
another.
    We estimate (21) in the two speci…cations described (“bivariate” and
“full”, the latter with additional controls). In each case, the number of
included lags (ranging from 1 to 8 quarters) was determined based on the
Schwartz information criterion. The choice of lags does not a¤ect the re-
sults. We also included country …xed e¤ects.19

                            9.1.    Granger causality
    We begin our time series analysis by conducting a Granger causality
test of the two variables of interest. Table 6 reports these results. The top
panel presents results for developing countries and the bottom for high-
income countries. We report the results of Wald tests for the exclusion of
lags of real GDP from the regression where real government consumption
is the dependent variable and conversely for the exclusion of lags of real
government consumption from the real GDP regression.
    A robust result emerging from the test is that we can reject at the
99 percent con…dence level for both income groups the null that the busi-
ness cycle does not Granger-cause government consumption. Meanwhile,
the null that government consumption does not Granger cause GDP is re-
jected only in the full speci…cation for high income countries. This provides
evidence that the co-movement of these two variables is likely due to a pol-
icy response, rather than a reverse e¤ect of government consumption on
output.

                            9.2.    Impulse responses
    The system described by (21) is under-identi…ed without further as-
sumptions about the matrix A. We make the following identifying assump-
tions:

   1. Government consumption requires at least one quarter to respond to
      GDP (and other variables). This assumption, whose logic is founded
      on the fact that …scal policy has inherent implementation lags, follows
      Blanchard and Perotti (2002).20
  1 9 As Nickell (1981) has suggested, dynamic models with …xed e¤ects may provide

biased estimates. While this bias cannot be dismissed entirely for dynamic panels with
short time series, Judson and Owen (1999) estimate that a VAR based on OLS with cross-
sectional dummy variables provides less biased estimates than Arellano-Bond (1991)
type estimators, in unbalanced panels with at least 30 longitudinal observations. This
condition is met for all countries in our sample.
  2 0 Notice that this identifying assumption is not necessarily inconsistent with the GMM

results of Table 4 since in that case the contemporaneous impact of output on government
spending captures both anticipated and unanticipated changes in output whereas in the


                                           24
   2. As before, we assume that the real interest rate on 6-month U.S.
      Treasuries and the weighted growth of countries’ trading partners
      cannot be a¤ected by other variables (or each other). We exclude the
      U.S. from the high-income country sample to make the exogeneity of
      these variables more plausible in this income group.

    The estimated impulse responses for developing countries are shown in
Figures 1-2. Dotted lines re‡ect two-standard-deviation bands. Figures
1 and 2 present the responses of GDP and government consumption, re-
spectively, to a 10 percent impulse to the two variables. In Figure 1, a 10
percent positive shock to government consumption leads to a statistically
signi…cant e¤ect on output of about 0.96 percent on impact and a peak
e¤ect in quarter 3 of 1.1 percent. Given an average share of government
consumption in GDP in our sample of developing countries of 17.4 percent,
these …gures translate into multipliers of 0.55 on impact and 0.63 at the
peak. On the other hand, Figure 2 shows that a 10 percent shock to GDP
leads to an increase of around 3 percent in government consumption after
two quarters. We thus see evidence of both procyclical government con-
sumption and an expansionary e¤ect of …scal policy. Taken together, these
e¤ects imply that procyclical …scal policy tends to reinforce the underlying
business cycle.
    Our identifying assumption relies on the fact that government consump-
tion cannot respond contemporaneously to shocks. The same identifying
assumption is not valid for total government spending, since this variable
also includes automatic stabilizers, which may respond to business cycle
shocks within the same quarter. It is nevertheless interesting to observe in
Figures A1-A4 that the result regarding the procyclicality of government
consumption in developing countries carries over to total government ex-
penditure. This result holds regardless of whether government spending
(Figures A1-A2) or GDP (Figures A3-A4) is ordered …rst.
    Figures A5 and A6 show impulse responses of GDP and government con-
sumption, respectively, in a VAR regression when the additional variables
are included. The results obtained before are robust to these additional
variables. Government consumption shows a sizable procyclical response
to GDP and to trading partners’GDP and a negative response to increases
in global borrowing rates.
    Figures 3 and 4 repeat the exercise for high-income countries. Figure 3
shows that a 10 percent shock to government consumption leads to a signif-
icant output e¤ect on impact of 0.72 percent and to a peak e¤ect in quarter
9 of 1.7 percent. Given an average ratio of government consumption to
GDP in our sample of high income countries of 18.6 percent, these …gures
VAR case the contemporaneous e¤ect refers only to unanticipated changes. In other
words, it seems plausible to argue that while anticipated changes in output can a¤ect
government spending contemporaneously (through …scal rules), unanticipated changes
cannot (due to implementation lags).



                                         25
translate into multipliers of 0.39 on impact and 0.91 at the peak. At the
same time a 10 percent shock to GDP does not appear to have a statisti-
cally signi…cant e¤ect on government consumption in the …rst four quarters
following the shock. In the long term, however, government consumption
does increase by close to 5 percent. This medium-term procyclicality of
government consumption has been observed elsewhere (see Ravn and Si-
monelli (2007), …gure 1-A for example).21 Thus government consumption
shows a procyclical response with long delays.
    Figures A7-A10 present the results of a VAR regression with total gov-
ernment spending instead of government consumption. An interesting con-
trast emerges: regardless of the ordering of the variables, total government
spending appears to respond countercyclically to output shocks.
    Finally, …gures A11 and A12 show the results for high-income countries
of regressions with additional control variables. The results of …gures 3 and
4 remain unchanged.

                             10. CONCLUSIONS

    This paper has used a novel quarterly data set comprising 49 coun-
tries and spanning the period 1960-2006 to analyze whether the positive
correlation between (the cyclical components of) government consumption
and output commonly identi…ed in the literature does indeed capture pro-
cyclical …scal policy (i.e., a causal e¤ect of output on government spend-
ing) or instead re‡ects reverse causality (i.e., a causal e¤ect of government
consumption on output). We have used various econometric methods to
address this issue: instrumental variables, GMM, OLS estimation of simul-
taneous equations, Granger causality tests, and impulse responses from an
estimated VAR.
    We …nd overwhelming support for the existence, in developing countries,
of a causal relation from output to government consumption. Our analysis
thus leaves no doubt that …scal policy is indeed procyclical in developing
countries. Interestingly enough – and contrary to the typical …nding in
the literature –we also …nd substantial evidence of procyclicality in high-
income countries.
    Moreover, by taking into account possible reserve causality, we have
also identi…ed a signi…cant expansionary e¤ect of government consumption
on output in developing countries (a channel that has been disregarded
so far in the literature). This provides empirical support for the when-it-
rains-it-pours hypothesis: procyclical government consumption in develop-
ing countries implies that …scal policy exacerbates the business cycle. We
also …nd some support for this channel in high-income countries.
  2 1 Figure 1-A in Ravn and Simonelli (2007) in fact shows the impulse response of

government consumption to a TFP shock, while here the shock is to GDP. Still, the
results are qualititively similar.




                                        26
                           REFERENCES

Agenor, Piere-Richard, C. John McDermott, and Eswar S. Prasad (2000).
“Macroeconomic Fluctuations in Developing Countries: Some Stylized
Facts.” World Bank Economic Review 14: 251-285.
Alesina, Alberto, Felipe Campante, and Guido Tabellini (2008). “Why
is Fiscal Policy Often Procyclical?” Journal of the European Economic
Association, forthcoming.
Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond (1991). “Some Tests of Speci…cation
for Panel Data and an Application to Employment Equations.”Review of
Economic Studies 58: 277-297.
Arellano, Jose Pablo (2006). “Del De…cit al Superavit Fiscal: Razones
para una Transformacion Estructural en Chile.” Estudios Publicos 101:
165-186.
Barro, Robert (1979). “On the Determination of Public Debt.” Journal
of Political Economy 87: 940-971.
Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King (1993). “Fiscal Policy in General
Equilibrium.” American Economic Review 83: 315-334.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti (2002). “An Empirical Charac-
terization of the Dynamic E¤ects of Changes in Government Spending
and Taxes on Output.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117: 1329-1368.
Blinder, Alan (2004). “The Case Against the Case Against Discretionary
Fiscal Policy. ” CEPS Working Paper No. 100.
Braun, Miguel (2001). “Why Is Fiscal Policy Procyclical in Developing
Countries?” mimeo, Harvard University.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy (2004). “Fiscal Policy
and Financial Depth.” NBER Working Paper No. 10532.

Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito (2007), “A New Measure of Financial Open-
ness.” Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis. Forthcoming.
Fatas, Antonio, and Ilian Mihov (2006). “Fiscal Policy and Business Cy-
cles: An Empirical Investigation.” Mimeo (INSEAD).
Galí, Jordi and Roberto Perotti (2003). “Fiscal Policy and Monetary In-
tegration in Europe,” Economic Policy18: 533-572.
Judson, Ruth and Ann L. Owen (1999). “Estimating Dynamic Panel Data
Models: A Guide for Macroeconomists.” Economics Letters 68:9-15.




                                 27
Gavin, Michael and Roberto Perotti (1997). “Fiscal Policy in Latin Amer-
ica.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Guerson, Alejandro (2003). “On the Optimality of Procyclical Fiscal Pol-
icy when Governments are not Credible.” (Ph.D. dissertation, George
Washington University).

Ilzetzki, Ethan (2007). “Rent-Seeking Distortions and Fiscal Procyclical-
ity.” Mimeo (University of Maryland).
Jaimovich, Dany, and Ugo Panizza (2007). “Procyclicality or Reverse
Causality?” RES Working Papers 1029. Inter-American Development
Bank, Research Department.
Judson, Ruth A. and Ann L. Owen (1999). “Estimating Dynamic Panel
Data Models: A Guide for Macroeconomists.”Economics Letters 65: 9-15
Kaminsky, Graciela , Carmen Reinhart and Carlos A. Vegh (2004). “When
It Rains It Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies.”
in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, edited by Mark Gertler and Kenneth
Rogo¤, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lane, Philip (2003). “The Cyclical Behavior of Fiscal Policy: Evidence
from the OECD.” Journal of Public Economics 87: 2661-2675.

Mailhos, Jorge A., and Sebastian Sosa (2000). “On the Procyclicality
of Fiscal Policy: the Case of Uruguay.” Mimeo (CERES, Montevideo,
Uruguay).
Manasse, Paolo (2006). “Procyclical Fiscal Policy: Shocks, Rules, and
Institutions –A view from MARS.” IMF Working Paper No. 06/27.
McCallum, Bennett T. (1999).“Analysis of the Monetary Transmission
Mechanism: Methodological Issues,” NBER Working Paper No. 7395.
Mendoza, Enrique G. (1995). “The Terms of Trade, the Real Exchange
Rate, and Economic Fluctuations.” International Economic Review 36:
101-137.

Mendoza, Enrique G, and Marcelo Oviedo (2006). “Fiscal Policy and
Macroeconomic Uncertainty in Developing Countries: The Tale of the
Tormented Insurer.”Mimeo (University of Maryland and Iowa State Uni-
versity).
Monacelli, Tommaso and Roberto Perotti (2007). “Fiscal Policy, the Trade
Balance, and the Real Exchange Rate: Implications for International Risk
Sharing,” Mimeo (Universita Bocconi).




                                  28
Newey, Whitney and Kenneth West (1987). “A Simple Positive Semi-
De…nite, Heteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance
Matrix.” Econometrica, 55, p. 777-787.
Nickell, Stephen J. (1981). “Biases in Dynamic Models with Fixed Ef-
fects,” Econometrica 49: 1417-1426.

Perotti, Roberto (2004). “Estimating the E¤ects of Fiscal Policy in OECD
Countries.” Working Paper 274 IGIER, Bocconi University.
Ravn, Morten O. and Saverio Simonelli (2007). “Labor Market Dynamics
and the Business Cycle: Structural Evidence for the United States.”CSEF
Working Paper No. 182.
Ravn, Morten O., Stephanie Schmitt-Grohe and Martin Uribe (2007),
“Explaining the E¤ects of Government Spending Shocks on Consumption
and the Real Exchange Rate.” NBER Working Paper no. 13328.
Riascos, Alvaro and Carlos A. Végh (2003). “Procyclical Government
Spending in Developing Countries: The Role of Capital Market Imper-
fections.” Mimeo (UCLA and Banco Republica, Colombia).
Rigobon, Roberto (2004). Comments on “When It Rains It Pours: Pro-
cyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies.”in NBER Macroeco-
nomics Annual, edited by Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogo¤, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Sanchez de Cima, Manuel (2003). “The Political Economy of Pro-Cyclical
Fiscal Policy in Mexico, 1970-1988.” Working Paper (CIS, University of
Southern California).
Sims, Christopher A.(1992). “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series
Facts : The E¤ects of Monetary Policy.” European Economic Review 36:
975-1000.
Susuki, Yui (2006). “Fate for Procyclical Fiscal Policy in Emerging
Economies: Role and Function of Sovereign Borrowing with Default Op-
tion.” Mimeo (University of Michigan).

Stock, James H., and Motohiro Yogo (2002). “Testing for Weak Instru-
ments in Linear IV Regression.” NBER Technical Working Papers 0284.
Strawczynski, Michel and Joseph Zeira (2007). “Cyclicality of Fiscal Pol-
icy in Israel.” Discussion Paper No. 2007.04 (Bank of Israel).

Sturzenegger, Federico, and Rogerio Werneck (2006). “Fiscal Federalism
and Procyclical Spending: The Cases of Argentina and Brazil.” Mimeo
(Universidad Di Tella and PUC).



                                  29
 Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos A. Végh (2005). “Tax Base Variability and Pro-
 cyclical Fiscal Policy in Developing Countries.” Journal of Development
 Economics 78: 156-190.
 Tornell, Aaron, and Philip Lane (1998). “Are windfalls a curse? A non-
 representative agent model of the current account.” Journal of Interna-
 tional Economics 44: 83-112.
 Tornell, Aaron and Philip Lane (1999). “The Voracity E¤ect.” American
 Economic Review 89: 22-46.

                         11. DATA APPENDIX

    The annual sample uses the dataset of Kaminsky, Reinhart and Végh
(2004). A detailed description of the data is therein.
    The countries are included in the quarterly sample and the length of the
time series for each country are provided in Table A7. Developing countries
are in italics.
    Following is a description of series and data sources:
    Real GDP
    For high-income countries, OECD developing countries, and Brazil,
South Africa and Russia, real GDP was taken from OECD series CMPGDP
VIXOBSA. This a seasonally adjusted index of real GDP, reported at quar-
terly frequency by national sources, in real local currency units. Real, sea-
sonally adjusted GDP for Ecuador was obtained from the Central Bank
of Ecuador. Industrial production was used as a proxy for real GDP in
Uganda, and was obtained from the Bank of Uganda. For Chile and India,
industrial production (see below) was used as a proxy for real GDP to ex-
pand the sample size. None of the paper’s results are altered if real GDP
from the IFS is used instead. For other countries, IFS series 99B.PZF was
used. Non-seasonally adjusted series were de-seasonalized using the X-11
algorithm.
    Industrial Production
    IFS series 66 was the main data source. The series was normalized to
1 for 1Q2000. Real GDP (see above) was used. Data for South Africa was
obtained from the national statistical agency. Series were de-seasonalized
using the X-11 algorithm.
    CPI
    IFS series 64
    Real Government Consumption
    For high-income countries and OECD developing countries, and Brazil,
India, South Africa and Russia, real government consumption was taken
from the OECD series for Government Final Consumption Expenditure,
using a real index. Real government consumption for Argentina was taken
from MECON, and for Chile, Ecuador, Israel and Venezuela from their re-
spective central banks. Data for Ecuador and Israel was seasonally-adjusted

                                     30
by the central banks. Civilian government consumption was used for Israel.
Venezuela’s data on public consumption di¤ers from other countries in that
it includes government investment. We nevertheless leave Venezuela’s data
as reported. Excluding Venezuela from the sample does not impact any
of the paper’s results. Nominal government consumption for Uganda was
obtained from the Central Bank of Uganda. For other countries, IFS se-
ries 91F..ZF (nominal government consumption) was used. All nominal
series were de‡ated using CPI. De‡ating the series by the GDP de‡ator
does not a¤ect the paper’s results. Non-seasonally adjusted series were
de-seasonalized using the X-11 algorithm.
    Real Government Spending
    IFS series 82 (government expenditure) was used. In the case of Chile,
a series of non-interest spending that was available from IFS was used.
For Israel, Malaysia, and Turkey data was obtained from their respective
central banks. Data for Denmark and France was obtained from Euro-
stat. Series were expanded using the database of Agenor, McDermott, and
Prasad. The series was normalized to 1 for 1Q2000 and then de‡ated using
the CPI series, also normalized to 1 for 1Q2000.
    Real Return on 6-month U.S. Treasury Bills
    IFS series 11160C..ZF. The real Treasury yield was created by de‡ating
the returns on U.S. Treasuries by the CPI in‡ation rate of the previous
6-month period, using the above stated CPI series for the United States.
This is a measure of expected real return based on adaptive expectations.
Using an ex-post measure of the real return does not impact any of the
paper’s results. We then weigh this measure on a country-by-country basis
using the Chinn and Ito (2007) measure of …nancial openness, scaled to
range between zero and one.
    Weighted GDP growth of Trading Partners
    Following Jaimovich and Panizza (2007) we create an index of the GDP
growth of each country’s trading partners as the growth in real GDP (see
above) of each of the country’s trading partners. Trade-partner growth was
weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading
partners (taken from the IMF’s DOTS database). Finally, each country’s
weighted-trade-partner growth was de‡ated by the country’s average ratio
of exports to GDP over the entire period. This last statistic was created
using annual data, with exports (total, to rest of the world) taken from the
DOTS database, and nominal GDP in USD taken from the IMF’s World
Economic Outlook database.
    Terms of Trade
    IFS series 74 (unit price of exports) divided by series 75 (unit price of
imports).




                                     31
                         Table 1: Stylized Facts
   Dependent Variable: Change in Log Real Government Spending Variable

                    Independent Variable: Change in Log Real GDP

                          Developing Countries         High-Income Countries

Government                       0.51 ***                      -0.05
Spending                          (0.13)                      (0.37)

Government                       0.48 ***                    0.11 ***
Consumption                       (0.06)                      (0.03)
n (Spend.)                        1286                          852
n (Consum.)                       1598                         1946

Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
       Table 2: Cyclicality of Government Spending--Composition
   Dependent Variable: Change in Log Real Government Spending Variable

                    Independent Variable: Change in Log Real GDP
                                    Annual Data

                          Developing Countries         High-Income Countries

Government                      0.93 ***                       0.08
Spending                         (0.05)                       (0.11)

Government                      0.31 ***                     0.51 ***
Consumption                      (0.14)                       (0.07)

Government
                                1.31 ***                     1.22 ***
Capital
                                 (0.14)                       (0.37)
Formation

Interest                           -0.07                       -0.09
Payments                          (0.28)                      (0.30)
n (Expend.)                       3139                             754
n (Consum.)                       2945                             789
n (Interest)                      1178                             509

Cluster-Robust Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                      Table 3: OLS and IV Estimates
         Dependent Variable: Change in Real Government Consumption

                      Instrumented Variable: Change in Real GDP

       Instruments: 4 lags of Weighted GDP Growth of Trading Partners

                           Developing Countries                         High-Income Countries

                                    0.48 ***                                       0.11 ***
OLS
                                     (0.06)                                         (0.03)

                                       0.39                                          -0.13
IV                                    (0.31)                                         (0.15)
                                      [4.36]                                        [10.06]

n                                      1290                                          1570

Standard Errors in parenthesis, F-statistics of first stage regressions in square brackets
The critical value for the Stock and Yogo (2002) test for weeks instruments is an F-statistic of
11.59
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                               Table 4: GMM Estimates

    Dependent Variable--Change in Log Real Government Consumption

                   Instrumented Variable: Change in Real GDP

 Instruments: 4 lags of Weighted GDP Growth of Trading Partners and
         of the Real Interest Rate on 6-month U.S. Treasuries

                     Developing Countries                         High-Income Countries

                               0.51 ***                                      0.17 ***
OLS
                                (0.07)                                        (0.04)

                               0.61 **                                         -0.11
GMM                             (0.24)                                        (0.12)
                                [5.36]                                        [9.48]
n                                1290                                          1570
Standard Errors in parenthesis, F-statistics of first stage regressions in square brackets
The critical value for the Stock and Yogo (2002) test for weeks instruments is an F-statistic of
11.59
Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                Table 5: OLS Estimates--Simultaneous Equations
      Equation 1: Dependent Variable--(Detrended Log) Real Government
                                Consumption

         Independent Variable: (Detrended Log) Real GDP (1Q Lagged)

                            Developing Countries    High-Income Countries

                                  0.38 ***                0.53 ***
GDP (-1)
                                   (0.03)                  (0.02)

n                                  1608                     1947

           Equation 2: Dependent Variable--(Detrended Log) Real GDP

 Independent Variables: (Detrended Logs of) Real Government Consumption
                         and Real GDP (1Q lagged)

                            Developing Countries    High-Income Countries
Government                        0.05 ***                   0.01
Consumption                         (.01)                   (0.01)

                                  0.87 ***                0.93 ***
GDP(-1)
                                   (0.01)                  (0.01)

Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                        Table 6
    Wald Test for Granger Causality/Block Exogeneity
     Reported Chi-Squared (p-statistic in parenthesis)
                 Developing Countries
    Excluded Variable     Bivariate               Full

Real Government                         6.96     5.26 *
Consumption
                                       (0.14)    (0.72)

                                   35.1 ***     34.2 ***
Real GDP
                                       (0.00)    (0.00)
n                                       1517     1297
* Null rejected with 90% confidence
** Null rejected with 95% confidence
*** Null rejected with 99% confidence



               High-Income Countries
    Excluded Variable   Bivariate                 Full

Real Government                         12.6    20.5 ***
Consumption                            (0.13)    (0.00)

                                   61.5 ***     42.8 ***
Real GDP
                                    (0.00)       (0.00)
n                                       1685     1374
* Null rejected with 90% confidence
** Null rejected with 95% confidence
*** Null rejected with 99% confidence
                                                                    Figure 1
                                                             Developing Countries
                                              Bivariate Regression with Government Consumption
                                                        Response of Real GDP to Shocks

                                    Shock: GDP                                                                   Shock: Government Consumption

0.12                                                                                     0.02


 0.1
                                                                                        0.015

0.08
                                                                                         0.01

0.06
                                                                                        0.005
0.04

                                                                                            0
0.02
                                                                                                 0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16

   0                                                                                    -0.005
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
-0.02                                                                                    -0.01
                                                                       Figure 2
                                                                Developing Countries
                                                 Bivariate Regression with Government Consumption
                                                 Response of Real Government Consumption to Shocks

                                    Shock: GDP                                                                      Shock: Government Consumption

0.05                                                                                    0.12


0.04                                                                                     0.1


                                                                                        0.08
0.03

                                                                                        0.06
0.02
                                                                                        0.04

0.01
                                                                                        0.02

   0                                                                                       0
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16           0   1   2   3   4      5   6   7    8   9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
-0.01                                                                                   -0.02
                                                                                    Figure 3
                                                                             High-Income Countries
                                                                              Bivariate Regression
                                                                         Response of Real GDP to Shocks

                                                Shock: GDP                                                                      Shock: Government Consumption

0.12                                                                                            0.03

  0.1                                                                                          0.025

0.08                                                                                            0.02

0.06                                                                                           0.015

0.04                                                                                            0.01

0.02                                                                                           0.005

   0                                                                                               0
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24            0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
-0.02                                                                                          -0.005

-0.04                                                                                           -0.01
                                                                                 Figure 4
                                                                         High-Income Countries
                                                                           Bivariate Regression
                                                           Response of Real Government Consumption to Shocks

                                              Shock: GDP                                                                         Shock: Government Consumption

0.07                                                                                         0.12

0.06
                                                                                               0.1
0.05

0.04                                                                                         0.08

0.03
                                                                                             0.06
0.02
                                                                                             0.04
0.01

   0                                                                                         0.02
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
-0.01
                                                                                                0
-0.02                                                                                                0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
-0.03                                                                                        -0.02
                      Table A1: OLS Estimates
        Dependent Variable: Change in Real Government Spending

           Independent Variable: Change in Industrial Production

                         Developing Countries   High-Income Countries

                                 0.45 ***                0.05
OLS
                                  (0.08)                (0.13)
n (OLS)                           1163                   1514

Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                 Table A2: OLS and IV Estimates--Annual Data
              Dependent Variable: Change in Real Government Spending

                           Instrumented Variable: Change in Real GDP

                 Instrument: Weighted GDP Growth of Trading Partners

                                 Developing Countries      High-Income Countries

                                       0.93 ***                     0.08
OLS
                                        (0.05)                     (0.11)

                                         -0.56                     -0.74
IV
                                        (0.75)                     (0.80)
n                                       1874                           623
F-stat in first stage
                                        2.87                       11.83
of IV

Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                  Table A3: OLS and IV Estimates
        Dependent Variable: Change in Real Government Spending

                  Instrumented Variable: Change in Real GDP

     Instruments: 4 lags of Weighted GDP Growth of Trading Partners

                         Developing Countries   High-Income Countries

                                 0.34 ***                -0.33
OLS
                                  (0.09)                (0.575)

                                   -0.76                 -0.97
IV
                                  (0.60)                (1.66)
n                                 1049                   695
F-stat in first
                                  4.36                   8.63
stage of IV

Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                 Table A4: OLS and IV Estimates--Annual Data
              Dependent Variable: Change in Real Government Spending

                           Instrumented Variable: Change in Real GDP

                              Instrument: Lagged real GDP growth

                                 Developing Countries      High-Income Countries

                                       0.93 ***                     0.08
OLS
                                        (0.05)                     (0.11)

                                       1.03 **                      0.23
IV
                                        (0.47)                     (0.19)
n (OLS)                                 3139                           754
n (IV)                                  3114                           752
F-stat in first stage
                                        179.4                      163.69
of IV

Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
            Table A5: 2SLS Estimates with Both Instruments
        Dependent Variable: Change in Real Government Consumption

                   Instrumented Variable: Change in Real GDP


    Instruments: 4 lags of Weighted GDP Growth of Trading Partners, of
            the Real Interest Rates on 6-month U.S. Treasuries.

                         Developing Countries                      High-Income Countries

                                   0.51 *                                       -0.05
                                   (0.28)                                      (0.46)
                                   [5.36]                                      [9.48]
n                                  1598                                         1562

Standard Errors in parenthesis, F-statistics of first stage regressions in square brackets
The critical value for the Stock and Yogo (2002) test for weeks instruments is an F-statistic of
11.59
Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
                  Table A6: GMM Estimates--Annual Data

    Dependent Variable--Change in Log Real Government Consumption

                  Instrumented Variable: Change in Real GDP

    Instruments: Weighted GDP Growth of Trading Partners and the Real
                  Interest Rate on 6-month U.S. Treasuries

                    Developing Countries         High-Income Countries

                             0.34 ***                  0.63 ***
OLS
                              (0.10)                    (0.08)

                                  -1.71                 -1.09 **
GMM
                                 (1.35)                  (0.36)
n                                1866                     600

Standard Errors in parenthesis
* - Significant at 90%
** - Significant at 95%
*** - Significant at 99%
   Table A7: Length of Time Series by Country
     For Real GDP and Government Consumption Series

Country           Beginning Date     End Date
Argentina               93Q1              06Q4
Australia               60Q1               06Q4
Austria                 89Q1               06Q4
Belgium                 95Q1               06Q4
Brazil                  91Q1              06Q4
Canada                  61Q1               06Q4
Chile                   96Q1              06Q2
Colombia                94Q1              06Q3
Czech Republic          96Q1              06Q4
Denmark                 90Q1               06Q4
Ecuador                 90Q1               06Q4
Estonia                 93Q1              06Q3
Finland                 90Q1               06Q4
France                  78Q1               06Q4
Germany                 91Q1               06Q4
Iceland                 97Q1               06Q4
India                   90Q1              06Q3
Indonesia               93Q1              06Q3
Ireland                 97Q1               06Q4
Israel                  95Q1              06Q4
Italy                   81Q1               06Q4
Japan                   94Q1               06Q4
Korea                   70Q1              06Q4
Latvia                  90Q1              06Q3
Lithuania               95Q1              06Q3
Luxembourg              95Q1               06Q4
Malaysia                92Q1              06Q3
Mexico                  84Q1              06Q3
Netherlands             95Q1               06Q4
New Zealand             88Q1               06Q4
Norway                  78Q1               06Q4
Peru                    91Q1              06Q3
Philippines             97Q1              06Q3
Poland                  95Q1              06Q4
Portugal                95Q1               06Q4
Romania                 98Q1              06Q3
Russia                  95Q1              06Q4
Slovak Republic         95Q1              06Q4
Slovenia                95Q1              06Q3
South Africa            65Q1              06Q4
Spain                   95Q1               06Q4
Sweden                  93Q1               06Q4
Switzerland             80Q1               06Q4
Thailand                93Q1              06Q3
Turkey                  87Q1              06Q4
Uganda                  99Q1              06Q3
United Kingdom          60Q1               06Q4
United States           60Q1               06Q4
Venezuela               97Q1              04Q4
                                                                            Figure A1
                                                                      Developing Countries
                                                         Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                                 Response of Real GDP to Shocks
                                                              Government Spending Ordered First

                                   Shock: GDP                                                                      Shock: Government Spending

0.14                                                                                   0.05

0.12                                                                                   0.04

 0.1                                                                                   0.03


0.08                                                                                   0.02

                                                                                       0.01
0.06

                                                                                          0
0.04
                                                                                               0   1   2   3   4    5   6    7   8   9   10     11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                       -0.01
0.02
                                                                                       -0.02
  0
       0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   -0.03
                                                                        Figure A2
                                                                  Developing Countries
                                                     Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                     Response of Real Government Spending to Shocks
                                                          Government Spending Ordered First

                                    Shock: GDP                                                                     Shock: Government Spending

0.07                                                                                    0.12

0.06
                                                                                         0.1
0.05

0.04                                                                                    0.08
0.03
                                                                                        0.06
0.02

0.01                                                                                    0.04
   0
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   0.02
-0.01

-0.02
                                                                                          0
-0.03                                                                                          0   1   2   3   4   5    6   7    8   9   10     11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                        Figure A3
                                                                  Developing Countries
                                                     Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                             Response of Real GDP to Shocks
                                                                 Real GDP Ordered First

                                   Shock: GDP                                                                      Shock: Government Spending

0.14                                                                                   0.03

0.12                                                                                   0.02

 0.1
                                                                                       0.01

0.08
                                                                                          0
                                                                                               0   1   2   3   4    5   6    7   8   9   10     11   12   13   14   15   16
0.06
                                                                                       -0.01
0.04
                                                                                       -0.02
0.02
                                                                                       -0.03
  0
       0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   -0.04
                                                                        Figure A4
                                                                  Developing Countries
                                                     Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                     Response of Real Government Spending to Shocks
                                                                 Real GDP Ordered First

                                    Shock: GDP                                                                     Shock: Government Spending

 0.1                                                                                    0.12


0.08                                                                                     0.1


0.06                                                                                    0.08


                                                                                        0.06
0.04

                                                                                        0.04
0.02

                                                                                        0.02
   0
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                          0
-0.02                                                                                          0   1   2   3   4   5    6   7    8   9   10     11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                            Figure A5
                                                                       Developing Countries
                                                                        Full Specification
                                                                  Response of Real GDP to Shocks

                                      Shock: GDP                                                                   Shock: Government Consumption

0.12                                                                                      0.016

                                                                                          0.014
 0.1
                                                                                          0.012

0.08                                                                                       0.01

                                                                                          0.008
0.06
                                                                                          0.006

0.04                                                                                      0.004

                                                                                          0.002
0.02
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                   0   1   2   3   4      5    6   7    8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                          -0.002
   0
       0   1   2   3   4     5    6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   -0.004



                           Shock: Trading Partners' Growth                                                             Shock: Real U.S. Treasuries Rate

0.45                                                                                      0.08

 0.4
                                                                                          0.06
0.35

 0.3                                                                                      0.04

0.25                                                                                      0.02
 0.2
                                                                                             0
0.15
                                                                                                   0   1   2   3   4      5   6    7    8    9    10   11   12   13   14   15   16
 0.1                                                                                      -0.02

0.05
                                                                                          -0.04
  0
       0   1   2   3   4     5    6    7    8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   -0.06
                                                                                          Figure A6
                                                                                    Developing Countries
                                                                                      Full Specification
                                                                     Response of Real Government Consumption to Shocks

                                                        Shock: GDP                                                                                      Shock: Government Consumption

0.06                                                                                                        0.12


0.05                                                                                                          0.1


0.04                                                                                                        0.08


0.03                                                                                                        0.06

0.02                                                                                                        0.04

0.01                                                                                                        0.02


   0                                                                                                           0
        0       1       2       3       4       5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16           0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
-0.01                                                                                                       -0.02



                                            Shock: Trading Partners' Growth                                                                             Shock: Real U.S. Treasuries Rate

0.25                                                                                                         0.06

  0.2                                                                                                        0.04

0.15                                                                                                         0.02

  0.1                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                        0       1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8   9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16
0.05                                                                                                        -0.02

        0                                                                                                   -0.04
            0       1       2       3       4   5   6     7   8      9   10 11 12 13 14 15 16
-0.05                                                                                                       -0.06

 -0.1                                                                                                       -0.08

-0.15                                                                                                         -0.1
                                                                        Figure A7
                                                                 High-Income Countries
                                                     Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                             Response of Real GDP to Shocks
                                                          Government Spending Ordered First


                                   Shock: GDP                                                                       Shock: Government Spending

0.16                                                                                   0.015

0.14                                                                                    0.01

                                                                                       0.005
0.12
                                                                                           0
 0.1                                                                                            0   1   2   3   4     5   6   7    8   9   10    11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                       -0.005
0.08
                                                                                        -0.01
0.06                                                                                   -0.015

0.04                                                                                    -0.02

0.02                                                                                   -0.025

                                                                                        -0.03
  0
       0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   -0.035
                                                                    Figure A8
                                                              High-Income Countries
                                                 Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                 Response of Real Government Spending to Shocks
                                                      Government Spending Ordered First

                                    Shock: GDP                                                                      Shock: Government Spending

0.15                                                                                    0.12

 0.1                                                                                     0.1

0.05                                                                                    0.08

   0                                                                                    0.06
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
-0.05                                                                                   0.04

 -0.1                                                                                   0.02

-0.15                                                                                      0
                                                                                                0   1   2   3   4    5   6    7   8   9   10     11   12   13   14   15   16
 -0.2                                                                                   -0.02

-0.25                                                                                   -0.04
                                                                       Figure A9
                                                                High-Income Countries
                                                    Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                            Response of Real GDP to Shocks
                                                                Real GDP Ordered First

                                   Shock: GDP                                                                       Shock: Government Spending

0.16                                                                                   0.015

0.14                                                                                    0.01

                                                                                       0.005
0.12
                                                                                           0
 0.1                                                                                            0   1   2   3   4     5   6   7   8    9   10    11   12   13   14   15   16
                                                                                       -0.005
0.08
                                                                                        -0.01
0.06                                                                                   -0.015
0.04                                                                                    -0.02

0.02                                                                                   -0.025

                                                                                        -0.03
  0
       0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16   -0.035
                                                                        Figure A10
                                                                  High-Income Countries
                                                     Bivariate Regression with Government Spending
                                                     Response of Real Government Spending to Shocks
                                                                 Real GDP Ordered First

                                    Shock: GDP                                                                      Shock: Government Spending

0.15                                                                                    0.12

 0.1                                                                                     0.1

0.05                                                                                    0.08

   0                                                                                    0.06
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8      9   10   11   12   13   14   15   16
-0.05                                                                                   0.04

 -0.1                                                                                   0.02

-0.15                                                                                      0
                                                                                                0   1   2   3   4    5   6    7   8   9   10     11   12   13   14   15   16
 -0.2                                                                                   -0.02

-0.25                                                                                   -0.04
                                                                                    Figure A11
                                                                              High-Income Countries
                                                                                Full Specification
                                                                          Response of Real GDP to Shocks

                                              Shock: GDP                                                                       Shock: Government Consumption

 0.12                                                                                         0.030

  0.1                                                                                         0.025

                                                                                              0.020
 0.08
                                                                                              0.015
 0.06
                                                                                              0.010

 0.04                                                                                         0.005

 0.02                                                                                         0.000
                                                                                                       0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                                                              -0.005
   0
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24   -0.010
-0.02
                                                                                              -0.015

-0.04                                                                                         -0.020



                                    Shock: Trading Partners' Growth                                                                Shock: Real U.S. Treasuries Rate

0.14                                                                                          0.05

0.12                                                                                          0.04

 0.1
                                                                                              0.03
0.08
                                                                                              0.02
0.06
                                                                                              0.01
0.04
                                                                                                 0
0.02
                                                                                                       0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
   0                                                                                          -0.01
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
-0.02                                                                                         -0.02

-0.04                                                                                         -0.03
                                                                               Figure A12
                                                                         High-Income Countries
                                                                            Full Specification
                                                           Response of Real Government Consumption to Shocks

                                              Shock: GDP                                                                          Shock: Government Consumption

0.07                                                                                          0.12

0.06
                                                                                              0.10
0.05
                                                                                              0.08
0.04

0.03                                                                                          0.06

0.02                                                                                          0.04

0.01
                                                                                              0.02
   0
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24   0.00
-0.01
                                                                                                      0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7    8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
-0.02                                                                                         -0.02



                                    Shock: Trading Partners' Growth                                                               Shock: Real U.S. Treasuries Rate

 0.1                                                                                          0.03

0.08                                                                                          0.02

0.06
                                                                                              0.01
0.04
                                                                                                 0
0.02                                                                                                  0   1   2   3   4   5   6     7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                                                              -0.01
   0
        0   1   2   3   4   5   6    7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
                                                                                              -0.02
-0.02

-0.04                                                                                         -0.03

-0.06                                                                                         -0.04
