                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           AIR POLLUTION AND INFANT HEALTH:
                                LESSONS FROM NEW JERSEY

                                             Janet Currie
                                          Matthew J. Neidell
                                         Johannes Schmieder

                                         Working Paper 14196
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14196


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




¸˛We are grateful for funding under NIH grant R21 HD055613-01. All opinions and any errors are
  our own. We would also like to thank Katherine Hempstead and Matthew Weinberg of the New Jersey
  Department of Health for facilitating our access to the data. Seminar participants at Tilburg University
  provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
  reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Janet Currie, Matthew J. Neidell, and Johannes Schmieder. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Air Pollution and Infant Health: Lessons from New Jersey
Janet Currie, Matthew J. Neidell, and Johannes Schmieder
NBER Working Paper No. 14196
July 2008
JEL No. I12,Q53

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine the impact of three "criteria" air pollutants on infant health in New Jersey in the 1990s
by combining information about mother's residential location from birth certificates with information
from air quality monitors. In addition to large sample size, our work offers three important innovations:
First, because we know the exact addresses of mothers, we select those mothers closest to air monitors
to ensure a more accurate measure of air quality. Second, since we follow mothers over time, we
control for unobserved characteristics of mothers using maternal fixed effects. Third, we examine
interactions of air pollution with smoking and other predictors of poor infant health outcomes. We
find consistently negative effects of exposure to pollution, especially carbon monoxide, both during
and after birth. The effects are considerably larger for smokers than for nonsmokers as well as for
older mothers. Since automobiles are the main source of carbon monoxide emissions, our results have
important implications for regulation of automobile emissions.


Janet Currie                                        Johannes Schmieder
International Affairs Building                      Department of Economics
Department of Economics                             Columbia University
Columbia University - Mail code 3308                1022 International Affairs Building
420 W 118th Street                                  420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027                                  New York, NY 10027
and NBER                                            jfs2106@columbia.edu
jc2663@columbia.edu

Matthew J. Neidell
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
mn2191@columbia.edu
        The primary goal of pollution abatement is to protect human health, but there is still much debate

about the specific health effects. This paper addresses this issue by examining the impact of air pollution

on infant health in New Jersey over the 1990s. Policy makers and the public are highly motivated to

protect these most vulnerable members of society. There is increasing evidence of long-term effects of

poor infant health on future outcomes; for example, low birth weight has been linked to future health

problems and lower educational attainment (see Currie (2008) for a summary of this research). Studying

infants also overcomes several empirical challenges because, unlike adult diseases that may reflect

pollution exposure that occurred many years ago, the link between cause and effect is more immediate.

        Our analysis improves upon much of the previous research by improving the assignment of

pollution exposure from air quality monitors to individuals. Most observational analyses that assess the

impact of air pollution on health assign exposure to pollution by either approximating the individual’s

location as the centroid of a geographic area or computing average pollution levels within the geographic

area. In our data we know the exact addresses of mothers, enabling us to improve on the assignment of

pollution exposure.

        Despite this improvement in pollution measurement, we must still confront the problem that air

pollution is not randomly assigned, making potential confounding a major concern. Since air quality is

capitalized into housing prices (Chay and Greenstone, 2003) families with higher incomes or preferences

for cleaner air are likely to sort into locations with better air quality, and failure to account for this will

lead to overestimates of the effects of pollution. Alternatively, pollution levels are higher in urban areas

where there are often more educated individuals with better access to health care, which can cause

underestimates of the effects of pollution Our data permits us to follow mothers over time, so we include

both pollution monitor and maternal fixed effects to capture all time-invariant characteristics of the

neighborhood and mother. In our richest specification, the effects of pollution are identified using

variation in pollution exposure between children in the same families, after controlling flexibly for time


                                                        2
trends, seasonal patterns, weather, pollution monitor locations, and several observed characteristics of the

mother and child.

        Infants at higher risk of poor outcomes may be differentially affected by pollution, so we also

examine whether pollution has a differential impact on infant health depending on maternal

characteristics, such as whether the mother smoked during pregnancy and older maternal age. Previous

research has suggested that smoking might exacerbate the effect of air pollution by increasing

inflammatory responses and airway reactivity (Wang and Xu, 1998). Alternatively, since cigarette smoke

contains high levels of pollutants, including carbon monoxide, infants may already be exposed to high

levels so that the marginal impact may be smaller in smokers than in non-smokers if the effects of

pollutants are non-linear. Previous work has also suggested that infants of older mothers might be more

susceptible to problems related to smoking (Cnattingius, 1997), so it is also possible that these infants are

more vulnerable to the effects of pollution. To our knowledge, this is the first study to ask whether there

are such differential effects.

        Our estimates confirm that carbon monoxide (CO) has a significant effect on fetal health even at

the relatively low levels of pollution experienced in New Jersey in recent years, and that it has further

effects on infant mortality conditional on measures of health at birth. In particular, we estimate that a one

unit change in mean CO during the last trimester of pregnancy increases the risk of low birth weight by 8

percent. Furthermore, a one unit change in mean CO during the first two weeks after birth increases the

risk of infant mortality by 2.5 percent relative to baseline levels. These findings for CO are robust to

many different specifications. We also find that the effects of CO on infant health at birth are two to six

times larger for smokers and for mothers over age 35. Since the major source of CO in urban areas is

automobile exhaust, these findings have implications for regulations of automobile emissions.

        The rest of the paper is laid out as follows: Section I provides necessary background about the

ways in which pollution may affect infant health and the previous literature. Section II describes our



                                                     3
methods, while data are described in Section III. Section IV presents our results, and Section V details

our conclusions.

                                             I. BACKGROUND

A link between air pollution and infant health has long been suspected although the exact biological

mechanisms through which it occurs are not well understood. Carbon Monoxide (CO) is an odorless,

colorless gas that primarily comes from transportation sources, with as much as 90 percent of CO in cities

coming from motor vehicle exhaust (Environmental Protection Agency, January 1993, 2003b). CO bonds

with hemoglobin more easily than oxygen, reducing the body’s ability to deliver oxygen to organs and

tissues. While CO is poisonous to healthy adults at high levels, infants are particularly susceptible

because they are smaller and often have existing respiratory problems. In pregnant women, exposure to

CO reduces the availability of oxygen to be transported to the fetus. Moreover, carbon monoxide readily

crosses the placenta and binds to fetal haemoglobin more readily than to maternal haemoglobin and is

cleared from fetal blood more slowly than from maternal blood, leading to concentrations that may be 10

to 15 percent higher in the fetus’s blood than in the mother’s. Indeed, much of the negative effect of

smoking on infant health is believed to be due to the CO contained in cigarette smoke (World Health

Organization, 2000).


        Particulate matter can take many forms, including ash and dust, and motor vehicle

exhaust is a major source. The smallest particles are widely believed to cause the most damage

since they are inhaled deep into the lungs and can possibly enter the bloodstream [Environmental

Protection Agency, 2003b]. The mechanisms through which particles harm health are

controversial, with a leading theory being that they cause an inflammatory response that weakens

the immune system [Seaton, et al. 1995]. Since particles cannot cross the placenta, they would

have to damage the fetus indirectly by provoking inflammation in the mother.



                                                     4
        Ozone (the major component of smog) is formed through reactions between nitrogen oxides and

volatile organic compounds (which are found in auto emissions, among other sources) in heat and

sunlight. Ozone is a highly reactive compound that damages tissue, reduces lung function, and sensitizes

the lungs to other irritants. For example, exposure to ozone during exercise reduces lung functioning in

adults and causes symptoms such as chest pain, coughing, and pulmonary congestion. It is not clear why

ozone would affect the fetus, though like PM10 it might indirectly affect the infant by compromising the

mother’s health.

        The discussion suggests that one might well expect CO to have larger effects than other pollutants

because of its ability to cross the placenta and accumulate in the blood of the fetus. However, pollution

exposure could indirectly affect the fetus through the health of the mother by, for example, weakening her

immune system. Moreover, all three pollutants can directly affect infants after birth. 1 Although the

available research points towards potential impacts, it provides little guidance about the necessary levels

of pollution to induce negative effects or when fetuses or infants are most vulnerable.

        Many epidemiological studies have demonstrated links between very severe pollution episodes

and increased mortality of infants and others. One of the most famous focused on a “killer fog” in

London, England and found dramatic increases in cardiopulmonary mortality [Logan and Glasg, 1953]. It

has been less clear whether levels of air pollution that are common in the U.S. today have effects on

infant health.

        Previous epidemiological research on the effects of moderate pollution levels on prenatal health

suggest negative effects but have produced inconsistent results. Chart 1 provides a list of previous studies

examining this relationship, limiting our review to developing countries that are likely to have

comparable levels of pollutions to New Jersey For example, Ritz and Yu (1999) report that CO exposure

1
  Alternatively, since motor vehicle exhaust is a major contributor of CO and PM10, these pollutants may
themselves be markers for other components of exhaust which injure infants. Components such as polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), acetonitrile, benzene, butadiene, and cyanide (see
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/hapindex.html) have been shown to have effects on developing fetuses in animal
studies, such as retarded growth. Studies in humans have shown elevated levels of an enzyme induced by PAHs in
women about to have preterm deliveries [Huel et al, 1993].
                                                          5
in the last trimester of pregnancy increased the incidence of low birth weight (defined as birth weight less

than 2,500 grams), while Ritz et al. (2000) report that CO exposure in the six weeks before birth is

correlated with gestation in some regions of southern California but not in others. Ritz et al. (2000) report

that PM10 exposure 6 weeks before birth increases preterm birth, while Mainsonet et al. (2001) find that

PM10 has no effect on low birth weight.

         Studies of the effects of pollution on infant mortality also yield mixed results. For example,

Woodruff et al. (1997) report that infants with high exposure to PM10 are more likely to die in the post

neonatal period. But Lipfert et al. (2000) find that although they can reproduce some earlier results

showing effects of county-level pollution measures on infant mortality, the results are not robust to

including controls for maternal characteristics.

         An important limitation of these studies is that the observed relationships could reflect

unobserved factors correlated with both air pollution and child outcomes. Many of the studies in Chart 1

have very minimal (if any) controls for potential confounders. Families with higher incomes or greater

preferences for cleaner air may be more likely to sort into neighborhoods with better air quality. These

families are also likely to provide other investments in their children, so that fetuses and infants exposed

to lower levels of pollution also receive more family inputs, such as better quality prenatal care. If these

factors are unaccounted for, this would lead to an upward bias in estimates. Alternatively, pollution

emission sources tend to be located in urban areas, and individuals in urban areas may be more educated

and have better access to health care, factors that may improve health. Omitting these factors would lead

to a downward bias, suggesting the overall direction of bias from confounding is unclear.

         Two studies by Chay and Greenstone [2003a,b] deal with the problem of omitted confounders by

focusing on “natural experiments” provided by the implementation of the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the

recession of the early 1980s. 2 Both the Clean Air Act and the recession induced sharper reductions in



2
          These studies are similar in spirit to a sequence of papers by C. Arden Pope, who investigated the health effects
of the temporary closing of a Utah steel mill [Pope, 1989; Ransom and Pope, 1992; Pope, Schwartz, and Ransom, 1992]
                                                            6
particulates in some counties than in others, and they use this exogenous variation in levels of pollution at

the county-year level to identify its effects. They estimate that a one unit decline in particulates caused by

the implementation of the Clean Air Act (recession) led to between five and eight (four and seven) fewer

infant deaths per 100,000 live births. They also find some evidence that the decline in TSPs led to

reductions in the incidence of low birth weight. However, the levels of particulates studied by Chay and

Greenstone are much higher than those prevalent today; for example, PM10 levels have fallen by nearly

50 percent from 1980 to 2000. Furthermore, only TSPs were measured during the time period they

examine, which eliminates their ability to examine other pollutants that are correlated with particulates

emissions.

        Currie and Neidell (2005) extend this line of research by examining the effect of more recent

levels of pollution on infant health, and by examining other pollutants in addition to particulates. Using

within-zip code variation in pollution levels, they find that a one unit reduction in carbon monoxide over

the 1990s in California saved 18 infant lives per 100,000 live births. However, they were unable to find

any consistent evidence of pollution effects on health at birth. This paper improves on Currie and Neidell

(2005) by using more accurate measures of pollution exposure, controlling for mother fixed effects, and

investigating the interaction of air pollution with smoking and other risk factors. 3

                                                  II. METHODS

As discussed in the previous section, air pollution may affect infants differently before and after birth.

Before birth, pollution may affect infants either because it crosses the protective barrier of the placenta or

and to Friedman et al. [2001] who examine the effect of changes in traffic patterns in Atlanta due to the 1996 Olympic
games. However, these studies did not look specifically at infants.
3
  Smoking data was not available in the California data used by Currie and Neidell (2005). An additional issue is
that this paper (like the others discussed above) examines the effect of outdoor air quality measured using monitor in
fixed locations. Actual personal exposures are affected by ambient air quality, indoor air quality, and the time the
individual spends indoors and outdoors. One might expect, for example, that infants spend little time outdoors so
that outdoor air quality might not be relevant. Research on the relationship between indoor and outdoor air quality
[Spengler, Samet and McCarthy, 2000; Wilson, Mage, and Grant, 2000] suggests that much of what is outdoors
comes indoors. Furthermore, although the cross-sectional correlation between ambient air quality and personal
exposure is low (between .2 and .6 in most studies of PM10 for e.g.), the time-series correlation is higher. This is
because for a given individual indoor sources of air pollution may be relatively constant and uncorrelated with
outdoor air quality. So for a given individual much of the variation in air quality comes from variation in ambient
pollution levels.
                                                          7
because it has a systemic effect on the health of the mother. After birth, infants are directly exposed to

inhaled pollutants. Hence, our analysis proceeds in two parts: First we examine the effects of pollution

on health at birth as measured by birth weight and gestation. Second, we examine the effect of pollution

on infant mortality conditional on health at birth.

Modeling Birth Outcomes

         In order to examine the effect of pollution on health at birth, we restrict the sample to women

who lived within 10 kilometers (about 6.2 miles) of a monitor and estimate baseline models of the

following form:


                        (              )
                   3
(1)      Oijmt = ∑ Pmts β s + wmt
                               s s
                                  γ + xijmt δ + Yt + εijmt
                  s=1


where O is a birth outcome, i indexes the individual, j indexes the mother, m indexes the nearest monitor,

and t indexes time periods. The vector Pmt contains measures of ambient pollution levels in each of the

first, second, and third trimesters of the mother’s pregnancy, denoted by s, using the monitor closest to the

mother’s residence. We construct the trimester measures by taking the average pollution measure over

the trimester 4 , so βs reflects the effect from a change in mean pollution levels for trimester s. 5 The wmt

represents daily precipitation and daily minimum and maximum temperature averaged over each trimester

of the pregnancy. We control for weather in the vector w because it may have independent effects on

birth outcomes and is correlated with ambient pollution levels (Samet et al. 1997).

         The vector xijmt includes mother and child specific characteristics taken from the birth certificate

that are widely believed to be significant determinants of birth outcomes. These characteristics include

dummy variables for the mother’s age (19-24, 25-34, 35+), mother’s education (12, 13-15, or 16+ years),

and birth order (2nd, 3rd, 4th or higher), an indicator for whether it is a multiple birth, whether the mother is

married, whether the child is male, whether the mother is African-American, Hispanic, and other or

4
  We describe these trimester measures in more detail in the following section.
5
  While this measure captures high ambient levels sustained over a period of time, we also estimated models using
the maximum daily value of pollution over the same intervals, but found that it was not statistically significant in
any of our models.
                                                          8
unknown race, and whether the mother smokes, and the number of cigarettes if she smokes. Since these

variables are all categorical, to preserve sample size we control for missing values by including an

additional “missing” category for each variable. Appendix Table 1 shows the complete specification for

one of our models that includes the coefficients on the dummy variables for missing controls. Given that

family income is not included on the birth certificate, we also include a measure of median family income

and the fraction of poor households in 1989 in the mother’s census block group as a proxy. The vector Yt

includes month and year dummy variables to capture seasonal effects (pollution is strongly seasonal and

birth outcomes may also be) as well as trends over time, such as improvements in health care.

        As previously mentioned, a limitation of model (1) is that pollution exposure is likely to be

correlated with omitted characteristics of families that are related to infant health. In order to control for

omitted characteristics of neighborhoods and for differential seasonal effects in these characteristics (for

example, coastal areas experience less economic activity in winter than in summer relative to inland

areas), we estimate models of the form:


                       (             )
                  3
(2)     Oijmt = ∑ Pmts β s + wmt
                              s
                                 γ s + xijmt δ + Yt + ϕ mt ∗ Qt + ε ijmt
                 s=1


where now φmt is a fixed effect for the closest air pollution monitor and φmt*Qt is an interaction between

the monitor effect and the quarter of the year. In this specification, we compare the outcomes of children

who live in close proximity to each other and are born in the same quarter to capture average

neighborhood characteristics within a season to the extent.

        Model (2) may still suffer from omitted variables bias. In particular, unobserved characteristics

of mothers, such as her regard for her own health, may be important for her infant’s health and may also

be correlated with her choice of neighborhoods. Hence, in our richest specification we estimate:


                       (             )
                  3
(3)     Oijmt = ∑ Pmts β s + wmt
                              s
                                 γ s + xijmt δ + Yt + ϕ mt ∗ Qt + ς j + ε ijmt
                 s=1


where ζj is a mother-specific fixed effect. These models control for time-invariant characteristics of both


                                                      9
neighborhoods and mothers, so that the effects of pollution are identified by variation in pollution at a

particular monitor between pregnancies. Much of this variation is driven by changes in pollution levels

over time, due to air quality regulations, and within the year, due to seasonal patterns in pollution and

unpredictable variations in human activity.

        A necessary condition to identify the impact of pollution is that variation in infants’ pollution

exposure is uncorrelated with other characteristics of the infant or the infant’s families that may affect

infant health. It would be a problem, for example, if first children were more likely to be low birth weight

and mothers systematically moved to cleaner environments between the first and second births because

their incomes increased. In order to check that the variation in pollution is uncorrelated with mobility, we

performed the following exercise. We first estimated the actual “within family” variation in each

pollutant. We then estimated what the within family variation would have been if each mother had stayed

in the location in which she was first observed. The within family variances were virtually identical: the

actual and simulated within standard deviations for ozone are .939 and .947, respectively, for CO are .301

and .271, respectively, and for PM10 are .410 and .407, respectively, for ozone. This suggests that

mothers do not appear to be systematically moving to cleaner or dirtier areas between births.

Model for Infant Mortality

        In order to examine infant mortality conditional on health at birth, we modify the birth outcomes

model to capture the fact that birth outcomes are a one-time occurrence but mortality is a continuously

updated outcome. For example, the risk of death is highest in the first week or two of life and drops

sharply thereafter. Therefore, we estimate a weekly hazard model with time-varying covariates to

account for a varying probability of survival and levels of pollution over the infants’ first year of life. To

do this, we treat an infant who lived for n weeks as if they contributed n person-week observations to the

sample. The dependent variable is coded as 1 in the period the infant dies, and 0 in all other periods. Each

time-invariant covariate (such as birth parity) is repeated for every period, while the time-varying

covariates (such as pollution and weather) are updated each period.

                                                      10
           Based on this data structure, we estimate a model in which the probability of death Dijmt is

specified as:


                                   (                )
                             4
(4)         Dijmt = α(t) + ∑ θ τ Pmt β τ + wmt
                                            s
                                               γ s + xijmt δ + Oijmt π + Yt + ϕ mt ∗ Qt + ς j + ε ijmt
                            τ =1


where α(t) is a measure of duration dependence, specified as a linear spline function in the weeks since

the infant’s birth. We choose break points after 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, 20, and 32 weeks to capture the shape of the

actual empirical hazard. Pmt measures exposure to the three pollutants in a given week. Since the infant

death hazard varies greatly with time since birth, it is likely that an effect of pollution on infant death, if it

exists, would also vary with the baseline hazard. We allow for such differential effects by interacting the

weekly pollution measure Pmt with 4 dummy variables θτ indicating time since birth. θ1 equals one if time

since birth is between 0 and 2 weeks, θτ between 2 and 4 weeks, θ3 between 4 and 6 weeks, and θ4 for

over 6 weeks. Thus the effect of pollution as measured by βτ can differ arbitrarily over these four

intervals.

           Because infant death might be affected by pollution before birth as well as by pollution after

birth, we add birth weight as a measure of infant health outcomes at birth (Oijmt) to the list of independent

variables. We control for birth weight flexibly by including a series of dummy variables (<1500 grams,

1500-2500 grams, 2500-3500 grams, and over 3500 grams) 6 . To the extent that birth weight is a

sufficient statistic for health at birth, βτ from equation (4) will capture the independent effect of pollution

after birth conditional on health at birth.

           This model can be thought of as a flexible, discrete-time, hazard model that allows for time-

varying covariates, non-parametric duration dependence, monitor-specific quarter effects and mother

fixed effects. Allison [1982] shows that estimates from models of this type converge to those obtained

from continuous time models.

           This procedure yields a very large number of observations since most infants survive all 52 weeks


6
    Our results are, however, insensitive to including birth weight as a continuous variable.
                                                             11
of their first year. In order to reduce the number of observations, we limit this part of the analysis to

mothers who lost at least one child. In terms of observable characteristics, families with a death are more

likely to have mothers who are African American (30% vs. 19% overall), unmarried (62% vs. 72%

overall) and who are smokers (13% vs. 9.5% overall). However, mean ozone, CO, and PM10 measures

in the trimester before birth are virtually identical in families with deaths and those without. 7

           One way to think about these estimates is in terms of underlying heterogeneity in the

vulnerability of infants. Although the average family with a death is different than the average family

without one, we are concerned about the impacts of pollution on the infant at the life/death margin. If the

characteristics of the marginal infant who dies because of an increase in pollution is similar to the

characteristics of the marginal infant who survives the same increase in pollution, then our results will tell

us about the effects of variations in pollution for the range of pollution we observe.

                                                        III. DATA

Detailed data on atmospheric pollution come from the New Jersey Department of environmental

protection Bureau of Air Monitoring, accessed from the technology transfer network air quality system

database maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 8 The location of each of 57

monitors and what each one measures is shown in Figure 1. Unfortunately, it is more the exception than

the rule for a monitor location to measure all three of the pollutants that we study. PM10 is the most

frequently monitored pollutant, followed by O3 and CO. Because of this limitation of the data, we will

examine the impact of each pollutant in separate models (and samples), though we will also show one

specification that includes both CO and O3, the two pollutants that have the largest effects individually.

Figure 1 demonstrates that monitors are heavily clustered in the most populated areas of the state, which

lie along the transportation corridor between New York and Philadelphia.

           For each monitor, we construct measures of pollution by taking the mean of the daily values

either over the three trimesters before birth (for the birth outcomes models) or for each week after birth

7
    To the extent these conditions are not met, we will instead identify a local average treatment effect.
8
    The data is available at: <http://www.epa.gov/ttn/airs/airsaqs/detaildata/downloadaqsdata.htm>
                                                             12
(for the infant mortality model). For the pollutants of interest, the daily measures we use are the 8-hour

maximums of CO and O3 and the 24-hour average of PM10, which correspond with national ambient air

quality standards. 9 County level weather data come from the Surface Summary of the Day (TD3200)

from the National Climatic Data Center. 10

        Data on infant births and deaths come from the New Jersey Department of Health birth and infant

death files for 1989 to 2003. Vital Statistics records are a very rich source of data that cover all births and

deaths in New Jersey. Birth records have both detailed information about health at birth and background

information about the mother, such as race, education, and marital status. We traveled to Trenton, New

Jersey to use a confidential version of the data with the mother’s address, name, and birth date. The use

of this data allows us to more precisely match mothers to pollution monitors and to identify siblings born

to the same mother. Births were linked to the air pollution measures taken from the closest monitor by

using the mother’s exact address and the latitude and longitude of the monitors. It was also possible to

link birth and death records to identify infants who died in the first year of life.

        Descriptive statistics for infant health outcomes, pollution measures, and control variables are

shown in Table 1. The first four columns show means for all births in New Jersey, the sample of births

with residential address that were successfully geocoded, the sample of births within 10 kilometers of an

ozone monitor, and the sample of births to smoking mothers within 10 kilometers of an ozone monitor.

Because different monitors measure different pollutants, the subsamples used in the regression models are

slightly different. 11 Of the 1.75 million births in New Jersey over our sample period, 36% were

successfully geocoded and within 10 kilometers of an ozone monitor, with roughly 10% of these births to

9
  The 8-hour maximum corresponds to taking the maximum 8-period moving average within a 24 hour period.
Although we choose these measures because they are based on air quality standards, the measures are highly
correlated with other common measures of short-term spikes in pollutants. For example, the correlation between the
maximum 8 hour reading for CO with the maximum 1 hour average for CO and daily mean for CO is 0.91 and 0.94,
respectively. Comparable correlations for ozone are 0.98 and 0.93. These correlations are even higher within
monitor, and our models incorporate monitor fixed effects. Since PM10 is not measured every day, the weekly
mean for PM10 may be noisier than those for other pollutants.
10
   This data is available at http://www4.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi-win/wwcgi.dll?wwAW~MP#MR. If weather data was not
available for a county and date, we interpolated using data from surrounding counties. Our tests of this procedure
(using counties with weather data) indicated that it was highly accurate.
11
   Sample sizes also vary slightly for different outcomes because of missing values for the outcomes.
                                                          13
mothers who smoked. Column 5 restricts the sample further to children with a sibling within the sample,

which is the final sample we use in our analysis. Almost 20% of the total births are in the sibling sample

and within 10 kilometers of a monitor. Finally, column 6 further restricts the final sample to the subset of

mothers who smoked at both births, with the sample becoming much smaller but still sizable at 21,099

births.

          A comparison of columns 1 and 2 shows no differences in maternal characteristics between

successfully and unsuccessfully geocoded mothers. A comparison of columns 2, 3, and 4 of Panel A

shows that infant health is worse in the population closer to monitors, and much worse in the sample of

smokers. For example, the death rate is 6.9 per 1,000 births overall, 7.7 in the sample closer to monitors,

and 9.9 among the smokers. Comparing column 3 to column 5 or column 4 to column 6 suggests,

however, that infants with siblings in the sample do not differ systematically from those without, which

improves our ability to generalize results from the sibling regression models.

          Panels B and C give means of the pollution measures for the subsets of the geocoded sample. A

comparison of columns 3 and 4 suggests no systematic difference in air quality between the areas where

smokers and nonsmokers live. Similarly, mothers with more than one birth over the sample period live

are exposed to comparable levels of air quality as mothers with a single birth. 12

          It is also important to note that the means in Table 1 mask considerable variation in pollution

levels both across monitors and over time. In the most polluted areas, mean CO levels started at 4 ppm at

the beginning of the sample period, but declined to roughly 1 ppm by 2005. Figures 2 through 4 plot

pollution levels at one particular pollution monitor (the Camden Lab monitor in Camden) over time and

residual pollution levels after controlling for the time and monitor effects and the weather variables


12
  Although these mean pollution levels are far below air quality standards, the standards are based on daily
maximum concentrations. For determining compliance with air quality standards for CO, the EPA calculates 8 hour
moving average values, and then asks whether the daily maximum of this moving average ever exceeds 9 ppm
during the year. For ozone, the 3-year moving average of the fourth-highest daily maximum 8-hour average ozone
concentrations must be less than .08 ppm. For PM10, the 24 hour average must not exceed 150 μg/m3 more than
once per year on average over three years (see http://www.epa.gov/air/criteria.html). For the period of our sample,
several CO monitors experienced AQS violations in the period (e.g. 4 out of 13 monitors in 1989) but none after
1995; there were 2 ozone monitors in violation (1995 and 1998); and no PM10 monitors in violation.
                                                         14
included in our regression models. 13 The “a” series plot 3 month moving averages (corresponding to the

measures of pollution we use in birth outcome models), while the “b” series plot 7 day moving averages

(corresponding to the measures of pollution we use in the infant mortality models). These plots show that

although adjusting for these factors accounts for seasonal and annual trends, there is still considerable

variation left to identify the effects of pollution. 14 Panel D of Table 1 shows means of the control variables

available in the Vital Statistics data, the decennial census, and the weather data.

         Mothers within 10 kilometers of a monitor are almost a year younger on average than the sample

mean. It is striking that mothers within 10 kilometers of a monitor are also much more likely to be

African American or Hispanic and have a half year less education on average compared to the full

sample. They are also less likely to be married, but only slightly more likely to smoke than mothers who

live further away from monitors. Furthermore, census tracts near monitors are lower income and have a

higher fraction of poor inhabitants than further census tracts. These patterns are consistent with residential

sorting based on air quality: monitors are generally located in more polluted areas, and the characteristics

of those closer to the monitors are generally worse than those farther from the monitors.

         The pattern of relative disadvantage is even more pronounced for the population of mothers who

smoke. These mothers are much more likely to be African-American (though less likely to be Hispanic),

have a year less education, are much less likely to be married, and live in the poorest census tracts

compared to non-smoking mothers who live within 10 kilometers of a monitor. In contrast, mothers with

more than one birth in the sample look quite similar to mothers observed to have had only one birth.

          These systematic differences demonstrate the importance of adequately controlling for

characteristics of neighborhoods and families, as we do in our specifications.


13
   The patterns, not shown here, are very similar for the other monitors. The time period for these graphs (1994 to
1998) is restricted to improve exposition.
14
   While these figures are on the monitor level, we also checked how much of the variation in pollution is absorbed
by our regression controls on the mother level. For example for CO the standard deviation is 0.7 in the full sample.
After taking out the controls in equation (1), this is reduced to 0.5. Taking out monitor * quarter fixed effects and
mother fixed effects reduces the standard deviation to 0.21 and 0.17, respectively. As a group the controls account
for a significant part of the variation in pollution, mostly because of the inclusion of seasonal controls and monitor
dummies, but there is a substantial amount of variation remaining to identify health effects.
                                                             15
                                                 IV. RESULTS

Estimates of the effects of pollution on all mothers within 10 kilometers of a monitor are shown in Table

2. Each group of 3 columns shows estimates of equations (1), (2), and (3) for a different pollutant. The

mother fixed effects model, equation (3), is only identified from mothers with at least 2 children in the

sample. To assure that the differences between the models are not driven by changes in the sample

composition, the sample for estimating all three equations is restricted to children with at least one sibling

in the sample (corresponding to column (5) of Table 1). In all models we cluster standard errors at the

census tract level to allow for common shocks to mother’s exposed to comparable levels of pollution.

        Table 1 suggests that the models that do not adequately control for characteristics of the mother’s

location and for her own characteristics can be misleading. For example, although urban mothers are

typically exposed to higher levels of pollution, they are also wealthier and more educated in our data and

may have better access to health care. Failure to control for these factors could yield estimated

coefficients that are biased down and possibly even wrong-signed. Few of the pollution measures in

columns (1), (4), and (7) are statistically significant, and when they are, they are as likely to suggest

positive effects on birth weight and gestation as negative ones.

         However, once we include monitor*quarter fixed effects (as in columns (2), (5), and (8)) the

estimates suggest that CO in the last trimester of the pregnancy reduces birth weight, increases the

probability of low birth weight, and shortens gestation. Now the only wrong-signed coefficient suggests

that increases in PM10 in the first trimester of pregnancy increase gestation.

        Finally, when we control for mother fixed effects in columns (3), (6), and (9), the estimates for

CO become even larger. Ozone in the second trimester now has a statistically significant negative effect

at the ten percent level on birth weight and gestation. For PM10 the first trimester in the low birth weight

regression is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. This pattern of results across specifications

suggests the importance of controlling for both maternal and neighborhood fixed effects to account for

confounding factors. It also suggests that in New Jersey, conditional on other observable characteristics

                                                       16
of mothers, mothers in more polluted areas have unobserved characteristics that make them more likely to

have healthy infants.

           To summarize: third trimester CO has statistically significant, negative effects on infant health in

all of our specifications, with the estimated effect gradually increasing as we control more thoroughly for

potential confounders. In contrast, the estimated effects of PM10 and ozone are inconsistent across

specifications, with none statistically significant at the 95% level in the models that control for mother

fixed effects .The estimates in Table 2 imply that a one unit increase in the mean level of CO during the

last trimester (where the mean is 1.64 and standard deviation is .79) would reduce average birth weight by

16.65 grams (from a base of 3,236 grams) — a reduction of about a half a percent. The proportional

effects are greater for low birth weight where a one unit change in mean CO would lead to an increase in

low birth weight of .0083 (from a base of .106) – an eight percent increase in the incidence of low birth

weight. The greater effect for low birth weight than for mean birth weight suggests that infants at risk of

low birth weight are most likely to be affected by pollution, an observation that we explore further below

by examining infants with various risk factors. Additionally, a one unit change in mean CO is estimated

to reduce gestation by .074 weeks (from a base of 38.55 weeks) – a reduction in mean gestation of .2

percent.

           One way to put these estimates into perspective is to compare them to the effects of smoking.

The coefficients on smoking and number of cigarettes from the models for CO are shown in Table 3 (the

estimated effects of smoking in models for other pollutants are very similar but are not shown). In

models that do not include maternal fixed effects, smoking is estimated to have extremely negative effects

on infant health, consistent with much of the prior literature. For example, being a smoker is estimated to

reduce birth weight by 162 grams in models that include monitor fixed effects, and each additional

cigarette smoked reduces birth weight by 5 grams, for a total reduction of approximately 212 grams at the

mean of 10 cigarettes per day. However, as Almond, Chay and Lee (2003) and Tominey (2007) point

out, these estimates are likely to be contaminated by omitted characteristics of the mother that are

                                                        17
associated with her smoking behavior.

        Including mother fixed effects, which controls for unobserved characteristics of the mother,

reduces the estimated effects of smoking considerably, though they remain large: being a smoker is

estimated to reduce birth weight by 38.9 grams, and each cigarette reduces it a further 2.2 grams for a

total reduction of about 61 grams in infants of women who smoke 10 cigarettes per day. Hence it would

take a roughly 3.7 unit change in mean CO levels to have an equivalent impact on birth weight as that

from smoking 10 cigarettes per day. Similarly, the effect of smoking 10 cigarettes per day is a bit more

than twice as large as the impact of a one unit change in mean CO in terms of the effect on the incidence

of low birth weight.

        As discussed above, infants of smoking mothers could be either more or less affected than other

infants. We investigate this issue in Table 4, which shows estimates for mothers who smoked during both

pregnancies. The point estimates in Table 4 are generally much larger than those in Table 2, suggesting

the same level of pollution exposure is more harmful to the infants of smokers. Although the effects of

CO are no longer statistically significant in the model for birth weight, the point estimate of -39.2 in the

model with mother fixed effects is twice as large as the Table 2 coefficient. The coefficient on CO in the

models of low birth weight is .044 compared to .008 in Table 2. For gestation, the Table 4 coefficient on

CO is -.43 compared to -.074 in Table 2. These estimates indicate that the harmful effects from CO are

two to six times greater for smoking mothers than for non-smoking mothers, depending on the outcome.

Similarly, the impact of ozone is four to six times larger for smoking mothers. Furthermore, we now also

find that PM10 in the second and third trimesters has a statistically significant impact on birth weight,

while PM10 in the first and second trimesters are both estimated to increase the incidence of low birth

weight. PM10 in the second trimester is also estimated to reduce gestation significantly.

        Table 5 places the results for smoking mothers in context by showing estimates of the differential

effects of CO on other subsets of mothers who may be vulnerable to poor birth outcomes. Since some

demographic groups are fairly small, differential effects were estimated using the full sample of births and

                                                      18
interacting the vector of pollution measures with the relevant characteristic of the mother. For example,

column 1 of Table 5 is based on the same regression as column 3 in Table 2 except that the three pollution

measures are also interacted with an indicator for whether the mother was 19 years or younger at the time

of birth. Only the estimates on these interactions are shown, as the “main effects” (the estimates that

apply to the rest of the sample) are generally comparable to those shown in the main specification

(column 3, Table 2). The point estimates are substantially larger for very young and very old mothers and

for births that had other risk factors. 15 However, there do not seem to be stronger negative effects of

pollution on African-American, less educated, or low income mothers. Along with the results for

smokers, these estimates suggest that infants at higher risk of poor outcomes for other biological reasons

face higher risks from pollution.

         Hence, the effects of pollution appear to be amplified by biological risks but not by non-

biological risks. This result also bolsters the case that our identification strategy is working -- including

the mother fixed effects has taken out the main effect of confounding socioeconomic factors but has not

taken out a greater sensitivity to pollution that is linked to biological factors.

         Table 6 shows estimates of the effects of pollution on infant mortality from models based on

equation (4). In these models, we control for birth weight with a series of indicator variables to isolate the

effect of pollution after the birth on health. Consistent with the results discussed above, Table 6 suggests

that CO matters, rather than exposure to PM10 or ozone. Table 6 suggests that high CO exposures in the

first two weeks of life increase the risk of death. Since we control for the fact that more deaths occur in

the first two weeks with our baseline hazard, this estimates reflects the extent to which death within that

time is hastened by pollution exposure. We do not, however, find any statistically significant impacts of

ozone and PM10 on mortality.

         To gauge the magnitude of this estimate, we need to account for the fact that we estimated the


15
  Risk factors are anemia, hypertension (chronic or pregnancy associated), diabetes, heart or lung disease, herpes,
hydramnios, previous preterm infant, previous large infant, renal disease, incompetent cervix, rh-sensitivity, uterine
bleeding, eclampsia, hemoglobinopathy, or "other complications".
                                                         19
impact on the sample of mothers with at least one death, so the base risk of death in this subsample is

about 40% (2334 deaths divided by 5848 births). Therefore, we multiply our estimate by the ratio of the

overall sample IMR of 6.88 per 1000 births to the subsample IMR of 399 per 1000 births. This

calculation suggests 17.6 averted deaths per 100,000 births from a 1 ppm decrease in CO. 16 This estimate

is remarkably similar to the 16.5 averted deaths per 100,000 births reported in Currie and Neidell (2005).

         As discussed above, we believe that a major contribution of our study is that we can improve the

accuracy of our pollution measures because we have the mother’s exact addresses. In Table 7 we offer

two investigations of this claim. If being closer to a monitor improves measurement, then being farther

from a monitor should yield weaker results. Table 7 shows that this is indeed the case: we do not find

significant effects on health at birth (or, not shown, on infant mortality) for mothers 10 to 20 kilometers

from a monitor. 17 Similarly, studies often do not have an exact address of the mother but only the zip

code of residence, and therefore assign pollution to the zip code centroid using an inverse distance

weighted average of monitors near the zip code. In the last three columns of Table 7, we assign pollution

to the mother assuming we only know her zip code. In this less precisely merged sample we find

generally smaller estimates that are statistically insignificant. Both of these results are consistent with

improved measurement from knowing the mother’s exact address.

         In Table 8, we estimate models that include both CO and ozone. Since the sources of these

pollutants are similar and often therefore vary together, it is important to isolate which pollutant drives

our results. Although the sample size is somewhat reduced, the estimates for CO are even stronger than

those shown in Table 2, as we once again find significant effects of CO on all three infant outcomes. We

also find a negative effect of ozone on gestation, though now it is exposure in the last trimester rather than




16
   We do not show separate estimates of the effect of pollution on deaths among infants of smokers because
restricting the sample to smokers who had at least one death in the family results in very small sample sizes.
17
   We have also estimated models using mothers who are closer to pollution monitors (within 5 kilometers).
Unfortunately, the resulting reduction in sample size increases our standard errors substantially, making it more
difficult to draw a clear inference from this exercise.

                                                         20
the second trimester which seems to matter. 18

                                       V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

In order to begin to evaluate the costs and benefits of tighter pollution regulation, it is necessary to

understand how changes from current, historically low levels of air pollution are likely to affect health.

This paper examines the effects of air pollution on infant health using recent data from New Jersey. Our

models control for many potential confounders, with our richest model identified using variation in

pollution between births among mothers located near particular monitors.

         Our strongest and most consistent set of results show that CO has negative effects on infant health

both before and after birth. Since most CO emissions come from transportation sources, these findings

are germane to the current contentious debate over proposals to further tighten automobile emissions

standards. For example, the state of California’s most recent proposal to increase emissions standards has

been blocked by the Environmental Protection Agency. The Agency first argued that it had no authority

to regulate the greenhouse gases in auto exhaust. When that argument was dismissed by the Supreme

Court in April 2007, the agency then denied California’s request for the waiver necessary to implement its

law, claiming that uniform federal standards were superior to the piece-meal approach offered by the

state. The state is currently suing the federal government over the issue. Should the state prevail, at least

16 other states are set to implement California’s regulations (Maynard, 2007; Barringer, 2008).

         It is noteworthy that we find negative effects of exposure to CO even at the low levels of ambient

CO currently observed. Some areas in our study saw a reduction in mean CO levels from 4 ppm to 1 ppm

over our sample period. Our estimates of the effects of CO on birth weight and gestation suggest that this

reduction had an effect roughly equivalent to getting a women smoking 10 cigarettes a day to quit. We

also find that infants of smokers are at much greater risk of negative effects from CO exposure. We also

find some evidence of significant effects of PM10 and ozone on health at birth, particularly among


18
  We also estimated our models including an interaction with CO and an indicator for years after 1995 (midway
through our sample) to assess if the effects change over time, but the interaction term was insignificant, suggesting
the effects of CO are constant over the period.
                                                           21
smokers, though these estimates are less robust than our CO estimates. We further find that a one unit

decrease in mean CO levels in the first two weeks of life saves roughly 18 lives per 100,000 births, which

represents a reduction in the probability of infant death of about 2.5 percent.

         To value the impact of recent declines in CO throughout the U.S., we perform the following

illustrative calculations. 19 To value the improvements in birth weight, we compute the percentage change

in birth weight from a unit change in pollution by dividing the estimated impact of third-trimester CO on

birth weight (-16.65) by the mean birth weight in our sibling sample (3236). We multiply this by the

estimated elasticity between birth weight and earnings of 0.1 from Black et al. (2007) to obtain the

percentage change in earnings. We then multiply this by the average earnings of all full time workers per

state in 2003 20 and the total number of births per state in 2003 to get the change in earnings per birth

cohort per state from a one ppm change in CO. We then multiply this by the change in annual average 8-

hour CO concentrations from 1989 to 2003 per state to obtain the increase in annual earnings for the 2003

birth cohort. Finally, we compute the present discounted value of the annual earnings increase assuming

a 6 percent discount rate and 30 years of labor force participation, which gives us an estimated increase in

nationwide earnings of $720 million for the 2003 birth cohort due to the fact that CO had fallen from

1989 levels. This is clearly a lower bound, since the assumed discount rate of 6 percent is relatively high

and we ignore the fact that mean earnings for this cohort will certainly grow in the future. Furthermore

the decline in actual exposure was likely larger than is indicated by the mean decline over the monitors,

since at least in New Jersey, people tend to live in the more heavily polluted areas that experienced the

largest declines.

         In order to value the improvements in infant mortality, we multiply our estimate of 17.6 lives

saved per 100,000 births for a 1 ppm change in CO by the number of births per state and the decreases in


19
   For these calculations we assume a homogeneous relationship between pollution and birth weight or infant
mortality. While it is not possible to properly assess this, we do note that the marginal impact of CO on infant
mortality we estimate here is virtually identical to the marginal impact of 17 deaths per 100,000 births found in
Currie and Neidell (2005).
20
   Available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics at http://www.bls.gov/cew/.
                                                            22
CO levels per state to obtain the nationwide number of deaths avoided. This gives us a total of 449 deaths

averted in 2003 by the reduction in CO from 1989 levels. We compute the benefits from these avoided

deaths using a value of statistical life of $4.8 million as used by the EPA, which yields an estimated $2.2

billion in annual savings. 21

           While we recognize the strong assumptions behind these calculations, the magnitude of these

benefits suggests potentially substantial benefits from the improvements in CO over time. Moreover,

there are several reasons why our estimates may understate the health impact from pollution exposure.

Unlike small-scale epidemiological studies that use personal air quality monitors strapped to persons, we

use a crude proxy for individual exposures. Our noisier measures of exposure may lead us to falsely

accept a null hypothesis. And since the literature does not give much guidance about the type of

exposures that are most likely to be harmful (in terms of length of exposure, when it occurred during

pregnancy, or intensity of exposure) it is possible that more precise measures taken at key points in the

pregnancy would uncover larger effects. Furthermore, our study is based on the population of live births.

It is possible that pollution causes fetal losses or it impairs fertility. If high levels of pollution cause

vulnerable fetuses to be lost, or cause women who might have had low birth weight babies not to become

pregnant, then mean levels of birth weight and gestation will be increased. For all these reasons, we

regard these estimates as lower bounds on the benefits of pollution control to infants. As such, they may

still provide a useful benchmark for assessing the benefits of further reductions in air pollution in terms of

infant health.




21
     Full details of these calculations are available from the authors’ upon request.
                                                              23
                                                 REFERENCES

Allison, Paul, “Discrete-Time Methods for the Analysis of Event Histories,” Sociological Methodology,
        XII (1982) 61-98.

Almond, Douglas, Kenneth Chay and David Lee, “The Cost of Low Birth Weight,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics 121 (2005) 1031-

Basu, R.; Woodruff, T. J.; Parker, J. D.; Saulnier, L. and Schoendorf, K. C. "Comparing Exposure Metrics
       in the Relationship between Pm2.5 and Birth Weight in California." Journal of Exposure Analysis
       and Environmental Epidemiology, 2004, 14(5), pp. 391-96

Barringer, Felicity. “California Sues EPA Over Denial of Waiver,” The New York Times, January 3,
       2008.

Bell, M.; Ebisu, K. and Belanger, K. "Is Risk of Low Birth Weight Affected by Maternal Exposure to Air
        Pollution?" Epidemiology, 2007, 18(5), pp. S128-S28.

Black, Sandra, Paul Devereux and Kjell Salvanes. “From the Cradle to the Labor Market? The Effect of
        Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2007) 409-439.

Brauer, M.; Lencar, C.; Tamburic, L.; Koehoorn, M.; Demers, P. and Karr, C. "A Cohort Study of
        Traffic-Related Air Pollution Impacts on Birth Outcomes." Environmental Health Perspectives,
        2008, 116(5), pp. 680-86.

Chen, L.; Yang, W.; Jennison, B. L.; Goodrich, A. and Omaye, S. T. "Air Pollution and Birth Weight in
       Northern Nevada, 1991-1999." Inhalation Toxicology, 2002, 14(2), pp. 141-57.

Cnattingius, Sven. “Maternal Age Modifies the Effect of Maternal Smoking on Intrauterine Growth
        Retardation but Not on Late Fetal Death and Placental Aburption,” American Journal of
        Epidemiology, 145 #4, 1997, 319-.

Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone, “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence from
       Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, CXVIII (2003).

_______ and _______, “Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air Act of 1970,” NBER Working
       Paper 10053 (2003).

Currie, Janet. “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise? 1Socioeconomic Status, Poor Health in Childhood, and
         Human Capital Development,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2008.

Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell, “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn from
         California’s Recent Experience?” NBER Working Paper 10251 (2004)

Dugandzic, Rose; Dodds, Linda; Stieb, David and Smith-Doiron, Marc. "The Association between Low
      Level Exposures to Ambient Air Pollution and Term Low Birth Weight: A Retrospective Cohort
      Study." Environ Health, 2006, 5, pp. 3.


                                                  24
Environmental Protection Agency, “Automobiles and Carbon Monoxide,” EPA Office of Mobile Sources
       Fact Sheet OMS-3, January 1993, http://www.epa.gov/oms/consumer/03-co.pdf.

_______, “Criteria Pollutants” February 20th, 2003b, http://www.epa.gov/oar/oaqps/greenbk/o3co.html.

_______. “Air Quality Critera for Carbon Monoxide,” EPA Office of Research and Development, June
       2000, EPA600/P-99/001F.

Friedman, Michael, Kenneth Powell, Lori Hutwagner, LeRoy Graham, W. Gerald Teague, “Impact of
       Changes in Transportation and Commuting Behaviors During the 1996 Summer Olympic Games
       in Atlanta on Air Quality and Childhood Asthma,” Journal of the American Medical Association,
       CCLXXXV (2001) 897-905.

Huynh, M.; Woodruff, T. J.; Parker, J. D. and Schoendorf, K. C. "Relationships between Air Pollution
       and Preterm Birth in California." Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 2006, 20(6), pp. 454-
       61.

Lee, S. J.; Hajat, S.; Steer, P. J. and Filippi, V. "A Time-Series Analysis of Any Short-Term Effects of
         Meteorological and Air Pollution Factors on Preterm Births in London, Uk." Environmental
         Research, 2008, 106(2), pp. 185-94.

Lipfert, F. W.; Zhang, J. and Wyzga, R. E. "Infant Mortality and Air Pollution: A Comprehensive
         Analysis of Us Data for 1990." Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 2000,
         50(8), pp. 1350-66.

Liu, Shiliang, Daniel Krewski, Yuanli Shi, Yue Chen, and Richard Burnett, “Association between
        Gaseous Ambient Air Pollutants and Adverse Pregnancy Outcomes in Vancouver Canada,”
        Environmental Health Perspectives, CXI (2003) 1773-1778.

Liu, S. L.; Krewski, D.; Shi, Y.; Chen, Y. and Burnett, R. T. "Association between Maternal Exposure to
         Ambient Air Pollutants During Pregnancy and Fetal Growth Restriction." Journal of Exposure
         Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 2007, 17(5), pp. 426-32.

Logan, W.P.D. and M.D. Glasg, “Mortality in London Fog Incident, 1952,” Lancet I (1953) 336-338.

Maisonet, Mildred, Timothy Bush, Adolfo Correa, and Jouni Jaakkola, “Relation Between Ambient Air
       Pollution and Low Birth Weight in the Northeastern United States,” Environmental Health
       Perspectives, CIX (2001) 351-356.

Maynard, Micheline. “EPA Denies California’s Emissions Waiver,” The New York Times, Dec. 19 2007.

Parker, J. D.; Mendola, P. and Woodruff, T. J. "Preterm Birth after the Utah Valley Steel Mill Closure a
        Natural Experiment." Epidemiology, 2008, 19(6), pp. 820-23.

Parker, J. D. and Woodruff, T. J. "Influences of Study Design and Location on the Relationship between
        Particulate Matter Air Pollution and Birthweight." Paediatric and Perinatal Epidemiology, 2008,
        22(3), pp. 214-27.

Parker, J. D.; Woodruff, T. J.; Basu, R. and Schoendorf, K. C. "Air Pollution and Birth Weight among
        Term Infants in California." Pediatrics, 2005, 115(1), pp. 121-28.
                                                    25
Pope, C. Arden, “Respiratory Disease Associated with Community Air Pollution and a Steel Mill, Utah
       Valley,” American Journal of Public Health, LXXIX (1989) 623-628.

Pope, C. Arden, Joel Schwartz, and Michael Ransom, “Daily Mortality and PM10 Pollution in Utah
       Valley,” Archives of Environmental Health, XLVII (1992) 211-216.

Ransom, Michael, C. Arden Pope, “Elementary School Absences and PM10 Pollution in Utah Valley,”
      Environmental Research, LVIII (1992) 204-219.

Ritz, B.; Wilhelm, M.; Hoggatt, K. J. and Ghosh, J. K. C. "Ambient Air Pollution and Preterm Birth in the
         Environment and Pregnancy Outcomes Study at the University of California, Los Angeles."
         American Journal of Epidemiology, 2007, 166, pp. 1045-52.

Ritz, B.; Wilhelm, M. and Zhao, Y. X. "Air Pollution and Infant Death in Southern California, 1989-
         2000." Pediatrics, 2006, 118(2), pp. 493-502.

Ritz, Beate, and Fei Yu, “The Effects of Ambient Carbon Monoxide on Low Birth Weight Among
        Children Born in Southern California Between 1989 and 1993,” Environmental Health
        Perspectives, CVII (1999) 17-25.

Ritz, Beate, Fei Yu, Guadalupe Chapa and Scott Fruin, “Effect of Air Pollution on Preterm Birth Among
        Children Born in Southern California Between 1989 and 1993,” Epidemiology, XI (2000) 502-
        511.

Rogers, J. F. and Dunlop, A. L. "Air Pollution and Very Low Birth Weight Infants: A Target
        Population?" Pediatrics, 2006, 118(1), pp. 156-64.

Rogers, J. F.; Thompson, S. J.; Addy, C. L.; McKeown, R. E.; Cowen, D. J. and Decoufle, P.
        "Association of Very Low Birth Weight with Exposures to Environmental Sulfur Dioxide and
        Total Suspended Particulates." American Journal of Epidemiology, 2000, 151(6), pp. 602-13.

Sagiv, S. K.; Mendola, P.; Loomis, D.; Herring, A. H.; Neas, L. M.; Savitz, D. A. and Poole, C. "A Time-
        Series Analysis of Air Pollution and Preterm Birth in Pennsylvania, 1997-2001." Environmental
        Health Perspectives, 2005, 113(5), pp. 602-06.

Salam, M. T.; Millstein, J.; Li, Y. F.; Lurmann, F. W.; Margolis, H. G. and Gilliland, F. D. "Birth
       Outcomes and Prenatal Exposure to Ozone, Carbon Monoxide, and Particulate Matter: Results
       from the Children's Health Study." Environmental Health Perspectives, 2005, 113(11), pp. 1638-
       44.

Samet, Jonathan, Scott Zeger, Julia Kelsall, Jing Xu and Laurence Kalstein, “Does Weather Confound or
        Modify the Association of Particulate Air Pollution with Mortality?” Environmental Research
        Section A, LXXVII (1997) 9-19.

Seaton, Anthony et al, “Particulate Air Pollution and Acute Health Effects,” Lancet, CCCLIV (1995) 176-
        178.

Tominey, Emma. “Maternal Smoking During Pregnancy and Child Birth Weight,” London School of
      Economics Center for Economic Performance Working Paper DP0828, October 2007.
                                                   26
Xu, X. & Wang, L. Synergistic effects of air pollution and personal smoking on adult pulmonary
       function. Archives of Environmental Health 1998, 53, 4 –53.

Wilhelm, M. and Ritz, B. "Local Variations in Co and Particulate Air Pollution and Adverse Birth
       Outcomes in Los Angeles County, California, USA." Environmental Health Perspectives, 2005,
       113(9), pp. 1212-21.

Woodruff, T. J.; Darrow, L. A. and Parker, J. D. "Air Pollution and Postneonatal Infant Mortality in the
      United States, 1999-2002." Environmental Health Perspectives, 2008, 116(1), pp. 110-15.

Woodruff, T.J., J. Grillo, K.C. Schoendorf, “The Relationship Between Selected Causes of Postneonatal
      Infant Mortality and Particulate Air Pollution in the United States,” Environmental Health
      Perspectives, CV (1997) 608-612.

World Health Organisation (WHO). Carbon monoxide. WHO Air quality guidelines 2nd edition.
              WHO Regional office for Europe. Copenhagen (2000).




                                                    27
Chart 1: Selected Epidemiological Studies of Effects of Pollution on Infant Health, Developed Countries

Study                      Location              Years       Outcomes            Pollutants               Effects
Lipfert et al. (2000)      All of U.S.           1990        infant mortality    PM10, CP, SO2, SO4,      County level annual avg. pollution measures did not have robust relationships to
                                                                                 PM2.5                    pollutants when maternal variables were controlled.
Liu et al. (2003)          Vancouver, Canada     1985-1998   low BW, preterm     CO, NO2, SO2, O3         SO2 in 1st month increases LBW. SO2 and CO in last month increases preterm
                                                             birth, growth retard.                        birth. Growth retardation associated with CO, NO2, SO2 in 1st month.
Mainsonet et al. (2001)    Northeastern U.S.     1994-96     low BW                CO, PM10, SO2          CO in last trimester and SO2 in 2nd trimester increase LBW. No effect of PM10.

Ritz et al. (2000)         Los Angeles           1989-1993   preterm birth       CO, NO2, O3, PM10      PM10 exposure 6 weeks before birth increases preterm birth. CO exposure in same
                                                                                                        interval has effects only in some areas.
Ritz and Yu (1999)         Los Angeles           1989-1993   low BW              CO, NO2, O3, PM10      CO exposure in last trimester increased incidence of low BW.
Woodruff et al. (1997)     86 U.S. MSAs          1989-91     infant mortality    PM10                   Infants with high exposure more likely to die in postneonatal period.
Bell et al. (2007)         MA, CT                1999-2002   low BW              PM10&2.5, SO2, NO2, CO All pollutants at various trimesters related to birthweight

Brauer et al. (2008)       Vancouver, BC         1999-2002   low BW, gestation   PM10&2.5, SO2, NO2,      gestation associated with all but O3, birthweight associated with PM2.5
                                                                                 CO, O3
Chen et al (2002)        Washoe County, NV       1991-99     low BW              PM10, CO, O3             no associations after adjusting for confounding
Huynh et al. (2006)      California              1999-2000   gestation           PM2.5, CO                Exposure to PM2.5 but not CO associated with preterm birth
Lee et al. (2008)        London, UK              1988-2000   gestation           PM10, O3                 no association
Liu et al. (2007)        Calgary, Edmonton,      1985-2000   IUGR                SO2, NO2, CO, O3,        CO, NO2 & PM2.5 associated with IUGR
                         Montreal                                                PM2.5
Parker et al. (2008)     Utah                    1984-90     low BW, gestation   Steel mill closure       association with gestation but not birthweight
Parker et al. (2005)     California              2000        low BW              PM2.5, CO                Exposure to PM2.5 but not CO associated with birthweight
Parker & Woodruff (2008) US                      2001-03     low BW              PM10&2.5                 Association with PM10 but not PM2.5; varied by region

Ritz et al. (2007)         LA County, CA         2003        gestation           CO, NO2, O3, PM2.5       CO & PM2.5 assocaited with preterm birth
Ritz et al. (2006)         LA County, CA         1989-2000   mortality           CO, NO2, O3, PM10        CO and PM10 associated with mortality
Sagiv et al. (2005)        4 Pennsylvania        1997-2001   gestation           PM10, SO2                Both associated with preterm birth
                           counties
Salam et al. (2005)        California            1975-87     low BW               CO, PM10, O3, NO2       O3 during 2nd and 3rd trimester, CO during first
Woodruff et al. (2008)     US counties > 250k    1999-2002   mortality (by cause) PM2.5, PM10, CO, O3,    PM10 associated with respiratory; O3 associated with SIDS
                                                                                  SO2
Rogers & Dunlop (2006)     Rural counties in     1986-1988   very low BW          PM10                    PM10 associated with very low BW
                           Georgia
Rogers et al. (2000)       Rural counties in     1986-1988   very low BW         SO2, TSP                 Above median exposure associated with increase in very low BW
                           Georgia
Dugandzic et al. (2006)    Nova Scotia, CA       1988-2000   low BW              PM10, SO2, O3            No relationship after adjusting for confounders
Basu et al. (2004)         California            2000        low BW              PM2.5                    PM2.5 associated with lower birthweight; fairly comparable across methods
Wilhelm & Ritz (2005)      LA County, CA         1994-2000   low BW, gestation   PM10, PM2.5, CO          CO and PM10 associated with both if within 1 mile
Notes: BW = birth weight




                                                                                            28
Table 1: Sample Means
                                             [1]            [2]            [3]           [4]             [5]           [6]
                                                                                       <10km          like (3)      like (4)
                                                                        <10km         monitor &       but >=1       but >=1
                                             All        Geocoded        monitor       smoking          sibling       sibling
Number of observations                    1754861       1502205         628874         61996          283393         21099
Panel A: Outcomes
Birth weight in Grams                    3320.2       3319.8            3267.3         3054.6         3236.4         2937.4
                                         [617.4]      [615.4]           [630.6]        [656.1]        [660.6]        [682.2]
Infant death                             0.0073       0.0069            0.0078         0.0099         0.0086         0.0128
Gestation                                 38.86        38.83             38.71          38.28          38.55          37.84
                                         [2.672]      [2.302]           [2.475]        [2.892]        [2.643]        [3.212]
Low birth weight                          0.077        0.076             0.089          0.157          0.107          0.210
Panel B: Pollution Measures Last Trimester Before Birth
Ozone (8 hour moving average in .01 ppm)                3.73              3.60           3.61          3.60            3.57
                                                      [1.498]           [1.492]        [1.524]        [1.503]        [1.528]
CO (8 hour moving average in ppm)                       1.59             1.64            1.55          1.60            1.51
                                                      [0.703]           [0.792]        [0.772]        [0.758]        [0.732]
PM10 (24 hour moving average in 10 ug/m3)               2.97              2.99           2.99          2.97            3.01
                                                      [0.746]           [0.737]        [0.744]        [0.739]        [0.748]
Panel C: Pollution Measures One Week After Birth
Ozone (8 hour moving average in .01 ppm)                3.74              3.60           3.60          3.62            3.55
                                                      [1.800]           [1.791]        [1.822]        [1.805]        [1.825]
CO (8 hour moving average in ppm)                       1.58             1.64            1.55          1.60            1.51
                                                      [0.796]           [0.881]        [0.862]        [0.848]        [0.817]
PM10 (24 hour moving average in 10 ug/m3)               2.96              2.98           2.97          2.95            2.99
                                                      [1.507]           [1.495]        [1.491]        [1.480]        [1.504]
Panel D: Control Variables
Mother Age in Years                       28.72        29.22             28.25          27.44          27.75          26.92
                                         [5.938]      [5.995]           [6.164]        [5.992]        [6.003]        [5.645]
Mother African American                   0.187         0.19              0.30           0.41          0.35            0.54
Mother Hispanic                           0.172         0.18             0.23            0.14          0.20            0.10
Mother Years of Education                 13.35        13.27             12.79          11.77          12.74          11.46
                                         [2.600]      [2.632]           [2.681]        [1.946]        [2.565]        [1.843]
Multiple Birth                           0.0338        0.032             0.029          0.026          0.060          0.069
Mother married                            0.725         0.72              0.61           0.36          0.59            0.29
Birth parity                              1.956         1.98              2.00           2.46          2.44            3.33
                                         [1.145]      [1.148]           [1.186]        [1.615]        [1.288]        [1.856]
Child Male                                0.512         0.51              0.51           0.52          0.51            0.51
Mother smoking                            0.129         0.09             0.10            1.00          0.12            1.00
Number of cigarettes per day              1.035         1.01              1.03          10.06          1.16           10.35
                                         [3.971]      [3.903]           [3.911]        [7.625]        [4.105]        [7.571]
Median family income census                             4.66             4.05            3.53          3.97            3.25
  tract 1989 ($10,000)                                [1.766]           [1.584]        [1.375]        [1.621]        [1.307]
Fraction poor in census tract 1989                      0.09              0.13           0.17           0.14           0.20
                                                      [0.103]           [0.120]        [0.137]        [0.129]        [0.143]
Mean precipitation in previous                         13.02             13.05          13.11          12.98          13.03
  90 days                                             [4.211]           [4.149]        [4.158]        [4.080]        [4.074]
Mean of daily max temperature                          63.70             64.09          64.42          64.10          64.67
  previous 90 days                                    [14.65]           [14.74]        [14.70]        [14.74]        [14.74]
Mean of daily min temperature                          21.34             22.04          22.26          21.87          22.43
  previous 90 days                                    [15.18]           [15.15]        [15.11]        [15.18]        [15.12]
Notes: Standard deviations in brackets. Column [6] contains births where the mother smoked during the pregnancy for at least
one sibling.




                                                                  29
Table 2: Effects of Air Pollution on Health at Birth - All Mothers < 10 km from a Monitor

                                     [1]         [2]         [3]          [4]        [5]         [6]        [7]         [8]          [9]
                                                 CO                               Ozone                               PM10
A. Models of Birth Weight
3rd trimester pollution            -11.94      -13.81      -16.65       6.31       -3.57        -3.98      -1.91        0.19        -3.66
                                  [5.521]*    [6.343]*    [7.980]*    [2.753]*    [3.824]      [4.812]    [2.355]     [2.863]    [3.509]
2nd trimester pollution             10.13       -2.01       4.90        0.70       -1.45        -7.98      -4.22       -0.87        -2.17
                                   [6.510]     [7.325]     [8.492]     [3.166]    [3.846]     [4.518]+   [2.542]+     [3.008]      [3.450]
1st trimester pollution             -1.04       -7.24       -6.38       5.32        3.14        -3.34      -3.31        0.66        -1.69
                                   [5.447]     [6.503]     [7.785]    [2.914]+    [4.050]      [4.574]    [2.386]     [2.981]      [3.478]
Observations                      312589      312589      312589      268701      268701      268701     285239       285239       285239

B. Models of Low Birth Weight (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution          0.48        0.71       0.83       -0.35       -0.05            0.18        0.08       0.00         0.15
                              [0.245]+     [0.282]*  [0.384]*    [0.137]*     [0.196]          [0.251]    [0.113]     [0.132]      [0.183]
2nd trimester pollution         -0.34        -0.14     -0.36       -0.15       -0.15            -0.11       0.11        0.10        0.07
                               [0.310]      [0.346]   [0.453]     [0.162]     [0.193]          [0.252]    [0.124]     [0.150]      [0.186]
1st trimester pollution         -0.04        0.11      0.49        -0.01       0.19             0.43       0.12        0.10         0.34
                               [0.247]      [0.304]   [0.401]     [0.141]     [0.188]         [0.234]+    [0.116]     [0.144]     [0.194]+
                               313504      313504    313504      269485       269485           269485     286206      286206       286206

C. Models of Gestation (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution           -4.11      -4.78       -7.41        3.19          -0.96      -0.33        2.11        3.77        2.06
                                [2.221]+ [2.603]+      [3.635]*     [1.249]*       [1.769]    [2.255]    [1.023]*    [1.233]**    [1.599]
2nd trimester pollution            3.31      0.06         4.05        0.22          -3.23      -3.28       -2.46       -0.35       -1.12
                                 [2.624]    [3.130]     [3.955]      [1.480]      [1.793]+    [2.124]    [1.127]*     [1.352]     [1.714]
1st trimester pollution           -0.11      -1.18       -3.95        4.66          2.07       -1.17       -1.70        1.10       -0.07
                                 [2.273]    [2.678]     [3.582]    [1.319]**       [1.782]    [2.191]    [1.009]+     [1.227]     [1.613]
Observations                     305530     305530     305530       262117         262117     262117      276691      276691      276691
Monitor*quarter fixed effects       no        yes         yes          no            yes        yes          no         yes         yes
Mother fixed effects                no        no          yes          no             no        yes          no          no         yes
Notes: Standard errors in brackets, clustered on the census tract level. + indicates statistical significance at the 10 percent level, * at
the 5 percent level, and ** at the 1 percent level. All regressions include indicators for maternal age (19-24, 25-34, 35+) education
(high school, 13-15 years, 16+), multiple birth, birth order (2, 3, 4+), marital status, male child, maternal race (African American,
Hispanic, other race), and maternal smoking as well as the number of cigarettes per day, median family income in the Census tract in
1989, average precipitation and daily minimum and maximum temperature in each trimester before the birth, month dummies, and year
dummies. Regressions also include indicators for missing values of the control variables.




                                                                     30
Table 3: Effects of Smoking on Health at Birth - All Mothers < 10 km from a Monitor
(Coefficients from Models Including CO as Pollutant in Table 2)

                                                    [1]             [2]            [3]
A. Models of Birth Weight
Mother smokes                                     -161.8          -161.5         -38.89
                                                 [6.375]**       [6.352]**      [8.265]**
# Cigarettes per day                              -5.014           -5.05         -2.243
                                                 [0.482]**       [0.482]**      [0.620]**
# Observations                                    312589          312589         312589

B. Models of Low Birth Weight (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
Mother smokes                                    4.708           4.671            0.497
                                               [0.344]**       [0.343]**         [0.496]
# Cigarettes per day                             0.196           0.196            0.129
                                              [0.0265]**      [0.0265]**       [0.0393]**
# Observations                                  313504          313504          313504

C. Models of Gestation (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
Mother smokes                                      -31.59         -31.15          -2.724
                                                  [2.800]**      [2.797]**        [4.118]
# Cigarettes per day                               -1.165         -1.171          -0.667
                                                  [0.227]**      [0.228]**       [0.339]*
# Observations                                     305530         305530         305530
Monitor * Quarter Fixed Effects                      no             yes             yes
Mother Fixed Effects                                 no             no              yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2. These coefficients are from the models in columns (1)-(3) in
Table 2




                                                  31
Table 4: Effects of Air Pollution on Health at Birth - All Smoking Mothers<10 km from
a Monitor (Mother Fixed Effects Models Only)

                                              [1]              [2]              [3]
                                              CO             Ozone            PM10
A. Models of Birth Weight
3rd trimester pollution                     -39.22            -19.1            -24.41
                                            [32.58]          [17.20]          [14.08]+
2nd trimester pollution                      10.37           -32.66            -36.42
                                            [34.15]         [17.82]+          [15.22]*
1st trimester pollution                      0.317           -15.29             3.433
                                            [30.25]          [17.18]           [13.45]
Observations                                 20435           20464             20041

B. Models of Low Birth Weight (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution                    4.413            -0.262            0.429
                                            [2.219]*         [1.144]           [0.950]
2nd trimester pollution                      -4.276           1.647             1.773
                                            [2.311]+         [1.164]          [1.027]+
1st trimester pollution                       0.846           1.837             1.636
                                             [1.982]        [1.081]+          [0.938]+
Observations                                  20465          20501             20083

C. Models of Gestation (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution                     -42.89           -11.69            -3.209
                                            [17.92]*         [9.448]           [7.920]
2nd trimester pollution                       20.19           -18.5            -14.78
                                             [18.57]        [9.561]+          [8.102]+
1st trimester pollution                      -14.33          -15.15             -8.27
                                             [17.14]         [9.465]           [7.185]
Observations                                 19930           20118             19494
Monitor * Quarter Fixed Effects               yes             yes               yes
Mother Fixed Effects                          yes             yes               yes
Notes: See notes to Table 2.




                                                    32
Table 5: Effects of CO on Health at Birth - Mothers from Vulnerable Groups < 10 km from a Monitor
Models with Mother Fixed Effects

                                      [1]             [2]                [3]          [4]           [5]            [6]
                                                                    Risk factors                                Income
                                   <age 19        >= age 35         for the preg.   Black      <12 yrs ed.      <30,000
A. Models of Birth Weight
3rd trimester pollution             -20.52          -37.81             -24.88       -2.144        -9.186          -10.6
                                    [12.75]        [11.82]**          [11.15]*      [10.15]      [11.47]         [10.55]
2nd trimester pollution              6.638           20.27             -1.447        12.73        7.131           9.118
                                    [15.99]         [13.37]            [13.16]      [11.89]      [12.97]         [12.28]
1st trimester pollution             -9.448           0.553             -23.08       -9.429        -12.05         -15.14
                                    [12.79]         [12.20]           [10.89]*      [9.736]      [11.18]         [10.47]
Observations                        312589          312589            312589        312589       312589          312589

B. Models of Low Birth Weight (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution           1.075           1.767           1.18           0.322             0.697          0.729
                                [0.653]+        [0.640]**      [0.545]*         [0.545]           [0.570]        [0.573]
2nd trimester pollution           -1.06          -0.815         -0.327          -0.581            -1.108          -0.575
                                 [0.920]         [0.754]        [0.716]         [0.701]           [0.718]        [0.698]
1st trimester pollution           1.107           0.345          1.411           0.423              1.03          0.785
                                 [0.690]         [0.616]       [0.554]*         [0.567]          [0.609]+        [0.563]
Observations                     313504          313504         313504         313504            313504          313504

C. Models of Gestation (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution              -11.92          -11.83         -10.74          -6.692          -5.438          -5.378
                                    [5.694]*        [5.479]*       [5.192]*         [4.981]         [5.009]         [4.651]
2nd trimester pollution               6.601           7.081          1.29            1.343           4.245           1.476
                                     [8.562]         [5.863]        [6.221]         [5.888]         [6.256]         [5.695]
1st trimester pollution              -4.014          -3.129          -11.7          -5.119             -4           -4.384
                                     [6.703]         [5.129]       [5.103]*         [4.865]         [5.690]         [5.138]
Observations                        305530          305530         305530          305530          305530          305530
Notes: The columns show specifications that allow the effect of pollution to vary by characteristics of the mother. The
models are estimated as in Table 2, but the pollution measures are interacted with a dummy variable for the characteristic
of the mother. For example, in the second column the regression include each trimester CO measures interacted with
whether the mother is under age 19, with only the interactions shown. The main effects (not shown) are comparable to the
main effects in the corresponding specification in Table 2.




                                                               33
Table 6: Effects of Air Pollution after Birth on the Probability of Infant Death
All Mothers < 10 km from a Monitor
(Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 10,000)

                                               [1]                [2]                [3]
                                                CO               Ozone               PM10
Mean pollutant weeks 0-2                       101.9              8.274             -10.97
                                            [36.11]**            [18.20]            [25.58]
Mean pollutant weeks 2-4                      -21.61              4.478              -6.42
                                              [15.47]            [9.194]            [10.93]
Mean pollutant weeks 4-6                       12.88              9.177              8.122
                                              [10.77]          [5.543]+             [5.419]
Mean pollutant weeks >6                       -8.261              3.266             -0.564
                                              [5.819]            [3.411]            [1.809]
Brith weight < 1500 grams                     -804.6              278.3             -122.6
                                              [740.1]            [381.8]            [533.3]
Brith weight 1500-2500 grams                 -1515.3             -483.6             -908.6
                                             [737.0]*            [369.5]          [523.0]+
Brith weight 2500-3500 grams                 -1637.4               -620            -1041.8
                                             [738.2]*          [371.0]+            [525.1]*
Brith weight >= 3500 grams                   -1685.6             -664.4            -1066.1
                                             [739.6]*          [370.9]+            [525.0]*
Week after birth                             -1713.7              -1710            -1776.5
                                            [55.69]**          [57.69]**          [62.64]**
1(Week after birth >= 1)                      1814.8             1643.7             1671.5
                                            [97.20]**          [111.8]**          [121.8]**
1(Week after birth >= 2)                      -178.1              16.58              21.51
                                             [83.57]*            [97.69]            [109.6]
1(Week after birth >= 4)                       75.55              41.24              79.84
                                            [23.81]**            [26.34]          [29.55]**
1(Week after birth >= 8)                      -0.404              8.272              5.087
                                              [7.681]            [7.814]            [8.314]
1(Week after birth >= 12)                     -1.394              -4.28              -5.07
                                              [4.156]            [4.829]            [5.089]
1(Week after birth >= 20)                      1.174              2.775              0.917
                                              [1.379]          [1.493]+             [1.888]
1(Week after birth >= 32)                      1.736              1.293              2.459
                                            [0.594]**           [0.620]*          [0.786]**
Observations                                 192184             163392             131837
Number of Births                               5848               5078               4556
Number of Deaths                               2334               2038               1870
Number of Mothers                              2252               1962               1803
Notes: See notes to Table 2. Standard errors are clustered on mother level in all models. All
models include mother fixed effects.




                                                     34
Table 7: Effects of Air Pollution on Health at Birth – Alternative Ways to Assign Pollution

                                     Mothers > 10 km and < 20 km from a Monitor                  Assigning Pollution using Zip Code
                                        [1]               [2]                  [3]             [4]               [5]                [6]
                                       CO               Ozone              PM10               CO               Ozone              PM10
A. Models of Birth Weight
3rd trimester pollution                -1.11            -5.353             -8.613           -14.16             -2.097            -6.207
                                      [9.537]           [4.467]           [4.846]+          [9.536]            [5.184]           [4.546]
2nd trimester pollution               -11.25             2.696             -3.964            7.449             -7.957            -4.087
                                      [9.937]           [4.624]            [5.651]          [9.811]           [4.814]+           [3.941]
1st trimester pollution               -17.47            -2.464             -7.223           -0.551               1.6             -3.082
                                     [10.02]+           [4.410]            [5.079]          [8.695]            [4.662]           [3.681]
Observations                          248230            270668             137123           312589             268701            285239

B. Models of Low Birth Weight (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution             0.43              0.303               0.317                0.85              0.167             0.298
                                  [0.474]            [0.207]             [0.246]            [0.463]+            [0.273]           [0.236]
2nd trimester pollution            0.152             -0.156             -0.0303              -0.447            -0.0535             0.149
                                  [0.492]            [0.215]             [0.242]             [0.506]            [0.254]           [0.208]
1st trimester pollution            0.406              0.146               0.346               0.246              0.23              0.388
                                  [0.478]            [0.203]             [0.241]             [0.463]            [0.228]          [0.210]+
Observations                     249163             271605              137748               313504            269485             286206

C. Models of Gestation (Coefficients and standard errors multiplied by 100)
3rd trimester pollution              -0.618           0.0659             -2.434              0.71               1.028             1.413
                                    [4.359]           [1.993]            [2.195]            [4.192]            [2.387]           [2.034]
2nd trimester pollution               0.991           -0.142             0.0585              4.939             -3.561            -1.347
                                    [4.385]           [2.059]            [2.395]            [4.464]            [2.242]           [1.942]
1st trimester pollution              -1.241            0.762             -1.737              3.263             -0.121             0.842
                                    [4.109]           [1.849]            [2.041]            [3.892]            [2.195]           [1.769]
Observations                        243028            263952             133723             305530             262117            276691
Notes: See notes to Table 2. All models include mother fixed effects. The models in columns [4] to [6] assign pollution to the child assuming
we only knew the mother's zip code of residence and computing the inverse distance weighted average of monitor values from the zip code
centroid.



                                                                          35
Table 8: Effects of Air Pollution on Health at Birth - All Mothers < 10 km from a Monitor
Models control for both CO and O3

                                                       [1]             [2]            [3]
                                                      Birth        Low Birth
                                                     Weight          Weight       Gestation
3rd trimester CO (in ppm)                            -20.77           1.056         -9.416
                                                    [8.973]*        [0.429]*       [4.044]*
2nd trimester CO (in ppm)                             7.646          -0.784          5.366
                                                     [9.427]         [0.507]        [4.414]
1st trimester CO (in ppm)                            -5.765            0.79         -5.044
                                                     [8.443]       [0.445]+         [3.917]
3rd trimester ozone (in .01 ppm)                     -5.365            0.16         -3.115
                                                     [4.269]         [0.232]        [2.104]
2nd trimester ozone (in .01 ppm)                      0.271          -0.117         -1.591
                                                     [4.624]         [0.257]        [2.157]
1st trimester ozone (in .01 ppm)                     -4.384           0.275         -0.849
                                                     [4.172]         [0.241]        [2.032]
Observations                                        274358          275193         267818
Notes: See Table 2. Coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 in columns 2 and 3.
All models include mother fixed effects.




                                                  36
Appendix Table 1: Effects of Air Pollution on Birth Weight - All Mothers < 10 km from a Monitor – Showing All Controls

                                                 [1]           [2]       [3]         [4]           [5]       [6]         [7]           [8]       [9]
                                                              CO                                Ozone                                PM10
3rd trimester pollution                         -11.94      -13.81      -16.65       6.312      -3.566      -3.978      -1.906        0.19      -3.657
                                               [5.521]*    [6.343]*    [7.980]*    [2.753]*     [3.824]     [4.812]     [2.355]     [2.863]     [3.509]
2nd trimester pollution                          10.13      -2.009       4.904       0.695      -1.453      -7.975      -4.219      -0.865      -2.174
                                                [6.510]     [7.325]     [8.492]     [3.166]     [3.846]   [4.518]+    [2.542]+      [3.008]     [3.450]
1st trimester pollution                         -1.039       -7.24      -6.379       5.321       3.139       -3.34       -3.31       0.662      -1.691
                                                [5.447]     [6.503]     [7.785]   [2.914]+      [4.050]     [4.574]     [2.386]     [2.981]     [3.478]
Mother age 19 to 24                              40.51       40.92       31.89       40.63       41.34       30.69       44.56       45.19       35.16
                                              [6.195]**   [6.210]**   [6.840]**   [6.445]**   [6.480]**   [7.959]**   [5.989]**   [6.002]**   [7.329]**
Mother age 25 to 34                               61.3       62.14       32.54       50.51       51.57        29.4       61.17       62.08       33.73
                                              [6.975]**   [7.001]**   [8.655]**   [7.120]**   [7.158]**   [9.810]**   [6.735]**   [6.746]**   [9.267]**
Mother age 35 or higher                          62.36        63.5       32.94       49.92        51.2       35.63       61.62         63        36.98
                                              [7.702]**   [7.708]**   [11.22]**   [7.933]**   [7.984]**   [13.09]**   [7.528]**   [7.554]**   [12.36]**
High School                                      27.47       27.39      -1.738       23.99       23.58       4.496       25.37       25.43      -1.139
                                              [3.642]**   [3.651]**     [5.436]   [4.113]**   [4.143]**     [5.819]   [3.795]**   [3.796]**     [5.517]
13 - 15 Years Education                          52.29       52.25       7.928       50.31       49.35       8.641       49.56       49.33       8.576
                                              [4.108]**   [4.099]**     [7.200]   [4.808]**   [4.841]**     [7.771]   [4.301]**   [4.284]**     [7.466]
16 or more Years of Education                     57.5       57.32      -5.929       56.64       56.11       6.044       54.54       55.06      -6.013
                                              [4.523]**   [4.523]**     [9.059]   [5.290]**   [5.291]**     [10.54]   [4.892]**   [4.882]**     [9.418]
Multiple Birth                                 -1029.8     -1029.9     -1009.7     -1029.2     -1028.6     -1004.7     -1031.6     -1030.9     -1011.3
                                              [6.913]**   [6.923]**   [14.48]**   [7.770]**   [7.778]**   [14.67]**   [7.636]**   [7.636]**   [14.57]**
Birth order 2                                    87.06       87.64       57.06       100.4       99.92       57.53       91.73        92.3       56.36
                                              [4.300]**   [4.308]**   [5.558]**   [4.926]**   [4.947]**   [6.429]**   [5.252]**   [5.258]**   [6.776]**
Birth order 3                                    99.97       100.6       32.66       112.2       111.4       21.36       103.2       103.4       20.71
                                              [5.954]**   [5.968]**   [7.960]**   [6.589]**   [6.629]**    [9.236]*   [6.803]**   [6.786]**    [9.331]*
Birth order 4 or higher                          71.27       72.04        -11        85.23       83.79      -24.14       69.01       68.95       -19.5
                                              [7.842]**   [7.867]**     [10.01]   [8.016]**   [8.088]**    [10.79]*   [8.239]**   [8.247]**   [10.40]+
Mother married                                   86.22       85.88       31.67       90.94       90.73        40.1       87.27       86.99       36.69
                                              [3.349]**   [3.341]**   [5.503]**   [3.682]**   [3.704]**   [5.999]**   [3.547]**   [3.519]**   [5.769]**
Mother is smoking                               -161.8      -161.5      -38.89       -156       -156.7      -41.42      -160.7      -161.4      -43.47
                                              [6.375]**   [6.352]**   [8.265]**   [6.385]**   [6.399]**   [8.630]**   [6.348]**   [6.349]**   [8.328]**
Number of cigarettes per day                    -5.014       -5.05      -2.243      -5.845       -5.88       -3.03      -5.566      -5.592      -2.979
                                              [0.482]**   [0.482]**   [0.620]**   [0.504]**   [0.504]**   [0.614]**   [0.503]**   [0.502]**   [0.606]**
Male                                              114        113.8       120.1       114.9       114.8       122.5        115        114.8       120.8
                                              [2.166]**   [2.159]**   [2.503]**   [2.336]**   [2.331]**   [2.841]**   [2.296]**   [2.293]**   [2.684]**
Med fam income 1989 in $10,000                   3.463       1.543       3.994       1.018       2.576       7.333       2.738       5.668       3.844
                                               [1.675]*     [1.844]     [2.639]     [1.644]     [1.727]    [3.003]*     [1.794]   [1.834]**     [2.883]
Fraction of people poor in 1989                 -197.6      -199.6       -1.40      -173.7      -164.9       9.063      -195.5      -151.4       -1.10
                                              [21.25]**   [22.49]**     [29.51]   [20.50]**   [20.84]**     [30.99]   [22.86]**   [23.78]**     [30.32]
Precipitation third trimester                    0.239     -0.0704        0.02      -0.056      -0.554      -0.564        0.26    0.00816       0.0491
                                                [0.315]     [0.330]     [0.376]     [0.335]     [0.347]     [0.429]     [0.337]     [0.352]     [0.413]
Precipitation second trimester                  -0.301      -0.368        0.26     -0.0863      0.0536      -0.134      -0.328      -0.124       0.501
                                                [0.333]     [0.338]     [0.392]     [0.364]     [0.368]     [0.440]     [0.338]     [0.345]     [0.430]
Precipitation first trimester                   0.0421      -0.015      -0.208      -0.358      -0.254      -0.428     -0.0606     -0.0329      -0.511
                                                [0.308]     [0.314]     [0.387]     [0.348]     [0.353]     [0.423]     [0.347]     [0.360]     [0.434]
Mean daily min temp third trimester             -0.414       0.151      -0.118      -0.852      -0.555      -0.677      -0.332       0.181      -0.101
                                                [0.284]     [0.292]     [0.360]   [0.315]**   [0.322]+    [0.399]+      [0.301]     [0.308]     [0.394]
Mean daily min temp second trimester             -0.19       0.226      0.0736       0.049       0.264      0.0783      -0.014       0.147      -0.183
                                                [0.287]     [0.310]     [0.369]     [0.312]     [0.335]     [0.400]     [0.303]     [0.315]     [0.372]
Mean daily min temp first trimester             -0.653      -0.245      -0.269      -0.718      -0.421      -0.204      0.0284       0.186     -0.0115
                                               [0.271]*     [0.279]     [0.343]    [0.315]*     [0.326]     [0.392]     [0.293]     [0.315]     [0.394]
Mean daily max temp third trimester              1.448      -0.147      -0.105       1.057     -0.0419       0.423       1.778       -0.27       -0.25
                                              [0.476]**     [0.558]     [0.647]   [0.559]+      [0.608]     [0.750]   [0.517]**    [0.577]      [0.669]
Mean daily max temp second trimester             0.855      -0.132      -0.373        0.64      -0.237       0.585        1.00       0.199     -0.0112
                                              [0.444]+      [0.459]     [0.561]     [0.517]     [0.574]     [0.708]    [0.482]*     [0.486]     [0.564]
Mean daily max temp first trimester              2.172        0.74       0.393       1.361      -0.242      -0.365       1.799       0.437      -0.377
                                              [0.424]**     [0.521]     [0.643]   [0.483]**     [0.572]     [0.725]   [0.459]**     [0.546]     [0.702]
Mother Age missing                              -197.9      -196.5       21.44      -728.2      -749.1      -10.31       354.3       346.8         ---
                                                [377.5]     [371.1]     [13.54]   [15.74]**   [17.51]**     [13.16]   [14.29]**   [15.87]**
Education Variable Missing                      -35.39      -39.11       -51.4      -39.01      -43.79      -57.71      -31.79      -36.58     -57.57
                                              [7.283]**   [7.175]**   [9.412]**   [7.273]**   [7.298]**   [9.087]**   [7.291]**   [7.238]**   [8.802]**
Multiple Birth missing                          -262.2       -263       -174.1      -144.6       -143        3.059      -181.8       -179      -90.88
                                              [55.45]**   [55.14]**   [91.12]+     [58.52]*    [58.40]*     [86.42]   [51.78]**   [51.36]**    [89.62]




                                                                      37
Appendix Table 1: Effects of Air Pollution on Health at Birth - All Mothers < 10 km from a Monitor – Showing All Controls (Continued)

                                                    [1]         [2]         [3]         [4]          [5]        [6]         [7]          [8]        [9]
                                                                CO                                 Ozone                               PM10
Birth order missing                                36.62       40.88       15.89       106.1        103.8       37.01       63.41       64.4      -6.089
                                                  [38.14]     [38.22]     [42.23]    [37.28]**   [37.36]**     [43.80]     [38.67]   [38.81]+     [43.08]
Mother Married missing                            -240.8      -239.7       -175        -151.3      -148.6      -97.11       -293        -290      -171.6
                                                 [85.85]**   [85.62]**   [92.86]+     [76.33]*   [76.04]+      [83.20]   [77.53]**   [77.09]**   [92.98]+
Male missing                                      -713.5      -712.6      -175.8      -1681.8     -1676.6     -1324.5      -940.2      -926.4     -457.8
                                                 [419.1]+    [415.6]+     [433.1]    [506.3]**   [502.7]**    [671.3]*    [420.8]*    [416.7]*    [507.4]
Mother is smoking missing                         -102.6      -107.4      -44.53       -113.5      -115.5      -46.31       -108       -115.8     -49.11
                                                 [8.471]**   [8.501]**   [9.788]**   [8.562]**   [8.555]**   [10.08]**   [8.419]**   [8.428]**   [9.503]**
Mother African American                           -198.2      -193.6                   -211.8      -204.6                  -204.5      -197.9
                                                 [4.028]**   [4.189]**               [4.176]**   [4.177]**               [4.167]**   [4.272]**
Mother Hispanic                                   -43.51      -42.93                   -61.36       -56.8                  -51.91      -47.36
                                                 [4.027]**   [3.953]**               [4.333]**   [4.393]**               [4.154]**   [4.034]**
Other race or race missing                        -230.3      -228.1                   -232.4      -226.4                  -234.9      -228.7
                                                 [6.147]**   [6.337]**               [7.343]**   [7.465]**               [7.061]**   [7.310]**
Constant                                          3174.2      3438.1      3319.5       2947.5      3191.9     3363.6        2626       2825.8     3280.2
                                                 [380.4]**   [372.3]**   [85.77]**   [67.47]**   [75.56]**   [107.7]**   [60.59]**   [72.16]**   [106.1]**
Observations                                      312589      312589      312589      268701      268701      268701      285239      285239      285239
Monitor*quarter fixed effects                       no          yes         yes          no          yes        yes          no          yes        yes
Mother fixed effects                                no          no         yes          no          no         yes          no          no         yes

Notes: The table corresponds to the same regressions as Table 2 Panel A, but display all covariates (except for year, month and monitor dummies).




                                                                         38
                      Figure 1: Location of Air Monitors in New Jersey




                                                                    Legend
0 5 10   20   30   40 Kilometers                                         Carbon monoxide

                                                                         Ozone
0   5 10      20 Miles
                                                                         PM 10
