                     NEER WJRKING PAPER SERIES
                     NBER WJRKING




              TESTING THE SDRTING
                           SDRTING LCOEL
                                    LCOEL OF
                                          OF EDUCATION
                                              EDUCATION



                            Andrew Weiss
                                   Weiss



                       Working Paper No.
                       Working       No. 11120
                                         11420




                       BUREAU OF
              NATIONAL BUREAU    EXONOMIC RESEARCH
                              OF EXONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050
                    1050 Massachusetts
                         Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Avenue
                        Cambridge, MA
                                   MA 02138
                                       02138
                           August19814
                           August   l981




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
                                                             program
   Labor Studies
in Labor  Studies and
                  and project
                       project in
                                in Productivity
                                   Productivity (World
                                                 (World Econow).
                                                        Econow). Any
                                                                   Any
opinions expressed
opinions  expressed are
                      are those of the author and not those of
                                                             of the
                                                                the
National
National Bureau
         Bureau of
                of Economic
                    Economic Research.
                              Research.
                                                    NBER Working Paper   #1b20
                                                    August 198b



                     Testing the Sorting Model of Education



                                    ABSTRACT



       Proprietary data for production workeit is analyzed to determine
which aspects of productivity are aftected by secondary schooling. The
measures of productivity explored are: propensity to quit and be absent,
plrsical oatput per hour, and ability to perform complex tasks.
                                                                The data

suggests   that the sorting effect of education is an important determinant of
earnings for semi—skilled production workers.




                                                   Andrew Weiss
                                                   Department of Economics
                                                   Columbia University
                                                   New York, NY 10021
                    TESTING THE SORTING MODEL OF EDUCATION'



                                             Andrew Weiss


                                         Columbia University

                                       New York, N.Y. 10027

                                                   and

                                   Bell Communications Research




                                         Revised July 16, 1984




     U is well known that better educated workers earn more. It is not well known why.

Are they paid more because of cognitive skills that are learned in school? Because of

affective skills that are learned? Or because of traits that are positively correlated with

length of schooling but are not learned during the years in which schooling differences

occur?     This paper provides some tentative answers to those questions. We investigate

various aspects of the performance of production workers to see if those aspects of

performance that are positively correlated with education are ones that were likely to have

been learned during the additional years of schooling acquired by the better educated

workers in our sample and which years were most important for the traits or skills

measured by the relevant performance criterion.              In particular, we investigate whether


I.   I am grateful to Roger Klein, Richard Spady. and participants at the Labor Economics seminars at the
     University of Chicago and Columbia University. for valuable comments and suggestions. Gerald Mcligue.
     All Mouzami and Andrea Shepard provided valuable assistance in processing the data and n computer
     programming. John Raisian reconstructed his blue collar-white collar classiñcation scheme for us.
                                                -2-



better educated workers have a comparative advantage on more complex tasks: whether the

output per hour of better educated workers            is   higher than that of less well educated

workers: and whether better educated workers have a lower propensity to be absent or to

quit.   We also investigate whether the relationship between each of these aspects oF

perFormance is continuous or whether there is a discrete change associated with high school

graduation. Our a priori    presumption     is that traits such as a low propensity to be absent

or to quit are likel to have been learned prior to attendance in secondary school (the

overwhelming majority of workers       in    our sample had between 10 and 14 years of

education). ThereFore. if the most significant aspect of performance difterences for our

sample is attendance or quit propensity we would argue that the evidence supports a sorting

explanation for the correlation between earnings and education. Of course, one could

argue that "persistence. the trait which affects absenteeism and quit propensity is learned

in secondary school. To allow for this possibility we let high school graduation to have a

dkcontinuous effect on an individual's probability of quitting his job or being absent. A

dkcontinuous effect ol high school graduation is not necessary br confirmation ob a sorting

model but   it   is consistent with a particular sorting equilibrium:, a mix of pooling and

separating contracts (see Weiss 11983. pp. 4331). On the other hand, the existence of

pooling Nash equilibria at 12 years of schooling, and the concomitant discontinuous jump

in perbormance at that schooling level, is inconsistent with the usual continuity assumptions

made in human capital theoretic models. We also used the PSID sample to investigate

whether the return to high school graduation is greater during business booms or slumps.

Presumably a low propensity to quit is less valued when unemployment is high and firms

are laying off workers.

    We find that for high school graduation has a strong negative effect on absenteeism and

quit propensity. We also find that high school graduation has a large effect on the wages
                                                        .3-



of individuals even if education, education squared and education cubed are &so included

as right hand variables in an earnings equation. This effect of graduating high school on

hourly earnings is counter cyclical; so that in periods and areas where unemployment is

high employers pay a smaller premium to high school graduate. Indeed we estimate that                           a


12% county unemployment rate completely eliminates the discontinuity in the wage

schedule at completion of 12th grade.2 3


      In our conversations with personnel officers, a low proportion of leavers within their first

six months and a low rate of absenteeism were invariably named as the two most important

factors used to evaluate the quality of a cohort of workers. A low quit rat:, and low

absenteeism, may have a particularly strong effect on the productivity of production

workers.        In manufacturing, production typically proceeds in series; in the 20 odd plants

we've visited the output of one worker is an input for another, and there are seldom more

than three workers doing any one job.               Thus, when a new worker is being trained or a



2.    P. H. Mirves and E. E. Lawler calculated that the total cost of turnover of a bank teller was 85 times as
     large as his daily earnings plus benefits. Hence, if graduation from HS. decreases a workcm probability
     of quitting during their first year on the job by 10%. and assuming the average work year was 240 days,
     H.S. graduation would increase earnings of newly hired bank tellers by 3.fl.
3.    Mirves and Lawler also estimated that the total cost of absenteeism for a sample of 160 bank tellers was
     more than twice the cost in salaries and benefits- Thus if, as we estimate, HS. graduation restdts in a 14%
     decrease    in the percentage of days absent, then we would expect the negative correlation between
     absenteeism and education to lead to a 2% higher wage for H.S. graduates working as bank teIcrs.

     Allen (1981) used the 1972-73 Quality of Employment Survey to calculate the effect of wages on
     absenteeism.   He found that the elasticity of the abscnce rate with respect to marginal wage rate varies
     from --35 to -.48. Since these elasticities stem from partial derivatives we can not directls impute the
     elasticity of wages with respect to absenteeism from the inversc of Allen's estimates. Howeva his results
     suggest that if, as we estimate, high school graduates are abscnt 14% lcss than we would expc4 from their
     other demographic characteristics, then these difference in absenteeism could explain the entire wage
     premium received by high school graduates. On the other hand, for all the usual reasons Alki's estimates
     are likely to be biased toward zero,leading to overcstimates of the effect of absenteeism on wagc&

     Allen also finds a negative, albeit minor, effect of high school graduation on absenteeism. Hrwever. since
     he included wages as an independent variable in his abscnteeism equation, the model being atimated is
     substantially different from ours-in which we are investigating the effect of education on wages.
     Consequently if better educated people are paid more bccausc they are absent less, it might appear that
     once the researcher controlled for wages there was no statstically significant correlation betwesn education
     and absenteeism.
                                             -4-




substitute used for an absent worker, the low output of the inexperienced worker affects the

output of other workers who must wait for parts. Because of the layout of the plants used

in this study and the complementarity between workers and machines. it is seldom possible

to avoid disruptions in the production process by temporarily replacing a trained worker

who leaves or is absent with several less experienced workers.      Frequent changes in the

product mix generally make it too costly to accumulate enough inventory to fully cushion

the firm from the effect of quits or absenteeism.


I. TIlE DATA

    In order to estimate the relative importance of sorting and learning effects of education,

we assembled a data base of 2,920 newly hired semi-skilled production workers employed

by the same firm at three widely separated geographic locations. Each of these workers

was initially paid the same non-linear piece-rate. When a worker achieves 835 of expected

output for one month, the worker is assigned to a pay group. All the members of a pay

group receive the same pay.     This pay is proportional to the output of the group — the

average group size is 126 members — and promotion opportunities are insignificant. so

 there is little financial incentive for group members to achieve at high levels of output.

 Consequently, we only used the output of workers during their first month on the job in this

 study.


    Because almost all workers were assigned to a pay group within their first three months

 on the job, and the lower bound on earnings of newly hired workers was 65% of thc wage

 in a pay group, with earnings rising less than proportionately to output up to a ceiling at
                                                                              workers at
 83% of the pay group wage, annual earnings differences among the newly hired

 each location were trivial. Therefore, in the data analysis described below we did not

 compute these minor pay differences among workers.
                                                    -5-



     Previous studies of quit behavior, absenteeism or productivity that used samples of

workers with very different pay typkally included wages as independent variables.                    Those

studies suffer from simultaneous equation bias. If employers value a low propensity to be

absent or to quit or a high level of productivity, then workers who have those qualities (or

are perceived by employers as more likely to have those qualities) will receive higher wages

and more training.         Hence the error term in the quit, absenteeism, and productivity

equations    is   correlated with the wage variable and hence with all other independent

variables that are correlated with wages. Although all the workers at each location in our

sample received the same wage, they obviously did not have the same alternative

opportunities, the effect of differences in alternative opportunkies is discussed below.


     The data base we assembled is also unique in providing a large and detailed sample of

workers on very similar jobs with almost identical wage profiles on those jobs. Hence we

are able to separate the effects of jobs on quits and absenteeism from the effects of person-

specific variables. That is, for a sample of workers on a wide variety of dilterent jobs a

reported low quit propensity of better educated workers could be due to steep wage tenure

profiles on the jobs they take. In our data set this problem does not arise since all workers

face the same wage-tenure profiles and promotion opportunities (nill).

     For each worker data were available on sex, age, marital status, education, employment

status when the worker applied for work, and the complexity of the assigned job.4 as well

as   output per hour (measured in physical units and normalized by the industrial

engineering force to be equivalent across jobs), number of days absent, number of



4.   The industrial engineering staff measured the amount of time required For The average newly hired worker
     io learn each job. This Formula heavily weights the number of times per week an experienced operator
     would perform The talk. We used the logarithm of required training as our estimate of job complexity.
                                                       -6-



occasions absent, whether or not the worker quit and the date. The workers did not know

that they were the subjects of an empirical study. All the data were routinely collected

either by the personnel office, industrial engineers, or foremen at the three locations.

Although the total sample contained 2.920 individuals, complete data were not available

for all workers. In some cases workers may have been assigned to jobs for which there

were no measures of job complexity, in other cases the worker failed to answer all the

questions on the application form.               Also at each location different information was

available on the personnel records. In the southwest location, race data was not available

and only the screws half of the Crawford Physical Dexterity Test was administered; in the

other two locations both the pins and screws sections of the dexterity test were

administered before a worker was hired.6 The scores on this test were used by the firm in

deciding whether to hire the worker, but were not used in assigning workers to jobs. Job

assignments were random.


      An additional problem arose at the southwest location: the plant was divided into two

halves, with significantly different promotional opportunities.                   Unfortunately the data did

not reveal to which half of the plant particular workers were assigned, that initial

assignment may not have been random. At that plant, workers assigned to more complex

jobs had better promotional opportunities.                   Because of these unobserved differences in

 promotion opportunities, the relatively small sample size at location C. and the missing

 data on race, prior experience, employment status when they applied for this job, and

 scores on the pins section of the dexterity test, we did not use data from the southwest


 5.   Consecutive days absent are recordcd as a single occasion of absenteeism,
 6    The Crawford Physical Dexterity Test is a two-part test. In the first part an individual uses a tweezers to
      place pins into sleeves in a pegboard. In the second part small screws are screwed int. sleeves in the
      pegboard. Each part of the tcst takes three minutes and the number of operations performed in that time
      is tabulated,
                                                        -7-




location in estimating the quit equations below.

      Table   I   presents some summary statistics which provide a context within which to

evaluate the data. NA denotes data that were not available.




                                          Insert Table I about here



      Because this data set contains direct measures of three aspects of productivity: output

per hour, absenteeism (both percentage of days absent and occasions absent), and quit

propensity, it is possible to separately measure the effects of education for each of those

aspects of productivity. In addition, because the data includes a measure of the complexity

of the job to which the worker was assigned, one can estimate whether better educated

workers have a comparative advantage on more complex jobs.


     Previous economic studies of the effect of education on labor productivity have not

differentiated among the various components of productivity: either wages were used as

proxies for productivity, or supervisor evaluations were taken to represent productivity (see

Medoff and Abraham 11980]). Each of those approaches has been criticized: the former

for assuming that wages are proportional to marginal products;' the latter for treating

subjective supervisor evaluations as objective measures of productivity. Studies that rely on

productivity measures of experienced workers within a given job classification are also

subject to important sample selection biases.                 For example, suppose that education has a

positive effect on performance within a given job, and that, as Medoff and Abraham find,

7.   Studies that treat wagcs as equal to marginal products ignore the incentive, sorting and risk sharing effects
     of wages that woutd cause the ratio of wages to productivity to vary systematically with eitbcr experience
     or cducation. See, for example Salop [19741. Salop and Salop [19761. Lazear [19811. Calvo [19791,
     Stiglitz [19741. Caivo and Wellisz [19791. Weiss [19801. Gua&ch and Weiss [1980. 19821 Frccman [19771
     and Harris and Hoimstrom [19821.
                                                       -8-



education (and performance) have positive                    effects on a worker's probability of being

promoted. Then among workers within a job classificaüon, (i.e., workers who have not

been promoted) education could be negatively correlated with performance even though

education increases the performance of workers on the job.8 These effects can be seen in

Figure I. The downward sloping line is the criterion for promotion from job I to job 2. If

the dktdbution of perceived productivities were the same at all education levels, and were

a symmetric increasing hazard rate distribution, such as the normal or uniform, then on

both jobs the better educated workers would be perceived as being less able.9 This problem

does not arise for our data since none of the workers were promoted during the sample

period.'0 (Note that this sample selection bias does not affect the substantive point made

by Medoff and Abraham that within a sample of workers on the same job wages rise with

experience despite productivities falling with experience. We are simply pointing out that

in jobs in which there are significant promotional opportunities it is difficult to infer the

direct effect of expedence or education on productivity.)




                                         Insert Figure I about here



     Before showing how the data provides information on the relative contributions of the

sorting and learning aspects of education to earnings, we first examine the effect of



8.   Note that the same arguments could be made to explain why Medoff and Abraham find thai more
     experienced workers get worse supervisor recommendations. In most firms seniority, education and
     performance are all important criteria for promotion.
9.   An increasing hazard rate distribution     is   characterized by                 > C,   where F(x)   is   the
                                                                        dx   I—Fix)
    disiribution of productivity and f(x) is the density.
10, Another potential problem with using subjective evaluations is that supervisors might measure performance
     relative to expectations rather than relative to some absolute level as called for by the questionnaire.
     However. Medoff and Abraham present evidence that these subjective evaluations are not tmportant
     sources of bias.
                                                     .9.



education on earnings for some of the workers in our sample. and discuss whether

conclusions drawn from this subsample are applicable to a broader population.


    At the midwest location job applicants were asked their wage at their most recent job

and whether or not they were currently employed at that job.                        Using that data, we

estimated the effect of an additional year of education on the earnings of those workers

who were employed when they applied for their current job.'                  2
                                                                                 Earnings on the previous

job were used since for all workers at each plant monetary value of the job per hour

worked was approximately the same. Column 3 of Table 2, contains estimates of the effect

of various demographic variables on the logarithm of the previous hourly wage of workers

at that plant. Columns I and 2 reproduce the coefficients estimated by Wesley Mellow

using thc 1979 current population survey.




                                       Insert Table 2 about here



    Table 2 can be used in various ways depending on how ambitious we wish to be. First,

                    8 In wage
the estimates of              provide a measure of the effect of education on the earnings (in
                      8 educ

their previous job) for the subsample of workers for whom we have earnings data. We

used that estimate as a standard, and then calculated how much of that effect can be

explained by the partial correlation between education and various aspects of performance

for workers in that limited sample. This approach does not make any assumptions about

II. We excluded unemployed workers from the sample since the wage on their previous job, one which they
    either couldn't keep or chose to leave, does not seem reprcscntative of their expected earnings. In each
    case wages at the previous job were used since wages for experienced workers on their current job are a
    function solely of seniority and the output of the relevant pay group.
12. Obviously this is a biased estimate of the effect of Sucaton on earnings for workers in the population —
    the workers in our sample chose to leave the jobs for which we have recorded their earnings. In section 3
    we analyze the direction of this bias.
                                                  -la-


the sample being representative of any larger population, avoiding              issues   of sample

selection bias, but simply seeks to find those factors that contributed to earnings differences

on previous jobs for workers within this subsample. We assume that performance on

current jobs is correlated with previous employers' perceptions of expected performance,

e.g. characteristics that are correlated with a low quit propensity may have been rewarded

on the previous job even if realized tenure on that job was low. A cautious generalization

is to assume that workers for whom usable pay data was available are representative of

workers in the sample so that a year of education has approximately a 4c effect on the

hourly wage on other jobs for the workers in this sample.'

   A second use of the data in Table 2 is to provide a partial check of the importance of

sample selection bias for our sample. f one wishes to generalize our results outside our

sample.   As Heckman has shown, sample selection bias can have major consequences for

the analysis of mic!o-economic data (see Heckman [19791). Since our major concern is in

explaining the positive correlation between education and earnings. it is useful to check to

see if the return of education in our sample is biased. This is a potentially serious problem

because one would expect that better educated individuals who apply for these jobs are less

representative of their schooling cohort than are less well educated workers. However, the

estimated value of the return on education for workers for whom we had wage data is

roughly the same as returns estimated using the C.P.S. sample. Thus it does not seem that

our sample differs from the CPS sample in ways that grossly distort the effect of education

on earnings.     In addition, the sign of the effect of race, sex, education, tenure, and

experience on the logarithm of the wage is the same for our sample as for the randomly



t3. We had usable data on previous pay far 77 of the workers employed ai the midwest localion (those
   workers comprised 43% of the entire sample).
                                                    —II—




selected CPS sample.

      The personnel practices at these plants also provide grounds for believing that our

sample is representative. Only 22% of applicants whose applications were reviecd were

rejected. Of those, 85% were rejected because of a low score on the Crawford Physical

Dexterity Test. The estimation procedures included the worker's score on the dexterity test

as an independent variable, thus eliminating that potential source of sample selection bias.

In addition, the average pay increase for workers for whom we had wage data was 103%.

and workers waited more than 36 hours in freezing temperatures to receive job application

forms. This evidence indicates that the firm was paying above market wages, reducing the

sample selection problems derived from more sable" applicants not applying to the firm,

where ability refers to unobserved worker characteristics that are correlated both with

observed characteristics and with productivity)4 These high wages and the concomitant

excess supply of job applicants were routine features at the manufacturing locations of this

unionized firm.     At another location of this firm recall notices were recently mailed to

former employees: 90% of those who had found alternative work quit their jobs to return to

work for the firm. Consequently we have assumed that sample selection biases were small

and have not corrected for thcm. Alternatively we could have used the Bloom and

Killingsworth B-K        procedure to       correct for      sample selection       bias.    (Because     the

characteristics of excluded observations are unknown the standard Heckit correction can't

be used.) However, the B-K procedure is extremely sensitive to assumptions about the

distribution of the error term in the selection equation)5 Indeed, as they point out, the

14. Of course some residual sample selection bias occurs if unobserved attributes that tead workers to wait on
    tine longer, such as the ability io withstand the cold, are correlated with both performance measures and
    with observed attributes we are studying. At the midwest location we know the individual's ptace on tine.
    That number was uncorretaied with any of our measures of performance. Consequently, we have assumed
    thai this source of bias is small and have disregarded it
IS. See Olsen (1982) and Muthén and Jöreskog (1983).
                                              -12-



cquation being estimated is only identified if the assumed distribution of the error term of

the selection equation is nonlinear.


2. MODELS

    Typical]y an individual's choice of a level of secondary education is a function of both

observable and unobservable traits. The traits that are observable for our sample. and that

affect the schooling decision, include age, race, sex and manual dexterity. We grouped

together under the rubric 'stick-to-itiveness" all the unobserved attributes that affect      an

individual1s choice of a level of schooling. Stick-to-itiveness represents the combined effect

on schooling level of characteristics such as a low time discount rate, self-discipline, desire

for variety, and susceptibility to illness or to the urge to "take a day off.' Years of

schoo]ing. and high school graduation are used as proxies for the traits referred to as

stick-to-it iveness.


    In addition to representing these unobserved characteristics, education also indicates     a


level of training. We would expect that one skill that is acquired in school is the ability to

learn complex tasks. Of course, that skill may have been acquired prior to the years of

schooling across which our sample differs (almost the entire sample had at least nine years

of education) and influenced the individual's choice of a level of education,        Since we

intend to show the importance of the sorting effects of education, we assumc that skills

such as ability to learn complex tasks that affect the productivity of workers and that may

plausibly have been learned in secondary school were learned there.              That   is,   we

intentionally bias our analysis against a sorting explanation of the effect of education on

earnings.


   The performance equations we estimate are: whether or not the worker quit during his

first six months on the job, absenteeism (both days absent and occasions of absenteeism),
                                                -13-



and output per hour during the first month on the job as a fraction of his expected output

given the complexity of the job.        (These normalizations are routinely performed by the

industrial engineering staff as part of their efforts to compute the piece-rate for different

jobs.) The critical independent variables for the analysis are years of education, H.S.

graduation. job complexity, and a measure of the ematche between education level and job

complexity.

                     Match E    [education - mean (education)I times
                                [job complexity - mean (job complexity)I.

Job complexity was computed by taking the logarithm of the number of weeks the plant's

industrial engineering staff estimates     it   should take a ne employee to learn the job
(achieve the average productivity rating for the factory on that job). The main component

in the industrial engineers' calculation is the number of times per week an experienced

worker performs the task.

      In general we would expect stick-to-itiveness (those unobservable traits which lead

individuals to choose higher levels of schooling) to have its greatest effect on quit

propensities and to have a lesser effect on other aspects of behavior such as absenteeism.

On the other hand, one direct effect of education is to improve alternative opportunities,

increasing the probability of a quit.

2.1 The Quit Model

      Let S1 denote worker i's present value of his current job, V denote i's present value of

his best opportunity elsewhere, and M1 denote i's mobility costs (both real and psychic) of

a job change (housework and leisure are counted as jobs). Assume worker i is risk neutral

and quits if and only if

(I)
                                                            -14-



      To further specify U).          denote   the time discount rate of workers by r, worker i's age at

the start of the observation period by a. and the value of an individual's altertiative and

present job at time         t    by    r/.(z) and S10) respectively. Then, assuming mae workers

anticipate working until they are 65 years old, and normalizing t                     —0   for the time during

which the quit decision is made

                                                65—a, +3F

(2)                              V• —Si =          f        e_ [P(r) —SO)]dt.

where F is       a   dummy variable indicating whether a worker is a female, and                         is an

estimated     parameter of the problem.             If females anticipate working fewer years. we would

estimate 0<0. Next, let p10) represent the probability individual i changes jobs after the

observation period and before period z, and let the value of that job change be a weighted

average of the value of the previous job and some constant term B,,

      Assume that the values of the alternative and the present job grow at an exponential

rate so that

(3a)                 P(r) =     e"'   (Il—peOU V(o) + p,(r)(yP(0) + (l—)B,(0)]

(3b)                 S(r)   = c" [i—pz S(0)                 +p1Q)&yS(0)     + (l—)Be(0)]

where 0 <       y < 1.      Then, letting 6— (r—u)             and   letting a1 — 1   — (I—y)p1('). worker   I




quits   if and only if

                                  65—a,+F
(4)                                   f        a1e'    U-ç(o) —51(0)]dr >



      To   obtain an estimable quit equation from (4), assume:
                                                       -15-




(5)                                               aV(O) —

(6)                                               aS(O)

(7)                                                   M—

                   M65—a +dF)_
               (
Denoting                          by g(a,6,f3F), and substituting (5)-(7) into (4).


                                  fi if g(a.ô,$F) EX1$1       —          — X383 > 0
(8)
                                  1¼   o otherwise

Clearly, the net gain from changing jobs. the left hand side of (8). will be measured with

error. We assume this error term, denoted MQ' is distributed normally with zero mean and

is   i.i.d   Therefore, the quit equation we estimate is


                                       1   ifg(a,6.flF)EX,$, —A431         X3Th >
(9)
                                       o otherwise


      The worker characteristics that we measured and that aWect alternative opportunities

include education, race, sex, age, geographic location, dexterity, as measured by scores on

the physical dexterity test, and employment status when hired ( a worker who was on a

temporary lay-off from a desirable previOus job might be likely to quit when recalled from

the layoff).'6 Each of the factors affecting alternative opportunities could also aFfect job

satisfaction A',, thus the sign of those variables is indeterminant. However, we would

expect workers that were employed at the time of application to have a significantly higher


16-   One might argue that employers should be concerned with the total effect of education on the probability
      of a worker quitting taking into account the better alternative opportunities available to the better cducated
      workers. However, we are concerned with explaining wage differences in the market, not at the firm being
      studied. whcre there are no wage differences due to educalion differences. In the market cquilibrium better
      cducated workcrs have higher wages. There is no cvidence that the gain for a job change is positively
      correlated with cducation. Hence, alternative opportunities have the same attraction for all workers but
      better cducated workers have lower quit propensities. It is this difference in quit propensities, not of the
      effect of alternative opportunities. which contributes io differences in the equilibrium wage at different
      education levels.
                                                      -16-



level of job satisfaction (one reason they left the previous job was the anticipation of

increased job satisfaction) and hence to be less likely to quit. There are also job related

characteristics such as job complexity that affect job satisfaction but not alternative

opportunities.

    Finally we would expect stick-to-itiveness (as measured by years of education and high

school graduation), and whether the worker is married to independently impose additional

mobility costs. Those variables are not multiplied by g(a,ô,$F). They enter directly into

the quit equation as elements of X3)7


    As can be seen in Table 3a our major hypothesis is confirmed. I-I.S. graduation has a

strong negative effect on the probability of a worker quitting. This effect is independent of

the direct effect of schooling. We can reject the hypothesis that the only reason better

educated individuals have lower quit propensities is that they learned not to quit in school.


    Equation (9) was estimated by the method of maximum likelihood, using a pooled

sample from the southern and midwestern locations.                  Individuals were omitted if they were

laid-off before being with the firm for six months and selection bias was avoided by also

omitting workers in the same hiring cohort that would have been laid-off before six month

had they not already quit.            (All layoffs were made strictly by seniority). Because the

likelihood function       is   almost flat with respect to changes in              6   offset by compensating

changes in the vector of variables multiplied by 6, the standard errors of 6 and of the

coefficients     of variables multiplied by g(a,6,$F)                  are high.        Although statistically

 insignificant, they have values consistent with the model. Individuals such as white males

 that have better alternative opportunities are more likely to quit these jobs; workers who

 l7. See Mincer (i 978) for art analysis of the effect of marital status on worker mobility.
                                                     -17-




were employed when they applied for these jobs are                    less   likely to quit.   Similar

confirmation was provided by the negative value of . Our estimates suggest that females

in our sample anticipate spending 7 fewer years in the labor force than do males. This

finding is consistent with unpublished research by Jacob Mincer. Using the PSID sample

Mincer finds that women spend roughly 25% less time in the labor force than men. Finally

the similarity in the "t" statistics obtained using the gradient, hessian and White methods

suggests that the model is not grossly misspecifled.


   To obtain more precise estimates of 13 and 3,. and to make use of Mincer's findings on

the shorter work-life of womenwe reformulated equation (9) as


                                 I    if h (a,5,;F)[X1fl1—X2fl2kX3fl3>MQ
(9a)
                                 0 otherwise

                           —O5(i—.25F)(65—ag&_
                       C                         i
where h (a.&yF) =
                                     —.05


    That is. we impose the restrictions that r —            = .05 and that the effective work-life of

women is 25 shorter than that of men.

    Equation (9a) was estimated using a probit estimation procedure.                   The estimated

coefficients, and the effect of a change in each independent variable on the probability of a

worker quitting are presented in Table 3B.




                                Insert Tables 3A and 3B about here




       If job complexity and match are included as independent variables, when (9a)                  is


estimated the sample size falls to 1532 and the absolute value of all the I" statistics also

falls.    However, none of the results shown in Table 313 are significantly affected: high
                                               •18-



school graduation is estimated to correspond to a reduction in the probability of the worker

quitting of -.052 at a 10 quit probability and -.083 at a 20Sf quit probability. Similarly if

quit propensity is estimated separately for men and women in our sample, the effects noted

in Table 3B hold for each subsample.


   We checked      the   finding that   high    school     graduation significantly     affects quit

propensities using the 1968-1982 PSID sample. We estimate that each year of post—

primary education has a statistically and economically insignificant effect on a worker's

quit rate, while completion of high school is associated with a reduction in the individual's

quit rate of roughly one-third.




                                  Insert Table 4 about here



   When tenure was not included in a standard earnings equation using the 1981 PSID

data set, the effect of high school graduation on the logarithm of wages is more than 3

times as large as the effect of completion of either 11th or 13th grade. If tenure effects are

included as a right hand variables, the impact of high school graduation on wages falls by

40c. Thus, to a considerable extent, the higher earnings of high school graduates are due

to rewards to their longer tenure, or their expected tenure.               Even after correcting for

tenure, completion of 11th grade or 13th grade increases earnings by approximately 4.7%.

while graduation from high school increases earnings by approximately                   11%.   (This

coefficient was not statistically significant:        a   not surprising    result given the cubic

specification of the education function, as well as the permitted discontinuities at            1-1.5.


graduation and college graduation, and the scarceness of observations outside of 10 to             16


years of schooling. The cubic specification makes it unlikely that estimates of the effect of

high school graduation on earnings are capturing higher moments of the relationship
                                            -19-



between schooling and learning. Omitting the cubic term increases the "t statistics for all

the other education variables.




                                 Insert Table 5 about here



2.2 Absenteeism Model

   We first present a theoretical model that shows why differences in expected absenteeism

rates can significantly affect the wages of workers. We then estimate the discontinuities in

expected absenteeism rates associated with U.S. graduation for workers in our sample. In

evaluating the cost of absenteeism to firms. the nature of the production process is critical.

Traditional economic analyses of absenteeism assume a worker's marginal product is equal

to his wage and the cost of absenteeism is the wage of the worker. In this section we

consider the opposite polar case where the production process requires k workers to

operate. If more than k workers are present. the extra workers are redundant, they do not

increase output, If fewer than k workers appear, output is zero. To simplify the notation,

we assume output is linear in the number of workers, and normalize the value of output to

be equal to h. The number of workers hired is denoted by n. the wage of each worker by

w, the probability that a worker appears for work by p. and the expected profit of a firm

employing n workers by lr(n).     We let P(S, ? k) denote the probability that at least k

workers are present when n workers are hired.       Finally, we assume that workers are not

paid if they are absent (this assumption is made so that we can focus on the indirect costs

of absenteeism, rather than the direct cost of paying for a worker).

                                 ,r(n)iP(Sk)npw
The expected marginal product of the n+l worker is
                                                           .20-




                                                    )      k) —r(s,,    k)J.

The net expected value or the marginal worker is


          ir(n+I) — r(n) =                     k)      —   (n+l)pco — kF(S,,   > k) + npi.
                             —pkP(Sfl—l) +(1—p)1P(Sfl)—cP(Sfl)—pw,
                             =pc[ns            k—I) —r(s ) k)] —pw.

(10)                                        = k—I)

The expected value or the marginal worker is the probability that worker is decisive

(enables the plant to operate) times the value of the production process, minus that

workers expected      cost   to the firm.

     A firm increases the number of workers it employs so long as (10) is positive; it chooses

the smallest    n such   that


(ii)                                    p'(i—p)'"1 —pu <0. wherej —               k —   I
                             (n—j) !j

     If   we consider the    case where workers are paid even if they are absent, the usual policy

in   (iS. firms for routine levels or absenteeism, (10) is rewritten as

                                  piZ   r(s,   =   k    — I)   —



                and   (ii) as
                                    -
                                  pk                    p'(I—p)        —w <0
                                        (n—j)!j!

     In Appendix A we present an example showing the effect of changes in (]-p). the

probability of a worker being absent, on the profitability of the firm. As that example

illustrates, even if firms do not pay workers when they are absent, a given change in the

probability or a worker being present can have a more than proportional effect on the

equilibrium wage of the worker.                Consequently traits that are correlated with low
                                                -21-



absenteeism     rates may be significantly rewarded in the labor market.

      In estimating the determinants of   absenteeism we assume             that a worker is more likely

to   be absent the higher is his level of job dissatisfaction, and the lower his diligence. As in

the quit equation, job satisfaction is measured        by   the elements of X1. We use education

and    high school graduation as proxies for diligence—an individual who had insufficient

diligence or persistence to complete high school            is   likely to have poorer than expected

attendance habits.       We shall assume that absenteeism (both days and occasions of
absenteeism as a percentage of possible days worked) is a linear function of X... our proxies

for diligence.   anda normally distributed error term.

      In the quit equation we were able to separate the effect of education on job satisfaction

from its effect on stick-to-itiveness by arguing that job satisfaction has a greater effect on

the      quit    rates   of   workers    with    longer          expected     future   worklines.   The

education x g(a.&c3,F) term captured the effect of education on quits that was caused by

 its effect on either alternative opportunities or job satisfaction. This option is not available

 to us in the absenteeism equations: we assume workers are trading off one period gains and

 loses from absences. Consequently. the estimated coefficients on education and high school

 graduation could be estimating the effect of lower (or higher) levels of job satisfaction of

 better educated workers on their absence rates. The results from the previously estimated

 quit equations suggest this is not happening.

      As mentioned, two measures of absenteeism are used as dependent variables.

       Percentage of days absent is estimated using a Tobit procedure. Here, we are implicitly

 assuming that discrete absenteeism data can be approximated by a continuous distribution,

 and that the error term in the estimation equation is normally distributed but truncated so

 that absenteeism rates that the model predicts would be negative are recorded as zeros.
                                            -22-



We calculated the percentage of days workers were absent during their first six months on

the job; however, because not all the workers in our sample completed 6 months of work

those observations were weighted by the square root of the number of days for which they

were observed.




                                 Insert Table 6 about here



   We also used occasions of absent as a dependent variable.       In those calculations we

restricted ourselves to individuals who worked for 6 months, and used the negative binomial

procedure described by Hausman, Griliches and Hall (HGH).

   The implicit assumptions made by using the negative binomial model are that incidents

of absenteeism (several consecutive days absent are recorded as one incident) are generated

from a binomial distribution which, because of the large number of observations for each

individual, can be approximated by a Poisson arrival process; and that the X parameter

which describes the Poisson process has gamma distribution across the population. HGH

describe a maximum likelihood procedure to compute the effect of various independent

variables on X.   (Because the probability of being absent is a function of whether the

worker was absent on the previous day, the independence assumption required by the

binomial distribution is inappropriate for modeling percentage of days absent. It seems

more reasonable to expect incidents of absenteeism to be independently distributed.)




                                 Insert Table 7 about here



   Whether days or occasions are used as a measure of absenteeism we find that high

school graduation has a negative effect on absenteeism.         This effect   is   statistically
                                              -23-



significant regardless of the estimation procedure used. On the other hand education has a

positive, albeit statistically insignificant effect, on absenteeism. Thus, it seems unhkelv that

high school graduates learned in secondary school the traits that gave them low rates of

absenteeism.    Instead,   the   same unobserved characteristics that      lead   to successful

completion of high school seem to lead to low rates of absenteeism.


2.3 Output Per Hour

   The final indicator of performance explored was the logarithm of normalized output per

hour during the worker's first month at the plant.         As previously noted, newly hired

workers are randomly assigned to jobs and paid piece-rate. We assume that output per

hour is a linear function of all our observed characteristics, including the match term

described above.


   In Table 8 the OLS regression coefficients for this performance measure are reproduced

for each location with Hn statistics beneath them.




                                   Insert Table 8 about here



   From Table 8 we see that matching better educated people to more complex jobs has a

trivial effect on performance. This finding suggests that the pecuniary reward to education

for the workers in the sample is not due to skills learned in school that help those workers

learn complex production tasks.     In Table 2 we computed the effect of education on the

logarithm of normalized previous pay for workers in Plant A. Our best estimate was that

each year of secondary education had a 4-5% effect on the pay of the workers in our

sample. On the other hand, restricting the sample to workers in that plant we find that

each year of education has only a 1fl effect on the output of workers in that plant. This
                                               -24-



effect was not statistically significant.


   Thus to the extent that the same characteristics that affect a workers output, ability to

perform complex jobs, absenteeism, and quit propensity on their current job had a similar

effects on performance on previous jobs (where there are significant pay differences by

education), the data suggest that pay differences among the workers in our sample that are

attributable to education are, in large part, due to factors such as a lower propensity to be

absent or to quit. and not exclusively due to differences in expected output per hour or the

ability of the better educated workers to learn more complex manufacturing jobs. Of

course, these pay differences may be due to the ability of better educated workers to

qualify for more complex non-manufacturing jobs, or for their performance to be higher in

non-manufacturing jobs. On the other hand, for many of the jobs in the service sector it

seems unlikely that      skills   learned in secondary school affect output.   The implicit

assumption we are making is that the effect of education on productivity, and on the ability

to perform complex tasks, for the jobs encompassed by our data is similar to its effect on

the previous jobs of the workers in our sample. Figure 2 describes the distribution of jobs

in our sample according to the number of weeks required to learn each job.



                                    Insert Figure 2 about here


Although one should be extremely cautious about generalizing these results beyond our

sample of semi-skilled production workers, the PSID data provides an indirect means of

gathering evidence of the impact of a low quit propensity on the wage premium received by

high school graduates.
                                            -25-



2.4 Magnitude of Effects

   There is considerable evidence that during business slumps firms hoard workers: pay

wages above the value of the product of the workers.     Implicit contract theory maintains

that these high levels of wages and employment are consequences of optimal risk sharing

between firms and workers. Consequently during severe business slumps we would expect

firms to benefit from (or be hurt less by) quits and unpaid absences. Consequently, to

obtain quantitative estimates of the effect of the low quit propensity and low absenteeism of

high school graduates on their wages, we interacted county unemployment rates with high

school graduation while estimating a wage equation for males workers in the PSID data set

between 1968 and 1981. As in Tables 4 and 5 we included education, education squared.

and education cubed as independent variables to reduce the possible role of high school

graduation in approximating a precluded degree of curvature in the relationship between a

dependent variable and education.




                                 Insert Table 9 about here



   We estimate that, if the county unemployment rate is zero, graduation from high school

has roughly 3 times as great an effect on wages as does completion of 11th grade. While,

if the county unemployment rate is over 12%, the wage premium received by high school

graduates disappears.


   This pro.cyciical behavior of the wage premium for completion of high school             is


especially surprising given the occupational distributions of high school dropouts and high

school graduates.   High school dropouts are over represented among blue collar workers

(549 of the blue collar workers in the PSID sample were high school dropouts, while only

10% of the white collar workers were high school dropouts), Raisian finds that the wages
                                                      -26-



of blue collar workers relative to those of white collar workers are procyclical. Hence the

different occupations chosen by high school graduates and high school dropouts would

cause the wage premium for high school graduation to behave counter-cyclically.


     We also found a general procyclical effect of unemployment on wages—however, that

relationship was sensitive to the particular specification chosen. When logarithms of the

unemployment rates are used as independent variables the coefficient of the logarithm of

the national unemployment rate is statistically insignificant, while the coefficient of the

logarithm of the county unemployment rate minus the logarithm of the national

unemployment rate is positive and statistically significant. This variable was introduced to

allow for the possibility, suggested by Hall, that areas of the county that have high

unemployment rates pay high wages.t9


3. SAMPLE SELECTION BIAS

     As we discussed above, we have strong reasons for believing that sample selection bias

is   not a serious problem for our sample.             However, to the extent sample selection is a

problem. the biases introduced prejudice the analysis against the results we obtained.

Hence our results are stronger than would be indicated from the estimated coefficients and

"I" statistics.

     Since only a trivial number of applicants were rejected for reasons other than low

scores on the dexterity test, we shall restrict the discussion in this section to the biases



18. We used the same classification scheme as Raisian in determining which 2 digit occupations were blue
    collar and which were white collar.
19. Note that the formulation we have chosen has the lorm lnKç, — xØ + ,,. where Tht —N(O.o'). Coleman has
    argued against assuming that ,, is distributed lid, if one wishes to study cyclical effccts. He argues that a
    more reasonable mode! is tnw, —x1, 5+r+t,. which allows br cyclical effects in the error term, and a GLS
    estimation procedure. Consequently, the ", statistics br our OLS estimates of the cyclical variables
    should be viewS with caution.
                                             -27-




introduced from the application decision of workers.

    Imagine an unobserved application equation. A worker applies for a job with this firm

if and only if

(12)                                       Xy >

Having applied and been accepted at this job, the worker subsequently quits if and only if


(13)                                       > E2l1XY > E'),

and is absent if and only if


 (14)                              X,fl, > E31(X1 >

       Because better educated workers had higher wages on their previous jobs
                                                                               and better

 alternative opportunities. we would expect the coefficient on education in (12) to be

                                              and education are negatively correlated.     We
 negative.   Since (12) is not observed.

 expect that, at least for employed applicants.     is positively correlated with E2 and . A

 worker who was easily induced to leave his previous job is likely to be easily induced to

 leave his current job. This low level of commitment to his job might also be expected to
                                                                                     and
 lead to a higher than expected probability of being absent. Therefore, we expect E2
                                                                        Hence1 sample
 to be negatively correlated with education in equations (13) and (14).

 selection causes an upward bias on the estimated coefficients on education and H.S.
                                                                               of the
 graduation in the quit and absenteeism equations. leading to an underestimate
                                                                       propensity to be
 magnitude of the negative correlation between H.S. graduation and the
                                                           better educated workers, they
 absent or to quit. Because most firms pay higher wages to

  are not subject to this form of sample selection bias.
                                                             In the market equilibrium it is the

                                                                         the rate of return
  unbiased correlation between education and performance that determines

  to education. Thus we have underestimated the effect of the negative correlation between
                                                                         between earnings
  H.S. graduation and absenteeism and quit propensity on the correlation
                                                     •28•



and H.S. graduation.


4.   COMPARISON WITH PREVIOUS STUDIES

4.1 Quit Rates


     Previous estimates of the effect of education on quit propensity have varied widely.

However, with the exception of recent work by Flinn, Miller. and Mincer and Jovanovic,

those studies treated tenure as an independent variable without correcting for worker

heterogeneity and hence suffered from serious simultaneous equation biases)°

     To see the source of that bias, imagine an unobserved tenure equation

(15)                                        tenure—f(X) +,
as   well as an estimated quit equation.

                                            I   if X$1 + (tenure) fl >     '7:

(16)                               Quit—
                                            0 otherwise

     By including tenure          in   the quit equation. (16)      is   holding tenure constant when

estimating the effect of the components of X on quit probabilities, if a particular element

of X (such as education) had a negative effect on quit propensity it would have a positive

effect on tenure. Holding tenure fixed forces education to be negatively correlated with ni

Since    n   and   '72   are   positively correlated—individuals who for unobserved reasons have

more tenure than expected are likely to have lower than expected quit propensities—

education     is   negatively correlated with '72 Consequently, the estimated coefficient for

20. The papers by Flinn and Miller do not direcily address ihe question ol the effect of education on quli
     propensity: however in private conversaiions they confirmed thai their unreported results were consisteni
     with the results in this paper. The Mincer and Jovanovic paper partially corrected for worker
     heterogeneity by including previous mobility as an independent variable in the quit equation they
     estimated. They found that with this correction education was negatively correlated with quit ropensity.
                                              -29-




education in   Equation (16)    is   biased upward.     This bias could cause the estimated

correlation between education and quit propensity to be positive even if the true

relationship is negative.


   One might argue that it is the biased not the unbiased coefficient on education that

should concern us. That is, suppose a wage equation is estimated with tenure included as

an independent variable.       If education   is   affecting wages through its effect on quit

propensity. the biased coefficient from the quit equation on education partially explains why

people with the same tenure levels, but different education levels, receive different wages.


    A wage equation that includes tenure as an independent variable does not, however.

explain why earnings of better educated workers rise more rapidly with tenure than do the

earnings of less well educated workers. One possible explanation is that employers perceive

that better educated workers have lower quit propensities than do less well educated

workers.   Firms invest more resources in training better educated workers since the low

 quit propensities of those workers enable firms to recapture their investments in human

 capital. These differences in post-schooling training would result in steeper wage-tenure

 profiles for better educated workers. Consequently. schooling, by providing a signal of quit

 propensity. would be rewarded in the short-term by greater training, and in the long-run by

 higher life-time earnings.     This argument does not preclude a social return from the
                                                                                     quit
 signaling aspects of education—directing firm specific training to workers with low

 propensities results in efficiency gains.


 4.2 Credentialism

     We have argued that the negative correlation between high school graduation and both

 quit propensity and absenteeism gives some a support for a sorting explanation br the

 positive correlation between education and earnings. There are several potential problems
                                                    -30-



with using this      line of reasoning.         First,     the   literature review by R. Lavard and

6. Psacharapoulos "The Screening Hypothesis and Returns to Education" seems to suggest

that the effect of education on earnings is not significantly greater for completion of high

school or college than for other years of education.                  However, there       is   considerable

evidence that the rate of return to education is greatest in primary school (perhaps because

persistence as reflected in a low quit propensity and low absenteeism is taught there) and

lowest in post-secondary school (see George Psacharapoulos "Returns to Education: an

Updated Internationa) Comparison). Because a higher proportion of the education of high

school dropouts is in primary school, we would expect their rates of return to education to

be higher than the returns to high schod graduates even if completion of 12th grade has a

much greater effect on earnings than does completion of 11th or 10th grade.                           In our

sample, and in the PSID sampk we find that completion of high school has a strong effect

on earnings independent of the effect of education on earnings.21


    Another possible reason for the wide range of estimates of the effect of high school

graduation on wages or earnings is that previous studies did not allow for the effect of the

unemployment rate on the premium for high school graduation. As we observed in Table 9

a high unemployment rate would wipe out the wage premum received by high school

graduates. Hence, studks of the effect of high school graduation on earnings are sensitive

to the relevant unemployment rate for their sampks.




21. As discussed above, we estimate that for white males in the PSID sample completion of 11th or 13th grade
    increases wages by roughly 4.7% while high school graduation increases wages by I4.9. Similarly we
   estimated that completion of 15th grade increases wages by only 5.9% while compieting 16th grade
   (graduation from college) increases wages by 144t Similarly Olsen. White and Shefrin found that, after
   correcting for risk, the pecuniary beneñts of post-secondary education only outweigh the costs if the
   individual graduates from college. In a private conversation Shefrin reported that they also found the same
   result for secondary education and high school graduation.
                                              -31-




4.3 Absenteeism

   A second potential criticism of our proposed investigation is that absenteeism and quit

propensity are not important aspects of the productivity of workers. This claim was made
                                                                                CostH.
about absenteeism by Steven Allen in How Much Does Absenteeism                           The


productivity equation Allen estimates is extremely sensitive to his model specification. He

treats labor, absenteeism and the capital/labor ratio as independent variables in a Cobb—

Douglas production function estimating output per worker.          However, firms with low

absenteeism   rates   choose   high   capital-labor   (KIL)   ratios: the negative effect of

absenteeism on output is greater the higher is the KIL ratio (alternatively firms whose

technology dictates high KIL ratios will choose wage schedules and hiring criteria which

result in low absenteeism rates). Similarly. firms with high absenteeism rates employ more

workers to ensure adequate replacements in case of excessive absenteeism. The KIL ratio,

labor and absenteeism should all be treated as endogenous variables.    This is not a problem

 for our analysis. We did not estimate the effect of absenteeism on productivity. We

 showed which worker characteristics were correlated with absenteeism and simulated, in

 Appendk A. the possible impact of differences in absenteeism on the market wage of

 workers.


    To see the importance of Allen's specification on his results. suppose the only cost of

 absenteeism is overmanning as reflected in a lower capital-labor ratio. Then, output per

 hour could either be specified as a function Ii () of both the capital-labor ratio and the

 absenteeism rate for the firm or as a function g() of the capital—labor ratio. If g() is a

 geometric function while h    () is significantly different from the product of two geometric
 functions, then Allen's econometric specification would have all the costs of absenteeism

 being captured by the capital-labor ratio.
                                              -32-



     In   an earlier paper Allen (1981) estimated determinant of absenteeism.   In that paper

after correcting for wage differences he found that education does rot have a statistically

significani effect on absenteeism and the effect of wages on absenteeism is small, but

statistically significant.   However if absenteeism directly effects wages—so that to the

extent that better educated workers are less likely to be absent they are paid more—then

Allen may be measuring an extra-ordinarily large response of wages to absenteeism, as well

as a significant relationship between education and absenteeism.


4.4 Signaling

     There have been several previous empirical studies of the possible signaling effects of

education on earnings. In particular John Riley [19791 and Kenneth Wolpin [19771 have

each used data on the relative incomes of self employed workers and employees of firms to

support a signaling explanation for the correlation between education and earnings. The

results in this paper are consistent with their findings in support of signaling theory.

However, their results would also be generated by a pure human capital model with

unobserved heterogeneity across workers and random shocks affecting school leaving dates.

In that scenario the most able workers at any education level chse jobs where

productivity is directly rewarded. Consequently, as Riley and Wolpin find, earnings would

be higher in those occupations.      (See Weiss [19801 for a non-signaling model in which

earnings are systematically higher for the self-employed.)


5.   REVIEW OF RESULTS

     Recent large sample studies have shown returns to education in the region of 5%. We

find a similar rate of return for the pay on their previous job for workers in our sample. A

large component of this rate of return is the discontinuous increase n wages associated

with high school graduation.
                                              .33-



   Presumably the higher earnings of high school graduates are due to their higher

productivitY relative to high school dropouts.            We investigated four components of

productivity: output per hour, comparative advantage on more complex task, propensity to

quit, and propensity to be absent. We found that high school graduation appeared to be

uncorrelated with output per hour, and high school graduates did not appear to have a

comparative advantage on more complex jobs. On the other hand, high school graduates

were significantly less likely to quit or to be absent.

    We also found that the significant wage premium received by high school graduates in

the PSID sample is pro-cyclical. We estimated that when the county unemployment rate

reaches 12% this wage premium vanishes. Consequently, if a low quit propensity and a low

rate of absenteeism, are valued more during booms than slumps this data provides further

support to the argument that a considerable portion of the estimated return to high school

graduation is due to the sorting effect of that credential.

    Of course, one should be cautious in generalizing from this study to the economy as a

whole.   In some occupations skills learned in secondary school clearly have a major effect

on productivity    For our sample it seems that those unobserved attributes that lead some

 individuals to go to school longer than others. piay a significant role in explaining the

 higher earnings of better educated workers.
_____________




                                     REFERENCES


Allen. Steven. "An Empirical Model of Work Attendance.        Review of Economics and
        Statistics. Vol. 63, No. 1 (February 1981): 77-87.

Allen, Steven. "How Much Does Absenteeism Cost," Journal of Human Resources, 43
        (Summer 1983): 379-393.

Bloom. David and Mark Killingsworth.     "Correcting for Truncation Bias Caused by a
        Latent Truncation Variable. NBER Technical Working Paper No. 38, 1984.

Calvo, Guillermo. "Quasi-Walrasian Theories of Unemployment," American Economic
       Review, 69. No. 2, (May 1979): 102-107.

Calvo, Guillermo and Stan Wellisz. "Hierarchy. Ability and Income Distribution," Journal
       of Political Economy, 87, No. 5, (October 1979): 991-1010.

Coleman,   Thomas.    "Cyclical Variations in Individual     Wages   and   Employment
        unpublished mimeo, University of Chicago. 1984.

Fein,   Mitchell.   Job Enrichment Does Not Work," Atlanta Economic Review,          55.
         (November-December 1975).

Freeman. Smith. "Wage trends as Performance is Plays Productive Potential." The Bell
     Journal of Economics, 8, (Autumn 1977); 419-443.

Guasch, J. Luis and Andrew Weiss. Wages As Sorting Mechanism in Markets with
      Imperfect Information: A Theory of Testing." Review of Economic Studies, 47, No.
        3. (July 1980): 653-664.

                "An Equilibrium Analysis of Wage-Productivity Gaps." Review of
        Economic Studies. 49, (October 1982): 485-497.

Hackman. Richard. On the Coming Demise of Job Enrichment." Department of
     Administrative Sciences, Yale University, Technical Report. No. 9. December
         1974.

Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstrom. "A Theory of Wage Dynamics," Review of
       Economic Studies, XLIX (1982); 315-333.

Hausman, Jerry and Bronwyn Hall and Zvi Griliches. wEconometrics Models for Count
     Data with an Application to the Patents - R&D Relationship," Econometrica. 52
         (July 1984): 909-938.

Heckman. James. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error." Econometrica. 47,
      (1979); 73-92.

Heckman. James.     "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation. Sample
        Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for Such
         Models. Annals of Economic and Social Measurement. 5 (1976); 475-492.
Layard. R. and G. Psacharapoulos. "The Screening Hypothesis and Returns to Education,"
      Journal of Political Economy, 82 (September/October 1954): 985-998.

Lazear. Edward, "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement," Journal of Political Econorni,
       87. No. 6 (December 1979): 1261-1284.

Liu, Pak-Wai and Yue-Chim Wong. uEducational Screening by Certificates: An Empirical
       Test,u Economic Inquiry, 20, (January 1982); 72-83.

Medoff. James and Katherine Abrahams.          uExperience Performance and Earnings,'
       Quarterly Journal of Economics. 95, No. 4 (December 1980): 703-736.

Mincer, Jacob and Boyan Jovanovic. "Labor Mobility and Wages.' Studies in Labor
       Markets, Sherwin Rosen, editor. University of Chicago Press. 1981. pp. 21-64.

Mincer, Jacob. Wamily Migration Decisions," Journal of Political Economy, 86, No. 5,
       (October 1978): 749-774.

Mirves, P. H. and E. E. Lawler. "Measuring the Financial Impact of Employee Attitudes,u
       Journal of Applied Psychology. 62, (1977): 1-8.

Muthén, B. and K. G. Joreskog. "Selectivity Problems in Quasi-experimental Data."

Nicholson, N. and C. A. Brown and J. K. Chadwick-Jones. Absence from Work and Job
       Satisfaction," Journal of Applied Psychology. Vol. 61 (December 1976) pp. 728-
       737.

Olsen, Lawrence, Halbert White, and H. M. Shefrin. "Optimal Investment in Schooling
       When Incomes are Risky, Journal of Political Economy. 87, (June 1979): 522-
        539.

Olsen, R. J. 'Distributional Tests for Selectivity Bias and a More Robust Likelihood
       Estimator," International Economic Review, 23 (1982); 223-240.

Psacharapoulos, George. uReturns to Education: An Updated International Comparison,"
       Comparative Education, 17, 1981: 321-341.

Riley, John. "Testing the Educational Screening HypothesiC Journal of Political Economy,
        87, No 5, Part 2 (October 1979) 5227-5252.

Salop. Steven and Joanne Salop. "Self Selection and Turnover in the Labor Market,'
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90, No. 4 (November 1976): 629-49.

Stiglitz. Joseph. "Alternatives Theories of Wage Determination and Unemployment in
         L.D.C.'s: The Labor Turnover Model? Quarterly Journal of Economics, 88 (May
        1974): 194-227.

 Taylor, Daniel. Absence from Work Among Full-Time Employees." Monthly Labor
        Review, 104, (March 1981): 68-70.

 Viscusi. Kip. "Sex Differences in Workers Quitting,u Review of Economics and Statistics
      Vol. 62. No. 3 (August 1980) pp. 388-398.

Weiss. Andrew. "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets With Flexible Wages.'
       Journal of Political Economy. 88, No. 3 (May 1980): 526-558.

Weiss. Andrew. A Sorting-cum-Learning Model of Education,u Journal of Political
       Econorn; (June 1983): 420-442.

White, Hal. "Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Misspecified Models," Econometrica, 50,
          1982: 1-25.

Wolpin,     Kenneth.   Education and    Screening   uAmerican   Economic   Review,1   67,
          (December 1977); 949-58.
                            TABLE I

               Mean Value of the Relevant Variable


                                 Plant A       Plant B    Plant C
                                 Midwest        South    Southwest
                                  Plant         Plant      Plant


% White                                .72        .76       NA

% Black                                .24        .20       NA

Age                                24.6         25.3       26.7


Education                           12.1        12.2       11.9


¶ Employed at time of
   application (I if employed,
   0 otherwise)                          .64       .29        .38


E3 Male                                  .57       .19        .41


                                         .43       .48           .42
% Married

Previous work
   experience (in years)              3.54       NA         NA

Weeks to learn job                     7.5        5.1       11.7


Score on screws test                  22.6      21.3        24.0


Score on pins test                    22.4      23.5        NA

 lstmonthoutput                    III          63         105


 % days absent                         2.96       2.3        31

 %occasionsabsent                      1.2        1.1        1.12


 Quit rate in first
   six months on job                   9.8%      18.2%      l2.3'c
                                                              TABLE 2

          REGRESSION ESTIMATES COMPARING THE IMPACT OF VARIOLS VARIABLES
                          ON LOG HOURLY EARNINGS IN 1979

                                Current Population Survey Samplc Vcrsus Wciss Samplc
                                                  ("t — statistics in parentheses)



                                                         CPS                         CPS
                                                     With Size                       With                       Midwcst
                                                     of Firm                    Unionization                     Plant


                                                            -.070                        -.073                       -.027
           Non-White
                                                           (7.14)                      (5.24)                     (-1.52)

           Female                                            -.343                       -262                      -239
                                                          (5744)                      (21.86)                   (-1417)

                                                              .047                        .045                        .185
           Education
                                                           (573)                        (3.46)                     (2.48)

                                                              084                           .035                    -570
           (Education/JO)2
                                                           (2.98)                        (.69)                    (-203)

                                                                021                         .012                       .027
           Tenure
                                                          (10.60)                       (4.42)                       (.707)

                                                             -043                         -029                      -.120
            (Tenurc/iO)
                                                          (12.73)                       (6.26)                    (-1.70)

                                                                .022                        M14                        049
            Age-Educ.-6
                                                          (1196)                        (4.88                       (4.03)

            ((Age-Educ..61/i0)                              •.033                         -042                      -0.60
                                                          (15.84)                       (6.73)                     (-5.45)

                                                                .038                        .062                        .0006
            Edjc. Times Tenure
                                                            (2.98)                      (5.25)                       (.19)

                                                              -069                       -.039                        -.002
             Educ. Timcs (Age-Educ.-6)
                                                            (6.31)                      (3.89)                      (2.30)

                                                           yes                          yes                         yes
             Married Dummy
                                                       18.551                      18.551                       1,251
            Number of Observations
                                                                .436                          .524                      .207




                                                                                 .nd tither nrm lilt ot union membership. whether or no' the
•  CPS data .1w has dummy variables (or SMSA. rqio.z. xcupalio.l. indusIr).
   worker was employed part.time. and unionization of industry.
                                                                                                                The dependent variable is the
" Weiss data is from the o.zly plant iii this ,iudy tot which war dga cci 'he previous job is avijiable.
                                                                                     in 'he mony at the t,me they held that job.
                                                                               wage                                                         or
   logarithm of ihe wage thor most           nt job divided  by  the mesh
            mosi recent previous pa)          on their prtscni job the life time wages or all Ihe workers of .11 Ihe workers are apptoxlmalely
    In [ average pay in L.S. at that date
    ider.iical.
(The smaller R2s in columns 3 and 4 compared with columns      I   and 2 are due. in part.
to less variance in earnings within the Weiss sample.)

Evaluating the effect ol additional year or education, tenure and experience al the
nican values in each sample br education. tenure and experience:




  a in (wage)                     .064                 .041                    .044
    a educ.
  81n (Igg)                       M16                  .012                    .031
    ô tenure
       a In (wage)                .0056                 oo4o                   .061
  a experience (proxy)
                                          TABLE 3A


       PROBABILITY OF QUIflING WITHIN FIRST SIX MONTHS ON THE JOB
             MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATION PROCEDURE


                                 Estimated                     Standard Errors
                                 Coefficient              ("C' statistics below)
                                     or           Gradient        Hessian        White's
       Independent Variable*       Value          Method          Method         Method

   o                                      26          2.04            .61           .28
                                                     (-.13)         (-.42)        (-.91)

     (effect of being female         -6.81           42.3           10.6           4.19
   on anticipated work-life)                          (-.16)        (-.63)       (-1.62)

   H. S. Graduate                     -.342           .140            .135          .136
                                                   (-2.44)         (-2.54)       (-2.61)

   College Graduate                   -.242            .367            .397         .444
                                                     (-.66)          (-.62)       (-.59)

   Education                          -.07             .171            .057         .035
                                                     (-.44)          (-.67)       (-.76)

   g(a.b.dF) x education                 .015          .143           .044          .029
                                                      (.11)          (.34)         (.53)

   Married                            -.091            .078           .077           .077
                                                   (-1.16)         (-1.18)       (-1.17)

   g(a.O..ãF) x employed              -.098            .774           .231          .107
   at application                                    (-.13)          (-.43)       (-.92)

   Number of observations         2146

   Log Likelihood                 -741.99


Other independent variables included scores on each half of the dexterity test. race-location
interactions, location effects, age and an intercept term. We used three different methods
for calculating the standard errors because there is no consensus as to which is the correct
technique. If the model is correctly specified. the three methods give the same asymptotic
estimates. The estimates we obtain are sufficiently similar to provide some confidence that
the model is not grossly misspecified. Computational costs precluded performing the model
specification test suggested by White. If the model is misspecified then only the White
standard errors have any economic content.
                                            TABLE 3B


                               PROBABILITY OF QUElliNG
                               WITHIN FiRST SIX MONTHS*


                                                                              .s   Quit Probability
                                                                                 from a 1 unit
                                                                                 change in the
                                                                             Variable Evaluated at
Independent Variable                        Coefficient      "s" statistic    Quit Probability of

                                                                               109            20

Intercept                                    -.922              -L54

                                              -.341             -2.54        -.059          -.096
ItS. Graduate

                                              -.280               -.72       -.049          -.078
College Graduate

                                              -.106              -1.32       -.019          -.030
Education

                                              -.097              -1.26       -.017          -.027
Marrkd
                                               .0055              1.45        .00097         .0015
h (a.i.;F) x education

                                              -.00029             -.32       -.000052       -.000083
h(a.&,F)XagC

h(a.&;F) x male                                .0012               i6         .00022         .00034


            x white x south                    .068               4.58        .012           .019


                                              -.036              -2.34        -.0062         -.0099
h(a.&;F) x south

                                               .0061              1.00         .0011         .0017
            x white x midwest

h(a.&;F) x employed at application            -.0023             -4.95        -.0040         -.0064

                                               .00020               .34        .000035        .000056
h(Q.&,F)x pins section
of dexterity test

                                                .00094             1.94        .00016         .000:6
            x screws section
 of dexterity test

 Number of Observations                               2146

   set equal to -.25. 6 set equal to .05.

 .124 of observations had Q — i; the mean of h(a.&F) is 16.12
                                                   TABLE 4

                     QUITS PER YEAR FOR MALE PRIVATE SECTOR
                        EMPLOYEES IN PSID SAMPLE 196882#

                                       ("t" statistics in parentheses)


                              Independent                             Coefficient
                               Variable

                      H.S. graduate                                     -.030
                                                                      (-3.58)

                      Education                                          -.024
                                                                      (-2.26)

                      Education Squared                                  .0030
                                                                       (2.53)

                      Education Cubed                                   -.00011
                                                                      (-2.76)

                      Ln(Mean Experience                                 -.025
                      while in sample)                                (-3.67)

                      New E!ltrant                                       .014
                                                                       (1.62)

                      Non-white                                           •.030
                                                                       (-5.05)

                      Age                                                -.0023
                                                                       (-5.30)

                      Mean Cty Unemp. minus                              -.003
                      Mean Nat. Unemp                                  (-1.79)

                      Mean Quits per year                                 .092

                      Number of Observations                             3781

                                                                          .16


#    Each observation was weighted by the square rgot or the number of years the indivduaI was in the sample.
•   The other independent variables were S locations and two urban-suburban dummy variables, marital status.
    number of dependents, disabled, dummy variables for whether the individual has fewer than 2 years and
    fewer than 5 years of experience, as well as an intercept term.
                                          TABLE 5

             DEPENDENT VARIABLE: LN VAGES FOR 1981 PSID
              SAMPLE OF WHITE MALES EMPLOYEES IN THE
                          PRIVATE SECTOR
                              ('t' statistics below coefficients)


                    Independent                           Coefficient
                     Variable *

             Education                                        .247
                                                            (2.57)

             Education Squared                               -017
                                                           (-170)

             Education Cubed                                  .00047
                                                            (1.47)

             H.S. Graduate                                    .1035
                                                            (2.03)

             Cotleuc Graduate                                 .075
                                                            (1.03)

             Number of Observations                          1638




The ocher in dependeni variables wcrç S Iccailons and iwo urban-suburban dumm' variables. mariial
sculus. union membership. experience, experience squared. and experience cubed. tell as an iniercepi
icr iii.
                                                   TABLE 6

                              DAYS ABSENT AS A PERCENTAGE
                                    OF DAYS WORKED

                                        Tobi Estimation PrQcedure
                                         6 statistics in parentheses)

                                 Independeift Variable             Coefficient

                               Intercept                               7.38
                                                                      (2.54)
                               Male                                       .398
                                                                        (-.95)
                               Age                                      -.143
                                                                     (-5.89)
                               Education                                  .133
                                                                         (.58)
                               1-1.5.   Graduate                      -2.35
                                                                     (-4.04)
                               College Graduate                       -1.34
                                                                       (-.69)
                               Married                                   -.046
                                                                         (.1 3)

                               Job Complexity                            -.12
                                                                        (-.45)
                               Job      Match                           -.21
                                                                     (-1 .10)

                               Employed at Application                -1.23
                                                                     (-3.56)
                               Number of Observations                       1890

                               Lo Likelihood                            -4781.2




# The data for Tables 6 and 7 come from all locations of the firm, rather thaii the two included in the quit
    equations.
*   Each observation was weighted by the square root of the number of days worked- Dummy variables for the
    locations of the pLants. thç scores on the crews section of the denerity tt and race-location interactions
    ;t the two plants at which we had race data were also jncluded as independent variable.
                                               TABLE 7

                            OCCASIONS ABSENT DURING THE
                             FIRST SIX MONTH ON THE JOB

                                      Negative Binomial Mode'
                                     (; statistics in parentheses)'

                               Independent Variable*                Coefficient

                              Intercept                                2.70
                                                                      (5.68)
                              Male                                     -.11
                                                                     (-2.10)
                              Age                                      -.036
                                                                     (-9.20)
                              Education                                4.43
                                                                      (1.43)
                              H.S. Graduate                            -.239
                                                                     (-2.59)
                              College Graduate                         -.028
                                                                       (—.11)

                              Married                                    .0085
                                                                        (is)
                               Match                                     .011
                                                                        (.35)

                               Job Complexity                           -.0011
                                                                       (-.027)
                               Employed at Application                  -.14
                                                                      (-2.72)
                               Number of Observations                         1565

                               Log Likelihood                            1333.5




# Other independent variables were location, and score on the screws  section ol the dexterity test, and race-
                                                               available.
   location interactions br the two plants at which race data was
   Standard errors were calculated using the Hessian method.
                                          TABLE S

                     NORMALIZED FIRST MONTH OUTPUT

                          Estimated Iy Ordinary Least Squares
                               ("t' statistics in parcrtheses)


                        independent Variable'        Coefficient

                       Intercept                         73.57
                                                          (7.30)
                       Male                               9.29
                                                         (6.07)

                       Age                                 -.10
                                                        (-1.08)

                       Education                          1.35
                                                         (1.61)

                       H.S. Graduate                       -.21
                                                          (-.08)

                       College Graduate                 -12.61
                                                         (-2,02)

                       Married                             3.86
                                                          (2.87)

                       Score on                                .25
                       Dexterity Test                     (1.75)

                       Match                                   .49
                                                           (.59)

                       Job Complexity                      5.83
                                                          (5.51)

                        Employed at Application            1.13
                                                           (.8 3)

                        Number of Observations         I 859


                        Multiple R-Square                      .380




Other independent variables were location dummies.
                           TABLE 9


                LOG OF NOMINAL WAGES#
                                  SECIOR*
FOR MALE EMPLOYEES IN THE PRIVATE

                  ("ta statistics in Parentheses)


            Variable                   Parameter Estimates

                                        -.0087         -.0087
HS * County Unemp. Rate
                                      (-3.61)        (-3.61)

                                         .109           .111
H.S. Graduation
                                       (5.69)         (5.81)

                                         3.25          3.15
intercept
                                        (7.01)        (6.78)

                                          .084          .084
Education
                                        (4.97)        (5.01)

Education:                               -.0070         -.0069
                                       (-3.78)        (-3.77)

                                          .00030         .00030
Education3
                                        (5.15)         (5.09)

                                          .022           .023
 Experience
                                       (21.13)        (21.53)

                                         -.00037         -.00038
 Experience2
                                      (-14.50)       (-14.84)

                                          -.079         -.086
 Disability
                                        (-7.54)       (-8.25)

                                          -.157         -.158
 Race
                                       (-22.93)      (-23.16)

                                            .077          .082
 Marital Status
                                         (9.20)         (9.80)

                                            .062          .060
 Time
                                         (7.82)         (7.59)

                                            .191             .189
  Union Membership
                                        (30.58)        (3018)
                                            .365             .386
  Log CPI
                                          (3.35)        (3.54)
                                           -.104          -.118
  NewJOb                                              (-15.97)
                                        (-13.71)
                                             .0014           .0011
  County Unemp. Rate minus
  National Unemp. rate                      (.68)         (.5)
                National Uneinp. Rate                        -.0089              -.0Q96
                                                           (-2.59)             (-2.76)
                Number of Observations                 13612               136I
                                                               .625                .623

                Part Time (worked                            -.077
                fewçr than 1500 hours)                     (-8.06)




                                              of the estimated cocfiicients wrc changes if we iqposed a
# AIthoug the fit declined significantty more
   coefficient of one on ¶he log CPI.
                                                                                   in period : is 4 function of
   The model that is implicitly being estimated is that the wage of individuat i
   time and person speciñc independent varisbles and a normally dinributed errorCross  .,. If. as is tikely. the
                                          estimated  t statinics are not consistent.        sçctional estimates
   errprs   are corretated over time the
   from single years ugge5t that this problem is not serious.
                                        Appendix A



     To illustrate the effect of absenteeism on the equilibrium value of a worker to the firm
let us consider a production process which requires 20 workers to operate, generates
slO.000 of income per day if it operates, and has a fixed cost of $5,000 per day whether it
operates or not. We shall assume workers are not paid if they are absent. In equilibrium,
if the probability of a worker being absent is known by all employers and firms complete
for workers so that wages are bid up to the level where each production process earns zero
profits, we find that



                                      Profit Maximizing
                     Probability of      Number of          Equilibrium
                     Being Absent         Employees         Daily Wage

                          .20                 30            s   197.66
                          .19                 30                198.42
                          .18                 29                199.51
                          .17                 29                200.43
                          .16                 28                201.46
                          .15                 28                202.64
                          .14                 27                203.47
                          .13                 27                205.07
                          .12                 27                205.56
                          .11                 26                207.70
                          .10                 26                208.60
                          .09                 25                210.53
                          .08                 25                212.05
                          .07                 24                213.59
                          .06                 24                216.02
                          .05                 23                217.02
                          .04                 23                220.87
                          .03                 23                222.08
                          .02                 22                227.61
                           .01                 21               231.60
                           .00                 20                250.00
>
              J062
I-)
0
0
0.
fl                       PROMOTION
U                        STANDARD
>
w     JOB!
Cr)
GD
C



                        EDUCATION




             FIGURE 1
      25




      20

(I)
cc
0
'4.   IS
0
,JJ
(9
I-                      23.2
a                21.6
w I0
C-)

Lii
0

       5




       0
           1,2   3,4    5,6    7,8   9-10   11-12   13-14 15-16   17+

                  WEEKS REQUIRED TO LEARN THE JOB
                               FIGURE 2
