                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              HOUSING WEALTH ISN'T WEALTH

                                          Willem H. Buiter

                                        Working Paper 14204
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14204


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2008




I would like to thank Ben Broadbent, Markus Brunnermeier, Mike Buchanan, Charles Calomiris, Stephen
Cecchetti, Anne Sibert and participants at the conference "The Role of Money Markets" jointly organised
by Columbia Business School and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on May 29-30, 2008 for
helpful comments. I owe a debt to Mervyn King for planting the idea in my mind more than ten years
ago. The responsibility for any errors is mine. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Willem H. Buiter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Housing Wealth Isn't Wealth
Willem H. Buiter
NBER Working Paper No. 14204
July 2008
JEL No. E2,E21,E22,E3,E32,E37,G1

                                             ABSTRACT

A fall in house prices due to a change in fundamental value redistributes wealth from those long housing
(for whom the fundamental value of the house they own exceeds the present discounted value of their
planned future consumption of housing services) to those short housing. In a representative agent
model and in the Yaari-Blanchard OLG model used in the paper, there is no pure wealth effect on
consumption from a change in house prices if this represents a change in fundamental value. There
is a pure wealth effect on consumption from a change in house prices if this reflects a change in the
speculative bubble component of house prices. Two other channels through which house prices can
affect aggregate consumption are (1) redistribution effects if the marginal propensity to spend out
of wealth differs between those long housing and those short housing and (2) collateral or credit effects
due to the collateralisability of housing wealth and the non-collateralisability of human wealth. A
decline in house prices reduces the scope for mortgage equity withdrawal. For given sequences of
future after-tax labour income and interest rates, this may depress consumption in the short run while
boosting it in the long run.


Willem H. Buiter
European Institute
London School of Economics and Political Science
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
w.buiter@lse.ac.uk
Introduction

       The bold statement “Housing wealth isn’t wealth” was put to me about ten years ago by

Mervyn King, now Governor of the Bank of England, then Chief Economist of the Bank of

England, shortly after I joined the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England as an

external member in June 1997. Like most bold statements, the assertion is not quite correct; the

correct statement is that a decline in house prices does create a negative wealth effect on aggregate

consumption demand. On average, consumers are neither worse off nor better off.

       The argument is elementary and applies to coconuts as well as to houses. When does a fall

in the price of coconuts make you worse off? Answer: when you are a net exporter of coconuts, that

is, when your endowment of coconuts exceeds your consumption of coconuts. A net importer of

coconuts is better off when the price of coconuts falls. Someone who is just self-sufficient in

coconuts is neither worse off nor better off.

       As regards wealth effects, houses are like durable coconuts, or indeed like any consumer

durable. The fundamental value of a house is the present discounted value of its current and future

rentals, actual or (in the case of owner-occupiers) imputed. Anyone who is ‘long’ housing, that is,

anyone for whom the value of their home exceeds the present discounted value of the housing

services they plan to consume over their remaining lifetime will be made worse off by a decline in

house prices. Anyone ‘short’ housing will be better off. So the young and all those planning to

trade up in the housing market are made better off by a decline in house prices. The old and all

those planning to trade down in the housing market will be worse off. Another way to put this is

that landlords are worse off as a result of a decline in house prices, while current and future tenants

are better off. On average, the inhabitants of a country own the houses they live in; on average,

every tenant is his/her own landlord and vice versa. So in a representative agent model, there is no

net housing wealth effect. You need a model with heterogeneous agents in which a change in house

prices causes redistribution between agents with different marginal propensities to spend in order to

get an aggregate wealth effect from a change in house prices.

                                                  1
        Most econometric or calibrated numerical models I am familiar with treat housing wealth just like

the value of stocks and shares as a determinant of household consumption. Their designers appear to forget

that households consume housing services (for which they pay or impute rent) but not stock or bond services.

A prominent example is the FRB/US model (see Brayton and Tinsley, eds. (1996), Brayton, Levin, Tryon,

and Williams (1997), and Brayton, Mauskopf, Reifschneider, Tinsley and Williams(1997)). It is used

frequently by participants in the debate on the implication of developments in the US housing market for US

consumer demand. A recent example is Frederic S. Mishkin’s (2007) paper “Housing and the Monetary

Transmission Mechanism”. The FRB/US model a-priori constrains the wealth effects of housing wealth and

other financial wealth to be the same. The long-run marginal propensity to consume out of non-human

wealth (including housing wealth) is 0.038, that is, 3.8 percent.

        In several simulations, Mishkin increases the value of the long-run marginal propensity to

consume out of housing wealth to 0.076, that is, 7.6 percent, while keeping the long-run marginal

propensity to consume out of non-housing financial wealth at 0.038.

        The argument for an effect of a change in house prices on consumption other than the pure

wealth effect, is that housing wealth is collateralisable. Households-consumers can borrow against

the equity in their homes and use this to finance consumption. If they are credit-constrained, a boost

to housing wealth would relax the credit constraint and temporarily boost consumption spending.

Of course, the increased debt will have to be serviced, and eventually consumption will have to be

below the level it would have been at in the absence of the mortgage equity withdrawal (MEW). At

market interest rates, the present value of current and future consumption will not be affect by the

MEW channel.

        Ben Bernanke (2008), Don Kohn (2008), Fredric Mishkin (2007), Randall Kroszner (2007)

and Charles Plosser (2007) all have made statements to the effect that the credit effect, collateral

effect or MEW effect of a change in house prices is on top of, that is, in addition to, the ‘normal’

wealth effect. The message of this paper is that the benchmark model should instead by one in

which there is no pure wealth effect from a change in house prices and in which therefore the

collateral effect is instead of, not in addition to, the normal wealth effect. By overestimating the

                                                       2
contractionary effect on consumer demand of the decline in house prices, the Fed may have been

convinced to cut rates too fast and too far.

          The insight that housing wealth isn’t wealth has the status of a folk theorem in macro

consumer demand theory and empirics (see e.g. Buchanan and Fiotakis (2004), Edelstein and Lum

(2004), Case, Quigley, and Shiller (2005) and Carroll, Otsuka, and Slacalek (2006)). A rigorous

statement and formal model of the proposition is not, as far as I know, available. The representative

agent special case of the model presented in this paper can be found in the Appendix to Buiter

(2008).



1. The model

Individual household behaviour

          For sake of brevity, I consider an integrated household-consumer-home owner-construction

firm, rather than the separate household and business entities. The structure of preferences is

irrelevant to the result, as long utility is increasing in consumption of housing services and

consumption of non-housing goods and services.          What matters for the result are first the

assumption of housing autarky for the economy under consideration and second the absence of life-

cycle-related effects on the demand for housing services.

          Housing autarky means that there are no foreign owners of domestic housing. As regards

age-related variations in the demand for housing services, in the Yaari-Blanchard OLG model used

in what follows (for expositional simplicity), every surviving household has the same remaining life

expectancy, regardless of the age of the household (see Yaari (1965), Blanchard (1985) and Buiter

(1988)). In addition, the current housing stock and the all future contributions to the flow of rental

income from housing are fully owned by those currently alive. This is in contrast to human capital,

where the future wages earned (net of taxes on labour income paid) by the unborn are not owned by

any private agent currently alive today. This is a consequence of the implicit assumption of the

absence of hereditary slavery.        When combined with the assumption of no (operative)

                                                  3
intergenerational gift and bequest motive, it generates absence of debt neutrality in the Yaari-

Blanchard OLG model as in the Allais-Samuelson OLG model. From the perspective of the

ownership of financial assets (as opposed to the ownership of human capital), the Yaari-Blanchard

OLG model is, however, like a representative agent model. There are therefore no redistributional

effects from house price changes. Combined with the assumption of housing autarky (there is no

foreign ownership of the housing stock), this means that any equilibrium is indistinguishable from

an equilibrium in which every household always consumes its own endowment of housing services.

        Once born, each household has a constant, age-independent instantaneous probability of.

dying, µ ≥ 0 . The birth rate, β ≥ 0 , is constant. With β = 0 the model reduces to the

representative agent model, regardless of whether µ is positive or zero. At time t a surviving

household born at time v ≤ t earns an exogenous wage income w(t , s) ≥ 0 (for simplicity, each

household’s labour supply is assumed inelastic and scaled to unity), pays lump-sum taxes τ (t , v) ,

consumes an amount of non-housing goods and services z (t , v) ≥ 0 , and an amount of housing

services ρ (t , v) ≥ 0 . The rest of its income is either saved in the form real financial assets earning

the instantaneous risk-free real interest rate r (t ) plus a competitive annuity rate (to be discussed) or

spent on acquiring housing equity at a price p k (t ) for an ownership claim to one unit of physical

housing capital. Here k (t , v) is the number of housing shares owned by generation v at time t. A

unit of real housing capital earns real rental income or dividend x(t ) . Real financial wealth held by

the household, excluding the value of the stock of housing it owns, is denoted f(t,v). Non-housing

goods and services are the numéraire. The price of a unit of housing services in terms of non-

housing goods and services is p(t ) .

       There are efficient competitive annuities markets. Surviving households earn an annuity

premium rate r A on their non-human wealth (including housing wealth). When a household dies, all

its non-human wealth (which can be negative) accrues to the life-insurance company that has sold

them the annuity. There is free entry into the annuities market; therefore r A = µ .

                                                     4
        A utility-maximising competitive representative household born at time v ≤ t and having

survived until time t , maximizes the time-additive objective function in (1) subject to the

instantaneous budget identity (2) and the solvency constraint (3). The expectation operator

conditional on information at time t is Et , θ is the subjective rate of pure time preference and σ is

the reciprocal of the intertemporal substitution elasticity.

                                                  ∞
                          W (t , v) = Et ∫ e −θ ( s −t ) v ( ρ ( s, v) z ( s, v) ) ds, θ > 0
                                                  t


                                                  ( ρ η z1−η ) ; 0 < η < 1; σ > 0, σ ≠ 1
                                            1                 1−σ
                           v( ρ , z ) =                                                                         (1)
                                          1−σ
                                        = ln ( ρ η z1−η ) ; σ = 1


                                                = ( r (t ) + µ ) f (t , v) + ( x(t ) + µ p k (t ) ) k (t , v)
                 df (t , v)          dk (t , v)
                            + q (t )
                    dt                  dt                                                                      (2)
                                                + w(t , v) − τ (t , v) − z (t , v) − p(t ) ρ (t , v)

                                              s

                                 lim e ∫t                    ( f ( s, v ) + p k ( s ) k ( s, v ) ) ≥ 0
                                          ( r ( u ) + µ ) du
                                          −
                                                                                                                (3)
                                 s →∞


We assume that the (expected) rates of return on housing equity and on other financial assets are the same, so
                                                                     x p k
                                                                  r= k + k                                      (4)
                                                                    p   p
It follows that the instantaneous budget identity can be rewritten as:
                  d
                  dt
                     ( f (t , v) + p k (t )k (t , v) ) = ( r (t ) + µ ) ( f (t , v) + p k (t )k (t , v) )
                                                                                                                (5)
                                                       + w(t , v) − τ (t , v) − z (t , v) − p (t ) ρ (t , v)
        The only uncertainty in the model is uncertain life expectancy, if the probability of death µ

is positive. The objective functional W(t,v) in (1) can therefore be rewritten as
                                                          ∞
                                 W (t , v) = ∫ e − (θ + µ )( s −t ) v ( ρ ( s, v), z ( s, v) ) ds               (6)
                                                          t



        Let the present discounted value of current and future after-tax labour income or human

capital of a household of generation v at time t ≥ v be denoted h(t,v):

                                                      ∞       s

                                 h(t , v ) = ∫ e ∫t
                                                − ( r ( u ) + µ ) du
                                                                     ( w( s, v) − τ ( s, v) ) ds                (7)
                                                      t




                                                                        5
        The solvency constraint (3), the instantaneous budget identity (2) and (7) permit us to write

the intertemporal budget constraint of the household as follows:
                                                              ∞           s

              f (t , v ) + p (t )k (t , v) + h(t , v ) ≥ ∫ e ∫t
                                                                ( r ( u ) + µ ) du
                                                                      −
                             k
                                                                                   [ z ( s, v) + p( s) ρ ( s, v)] ds    (8)
                                                              t



        The first-order conditions for housing and non-housing consumption imply that, for all

s≥t :

                                                 ρ ( s) ⎛ η ⎞            −1
                                                       =⎜       ⎟ p( s )                                                (9)
                                                 z ( s) ⎝ 1 − η ⎠

                                                                                                        ⎛ σ −1 ⎞
                                                                  s ⎛ r ( u ) −θ   ⎞                   η⎜      ⎟
                                                              ∫t ⎜⎝       σ        ⎟ du   ⎛ p( s) ⎞     ⎝ σ ⎠
                                     z ( s, v) = z (t , v)e                        ⎠
                                                                                          ⎜        ⎟                   (10)
                                                                                          ⎝ p (t ) ⎠

                                                                                           η (1−σ )
                                                       ⎛       η        ⎞
                                 λ (t , v) = (1 − η ) ⎜⎜                ⎟⎟                            z (t , v) −σ     (11)
                                                       ⎝ (1 − η ) p(t ) ⎠

                                                      λ = −(r + µ )λ                                                  (12)
Here λ (t , v) is the co-state variable of real private non-human wealth at time t for a household born

at time v (measured in units of utility), whose equation of motion is given in (2), that is, the present

value shadow price for a household of generation v of private financial wealth and housing wealth.

        From equations (8) to (12), we can obtain the following individual decision rules for

consumption or consumption functions. Total consumption of both housing services and non-

housing goods and services is denoted c = p ρ + z :

                                                   z (t , v) = (1 − η )c(t )                                           (13)

                                                                           η
                                                    ρ (t , v) =                      c(t )                             (14)
                                                                          p(t )

                                 c(t , v) = ξ (t ) ⎡⎣ f (t , v) + p k (t )k (t , v) + h(t , v) ⎤⎦                      (15)

where ξ (t ) , the marginal propensity to consume out of comprehensive wealth, is independent of

generation-specific parameters and variables.




                                                                              6
                                                                                                    −1
                                  ⎡ ∞ − s ⎡⎛ σ −1 ⎞ r (u ) + µ + θ ⎤ du            ⎛ σ −1 ⎞
                                                                                  η⎜      ⎟    ⎤
                                       ∫t ⎢⎣⎜⎝ σ ⎟⎠              σ ⎥⎦ ⎛ p ( s ) ⎞
                                                                                   ⎝ σ ⎠
                                  ⎢
                          ξ (t ) = ∫ e                                                      ds ⎥
                                  ⎢t                                    ⎜        ⎟             ⎥
                                                                                                         (16)
                                                                        ⎝ p (t ) ⎠
                                  ⎢⎣                                                           ⎥⎦

       Equations (2), (7), (8) (holding with equality) and (15) imply:

                               dc(t , v) ⎛               ξ(t )          ⎞
                                        = ⎜ r (t ) + µ +        − ξ (t ) ⎟ c(t , v)                      (17)
                                 dt       ⎝              ξ (t )          ⎠

       For the logarithmic instantaneous felicity function σ = 1 , this simplifies to

                                                 ξ (t ) = ξ = θ + µ                                      (18)

and the familiar consumption Euler equation

                                          dc(t , v)
                                                    = ( r (t ) − θ ) c(t , v)                            (19)
                                            dt



Aggregation

       For any individual household flow or stock variable y(t , v) we define the population

aggregate Y (t ) as follows: for β > 0 ,

                                                       t
                                           Y (t ) =    ∫ y(t, v)S (t , v)dv
                                                      −∞
                                                                                                         (20)


where S (t , v) is the number of households born at time v that are still alive at time t. Let O(t ) > 0

be the size of the population (the size of the labour force or the number of households) at time t.

                                             S (t , v) = β O(v)e− µ (t −v )                              (21)

and

                                                O(v) = O(0)e( β − µ ) v                                  (22)

Without loss of generality let O(0) = 1 . So

                                       S (t , v) = β e− µt + β v          if β > 0                       (23)

and
                                                               t
                                          Y (t ) = β e− µt    ∫ y(t, v)e
                                                                             βv
                                                                                  dv                     (24)
                                                              −∞

                                                                   7
We cover the case of a zero birth rate as follows:

                                                        When β = 0,
                                                        y (t , v) = y (t )
                                                                                                                             (25)
                                                        and
                                                        Y (t ) = e − µt y (t )

        I also assume that you are born just with your endowment of human wealth – there are no

intergenerational gifts and bequests – and therefore:

                                                  a(t , t ) + p k (t )k (t , t ) = 0                                         (26)

        Also, for simplicity, assume that everyone alive earns the same wage and pays the same

taxes, so

                                                         w(t , v) = w(t )
                                                                                                                             (27)
                                                         τ (t , v) = τ (t )

It follows that each surviving member of every generation has the same human wealth:

                                                          h(t , v) = h(t )                                                   (28)

The aggregate consumption function is given by:

                                       C (t ) = ξ (t ) ⎡⎣ F (t ) + p k (t ) K (t ) + H (t ) ⎤⎦                               (29)

                                                      Z (t ) = (1 − η )C (t )                                                (30)
                                                                   η
                                                       R (t ) =           C (t )                                             (31)
                                                                  p(t )
With

            d
            dt
               ( F (t ) + p k (t ) K (t ) ) = r (t ) ( F (t ) + p k (t ) K (t ) ) + W (t ) − T (t ) − Z (t ) − p(t ) R(t )   (32)


                                         H (t ) = [r (t ) + β ]H (t ) − W (t ) + T (t )                                     (33)

        If follows that the aggregate consumption ‘Euler equation’ is given by:

                                            ⎛            ξ ⎞
                                       C = ⎜ r + β − ξ + ⎟ C − βξ ( F + p k K )                                             (34)
                                            ⎝            ξ⎠

        With the logarithmic utility function, σ = 1 , the aggregate consumption Euler equation

simplifies to:


                                                                       8
                           C = ( r + β − µ − θ ) C − β (θ + µ ) ( F + p k K )                   (35)




The accumulation of housing capital

        There is a continuum of competitive home construction firms on the unit circle who

maximize profits by accumulating housing capital and letting it out. Each firm maximises the

following objective function:
                                         ∞        s

                                V (t ) = ∫ e ∫t
                                              −
                                                           ( p( s)α ( s) K (s) − A( s) ) ds
                                                r ( u ) du
                                                                                                 (36)
                                         t∞



subject to the constraint that the resource cost of housing capital formation is quadratic in the

investment rate,

                                                      γ ( I (t ) − (δ + n) K (t ) )
                                                                                      2

                                A(t ) = I (t ) +                                                 (37)
                                                      2             K (t )
and the capital stock adjustment identity

                                                  K = I − δ K                                   (38)

Here γ ≥ 0 measures the severity of the housing capital adjustment costs and δ ≥ 0 is the constant

proportional deprecation rate of the stock of housing capital. When γ → ∞ we have the case of

unaugmentable capital. When γ → ∞ and δ = 0 we have the case of housing as ‘land’ in the sense

of the unaugmentable and indestructible contribution of nature. When γ is positive but finite, the

housing stock is fixed in the short run but augmentable in the long run.

        Note that, unlike its owners, this enterprise does not die. Its discount rate is therefore the

risk-free real interest rate, without the annuity premium added (see Buiter (1989). The production

function for housing services is assumed to be linear in the capital stock and is given by α ( s ) K ( s ) .

        The first-order conditions for an optimum imply that optimal investment is governed by

equations (39) and (40):

                                        ⎛        1             ⎞
                                    I = ⎜ δ + n + ( q(t ) − 1) ⎟ K (t )                          (39)
                                        ⎝        γ             ⎠


                                                                9
                       ( ( r ( u ) +δ ) ) du ⎡                                                                     ⎞ ⎤
             ∞                                                                                                      2
                                                                         ⎛ I (s)            ⎞ γ ⎛ I (s)
                     s

     q (t ) = ∫ e
                 −∫t
                                             ⎢ p( s )α ( s ) + γ (δ + n) ⎜        − (δ + n) ⎟ + ⎜        − (δ + n) ⎟ ⎥ ds (40)
              t                              ⎢⎣                          ⎝ K ( s)           ⎠ 2 ⎝ K ( s)           ⎠ ⎥⎦
or
                                                 ⎞ γ⎛ I
                                                                                          2
                                     ⎛ I                            ⎞
                      pα + γ (δ + n) ⎜ − (δ + n) ⎟ + ⎜ − (δ + n) ⎟
                 q                  ⎝K          ⎠ 2⎝K              ⎠ = r +δ
                    +                                                                        (41)
                 q                           q
        The shadow price of the capital stock (the current value co-state variable of K (t ) in (38), is

Tobin’s ‘marginal q’. The market value of the equity held in the construction companies is also

given by (36).

        Because the investing firm is assumed to be a price taker, and because the production

function of housing services is linear in the capital stock and the investment adjustment cost

function is linear homogeneous in the investment rate and the capital stock, Tobin’s marginal q also

equals Tobin’s average q, which is the fundamental value of a unit of installed housing capital.

        This result, first established by Hayashi (1982), implies that

                                                   V (t ) = q(t ) K (t )                                                (42)

The intuition is, as stated in Hayashi (1982), that average Tobin’s q (and marginal Tobin’s q) are

independent of the initial capital stock if the production and installation functions are linear

homogeneous and if the firm is a price-taker.

        I write the market value of a unit of installed housing capital as

                                                       pk = q + b                                                       (43)

The first term on the RHS of (43) is the fundamental value of a unit of installed housing, defined by

(40) and (39), that is, its shadow price. When p k is interpreted not as a shadow price in a dynamic

optimisation problem, where the boundary conditions for optimality ensure that the shadow price

supports the optimum (that is, b (t ) = 0 ), but rather as an asset market price set in a market where

there is no invisible transversality-condition-imposing hand, there can also be a bubble term b(t) in

(43). If the bubble is (myopically) rational, then

                                                     b = ( r + δ ) b                                                   (44)


                                                                10
                   The competitive rental rate for housing services, x , earned by households as dividends from

their ownership of housing capital (see equation (2)) is given by

                                                                                  ⎞ γ⎛ I
                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                      ⎛ I                         ⎞
                                                   x = pα + γ (δ + n) ⎜ − (δ + n) ⎟ + ⎜ − (δ + n) ⎟ − δ p k .                                                                                                                 (45)
                                                                      ⎝K          ⎠ 2⎝K           ⎠

Equilibrium in the housing market or housing autarky

We now impose economy-wide equilibrium in the housing market:

                                                                                                       R(s) = α (s) K (s), s ≥ t                                                                                              (46)

It follows from (46), (43), (42), (36) and (32), that

       ∞                                 s                                                                        ∞                            s                                 ∞                                       s
                ∫ r (u ) du       −                         − ∫ r ( u ) du              − ∫ r ( u ) du
       ∫ Z (s)e t ds = F (t ) + p (t ) K (t ) − ∫ p(s) R(s)e t ds + ∫ (W (s) − T (s) ) e t ds
                                 k


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (47)3
        t                                                                                                            t                                                           t
                                                                                                                                ∞                                                s

                                                           = F (t ) + b(t ) K (t ) − Λ (t ) + ∫ (W ( s ) − T ( s ) ) e ∫t
                                                                                                                      − r ( u ) du
                                                                                                                                   ds
                                                                                                                                 t

where the present discounted value of all future costs of housing investment, Λ(t ) is given by:

                                                                                      ∞           s

                                                               Λ (t ) = ∫ e ∫t
                                                                               r ( u ) du    −
                                                                                          A( s )ds
                                                                                       t
                                                                                                      t ∞        s
                                                                                                             − ∫ ( r ( u ) + µ ) du
                                                                                    = β e − µt        ∫
                                                                                                      −∞ t
                                                                                                           ∫e t                     a( s, v)e β v dsdv if β > 0                                                               (48)

                                                                                                  ∞        s

                                                                                    =e               ∫ ( r (u ) + µ ) du a( s, v)ds if β = 0
                                                                                                       −
                                                                                                  ∫e t
                                                                                           − µt

                                                                                                  t

                   The key point to note is that the aggregate intertemporal budget constraint (47) does not

depend on the fundamental value of the current housing stock, qK . Housing variables enter the

budget constraints only through the cost of future investment in housing, Λ , and through the bubble

term in the house price equation, if there is one, bK .

                   Once we impose the housing market equilibrium or housing autarky condition, given by the

first equality in (46), we can rewrite the three consumption functions in the following manner:


                                 ∞
                                                               ∫
                                                                   s
                                                                                             η ⎛                                                   ∞
                                                                                                                                                                                              ∫
                                                                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ⎞
                                 ∫                                                                                                                 ∫ (W ( s ) − T ( s ) ) e
                                                           −           r ( u ) du                                                                                                         −           r ( u ) du
3 Similarly,                            p ( s ) R ( s )e       t
                                                                                    ds =              ⎜ F (t ) + b (t ) K (t ) − Λ ( t ) +
                                                                                                                                                                                              t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ds ⎟ and
                                  t
                                                                                           1 −η ⎝                                                  t                                                                 ⎠

                                                  1 ⎛                                                                                                                            ⎞
∞                                                                                                                        ∞
                   ∫                                                                                                                                      ∫
                       s                                                                                                                                      s




∫                                                                                                                        ∫   (W ( s ) − T ( s ) ) e
               −           r ( u ) du                                                                                                                 −           r ( u ) du
    C ( s )e       t
                                        ds =               ⎜ F (t ) + b (t ) K ( t ) − Λ (t ) +
                                                                                                                                                          t
                                                                                                                                                                               ds ⎟
t
                                               1 −η ⎝                                                                    t                                                       ⎠.

                                                                                                                                     11
                                       ⎛ 1 ⎞
                                   C =⎜        ⎟ ξ ( F + bK − Λ + H )
                                       ⎝ 1 −η ⎠
                                   Z = (1 − η )C                                                     (49)
                                   pR = η C = α K
where
                                     F = rF + W − T − (1 − η )C − A                                 (50)
                                                Λ = rΛ − A                                          (51)
                                         H = ( r + β ) H − W + T                                    (52)
                                                   d
                                                      (bK ) = rbK                                    (53)
                                                   dt

         Equation (53) constrains the bubble and/or the housing investment process. If the bubble is rational

that is, it satisfies the homogeneous equation of the equation of motion driving the fundamental valuation q ,

as given by equation (44), it follows that either there is no bubble, b(t ) = 0 or gross housing investment is

zero, I (t ) = 0 .

         Equations (49), (50), (51) and (53) permit the consumption function to be written as

                                               ⎛ 1 ⎞
                                           C =⎜        ⎟ξ ( N + H )
                                               ⎝ 1 −η ⎠
                                           Z = (1 − η )C                                             (54)
                                           pR = η C = α K

                                                N = F + bK − Λ                                       (55)

                                        N = rN + W − T − (1 − η )C                                  (56)

         The human capital of the generations currently alive, H is given by:
                                           ∞       s

                                H (t ) = ∫ e ∫t
                                               −( r ( u ) + β ) du
                                                                   (W ( s) − T ( s) ) ds             (57)
                                           t


         The presence of the birth rate as an augmentation factor for the discount rate applied to future

aggregate after-tax labour income is due to the assumption, built into the model, that the human wealth of

future generations is not owned by anyone currently alive. This assumption about property rights

(effectively the absence of hereditary slavery), together with the assumption that there are no operative

intergenerational gift and bequest motives, makes for the absence of debt neutrality that is a property of all

OLG models that make the same two key assumptions.



                                                              12
2. The pure wealth effect of house price changes on consumption
        The OLG structure does not destroy the absence of wealth effects from a change in house prices,

because the aggregate demand for housing services is not affected by a change in the distribution of wealth

between the young and the old. If there were age-specific propensities to consume housing services, this

would not in general be the case.

       The aggregate consumption Euler equation with the housing autarky condition imposed is
                                                ξ           β
                                  C = (r + β + − ξ )C −        ξN                               (58)
                                                ξ          1 −η
Note that Λ (t ) = L(t ) if and only if β = 0 . This is because Λ (t ) is the present discounted value at

time t of the real resource cost of current and future investment in housing by all generations

currently alive and yet to be born, all of which is reflected in the forward-looking valuations of the

existing housing stock, while L (t ) is just the present discounted value of the real resource cost of

current and future housing investment by all generations currently alive (see footnote 2).

        It is clear from equations (49), (50), (51) and (52) that, provided there is no housing bubble

( b (t ) = 0 ), current aggregate consumption of housing services plus non-housing services C (t ) is

independent of the value of the current housing stock, p k K . In other words, consumption is

independent of the fundamental value of the housing stock, q (t ) K (t ) .               Likewise, current

consumption of housing services, p (t ) R (t ) is independent of the value of the current housing stock,

and so is aggregate consumption of non-housing goods and services, Z (t ) .

        The present discounted value of the real resource cost of future investment in housing Λ (t ) ,

given in equation (48) may of course be affected by the same factors that cause a change in the

value of the existing housing stock, but that is a quite separate matter from a wealth effect on

consumption of a change in the value of the existing housing stock. This effect of house prices on

investment in housing is recognized through the housing investment function, given in equation

(39), which makes gross housing investment an increasing function of Tobin’s q. So Λ (t ) is a

function not of the current price of housing capital but of the sequence of future (expected) prices of

housing capital.
                                                     13
       I summarise this as a Proposition:



Proposition 1: In the Yaari-Blanchard OLG model, a change in the fundamental value of a unit of
installed housing, φ , has not wealth effect on aggregate consumption demand, the demand for
housing services or the consumption demand for non-housing goods and services.

It also follows immediately from the consumption functions in (49), that the following holds:

Proposition 2: In the Yaari-Blanchard OLG model, a change in the bubble component of the price
of a unit of installed housing, b, is associated with a wealth effect on aggregate consumption
demand, on the demand for housing services and on the consumption demand for non-housing
goods and services.

Why the common error?

       How did so many of students of consumption behaviour and wealth effects miss the obvious

point of Proposition 1?

       The most likely reason is that the standard consumption function is the decision rule of an

individual, or an aggregation of such individual decision rules.      When studying consumption

behaviour, equilibrium conditions are not normally imposed on these decision rules. On the whole

this is good practice – the fact that prices and economy-wide aggregate quantities taken as

parametric by individuals are in fact endogenously determined by the interaction of these price-

taking economic agents, does not mean that it is not helpful to treat individual decision rules and

equilibrium conditions conceptually distinct. But when we deal with general equilibrium responses

to policies or shocks, the equilibrium conditions do of course have to be imposed. This was

obviously not done in such papers as Mishkin (2007).

       Without imposing the (‘in the aggregate, you own the house you rent’ or ‘housing autarky’

assumption (46) and using equations (36), (42) and (43), total consumption, non-housing

consumption and housing consumption can, respectively, be written as in equations (29), (30) and

(31) respectively, that is, as functions of total non-human wealth, F + p k K and human wealth, H ,

and with the equations of motion for non-human wealth and human wealth given by (32) and (33)




                                                14
respectively. In this version of the consumption function, non-housing financial wealth, F and

housing wealth p k K enter with the same marginal propensities to spend, ξ .

        The equation C = ξ ( F + p k K + H ) is the standard ‘permanent income’ consumption

function where aggregate consumption is proportional to the sum of aggregate non-human and

human wealth, and where aggregate non-human wealth includes the value of the housing stock on

the same terms as other non-human wealth. However, when we impose the housing autarky

                                                                 ⎛ 1 ⎞
assumption, that same consumption function can be written as C = ⎜      ⎟ ξ ( F + bK − Λ + H ) and
                                                                 ⎝ 1 −η ⎠

the absence of a pure wealth effect of fundamental housing wealth on aggregate consumption

demand is confirmed. When housing is pure ‘land’, that is non-augmentable and indestructible, then

Λ = 0 and the consumption function simplifies to

                                       ⎛ 1 ⎞
                                    C =⎜      ⎟ ξ ( F + bK + H ) .
                                       ⎝ 1 −η ⎠

        This makes it even clearer that in the model under consideration, a change in housing wealth affects

consumption if and only if it is due to a change in the speculative bubble component of house prices.




Qualifications of the housing wealth irrelevance result

Wealth isn’t well being

        At the risk of belabouring the obvious, Proposition 1 says that a change in the fundamental

value of a unit of housing does not lead to any change in consumption demand model. However,

since R (t ) = α (t ) K (t ) , a larger physical stock of housing capital increases equilibrium consumption

of housing services raises utility - makes you better off. Wealth (the value of your endowments)

bears no obvious relation to utility in any case, as wealth values the infra-marginal units of assets at

the marginal contribution to lifetime utility of the last unit: in a world without scarcity, all

endowments would be valued at zero and wealth would be zero, but utility would be maximal.



                                                     15
Changes in housing wealth due to a housing bubble

       Proposition 2 points out that when the change in the house price is due to a bubble rather

than to a change in fundamental value, that is, b (t ) ≠ 0 in equation (49), the change in house prices

does represent a pure wealth effect. Even if the economy is autarkic in housing, bubble-inclusive

price of the house exceeds the value of their endowment of current and future housing services by

the amount of the bubble.       Whether the housing market in the US or elsewhere has been

characterised by a speculative bubble between, say, 2000 and 2007 is a hotly debated issue (see e.g.

Case and Shiller (2003) and Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005)). In the simple model of the

paper, the marginal propensity to spend out of a change in house prices due to a change in the

bubble component of the house price is the same as the marginal propensity to consume out of any

other component of non-human or human wealth.



Distributional effects, including intergenerational distribution

       In more general OLG models, especially those with systemic variations in household size

over the life cycle and with age-dependent propensities to consume (among other reasons because

remaining life expectancy is negatively related to age after some point), a decline in house prices

redistributes wealth from those for whom the value of the housing stock they own is greater than the

present discounted value of their future consumption of housing services to those for whom the

value of the housing stock they own is less than the present discounted value of their future planned

consumption of housing services.       That is, a house price decline redistributes wealth from

homeowners to tenants.

       This means that the young, and all others planning to trade up in the housing market in the

future will benefit from a decline in house prices. The old and all others planning to trade down in

the housing market in the future will lose when house prices fall. The size or even the sign of the

net effect on aggregate consumption demand of such redistributional changes are, as far as I know,

not well established. An Allais-Samuelson overlapping generations model is the natural vehicle for


                                                  16
analyzing these intergenerational distributional effects. Other distributional effects can occur in

open economies where the residents are tenants of non-resident landlords.



Credit or collateral effects

        Finally, unlike human capital, housing wealth is collateralisable.           This means that

households can borrow using the value of the homes they own as security. Unsecured borrowing is

more expensive than secured borrowing and may often not be possible on any terms. With free

labour (no slavery or indentured labour), future labour earnings cannot legally be collateralised and,

unless reputational concerns are a powerful motivator, commitments to use future after-tax labour

income to service unsecured debt may not be credible. Housing wealth therefore permits credit

constraints to be relaxed (see e.g. Hurst and Stafford (2004) and Klyuev and Mills (2006)). A

decline in house prices reduces the amount households can borrow (through ‘mortgage equity

withdrawal’ or MEW). Assuming that human wealth is not collateralisable at all, a simple way to

bring the housing collateral role into the model of this paper is to introduce the further constraint on

individual household optimisation that net financial wealth cannot be negative:

                                     − f (t , v) ≤ p k (t )k (t , v)                         (59)
or, in the aggregate version:
                                       − F (t ) ≤ p k (t ) K (t )                            (60)
        This constrains net debt not to exceed the value of the housing stock. If this constraint is

binding, a fall in house prices will clearly lower aggregate consumption, regardless of whether

housing price changes have a pure wealth effect.

        In his simulation of the effect of a house price decline on consumption and investment

demand in the US, Mishkin (2007) captured this credit effect of a change in house prices by

assigning to housing wealth twice the long-run marginal propensity to consume (0.076) than that

assigned to other financial wealth (0.038). This is incorrect for two reasons.

        First, because of the housing autarky argument, the model of this paper suggests that,

without the collateral/credit effect, the marginal propensity to consume out of housing wealth would


                                                       17
be zero, not 0.038. At most therefore, Mishkin should, when he added the collateral effect to the

benchmark FRB/US model, have assigned the value 0.038 to the marginal propensity to consume

out of housing wealth, not 0.076.

       However, even 0.038 is likely to be an overestimate of the long-run marginal propensity to

consume out of housing wealth. The debt incurred through MEW has to be serviced. Although

current consumption will be higher as a result of a household’s ability to relax a borrowing

constraint by increasing the size of its mortgage, the present discounted value of future consumption

will have to be lower. At market interest rates, the present discounted value of current and future

consumption does not change as a result of a decline in house prices and the associated tightening

of the credit constraint. Modelling the credit effect of a house price decline properly would

introduce it as a tightening of a borrowing constraint, but with the household’s intertemporal budget

constraint satisfied both in the benchmark (with borrowing collateralised against property) and in

the counterfactual simulation (with lower MEW). It may not be easy to determine reliably when the

consumption-reducing effect of increased debt service will kick in and dominate the consumption-

increasing effect of higher borrowing potential for a credit-constrained household, but to assume, as

Mishkin does, that it never kicks in surely makes no sense.



3. Conclusion

       The value of a house is its fundamental value – the present discounted value of its future

actual or imputed rentals – plus a speculative bubble component, if any. A fall in house prices due

to a change in its fundamental value redistributes wealth from those long housing (for whom the

fundamental value of the house they own exceeds the present discounted value of their planned

future consumption of housing services) to those short housing (from whom the fundamental value

of the house they own is less than the present discounted value of their planned future consumption

of housing services. In a closed economy representative agent model and in the Yaari-Blanchard



                                                 18
OLG model used in the paper, there is no pure wealth effect on consumption from a change in

house prices if this represents a change in their fundamental value.

       There is a pure wealth effect on consumption from a change in house prices if this reflects a

change in the bubble component of house prices.

       Two other channels, not considered in the formal model, through which a fall in house

prices can affect aggregate consumption are (1) redistribution effects if the marginal propensity to

spend out of wealth is different between those long housing (the old, say) and those short housing

(the young, say) and (2) collateral or credit effects due to the collateralisability of housing wealth

and the non-collateralisability of human wealth. A decline in house prices reduces the scope for

mortgage equity withdrawal. For given sequences of future after-tax labour income and interest

rates, this may depress consumption in the short run while boosting it in the long run.




                                                  19
References

Bernanke, Ben S. (2007), "The Financial Accelerator and the Credit Channel”, speech given at The
Credit Channel of Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century Conference, Federal Reserve Bank
of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, June 15;
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/Bernanke20070615a.htm

Blanchard, O. (1985), “Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons”, Journal of Political Economy, 93,
April, pp. 237-47.

Brayton, F., and P. Tinsley, eds. (1996). “A Guide to FRB/US: A Macroeconomic Model
of the United States,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper 1996-42
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).

Brayton, F., A. Levin, R. Tryon, and J.C. Williams (1997). “The Evolution of Macro
Models at the Federal Reserve Board,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
Policy, vol. 47 (December), pp. 43-81.

Brayton, Flint, Eileen Mauskopf, David Reifschneider, Peter Tinsley, and John Williams
(1997). “The Role of Expectations in the FRB/US Macroeconomic Model,” Federal
Reserve Bulletin, vol. 83 (April), 227-45.

Buiter, Willem H. (1988), “ Death, birth, productivity growth and debt neutrality”, Economic
Journal, 98, June, pp. 279-93.

Buiter, Willem H. (2008), "Lessons from the North Atlantic Financial Crisis", paper prepared
for presentation at the conference “The Role of Money Markets" jointly organised by Columbia Business
School and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York on May 29-30, 2008. Pdf file downloadable from
http://www.nber.org/~wbuiter/NAcrisis.pdf

Buchanan, Mike and Themistoklis Fiotakis (2004), House Prices: A Threat to Global Recovery or
Part of the Necessary Rebalancing? Goldman Sachs Global Economics Paper No. 114, July 15.

Carroll, C., M. Otsuka, and J. Slacalek (2006). “How Large is the Housing Wealth Effect? A New
Approach,” NBER Working Paper No. 12746 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research, December).

Case, K.E., and R.J. Shiller (2003). “Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2, pp. 299-342.

Case, K.E., J.M. Quigley, and R.J. Shiller (2005), “Comparing Wealth Effects: The Stock
Market Versus the Housing Market,” Advances in Macroeconomics, vol. 5 (no. 1),
www.bepress.com/bejm/advances/vol5/iss1/art1.

Edelstein, Robert H. And Sau Kim Lum (2004), “House prices, wealth effects, and the Singapore
macroeconomy” Journal of Housing Economics, Volume 13, Issue 4, December 2004, Pages 342-
367.

Hayashi, F. (1982), “Tobin's Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical Interpretation”,
Econometrica, Vol. 50, No. 1, (Jan., 1982), pp. 213-224



                                                 20
Himmelberg, C., C. Mayer, and T. Sinai (2005), “Assessing High House Prices: Bubbles,
Fundamentals and Misperceptions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 19, pp. 67-92.

Klyuev, V., and P. Mills (2006), “Is Housing Wealth an ATM? The Relationship Between
Household Wealth, Home Equity Withdrawal, and Saving Rates,” IMF Working Paper WP/06/162
(Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Kohn, Donald L. (2008), “The U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy”, speech given at the University of North
Carolina at Wilmington, Cameron School of Business' Business Week Program, Wilmington, North
Carolina, February 26, 2008; http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20080226a.htm

Kroszner, Randall S. (2008),.Testimony on the Federal Housing Administration Housing
Stabilization and Homeownership Act before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of
Representatives, April 9, 2008.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/kroszner20080409a.htm

Hurst, E., and F. Stafford (2004). “Home is Where the Equity Is: Mortgage Refinancing and
Household Consumption,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 36 (no. 6), pp. 985-1014.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007), Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism, Finance and
Economics Discussion Series, Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal
Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 2007-40.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/Pubs/feds/2007/200740/200740pap.pdf

Plosser, Charles I. (2007), “House Prices and Monetary Policy”, Lecture, European Economics and
Financial Centre Distinguished Speakers Series, July 11, London, UK.
http://www.philadelphiafed.org/publicaffairs/speeches/plosser/2007/07-11-07_euro-econ-finance-
centre.cfm

Yaari, M. (1965), “Uncertain Lifetime. Life Insurance and the Theory of the Consumer”, Review of
Economic Studies, 32, April, pp. 137-50.




                                                  21
