NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFORMATION, AVOIDANCE BEHAVIOR, AND HEALTH:
THE EFFECT OF OZONE ON ASTHMA HOSPITALIZATIONS
Matthew J. Neidell
Working Paper 14209
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14209

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

I thank Janet Currie, Michael Greenstone, Ken Chay, Sherry Glied, Enrico Moretti, Helen Levy, Will
Manning, Tomas Philipson, Sylvia Brandt, Elizabeth Powers, Michael Khoo, Joshua Graff Zivin, Amanda
Lang, Paul Rathouz, Bob Kaestner, Kerry Smith, Pat Bayer, Wes Hartmann, an anonymous referee,
and numerous seminar participants for valuable feedback. I am also very grateful to Bruce Selik and
Joe Cassmassi of the South Coast Air Quality Management District for providing information on smog
alerts, Mei Kwan, E.C. Krupp, and Ken Warren for help with obtaining the attendance data used for
this analysis, and Sarah Kishinevsky, Mike Kraft, and Sonalini Singh for excellent research assistance.
Financial support from the University of Chicago's Center for Integrating Statistical and Environmental
Science is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Matthew J. Neidell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The Effect of Ozone on Asthma Hospitalizations
Matthew J. Neidell
NBER Working Paper No. 14209
July 2008
JEL No. D80,I12,I18,Q53
ABSTRACT
This paper assesses whether responses to information about risk impact estimates of the relationship
between ozone and asthma in Southern California. Using a regression discontinuity design, I find smog
alerts significantly reduces daily attendance at two major outdoor facilities. Using daily time-series
regression models that include year-month and small area fixed effects, I find estimates of the effect
of ozone for children and the elderly that include information are significantly larger than estimates
that do not. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that individuals take substantial action
to reduce exposure to risk; estimates ignoring these actions are severely biased.

Matthew J. Neidell
Department of Health Policy and Management
Columbia University
600 W 168th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
mn2191@columbia.edu

I. Introduction
Information about risk is provided in numerous areas of public health so individuals can
adjust their behavior when confronted with risk. Observational analyses that estimate health
effects from exposure to these risks, however, typically assume no behavioral responses to risk.
For example, several recent studies examining the effect of outdoor air pollution on health
provide convincing empirical evidence of exogenous variation in ambient pollution, but do not
account for actions individuals may take to reduce their exposure to pollution, such as decreasing
the amount of time spent outside (for example, Friedman et al. 2001; Chay and Greenstone
2003a,b; Currie and Neidell 2005). Even if ambient pollution levels are as good as randomly
assigned, exposure to pollution remains endogenous, so estimates of the biological effect of
pollution on health are biased.
This paper assesses whether behavioral responses to information about risk impact
estimates of the relationship between ozone and asthma hospitalizations in Southern California.
Avoidance behavior is especially pervasive in this context because information about pollution is
so widespread. The Los Angeles Times, the most widely circulated newspaper in the region,
provides the pollutant standards index (PSI), 2 a continuous index that converts forecasted daily
pollution levels into an easily understandable format and, depending on the level of pollution,
advises the public regarding health effects and precautionary actions to take (Environmental
Protection Agency 1999). Furthermore, various media channels, including television and radio,
announce “smog alerts” when forecasted ambient ozone exceeds a particular threshold. These
alerts encourage susceptible individuals, such as children and the elderly, to avoid exposure to
ozone by remaining indoors and all others to avoid rigorous outdoor activity. Importantly, both
2

The Air Quality Index replaced the PSI in 1999, but data in this analysis goes through 1997.

2

sources of information are forecasted a day in advance to provide ample time for individuals to
react.
To assess the impact of responses to information about risk, this paper proceeds in two
stages. First, I estimate whether people respond to information about pollution by examining the
effect of smog alerts on daily outdoor activities. As a measure of outdoor activities, I use daily
attendance from 1989 to 1997 at two major outdoor facilities in Southern California: the Los
Angeles Zoo and Griffith Park Observatory. To identify the effect of smog alerts, I employ a
regression discontinuity design by exploiting the deterministic selection rule used for issuing
alerts. If days just above or below the smog alert threshold do not vary systematically with
outdoor activity decisions, then I can obtain estimates of the causal effect of alerts on avoidance
behavior. In support of this approach, other observable characteristics, such as weather and
observed pollution, move smoothly around this threshold, suggesting any change in outdoor
activities at this threshold can be directly attributed to smog alerts.
The second stage of this paper focuses on estimating the bias from incorporating these
responses by examining the impact of ozone on asthma hospitalizations. If individuals respond
to information about ozone and ozone affects health, then accounting for responses should
increase the estimated effect of ozone. To identify the effect of ozone, I estimate daily timeseries regression models that include year-month fixed effects and finely defined geographic area
fixed effects. The year-month fixed effects non-parametrically absorb seasonal and temporal
trends in ozone and health. The area fixed effects capture observed and unobserved factors
common to residents within that area, such as income, education, and access to health insurance,
to the extent they do not vary over time. I also include extensive controls for weather, other
outdoor pollutants, and day of week dummy variables to capture time varying factors. The

3

remaining variation in ozone is likely independent from the numerous behavioral and
environmental factors that affect health.
The first set of results indicates that people respond to smog alerts. Attendance is
significantly lower on days when smog alerts are announced, with declines in preferred
specifications of 6 and 13 percent across the two facilities considered. These results are
generally insensitive to functional form assumptions of the regression discontinuity design and
are robust to several specification checks. For example, the estimates are remarkably unaffected
by the inclusion of numerous controls for weather conditions and observed air quality, both
significant predictors of outdoor activities. Attendance for children and the elderly, two groups
specifically targeted by air quality information, display greater responses to alerts. These
findings indicate that people value the provision of information contained in the warnings.
The second set of results confirms that accounting for responses to information about risk
drastically alters conclusions about the relationship between ozone and health, though only for
susceptible populations. Ignoring avoidance behavior suggests ozone has the smallest effect on
children, while controlling for avoidance behavior indicates the biggest effect on children.
Including smog alerts and the PSI increases estimates of the effect of ozone by roughly 160
percent for children and 40 percent for the elderly, but has no effect on estimates for adults.
These patterns by age are consistent with children and the elderly having greater response to
alerts than adults.
The coefficients on information about risk can also be directly interpreted for
understanding the effect of ozone on health. If providing information improves health ceteris
paribus – importantly, holding observed ozone levels fixed – this implies evidence of both a
response to information and an effect of ozone on health. For example, if individuals respond to

4

an alert by reducing their exposure to ozone and, consequently, their health improves, then ozone
must affect health. I find that information has a significant, negative effect on hospitalizations
for children and the elderly, further supporting that ozone effects health.
Evidence that people respond to public information about risk is interesting in own right.
First, studies consistently document that individuals adjust their behavior in response to
information about permanent, long-standing risk. 3 Information is often disseminated to shape
individuals’ short-run behavior in response to imminent dangers, such as terrorism threats,
environmental hazards, and disease outbreaks, and these findings indicate that people respond to
rapidly changing information about risk. Second, economic epidemiology models imply that
diseases can be self-limiting through avoidance behavior, so there may be little role for
government intervention (Philipson 2000). Studies that examine behavioral responses to disease
outbreaks, however, are unable to distinguish how information about risk is transmitted as a
disease spreads, whether by private or public information. 4 Because air quality information is
publicly provided, these findings indicate the government has a potential role in affecting illness
by disseminating information about risk.
Most importantly, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that individuals take
substantial actions to reduce exposure to ozone; estimates of the health effect of ozone that
ignore these actions are severely biased. Given the contentious debates surrounding air quality
regulations, 5 it is important to account for this behavior to correctly measure the costs of ozone
to society. Moreover, given the widespread prevalence of information about risk, these findings
suggest the importance of accounting for protective behavior in a wide range of statistical
analyses that rely on observational data to understand biological relationships.
3
4

For example, see Ippolito and Mathios (1990), Jin and Leslie (2003), and Smith and Johnson (1988).
For example, see Ahituv, Hotz, and Philipson (1996), Mullahy (1999), and Philipson (1996).

5

II. Background
A. Air Quality and Health
One of the most influential studies on air pollution and health comes from the London
“killer” fog, a severe air pollution episode in London, England, in December, 1952 (Wilson and
Spengler 1996). The unexpected – and arguably exogenous – change in air quality stemming
from a temperature inversion has been linked with thousands of premature deaths (Logan and
Glasg 1953). Since air quality was not regularly monitored and its health effects were poorly
understood (and fog was common in London), people were largely uninformed of the harm they
faced from exposure, so there was limited, if any, avoidance behavior.
More recent studies have focused on determining effects from air pollution at the lower
levels commonly found in developed countries. Countless observational analyses have estimated
statistical associations between pollution and various health outcomes, mostly focusing on
mortality and respiratory related morbidity, such as asthma, with summaries provided in Levy et
al. (2001), Brunekreef and Holgate (2002), Wilson and Spengler (1996), and Environmental
Protection Agency (2006). A common statistical approach is the use of daily time-series data on
health outcomes, such as hospitalizations, linked with contemporaneous and lagged levels of
pollution and potential confounding variables, such as weather (for example, Katsouyanni et al.
1996, Thurston et al. 1992, Schwartz 1995, Bell et al. 2004). An alternative approach is cohort
studies that follow individuals over time and compare pollution measures aggregated over time
with health outcomes (for example, Dockery et al. 1993, Pope et al. 1995, Kinney, Thurston, and
Raizenne 1996).
These approaches have been criticized on the grounds that ambient pollution is not
randomly assigned (Chay and Greenstone 2003a,b), leading to a surge in quasi-experimental

TP

5

For example, new air quality standards for ozone were proposed in 1997 and upheld in court until 2003.
6

techniques to isolate exogenous changes in pollution. For example, several studies by Pope and
others (Pope 1989, Pope, Schwartz, and Ransom 1992, Ransom and Pope 1995) used changes in
pollution that resulted from the opening and closing of a steel mill in Utah because of a labor
strike. Heinrich, Hoelscher, and Wichmann (2000) exploited changes in total suspended
particles (TSPs) in Eastern Germany from shifts in industrial activity and stricter air quality
regulations as a result of German reunification in 1990. Friedman et al. (2001) used the
temporary change in air quality from short-term traffic rules intended to accommodate the 1996
Olympic Games in Atlanta, GA. Two studies by Chay and Greenstone (2003a,b) exploited the
implementation of the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the recession of the early 1980s that induced
considerable temporal and spatial variation in TSPs throughout the United States. Lederman et
al. (2004) compared birth outcomes of children born to women living or working within two
miles of the World Trade Center who were pregnant on September 11, 2001, to children born to
women more than two miles away. Lleras-Muney (2005) used the plausibly random relocation
of military personnel to new residential locations to estimate the effect of various pollutants on
children's health. 6
Although these studies often go to great lengths to provide convincing empirical evidence
that ambient pollution levels can be viewed as randomly assigned, they typically assume people
do not respond to their assigned level of pollution. Unlike the early killer fog episodes where
people were largely unaware of the danger associated with pollution levels, the scope for
avoidance behavior has increased considerably over time, though the extent to which it exists
may vary depending on the specific context. If people respond to higher pollution levels by
increasing avoidance behavior, then the estimated effect of pollution on health is biased down.
6

For examples of other studies, see Currie and Neidell (2005), Neidell (2004), Jayachandran (2005), and Sneeringer
(2006).

7

B. Ozone, Asthma, and Information
Ground-level ozone is a criteria pollutant 7 regulated under the Clean Air Acts that affects
respiratory morbidity by irritating lung airways, decreasing lung function, and increasing
respiratory symptoms, with effects exacerbated for susceptible individuals, such as children, the
elderly, and particularly asthmatics. Because it takes some time for a disease such as asthma to
progress, symptoms can arise from contemporaneous exposure (in as quickly as one hour of
exposure), from cumulative exposure over several days, or several days after exposure. For
example, “an asthmatic may be impacted by ozone on the first day of exposure, have further
effects triggered on the second day, and then report to the emergency room for an asthmatic
attack three days after exposure” (Environmental Protection Agency 2006).
Numerous studies have documented associations between ozone and hospital admissions
for asthma using daily time series data – the approach taken in this paper – with the most
comprehensive review provided in Environmental Protection Agency (2006). Evidence
generally supports significant increases in asthma hospitalizations as ozone increases, though it
is not uncommon to find no association (for example, Norris et al. 1999, Lierl and Hornung
2003, Garty et al. 1998). Cumulative effects are supported by the data, with the largest effect on
hospital admissions from one lag of ozone, followed by two lags, then zero, three, and four lags
in a virtual tie, with no effect established beyond four lags (Environmental Protection Agency
2006).
The process leading to ozone formation makes it highly predictable and straightforward
to avoid. Ozone is not directly emitted into the atmosphere, but is formed from interactions of
nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) (both of which are directly
7

Criteria pollutants are six common air pollutants with established health-based air quality standards. They include
ozone, carbon monoxide, particulate matter, nitrogen dioxide, lead, and sulfur dioxide.

8

emitted) in the presence of heat, sunlight, and solar radiation. Because of this process, ozone
levels vary considerably both across and within days, peaking in the summer and middle of the
day when heat, sunlight, and solar radiation are highest (Environmental Protection Agency
2006). Therefore, ozone levels can be predicted using weather forecasts, and ozone rapidly
breaks down indoors because there is less heat and sunlight (Chang et al. 2000). Since
symptoms from ozone exposure can arise over a short period of time, altering short-run exposure
by going indoors can reduce the onset of symptoms.
Because of the potential effectiveness of avoidance behavior, the pollutant standards
index (PSI) was developed to inform the public of expected air quality conditions. The PSI,
which is forecasted on a daily basis, ranges from 0-500 and is indexed so that a value of 100
corresponds to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards set forth in the Clean Air Acts. The
PSI is computed for five of the criteria pollutants, and the maximum PSI across pollutants is
required by federal law to be reported in major newspapers (Environmental Protection Agency
1999). It also contains a brief legend summarizing the air quality: 0-50 good; 51-100 moderate;
101-200 unhealthful; 201-275 very unhealthful; and 275+ hazardous.
In addition to providing the PSI, California state law requires the announcement of a
stage I air quality episode when the PSI is at least 200, which corresponds to 0.20 parts per
million (ppm) for ozone. 8 These episodes, which also occur on a daily basis, are more widely
publicized than the PSI; they are announced on both television and radio. Although air quality
episodes can potentially be issued for any criteria pollutant, they have only been issued for
ozone. Compatible with seasonal patterns of ozone, alerts are issued from March 1 to October
31. Because ozone is a major component of urban smog, this has given rise to the term “smog
8

Additionally, a stage II air quality episode is issued when the PSI exceeds 250 or ozone forecast exceeds 0.30 ppm,
but this only occurred once over the time period studied.

9

alerts.”
The agency that provides air quality forecasts and issues smog alerts for Southern
California is the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). They produce the
following day’s air quality forecast by noon the day before to provide enough time to
disseminate the information. Because SCAQMD covers all of Orange County and the most
populated parts of Los Angeles, Riverside, and San Bernardino counties – an area with
considerable spatial variation in ozone – they provide the forecast for each of the 38 source
receptor areas (SRAs) within SCAQMD. When an alert is issued, the staff at SCAQMD contacts
a set list of recipients, including local schools and newspapers. The media then further circulate
the information to the public, but greatly condense it. For example, the Los Angeles Times,
although it receives air quality forecasts for all 38 SRAs in SCAQMD, only reports air quality
forecasts for ten air monitoring areas (AMAs) in SCAQMD by taking the maximum forecasted
value of the SRAs within an AMA.
Given the reporting process and the factors believed to affect ozone formation, the model
used for issuing an alert can be summarized as:
(1)

alertat = 1{maxat(ozonefst = f(weatherfst,ozonest-1,solradt))≥0.20}

where the subscripts a, s and t indicate AMA, SRA, and date, respectively, ozonef is the
forecasted 1-hour level of ozone, weatherf is the weather forecast, ozone is observed 1-hour
ozone, solrad is solar radiation, and 1{•} is an indicator function equal to one when the
forecasted ozone exceeds 0.20 ppm and 0 otherwise.
III. Data
A. Outdoor attendance
For a measure of time spent outdoors, accurately recorded individual level time diaries

10

would be an ideal source of data, but such data are generally unavailable at a daily level over a
sufficient period of time. I instead use daily aggregate measures of attendance at two outdoor
facilities within the boundaries of the SCAQMD: the Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens
(“Zoo”) and Griffith Park Observatory (“Observatory”). 9 The Zoo is open everyday from 10
a.m. to 5 p.m., with the closing time extended to 6 p.m. from July 1 to Labor Day. The
Observatory is open from 2 p.m. to 10 p.m. Tuesday through Friday and 12:30 p.m. to 10 p.m. on
Saturday and Sunday, but is open from 12:30 p.m. to 10 p.m. everyday during the summer. Both
are located a short distance from downtown Los Angeles and attract sizeable crowds, averaging
over 4500 attendees per day. These data are available from 1989-1997, with descriptive statistics
for each shown in Table 1.
Although focusing on two specific facilities limits generalizability, these data provide
several advantages over time use surveys. One, because they are administrative data, they are
likely to be free of recall errors that often arise in survey data. Two, these data are available over
a long period of time in which there is substantial variation in ozone levels, forecasts, and smog
alerts. Three, the exact dates are available in the attendance data, allowing me to merge several
files at the daily levels and use the regression discontinuity design. Therefore, this approach
improves upon measurement, precision, and causality at the expense of generalizability.
The Zoo charges varying admission fees, so it also offers some breakdown of attendance
by demographics to assess heterogeneity in responses to alerts. Separate daily attendance is
available for adults, children under 2, children aged 2-12, and seniors aged 62 and up, with
means for each presented in Table 1. Children and the elderly are two groups considered
susceptible to the effects of ozone, so their responses may differ from adults. 10 Although this
9

The Zoo and Observatory are owned and operated by the City of Los Angeles.
Children’s responses to alerts could reflect state rules requiring schools to reschedule outdoor activities, but the

10

11

definition of susceptibility is not exhaustive, both groups are specifically targeted by air quality
information. The Zoo also offers attendance for Greater Los Angeles Zoo Association (GLAZA)
members. While the Zoo is both a tourist and local attraction, GLAZA members are typically
local residents who may be more aware of alerts and find it easier to switch activities. 11
Therefore, they are more likely to respond to alerts, providing one robustness check of the
model.
I also collect data on attendance at baseball games (available in the ‘game logs’ at
www.retrosheet.org) for two major league baseball teams in SCAQMD: the Los Angeles
Dodgers, who play a short distance form downtown Los Angeles, and the California Angels 12 ,
who play in Anaheim, approximately 30 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles. Attending a
baseball game is a more sedentary activity than attending the Zoo or Observatory and most
baseball games are played at night when ozone levels decrease, so I use attendance at games as a
specification check. Average attendance from 1989-1997, which includes advance ticket sales
and purchases the day of the game, is over 37,000 for the Dodgers and 26,000 for the Angels.
The sample size for both teams is considerably smaller than the Zoo and Observatory because
the baseball season is shorter than the smog alert season and because games are not played every
day in Southern California.
B. Health Outcomes
Data on health outcomes comes from a non-public version of the California Hospital
Discharge Data (CHDD), which contains records for all individuals discharged from a hospital in
the state. The non-public version contains the exact date of admission and the patients’
analysis focuses almost exclusively on summer months when children are not in school and also includes a dummy
variable for summer schedule.
11
GLAZA members pay an annual fee and do not pay an admission fee per visit.

12

residential ZIP code, which are used to assign individuals to information, pollution, and weather.
The principal diagnosis of the patient is used to identify asthma admissions based on the
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM) codes.
Since the effects of pollution and responses to information may vary by age, I use the age of the
patient to separate admissions by age. Although an imperfect measure of health, asthma hospital
admissions from the CHDD provide a large sample of data at a high frequency with detailed
geographic residence.
For the dependent variable, I compute the daily number of hospital admissions for asthma
in each SRA, also shown in Table 1. I compute asthma admissions for three age groups: 5-19,
20-64, and 65 and over. 13 The value of 0.369 for ages 5-19 in the first column indicates there are
0.369 hospital admissions per day for asthma per SRA, which translates into nine admits per day
for all of SCAQMD, shown in the second column.
C. Air quality information
I collected forecasted ozone directly from the Los Angeles Times for the years 1989-1997.
Since the Times only reports air quality forecasts for each AMA (although it receives forecasts
for each SRA), the AMA is the finest geographic resolution for pollution information. For data
on smog alerts, I obtained an administrative file from SCAQMD that contained dates when alerts
were issued anywhere in the district but not the area it was issued for. Because there is
considerable spatial variation in ozone levels throughout SCAQMD, I instead assign an alert to
each AMA if the ozone forecast in that AMA (from the Times) equals or exceeds 0.20 ppm,
according to equation (1). 14 To verify the appropriateness of assigning alerts, I created an
12

The California Angels were renamed the Anaheim Angels in 1997, and then the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim
in 2005.
13
I omit children less than five because of difficulties in correctly diagnosing asthma at this age.
14
The ozone forecast is reported in PSI units, rather than ppm that observed ozone levels are recorded. Because the

13

indicator for whether an alert was issued anywhere in SCAQMD and compare it to the
SCAQMD administrative file. The selection rule in equation (1) is strictly followed: there are
only seven inconsistencies of the 2138 data points available over the period studied.
Since alerts are forecasted, I assess their accuracy by using data on observed ozone for
each AMA, also shown in Table 1. Of the 104 alerts issued in the AMA for the Zoo, less than 20
percent were correctly issued; conversely, there were 35 days where ozone surpassed 0.20 ppm
but no alert was issued. Accuracy for the rest of SCAQMD is comparable to the AMA of the
Zoo. If people track alert accuracy, the inaccuracy of alerts may be problematic for encouraging
people to respond. 15 It is, however, useful for the regression discontinuity design: if scientists
and meteorologists cannot distinguish between days above and below the threshold, then it is
unlikely that individuals can.
D. Pollution and weather
Daily pollution data is from the California Air Resources Board. There is approximately
one pollution monitor for ozone in each of the 38 SRAs, and roughly 20 for carbon monoxide
(CO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), two other pollutants necessary to control for because of their
correlation with ozone and potential health effects. 16 I assign pollution levels to the SRA based
on the values for the monitor in that SRA and drop SRAs if no monitor is present for ozone. If
an SRA does not have a monitor for CO or NO2, I assign pollution values from the nearest SRA
with a monitor to preserve sample size. I use measures of these pollutants that correspond with
air quality standards for the dates of the analysis.
Because weather is correlated with ozone levels and may directly affect time spent
PSI is a nonlinear function of ppm, I convert the ozone forecast to ppm.
15
I estimated models that also included an indicator for whether alerts are issued correctly, and found no significant
differences in the estimates.
16
Particulate matter (PM10) is unfortunately unavailable on a daily basis, but the high collinearity between PM10,

14

outside and health, I control for numerous weather variables obtained from the Surface Summary
of the Day (TD3200) from the National Climatic Data Center. Using the 30 weather stations
available in SCAQMD, I assign daily maximum and minimum temperature and precipitation to

each SRA in an analogous manner to pollution. For maximum relative humidity, sun cover, and
resultant wind speed, there is only one weather station in SCAQMD with a complete history of
this variable (Los Angeles International Airport), so I assign it to all SRAs within SCAQMD.
These variables are also frequently missing, so to preserve sample size I impute the missing
values using a best-subset regression with all other weather variables and ozone as covariates.
To assign information, pollution, and weather to individuals in the CHDD, I assign SRAs
and AMAs to each individual using their ZIP code of residence, and merge the data by SRA or
AMA and date. There are considerable disagreements over how to assign pollution from
monitors to individuals. Using SRAs is justified on the grounds that SRAs were specifically
designed to represent an area with common geography and pollution concerns, so there is a high
degree of uniformity in ozone levels within an SRA. Each outdoor venue is linked to the
pollution and weather station within its SRA by date as well.
IV. Conceptual Framework
A. Health Effects of Ozone
To fix ideas on measuring and interpreting the effect of pollution on health, assume the
following relationship between asthma and ozone:
(2)

asthma = f (ozone*avoidance, S)

where avoidance is a measure of avoidance behavior, such as time spent outdoors, and S are all
other factors that affect health, such as medical services, exercise, existing health capital, and
weather. Interacting ozone with avoidance behavior reflects exposure to pollution: ozone affects
CO, and NO2 should not bias estimates for ozone.
15

people only if they are exposed to it. For example, if ozone is 0.20 ppm and people spend no
time outside (possibly because an alert is issued), then exposure to ozone is considerably less
than if they spend time outside.
Imagine two experiments, both of which hold fixed S but differ in how they treat outdoor
time. In the first experiment, which is analogous to controlled-human exposure experiments,
individuals are randomly assigned into one of two rooms, each containing different levels of
ambient ozone. Individuals can not respond to the amount of ambient ozone in the room
(δavoidance/δozone = 0), so their exposure to ozone is identical to the ambient level of ozone.
Because of random assignment, the difference in outcomes across the two groups
(δasthma/δozone) is a causal estimate of the biological effect of ozone on asthma.
In the second experiment, which is analogous to quasi-experimental studies, individuals
are randomly assigned to one of two locations, each containing different levels of ambient ozone.
In contrast to the first experiment, people can respond to the amount of ambient ozone in their
location, so their exposure to ozone is not necessarily identical to the ambient level of ozone.
Since these responses are not held fixed, the measured effect of ozone on asthma
(dasthma/dozone = δasthma/δozone + δasthma/δavoidance·δavoidance/δozone) does not
represent the biological effect. Because of random assignment, this is a causal estimate of the
“behavioral” effect of ozone on asthma. If outdoor time is negatively correlated with ambient
ozone levels, then the behavioral effect will represent a lower bound of the biological effect.
If any responses to ambient ozone in the second experiment can be properly accounted
for, the direct health effect from responding (δasthma/δavoidance·δavoidance/δozone) represents
the “avoidance” effect. That is, it represents the effect from limiting exposure to ozone on
asthma for a given level of ozone. Importantly, it can be used as an alternative way of examining

16

whether ozone affects asthma – if people reduce their exposure to a pollutant and this causes an
improvement in health, then the pollutant must affect health. Furthermore, accounting for
avoidance behavior enables one to uncover the biological effect of ozone on asthma.
B. Avoidance behavior 17
Individuals may substitute between indoor and outdoor activities because they believe
exposure to outdoor pollution affects health and because of the direct utility they receive from
spending time outside. People spend less time outside (increase avoidance behavior) when
forecasted ozone increases if more time outside is worse for health when ozone is high, a
reasonable condition because it is precisely what air quality information conveys. 18 Susceptible
people are more likely to respond to information if avoidance behavior is more productive for
them, also a reasonable condition. If responses to information vary by susceptibility, then the
bias in estimates of the health effect of ozone from omitting avoidance behavior will vary by
susceptibility as well.
Although susceptible individuals are more likely to respond to air quality information in
general, they may be less likely to respond to smog alerts per se. Smog alerts are widely
disseminated, so the cost of acquiring this information is nearly zero. All individuals –
regardless of susceptibility – are encouraged to respond to alerts, so some unsusceptible
individuals will respond to alerts if the expected benefits from responding outweigh the costs.
Obtaining the ozone forecast, however, involves greater effort, so only those who benefit from
avoiding ozone – the susceptible population – are likely to acquire that information. Since smog
alerts are determined by the ozone forecast, then smog alerts offer no additional information
once the ozone forecast is obtained. Therefore, susceptible individuals are less likely to respond
17

Contact the author for a full derivation of the predictions described in this section.

17

to an alert than unsusceptible individuals.
V. Estimation Strategy
There are two primary empirical objectives: to assess whether people respond to air
quality information and, if they respond, to assess the bias from incorporating these responses.
Although the empirical models are nested theoretically, I separately elaborate on empirical
strategies for each equation because: 1) the data do not fully overlap since I only observe outdoor
behavior for two locations in SCAQMD but hospital admissions for all of SCAQMD and 2)
empirical concerns unique to each model require different identification strategies.
A. Avoidance behavior
To estimate the effect of air quality information on attendance at each outdoor location, I
focus on estimating the impact of smog alerts only and use the ozone forecast to identify the
effect of smog alerts. Since alerts are a deterministic function of the forecasted ozone, as
indicated in equation (1), forecasted ozone fully governs the alert selection rule and makes it
possible to leverage a regression discontinuity (RD) design. If days just below forecast ozone
levels of 0.20 ppm are otherwise identical to days just at or above 0.20, then the discontinuity in
attendance that occurs at 0.20 ppm represents the causal effect of alerts. If people directly
respond to the ozone forecast, this does not invalidate the empirical strategy – it will simply
reduce the effect of alerts on attendance. Therefore, this design assesses whether people respond
to the more simplistic and readily available information contained in alerts conditional on the
continuous index being available.
To implement the RD, I estimate the following equation:
(3)

log(attendancet) = alertt α1+ g(ozoneft, α2) + Xt α3 + Mt α4 + f(t) + εt

18

A necessary condition for this to arise is that indoor ozone levels are considerably lower than outdoor levels,
which evidence generally supports (Chang et al. 2000).

18

where alertt is a dummy variable indicating whether a smog alert is issued in the AMA of the
outdoor facility at day t, g is a function that relates the ozone forecast (ozonef) to attendance, and
εt is an error term. Xt are meteorological and pollution variables that affect quality of the day. Mt
are holiday, summer schedule, and day of week dummies to account for changes in leisure time.
f(t) is a set of year-month dummy variables to account for both seasonal and temporal patterns in
solar radiation, pollution, and weather. If α1 < 0, this indicates outdoor attendance decreases
when alerts are announced. Because the Observatory is open during the evening when ozone
levels are lower and responses may be smaller there than at the Zoo, I estimate this model
separately for both places. 19
To allow for a flexible specification of g, I begin by estimating a specification linear in
ozone forecast, as graphical evidence below suggests is plausible. Additionally, I control for g
non-parametrically by specifying a dummy variable for each value of the ozone forecast, but
omit the smog alert variable. To infer the impact of alerts, I use the change in coefficients
around the alert threshold by comparing the dummy variable on ozonef = 0.19 to ozonef = 0.20
ppm. If the dummy variable(s) above the alert threshold is lower than the one below the alert
threshold, this implies a decrease in attendance in response to alerts. 20
While it is impossible to know whether the unobservables are identical across alert status,
I examine how well the observable covariates balance across alert status. Figure 1 shows a plot
of three likely influential covariates (temperature, humidity, and CO) against ozone forecast
levels. All three covariates evolve smoothly throughout this plot, suggesting they are unaffected
by smog alerts. Given the observed factors balance, then it is more reasonable to believe the

19

Since the covariate (ozone forecast) that determines the treatment (smog alert) is discrete, I compute standard
errors clustered on each value of forecasted ozone (Card and Lee 2006).
20
Results are robust to alternative specifications of g, such as restricting the sample to observations centered on the
alert threshold (.15-.24 ppm).

19

unobserved factors do as well.
As preliminary evidence that people respond to alerts, average attendance at the Zoo is
also plotted in Figure 1. Focusing on the observations near 0.20 ppm, attendance is generally
increasing in forecasted ozone prior to 0.20 ppm. At 0.20 ppm, the point at which an alert is
issued, attendance sharply drops. After that, attendance remains increasing in forecasted ozone,
but is generally lower than attendance below 0.20 ppm. This jump in attendance at the alert
threshold, which is larger than any other jump in attendance, provides the first piece of evidence
that people respond to smog alerts.
Two additional assumptions necessary to obtain unbiased estimates of α1 is that 1) alert
status is not updated once actual levels of ozone are realized and 2) there are no supply-side
effects. Despite the temptation to continuously update alert status, officials at SCAQMD
indicate this is highly unlikely because of flaws inherent in detecting and disseminating an alert
as it occurs. 21 In terms of supply side effects, facilities do not lower their price to entice
customers or keep animals inside to protect their health on alert days, suggesting this assumption
is likely to be satisfied. It is possible, however, that a more crowded atmosphere provides less
enjoyment because of longer waiting times, for example. If an alert reduces crowding so that
unsusceptible people increase demand for these outdoor attractions, this will result in a
downward bias in α1.
B. Health Effects of Ozone
To estimate the effect of ozone on health, one would ideally focus on a more detailed
version of equation (2) that includes lagged values of ozone, outdoor time, and other appropriate
21

For example, ozone typically peaks in the late afternoon, around 3:00 pm. The data is not received until an hour
later, and if a violation is detected, it must be double-checked to ensure accuracy. At this point, which can be up to
two hours after the violation first occurred, the media are first made aware. By the time this information is

20

variables. This is not feasible because the data with health outcomes covers all of SCAQMD
while the data for outdoor time is not at the individual level and only covers two particular
places. Instead, I substitute the factors that affect outdoor time into equation (2) to estimate the
following reduced form relationship:
4

(4)

[

asthma sat = ∑ ozonesat − j π 11j + ozone sat − j * alert at − j π 12j + ozone sat − j * ozoneatf − j π 13j + X sat − j β 2j

]

j =0

+ M t β 3 + f (t ) + σ s + v sat

where s, a, and t indexes SRA, AMA, and time, respectively, and vsat is the error term. 22 h is the
number of hospital admissions per day in each SRA. To remain consistent with previous ozone
time-series studies that often found effects up to four days after exposure (Environmental
Protection Agency 2006), I include four lags of ozone, information, and weather, but also assess
sensitivity to alternative amounts of lags. X, M, and f(t) are the same as equation (3) except I
also include smog alerts and the ozone forecast in levels in X to capture nuance effects associated
with alerts being issued, such as individual over-reactions to alerts or hospitals increased
willingness to admit patients because of an alert. σs is an SRA fixed effect that accounts for
observed and unobserved time invariant determinants of health within an SRA. Therefore, I
compare changes in ozone levels and information with changes in hospitalizations within each
month of the year and within an SRA.
The primary test of this analysis focuses on whether accounting for avoidance behavior
affects estimates the biological effect of ozone on health. Instead of comparing the effect of each
lag separately, I focus on the overall effect of ozone by computing the sum of the effect of ozone
disseminated and received by the public, sunlight has decreased and ozone levels have typically fallen to safer
levels.
22
Smog alerts and the air quality forecast are included in levels in the vector X, described below. Although this
equation should also contain ozone interacted with the other covariates (X and M), I omit the additional interactions
to simplify exposition. Results with complete interactions, however, are nearly identical to results from this
specification.

21

across all lags,

∑ (∂asthma

sat

(

)

/ ∂ozone sat − j ) = ∑ π 11j + alert t − j π 12j + ozone tf− j π 13j . If people

respond to information about pollution and ozone affects health, then including smog alerts and
the ozone forecast should increase estimates of the effect of ozone. To formally test this
hypothesis, I estimate equation (4) both with and without controls for information about risk, and
compare estimates via a Hausman test (Hausman 1978). 23
The identification of ozone comes from daily variation in ozone levels within each year
and month and within an SRA. To highlight this variation in ozone, Figure 2 plots the mean
level of ozone for each day of the year. Immediately evident is the strong daily variation in
ozone, which is likely to be orthogonal to diet, exercise, health care choices, pre-existing health
stock, and numerous other factors that affect asthma hospital admissions. This figure also
demonstrates the strong seasonal patterns in ozone that are necessary to account for because
behavior and environmental conditions change throughout the year as well
In order to obtain precise estimates of the parameters of interest, it is essential that there
is enough variation in ozone levels independent of seasonality, weather, co-pollutants, and all
other variables included in these regressions. Figure 3 plots the mean residual variation in ozone
for each day of the year after adjusting for X, M, year-month dummies and SRA fixed effects.
This figure demonstrates substantial residual variation in ozone that is constant throughout the
year, indicating seasonality is accounted for and ample variation for obtaining precise estimates.
A concern with using daily variation in ozone is the factors that drive this variation –
weather and ozone precursors – may directly affect health and not be observed in X. 24 With
respect to weather, I control for temperature and sun cover – the two meteorological factors that
23

The Hausman test statistic is given by (γs - γl)’* [var(γl) – var(γs)]-1 * (γs - γl) ~ χ2(q) where γs is the estimated
effect of ozone when excluding information from equation (4), γl is the estimated effect of ozone when including
information, and q is the number of lags of ozone.

22

affect ozone formation – directly in these regressions (as well as several other weather variables).
Furthermore, I demonstrate below that estimates of the effect of ozone are insensitive to
excluding all weather variables, suggesting confounding from weather is not a major concern.
With respect to ozone precursors (NOx and VOCs), I can not directly include them in
regression models because they are generally unavailable at the same level of detail, but it is
unclear whether to control for them even if they are available. On one hand, these pollutants are
not believed to be directly related to asthma, so any effect they might have on asthma is through
their effect on ozone, which would dampen the estimated effect of ozone on health. On the other
hand, the sources of NOx and VOC emissions may emit other pollutants that affect health. For
example, automobiles emit benzene, which has been linked with asthma, in addition to NOx.
Although I can not include all co-pollutants in the empirical models, I include CO and NO2 – two
criteria pollutants linked with short-term respiratory health effects – and also demonstrate results
are insensitive to excluding these co-pollutants.
As described in the conceptual framework, assessing the direct effect on information on
asthma in equation (4) can be used as another test for understanding the health effects of ozone.
If people respond to information and information has a negative effect on asthma
hospitalizations, this implies ozone must affect health. For example, if individuals respond to
alerts by reducing their exposure to ozone and their health improves, then ozone must affect
health. Rather than focus on specific lags, I also use the sum across all lags:

∑ (∂asthma

sat

(

) (

)

(

)

f
j
/ ∂alert sat − j ) = ∑ ozonet − j π 12j ,∑ ∂asthma sat / ∂ozone sat
− j = ∑ ozonet − j π 13 and

jointly test whether the two parameters are different from zero. Smog alerts are identified by
including the ozone forecast, akin to the RD design linear in forecasted ozone, which evidence

24

This concern is also present in other epidemiological analyses that use daily time series.

23

below indicates is a reasonable approximation for g. The ozone forecast is only identified if all
factors that affect the ozone forecast, as specified in equation (1), are observed in equation (4).
Although more tenuous than the assumption for the effect of smog alerts, it is a plausible
assumption given the extensive controls for weather, solar radiation, and lagged ozone.
VI. Do People Respond to Smog Alerts?
The first set of regression results, shown in Table 2, provides further evidence that people
respond to smog alerts by decreasing outdoor activities. There is a separate panel for each
outdoor facility, and each panel includes results from four specifications to gauge the sensitivity
of estimates to both potential confounding and functional form assumptions of the RD. The odd
numbered columns omit several variables likely to affect the demand for outdoor activities
(precipitation, wind, humidity, observed ozone, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen dioxide), while
the even numbered columns include them. 25 Columns (1) and (2) use a linear specification for
the RD and columns (3) and (4) are non-parametric estimates that specify a dummy variable for
each forecasted ozone value.
Results for the Zoo are shown in Panel A. Columns (1) and (2) show a statistically
significant drop in attendance of 15 percent both with and without the additional weather and air
quality covariates. The non-parametric results in columns (3) and (4) indicate that smog alerts
reduce attendance between 12 and 13 percent, quite similar to the parametric estimates.
Moreover, the results are almost completely unaffected by excluding several important
covariates, which is notable given that weather and observed ozone are important predictors of
outdoor activities. This suggests that these variables evolve smoothly around the discontinuity,
so the change in attendance at the discontinuity represents the causal effect of smog alerts.
Results for the Observatory, shown in Panel B, also show a decline in attendance from

24

smog alerts. Attendance declines by roughly 3 percent in the parametric model, though
statistically insignificant. In the non-parametric specification, there is a statistically significant
drop in attendance of 6 percent, which is larger than the parametric estimates. Both estimates are
also insensitive to including the weather and pollution variables. These results suggest a
response to alerts, with the smaller magnitude than the Zoo consistent with the Observatory
including night hours when ozone levels typically decrease.
I provide several sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of these results. If the costs
of avoiding these outdoor activities are lower for local residents, either because they are more
aware of information or have lower costs of substitution, then they should display larger
responses to alerts. Using the attendance breakdown at the Zoo, I explore how GLAZA
members respond to alerts. Shown in column (1) of Table 3, GLAZA members reduce
attendance by 19 percent, which is larger than the total attendance response. Given that GLAZA
members are more likely to be local residents, this conforms to expectations that locals show a
greater response to alerts than other attendees.
More susceptible people are more likely to display avoidance behavior, but they may be
less likely to respond to alerts if they obtain the continuous ozone forecast. To assess this, I
estimate equation (3) for the Zoo separately for children and the elderly, two susceptible groups.
The results, shown in columns (2) through (4) of Table 3, indicate responses between 19 and 24
percent for children and seniors, also larger than the overall response. Although this basic
classification of susceptibility is not sufficient for capturing those with a history of respiratory
illness, it captures two major groups targeted by air quality information. In general, these results
suggest the more simplified information contained in the alerts is valued by potentially
susceptible populations.

TP

25

I do not omit temperature and sun cover because they are part of the ozone prediction model.
25

I also provide several specification tests for this model, shown in Table 4. As a first test,
I estimate regressions with the dependent variable in levels rather than logs, which holds
constant the number of attendees, rather than percent of attendees, affected by alerts. Shown in
column (1), the implied percentage drop in attendance is comparable in magnitude to the main
results: Zoo attendance drops by 10 percent and Observatory attendance by 3 percent.
Second, I provide a falsification test by testing for a discontinuity where one should not
exist. 26 Following Imbens and Lemiuex (2007), I use the sub-sample with no smog alerts (ozone
forecasts less than 0.20 ppm), which avoids estimating a regression where a known discontinuity
exists, and create an artificial discontinuity at the median ozone forecast, which maximizes the
power of the test to find jumps. 27 The results, shown in column (2), are not statistically
significant, providing support for the model.
As a third check, I include future alerts in equation (3). People cannot respond to a
forecasted alert before it occurs, so finding an effect would suggest misspecification. If people
use a naïve version of equation (1) to forecast ozone on their own, however, then they may
anticipate future smog alerts by increasing current outdoor activities, suggesting a positive
coefficient on future alerts. Therefore, only a negative coefficient on future alerts would
necessarily suggest misspecification. The results, shown in column (3) of Table 4, indicate a
positive but statistically insignificant effect from future alerts for both facilities, hinting people
may anticipate future smog alerts. Furthermore, the effects from contemporaneous alerts are
unaffected by the inclusion of future alerts.
For a final specification check, I estimate the regression using an outcome that should not
be affected by smog alerts. One concern with the evidence presented thus far is that people may
26
27

Figure 2 also provides informal evidence that the largest jump in attendance occurs at 0.2 ppm.
The median ozone forecast for this subsample is 0.11 ppm.

26

respond to alerts out of altruistic rather than health concerns by driving less so as to not further
contribute to pollution on days already considered highly polluted. Therefore, people may
reduce visits to specific outdoor attractions but not limit total time outside, implying a decrease
in outdoor attendance is not evidence of avoidance behavior. Since attending baseball games is a
sedentary activity and typically at night when ozone levels are lower, attendance at Dodgers and
Angels games should not be affected by alert status. Shown in column (4) of Table 4, smog
alerts are not statistically significant for both teams, and the large point estimate for the Angels
suggests, if anything, an increase in attendance, which is consistent with lower ozone levels at
night. 28 This finding helps to substantiate the overall evidence that people are displaying
avoidance behavior in response to information about pollution.
Overall, these estimates suggest a significant drop in attendance from an alert. The
results are extremely insensitive to functional form assumptions and potential confounding, and
are of the same order of magnitude despite coming from distinct sources, making it unlikely
these results are due to sampling variability or general misspecification. The results suggest
people respond to smog alerts by reducing time spent outdoors.
VII. The Health Effects of Ozone
Given the evidence that people respond to these alerts, I now turn to whether this impacts
estimates of the effect of ozone on health by presenting both graphical and regression analyses.
A. Graphical analysis
The main finding of this analysis is depicted in Figure 4. This figure is a nonparametrically smoothed scatter plot of regression-adjusted asthma hospitalizations against once

28

Results are nearly identical when using only night games. As an additional test, if people drive less in response to
alerts, then CO levels -- a proxy for traffic because it primarily comes from automobiles -- should fall at the alert
threshold. As shown in Figure 2, however, CO evolves smoothly through the alert threshold, rejecting the altruism
effect.

27

lagged observed ozone levels. 29 I focus on one lag here because previous studies have found the
1-day lag to have the largest effect on hospital admissions (Environmental Protection Agency
2006), though regressions below include several lags simultaneously. To assess the impact of
avoidance behavior, I plot two separate lines. The first line ignores avoidance behavior by
plotting asthma and observed ozone levels for all days regardless of whether a smog alert is
issued. The second line accounts for avoidance behavior by limiting the plot to days where no
smog alerts occur – so people could not have displayed avoidance behavior in response to an
alert. If people respond to alerts and ozone affects health, then the second line should be higher
than the first line.
The results for children (Figure 4A) confirm the importance of avoidance behavior. For
lower levels of ozone, the two lines mirror each other, which is as expected because alerts, and
therefore avoidance behavior, are unlikely at such low levels of realized ozone. Once ozone
crosses 0.1 ppm and smog alerts become more common, however, the two lines diverge. 30 The
relationship between ozone and hospitalizations flattens out considerably when ignoring smog
alerts, which is consistent with avoidance behavior: as pollution levels rise, individuals protect
themselves by reducing exposure, so increases in ambient ozone do not lead to increases in
illness. Accounting for smog alert status, however, paints an entirely different picture; it shows a
positive and linear relationship between ozone and asthma throughout the entire range of ozone.
As ozone increases and alerts become more common, the line accounting for avoidance behavior
is considerably higher than the one ignoring it. Although both lines support an effect of ozone
on health, the line ignoring behavior substantially understates the effect.
29

Asthma is regression-adjusted using all covariates in the regression analysis except for observed ozone and
information about ozone. The smoothing is performed using locally weighted regression (LOWESS) procedures
with a bandwidth of 0.4 and running-line least squares smoothing.

28

The results for adults (Figure 4B) suggest avoidance behavior does not bias estimates for
this age group. The two lines are nearly indistinguishable from each other, showing a positive,
linear relationship between ozone and asthma throughout the entire range of ozone. This
suggests adults do not engage in avoidance behavior in response to an alert, which is consistent
with results from Table 3 indicating that children and elderly Zoo attendees show greater
responses to alerts than adults.
B. Regression results
Regression estimates (shown in Table 5), which extend the graphical analysis by
allowing for contemporaneous and several lags of ozone and other environmental confounders,
support the graphical relationship from Figure 4. For children, estimates of the effect of ozone
that omit air quality information in column (1) indicate that a 0.01 ppm increase in the 5-day
average ozone leads to a statistically significant 1.09 percent increase in hospital admissions.
When controlling for smog alerts and the ozone forecast, estimates in column (2) indicate a 0.01
ppm increase in the 5-day average ozone leads to a statistically significant 2.88 percent increase
in hospital admissions, which is 2.6 times larger than estimates that ignore information, a
statistically significantly difference according to the Hausman test. Furthermore, alerts have a
statistically significant and negative effect on hospitalizations, suggesting a reduction in
exposure to ozone via smog alerts improves health. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that families protect this vulnerable segment of the population, and this behavior
affects the estimated relationship between ozone and health.
Also consistent with the graphical results, estimates for adults ages 20-64 are unaffected
by controls for information about pollution, shown in columns (3) and (4). Estimates of the
30

The two lines diverge below 0.2 ppm because smog alerts are based on forecasted ozone while this plot is based
on observed ozone.

29

effect of ozone are statistically significant in both specifications, and controlling for information
does not affect these estimates according to the Hausman test. Estimates with controls for
information indicate a 0.01 ppm increase in the 5-day average ozone leads to a 2.08 percent
increase in hospital admissions, which is slightly smaller than the effect on children. Consistent
with information not impacting the estimates for ozone, information has no direct effect on
health. This suggests adults do not respond to this information in sufficient volume to affect the
estimated relationship between ozone and health.
For the elderly, shown in columns (5) and (6), the effect of ozone is statistically
significant in both specifications. Estimates are 40 percent larger with controls for both alerts
and the ozone forecasts (column (6)) than estimates without controls for information (column
(5)), which is significantly different at the 10 percent level according to the Hausman test. A
0.01 ppm increase in the 5-day average increases asthma admissions by 2.66 percent, which is
close to the effect for children. Although neither source of information is statistically significant
at conventional levels, the ozone forecast is statistically significant at 15 percent, suggesting the
ozone forecast is the more important piece of information for the elderly. Overall, these results
imply the elderly display avoidance behavior, though its impact on estimates is smaller than the
impact for children.
To gauge the magnitude of these effects, I calculate the savings in asthma hospital costs
for children only from a uniform 0.01 ppm decrease in the 5-day average ozone in all SRAs in
SCAQMD using estimates from columns (1) and (2) in Table 4. Using estimates from column
(1) and valuing an asthma admission at the mean hospital bill for asthma ($7301), a 0.01 ppm
decrease yields savings of roughly $157,727 per smog alert season. 31 Controlling for
31

157,727 = 22 * (0.4008/100) * 245 * 7301, where 22 is the number of SRAs used in the analysis, 0.4008 is the
effect from a one ppm decrease in ozone, and 245 is the number of days per smog alert season.

30

information about pollution increases this estimate considerably to $417,717. 32 The difference
of roughly $260,000 between these estimates for children suggest the importance of accounting
for avoidance behavior, though it represents a lower bound of this difference because it ignores
any direct effects on well-being not included in hospital costs and it ignores health episodes other
than asthma hospitalizations. Therefore, the estimated difference in costs understates the full
difference in social benefits associated with reductions in ozone levels.
C. Sensitivity Analyses
In Table 6, I assess the sensitivity of estimates to the number of lags included in the
regression. I begin with a model containing only contemporaneous ozone, information, and
weather, and then consecutively add one lag at a time, with the final specification including six
lags. For children, in the model without controls for avoidance behavior, the effect of ozone is
monotonically increasing from zero to three lags, and levels out after that, generally consistent
with prior evidence. With controls for avoidance behavior, the effect of ozone is monotonically
increasing even through lag 6, suggesting more lags than is typically used may be necessary for
capturing the full health effects of ozone on children. For adults and the elderly, three and four
lags appear to sufficiently capture all of the health effects, respectively, regardless of whether
avoidance behavior is controlled for.
In table 7, I present a series of specification checks to assess the likelihood of timevarying unobserved heterogeneity. As previously mentioned, ozone is correlated with weather
and other pollutants that may affect health but not be fully captured in these models. As a crude
test, I estimate models that do not control for weather and other pollutants. If estimates are
insensitive to excluding these variables, this increases confidence that there is no remaining
confounding. These estimates, shown in Panel A (excluding weather) and B (excluding co-

TP

32

Comparable calculations for the elderly are $219,781 and $305,392, respectively.
31

pollutants) of Table 7, confirm that the effects of ozone are generally unaffected by these
variables, lending support to the empirical methodology.
I also estimate models using only emergency room (ER) admissions as the dependent
variable. Hospital admissions for asthma can be pre-arranged and may not reflect the effect of
exposure to ozone, while ER admits, which are roughly 60 percent of all hospital admits for
asthma, are unplanned episodes that are more likely to be an immediate reaction to ozone. The
results, shown in Panel C of Table 7, indicate estimates are insensitive to this alternative measure
– although coefficients are smaller, it has a comparable percentage effect on ER admissions as
hospital admissions.
As a general specification check, I add future pollution levels, information, and weather
to the model. Ozone and information in the future cannot affect health today, so any effect
would suggest misspecification of the model. To maintain balance with the lagged structure of
the model, I add five leads of ozone and information along with the appropriate interaction
terms, and separately test the joint significance of the biological and avoidance effect. The
results, shown in Panel D of Table 7, reveal quite comparable effects of ozone and information
as in Table 5 for all ages and no statistically significant effect from future alerts and ozone,
providing general validation to the specification.
VIII. Conclusion
This paper finds that individuals in Southern California respond to information about
pollution by reducing time spent outside, and this significantly impacts estimates of the
relationship between ozone and health for susceptible populations. If people change their
behavior in response to this information, this action must have some costs to them. Given that

32

providing information about pollution is a growing part of environmental policy, 33 measuring
these costs is essential for designing optimal policy and should be a focus of future research.
There are two important caveats to this study. First, Southern California has a unique
history of smog and ozone, so the results may not necessarily generalize to other contexts.
Although numerous cities provide various types of air quality forecasts, they are typically less
publicized than in Southern California. Furthermore, forecasting pollutants other than ozone is
inherently more difficult, so information is less prevalent and reliable for other pollutants. In
both cases, less information leads to less avoidance behavior, and less potential bias in estimates.
The second caveat is there may be additional sources of private information about
pollution. Although ozone is not directly visible, it is a major component of smog, which is
visible. There is no evidence to indicate whether people respond to this information, but if the
bias from omitting this information is in the same direction as the bias from omitting public
information, then current estimates of the biological effect would remain underestimates of the
true effect.
IX. References
Ahituv, Avner, V. Joseph Hotz, and Tomas Philipson. 1996. “The Responsiveness of the
Demand for Condoms to the Local Prevalence of AIDS.” Journal of Human Resources
31(4): 869-97.
Bell, Michelle, Aidan McDermott, Scott Zeger, Jonathan Samet, and Francesca Dominici. 2004.
“Ozone and Short-Term Mortality in 95 US Urban Communities, 1987-2000.” Journal of
American Medical Association 292: 2371-2378.
Bresnahan, Brian, Mark Dickie, and Shelby Gerking. 1997. “Averting Behavior and Urban Air
Pollution.” Land Economics 73: 340-357.
Brunekreef, Bert and Stephen Holgate. 2002. “Air Pollution and Health.” Lancet 360: 1233–42.
Card, David and David Lee. 2006. “Regression Discontinuity Inference with Specification
Error.” NBER Technical Working Paper #322.
Chang L., Petros Koutrakis, Paul Catalano, and Helen Suh. 2000. “Hourly Personal Exposures to
Fine Particles and Gaseous Pollutants.” Journal of the Air and Waste Management
Association 50(7): 1223-35.
33

Similar pollution warning systems have been implemented in, for example, Arkansas, Texas, Baltimore,
Washington, New York, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Chicago.

33

Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. 2003a. “Air Quality, Infant Mortality, and the Clean Air
Act of 1970.” NBER Working Paper #10053.
Chay, Kenneth and Michael Greenstone. 2003b. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a
Recession.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(3): 1121-1167.
Currie, Janet and Matthew Neidell. 2005. “Air Pollution and Infant Health: What Can We Learn
from California’s Recent Experience?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3): 10031030.
Dockery, Douglas, C. Arden Pope, Xiping Xu, John Spengler, James Ware, Martha Fay,
Benjamin Ferris, and Frank Speizer. 1993. “An Association between Air Pollution and
Mortality in Six U.S. Cities.” New England Journal of Medicine 329:1753-1759.
Environmental Protection Agency. 1999. “Guidelines for Reporting of Daily Air Quality – Air
Quality Index (AQI).” EPA Document #454-R-99-010, Research Triangle Park, NC.
__________. 2006. Air Quality Criteria Document for Ozone. Washington, DC: Environmental
Protection Agency.
Friedman, Michael, Kenneth Powell, Lori Hutwagner, LeRoy Graham, and W. Gerald Teague.
2001. “Impact of Changes in Transportation and Commuting Behaviors During the 1996
Summer Olympic Games in Atlanta on Air Quality and Childhood Asthma.” Journal of
the American Medical Association 285: 897–905.
Garty, Ben Zion, Evsey Kosman, Eli Ganor, Victor Berger, Limor Garty, Tova Wietzen,
Yesheskel Waisman, Mark Mimouni, and Yozv Waisel. 1998. “Emergency Room Visits
of Asthmatic Children, Relation to Air Pollution, Weather, and Airborne Allergens.”
Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology 81(6): 563-70.
Hausman, Jerry. 1978. “Specification Tests in Econometrics” Econometrica 46: 1251-1271.
Heinrich, Joachim, Bernd Hoelscher, and H. Erich Wichmann. 2000. “Decline of Ambient Air
Pollution and Respiratory Symptoms in Children.” American Journal of Respiratory and
Critical Care Medicine 161: 1930–1936.
Imbens, Guido and Thomas Lemieux. 2007. “Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice.” NBER Technical Working Paper 337
Ippolito, Pauline and Alan Mathios. 1990. “Information, Advertising and Health Choice: A
Study of the Cereal Market.” Rand Journal of Economics 21:459-480.
Jayachandran, Seema. 2005. “Air Quality and Infant Mortality during Indonesia’s Massive
Wildfires in 1997.” Mimeograph, UCLA.
Jin, Ginger and Philip Leslie. 2003. “The Effect of Information on Product Quality: Evidence
from Restaurant Hygiene Grade Cards.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(2): 409451.
Katsouyanni, Klea, Joel Schwartz, C. Spix, Giota Touloumi, Zmirou D, Zanobetti A, Wojtyniak
B, Vonk JM, Tobias A, Ponka A, Sylvia Medina, Bacharova Ljuba, and Ross Anderson.
1996. “Short Term Effects of Air Pollution on Health: A European Approach Using
Epidemiologic Time Series Data: The APHEA Protocol.” Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health 50(Suppl 1): S12-8.
Kinney, Patrick, George Thurston, and Mark Raizenne. 1996. “The Effects of Ambient Ozone on
Lung Function in Children: A Reanalysis of Six Summer Camp Studies.” Environmental
Health Perspectives 104(2): 170-4.
Lederman, Sally Ann, Virginia Rauh, Lisa Weiss, Janet Stein, Lori Hoepner, Mark Becker, and
Frederica Perera. 2004. “The Effects of the World Trade Center Event on Birth Outcomes

34

among Term Deliveries at Three Lower Manhattan Hospitals.” Environmental Health
Perspectives 112(17): 1772–1778.
Levy, Jonathan, Timothy Carrothers, Jouni Tuomisto, James Hammitt, and John Evans. 2001.
“Assessing the Public Health Benefits of Reduced Ozone Concentrations.”
Environmental Health Perspectives 109(12): 9-20.
Lierl, Michelle and Richard Hornung. 2003. “Relationship of Outdoor Air Quality to Pediatric
Asthma Exacerbations.” Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology 90(1): 28-33.
Lleras-Muney, Adriana. 2005. “The Needs of the Army: Using Compulsory Relocation in the
Military to Estimate the Effect of Environmental Pollutants on Children's Health.”
Mimeograph, Princeton University.
Mullahy, John. 1999. “It'll Only Hurt a Second? Microeconomic Determinants of Who Gets Flu
Shots.” Health Economics 8(1): 9-24.
Neidell, Matthew. 2004. “Air Pollution, Health, and Socio-Economic Status: The Effect of
Outdoor Air Quality on Childhood Asthma.” Journal of Health Economics 23(6): 12091236.
Norris, Gary, Sharon YoungPong, Jane Koenig, Timothy Larson, Lianne Sheppard, and James
Stout. 1999. “An Association between Fine Particles and Asthma Emergency Department
Visits for Children in Seattle.” Environmental Health Perspectives 107(6): 489-493.
Philipson, Tomas. 1996. “Private Vaccination and Public Health: An Empirical Examination for
U.S. Measles.” Journal of Human Resources 31(3): 611-30
__________. 2000. “Economic Epidemiology and Infectious Diseases.” In Handbook of Health
Economics, Vol I, eds. Anthony Cuyler and Joseph Newhouse, 1761-1799. NorthHolland.
Pope, C. Arden. 1989. “Respiratory Disease Associated with Community Air Pollution and a
Steel Mill, Utah Valley.” American Journal of Public Health 79: 623–628.
Pope, C. Arden, Joel Schwartz, and Michael Ransom. 1992. “Daily Mortality and PM10
Pollution in Utah Valley.” Archives of Environmental Health 47: 211–216.
Pope, C. Arden, Michael Thun, M.M. Namboodiri, Douglas Dockery, John Evans, Frank Speizer
and Clark Heath Jr. 1995. “Particulate Air Pollution as a Predictor of Mortality in a
Prospective Study of U.S. Adults.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care
Medicine 151(3): 669-674.
Ransom, Michael, and C. Arden Pope. 1995. “External Health Costs of a Steel Mill.”
Contemporary Economic Policy 13: 86-97.
Schwartz, Joel. 1995. “Air Pollution and Hospital Admissions for the Elderly in Detroit,
Michigan.” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 150(3): 648655.
Smith, V. Kerry, and Reed Johnson. 1988. “How Do Risk Perceptions Respond to Information?
The Case of Radon.” Review of Economics and Statistics 70(1): 1-8.
Sneeringer, Stacy. 2006. “Pollution and Infant Health.” Mimeograph, Wesleyan University.
Thurston, George, Kazuhiko Ito, Patrick Kinney, and Morton Lippmann. 1992. “A multi-year
study of air pollution and respiratory hospital admissions in three New York State
metropolitan areas: results for 1988 and 1989 summers.” Journal of Exposure Analysis
and Environmental Epidemiology 2(4):429-50.
Wilson, Richard and John Spengler. 1996. Particles in Our Air: Concentration and Health
Effects. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press

35

Figure 1. Zoo Attendance and Covariates by Ozone Forecast

attendance/1000

humidity

36

CO

max. temp.

0.23

0.22

0.21

0.2

0.19

0.18

0.17

0.16

0.15

0.14

0.13

0.12

0.11

0.1

0.09

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Figure 2. Variation in 1-hour Ozone by Day of Year
0.120

ozone (ppm)

0.100
0.080
0.060
0.040
0.020
0.000
3/5

3/26

4/16

5/7

5/28

6/18

7/9

7/30

8/20

9/10

10/1

10/22

9/10

10/1

10/22

day of year

Figure 3. Residual Variation in 1-hour Ozone by Day of Year

0.020
0.015

ozone (ppm)

0.010
0.005

v

0.000
-0.005
-0.010
-0.015
-0.020
3/5

3/26

4/16

5/7

5/28

6/18

7/9

day of year

37

7/30

8/20

Figure 4. Adjusted Asthma Hospital Admissions by Age on Lagged Ozone by Alert Status

-.02

adjusted asthma admissions
0
.02
.04

.06

A. Age 5-19

.05

.1

.15
.2
ozone (ppm)
Overall

.25

.3

.25

.3

No Alert

-.02

adjusted asthma admissions
0
.02
.04

.06

B. Age 20-64

.05

.1

.15
.2
ozone (ppm)
Overall

No Alert

38

Table 1. Summary statistics
A. Daily attendance
Zoo (n=1949)
children <2
children 2-12
seniors
adult
GLAZA members
Observatory (n=1770)
Dodgers (n=574)
Angels (n=655)
B. Daily asthma hospital admissions
age group
5-19
20-64
65+

mean
4766
299
766
81
1530
718
5629
37886
26679

std. dev.
3160
362
774
51
1655
538
2368
8012
9042

per SRA
0.369
0.737
0.292

per SCAQMD
9.007
17.995
7.165

C. Alert accuracy
Zoo
year
SCAQMD
1989
16 / 6 / 9
169 / 56 / 89
1990
12 / 2 / 5
118 / 28 / 54
1991
20 / 4 / 8
142 / 34 / 50
1992
24 / 2 / 8
140 / 39 / 42
1993
10 / 2 / 1
84 / 23 / 20
1994
15 / 3 / 2
107 / 14 / 20
1995
7/0/1
32 / 3 / 5
1996
0/0/1
16 / 0 / 6
1997
0/0/0
3/0/1
Total
104 / 19 / 35 811 / 197 / 287
number of alerts issued / number of alerts correct / number of alerts missed
D. Independent variables
Zoo
variable
alert
ozone 1-hour (ppm)
ozone 1-hour if alert = 1
ozone 1-hour forecast (ppm)
maximum temperature (°F)
precipitation (inches)
relative humidity (%)
average cloud cover sunrise to sunset (%)
resultant wind speed (mph)
carbon monoxide 8-hour (ppm)
nitrogen dioxide 1-hour (ppm)

mean
0.053
0.078
0.129
0.115
82.15
0.218
89.75
0.450
5.66
2.310
0.073

39

std. dev.
0.225
0.038
0.037
0.046
9.70
1.617
7.11
0.298
2.37
1.237
0.032

mean
0.071
0.082
0.149
0.108
81.91
0.200
89.76
0.443
5.70
1.762
0.062

SCAQMD
std. dev.
0.257
0.043
0.046
0.050
10.84
1.546
7.30
0.297
2.37
1.067
0.029

Table 2. Regression estimates of smog alerts on attendance
1
2
3
A. Dependent variable = log(daily attendandance) at Los Angeles Zoo
alert
-0.148**
-0.150**
-0.122**
[0.036]
[0.040]
[0.013]
Controls for weather
N
Y
N
Observations
1949
1949
1949

4
-0.129**
[0.014]
Y
1949

B. Dependent variable = log(daily attendandance) at Griffith Park Observatory
alert
-0.032
-0.031
-0.061**
-0.059**
[0.023]
[0.022]
[0.013]
[0.014]
Controls for weather
N
Y
N
Y
Observations
1770
1770
1770
1770
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Standard errors clustered on ozone forecast in
brackets. Columns 1 and 2 include a linear term for ozone forecast and columns 3
and 4 include a separate dummy variable for each ozone forecast using the entire
sample. In columns 1 and 2, alert is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the ozone
forecast is at least 0.2 ppm. In columns 3 and 4, alert is the coefficient on ozone
forecast = 0.2 ppm minus the coefficient on ozone forecast = 0.19 ppm. All
regressions include a quadratic in maximum temperature, percent of sun cover, an
indicator for holiday, an indicator for summer schedule, day of week dummies and
year-month dummies. Controls for weather include observed ozone, precipitation,
resultant wind speed, maximum relative humidity, carbon monoxide, and nitrogren
dioxide.

Table 3. Regression estimates of smog alerts on Zoo attendance by demographic
4
1
2
3
Seniors
GLAZA members
Children <2
Children 2-12
alert
-0.193**
-0.222**
-0.236**
-0.194**
[0.054]
[0.061]
[0.061]
[0.042]
See notes to Table 2. There are 1949 observations in all models. The specification in each
column is comparable to the linear RD model from column 2 in Table 2.

40

Table 4. Specification checks of estimates of smog alerts on attendance

Attendance at:
alert

1

2

3

4

Dep. Var. in Levels
Zoo
-476.194*
[201.902]
{0.100}

False Alert
Zoo
-0.017
[0.035]

Future Alert
Zoo
-0.147**
[0.040]

Unaffected Activity
Dodgers
0.014
[0.089]

574
Angels
0.105
[0.149]

future alert
Observations

1949

1845

0.031
[0.045]
1898

Attendance at:
alert

Observatory
-146.114
[90.748]
{0.026}

Observatory
-0.016
[0.032]

Observatory
-0.034
[0.023]

future alert

0.032
[0.031]
Observations
1770
1671
1723
655
See notes to Table 2. The specification in each column is comparable to the linear RD model from
column 2 in Table 2. The value in braces in column 1 represents the percentage change in attendance.
False alert is assigned at the median ozone forecast (.11 ppm) for the subsample with ozone forecast <
0.20 ppm.

41

Table 5. Regression estimates of ozone and avoidance behavior on asthma hospitalizations by age
1

2
3
4
5
6
Age 5-19
Age 20-64
Age 65+
ozone (sum of lags)
0.401*
1.061**
1.356**
1.532**
0.558**
0.776**
[0.185]
[0.245]
[0.254]
[0.335]
[0.158]
[0.208]
{1.09}
{2.88}
{1.84}
{2.08}
{1.91}
{2.66}
Hausman test (χ2)
20.45
0.74
2.92
Prob > χ2
0.00
0.39
0.09
alerts (sum of lags)
-0.162**
-0.039
-0.014
[0.057]
[0.078]
[0.049]
PSI (sum of lags)
0.013
-0.019
-0.037
[0.031]
[0.042]
[0.026]
F(alerts, PSI)=0
5.41
0.59
2.16
Prob > F
0.00
0.55
0.12
Notes: The number of observations is 38,482 in all regressions. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%. Numbers in brackets
are standard errors. 'sum of lags' is the sum of the contemporaneous and 4 lags of the coefficients (see text for more details).
Numbers in braces are percent change in hospitalizations from .01 ppm increase in ozone. χ2 is the test statistic from a
Hausman test comparing estimates in the even column with the preceeding odd column. Columns 2, 4, and 6 include controls
for avoidance behavior (contemporaneous and 4 lags of smog alerts and PSI). All regressions include day of week dummies,
year-month dummies, SRA fixed effects, and contemporaneous and 4 lags of maximum & minimum temperature, percipitation,
humidity, sun cover, wind speed, carbon monoxide, and nitrogen dioxide.

42

Table 6. Lag sensitivity of regression estimates of ozone on asthma hospitalizations by age
1

2
3
4
5
6
Age 5-19
Age 20-64
Age 65+
ozone (0 lags)
0.177
0.176
0.536**
0.433*
0.203*
0.307*
[0.121]
[0.144]
[0.166]
[0.198]
[0.103]
[0.123]
ozone (1 lag)
0.308*
0.420*
0.870**
0.843**
0.266*
0.380*
[0.142]
[0.177]
[0.195]
[0.243]
[0.121]
[0.151]
ozone (2 lags)
0.340*
0.625**
1.223**
1.354**
0.358**
0.498**
[0.159]
[0.205]
[0.218]
[0.281]
[0.136]
[0.175]
ozone (3 lags)
0.468**
0.976**
1.237**
1.325**
0.419**
0.518**
[0.173]
[0.228]
[0.237]
[0.313]
[0.148]
[0.194]
ozone (4 lags)
0.401*
1.061**
1.356**
1.532**
0.558**
0.776**
[0.185]
[0.245]
[0.254]
[0.335]
[0.158]
[0.208]
ozone (5 lags)
0.425*
1.255**
1.371**
1.521**
0.543**
0.718**
[0.196]
[0.262]
[0.270]
[0.360]
[0.168]
[0.224]
ozone (6 lags)
0.462*
1.411**
1.203**
1.235**
0.571**
0.729**
[0.208]
[0.280]
[0.285]
[0.384]
[0.177]
[0.238]
See notes to Table 5. The specification in each column is comparable to the corresponding column in
Table 5. Each row contains results including the specified number of lags.

43

Table 7. Specification checks of estimates of ozone and avoidance behavior on asthma hospitalizations by age

Age:
ozone (sum of lags)

alerts (sum of lags)
PSI (sum of lags)
F(alerts, PSI)=0
Prob > F

1
5-19
1.116**
[0.237]
{3.03}
-0.166**
[0.057]
0.013
[0.030]
5.76
0.00

2
20-64
A. No Weather
1.524**
[0.325]
{2.07}
-0.038
[0.078]
-0.021
[0.041]
0.63
0.53

3
65+

4
5-19

0.742**
[0.202]
{2.55}
-0.012
[0.048]
-0.038
[0.025]
2.24
0.11

1.298**
[0.240]
{3.52}
-0.180**
[0.057]
0.023
[0.030]
6.03
0.00

C. ER Admissions
1.052**
[0.273]
{1.43}
-0.003
[0.064]
-0.010
[0.034]
0.09
0.91

0.500**
[0.158]
{1.71}
0.012
[0.037]
-0.022
[0.020]
0.71
0.49

5
20-64
B. No Co-Pollutants
1.582**
[0.329]
{2.15}
-0.045
[0.078]
-0.012
[0.042]
0.51
0.60

6
65+
0.780**
[0.204]
{2.68}
-0.014
[0.049]
-0.035
[0.026]
1.96
0.14

D. Future Ozone and Information
1.020**
1.719**
0.831**
[0.277]
[0.384]
[0.238]
{2.77}
{2.33}
{2.85}
alerts (sum of lags)
-0.105
-0.038
-0.049
[0.062]
[0.086]
[0.054]
PSI (sum of lags)
-0.018
-0.020
-0.025
[0.036]
[0.049]
[0.031]
F(alerts, PSI)=0
3.29
0.46
1.92
Prob > F
0.04
0.63
0.15
future ozone (sum of lags)
0.414
-0.496
-0.124
[0.276]
[0.383]
[0.238]
future alerts (sum of lags)
-0.003
0.054
-0.018
[0.062]
[0.086]
[0.053]
future PSI (sum of lags)
-0.014
-0.030
0.026
[0.035]
[0.049]
[0.030]
F(future alerts, future PSI)=0
0.15
0.24
0.39
Prob > F
0.86
0.79
0.67
See notes to Table 5. All specifications include controls for avoidance behavior (contemporaneous and 4 lags of smog alerts and PSI). 'No
Weather' excludes weather as independent variables. 'No Co-Pollutants' excludes co-pollutants as independent variables. 'ER Admissions'
limits the dependent variable to emergency room admissions. 'Future' include 5 leads of ozone, information, and their interaction, weather, and
co-pollutants.
ozone (sum of lags)

0.787**
[0.178]
{2.14}
-0.073
[0.042]
-0.013
[0.022]
3.79
0.02

44

