NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LABOR SUPPLY: ARE THE INCOME AND SUBSTITUTION EFFECTS BOTH
LARGE OR BOTH SMALL?
Miles S. Kimball
Matthew D. Shapiro
Working Paper 14208
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14208

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2008

¸˛This research was funded by National Institute on Aging grant P01-AG10179. We are grateful to
F. Thomas Juster for help in designing the survey instrument, to Robert Barsky for collaboration in
the early stage of this project, and to John Bound and Gary Solon for important suggestions. Ana
Quinones and Brahima Coulibaly provided outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Labor Supply: Are the Income and Substitution Effects Both Large or Both Small?
Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 14208
July 2008
JEL No. C42,E24,J22
ABSTRACT
Labor supply is unresponsive to permanent changes in wage rates. Thus, income and substitution
effects cancel, but are they both close to zero or both large? This paper develops a theory of labor
supply where income and substitution effects cancel, taking into account optimization over time, fixed
costs of going to work, and interactions of labor supply decisions within the household. The paper
then applies this theory to survey evidence on the response of labor supply to a large wealth shock.
The evidence implies that the constant marginal utility of wealth (Frisch) elasticity of labor supply
is about one.

Miles S. Kimball
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
mkimball@umich.edu
Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu

1

Introduction

One of the best-documented regularities in economics is that—when they affect all members
of a household proportionately—large, permanent differences in the real wage induce at
most modest differences in the quantity of labor supplied by a household. This is true
across households, across countries, and across time. The standard explanation is that the
substitution and income effects of a permanently higher real wage are of approximately the
same size; that is, the motivation to give up leisure to take advantage of a higher real wage is
roughly cancelled out by the extra freedom to pursue leisure afforded by the higher income
that the higher real wage provides. This explanation has broad support among economists
because it has the merit of accounting for a wide range of data with one restriction on the
utility function.
Among those economists who agree with the view that the income and substitution
effects of a permanent increase in the real wage are approximately equal, there is much
less agreement about whether the income and substitution effects are both large or both
small. The size of the substitution effect is closely related to the elasticity of labor supply
with respect to fluctuations in the real wage that are too short-lived to have substantial
income effects. The size of the substitution effect is also a key factor in the magnitude of
distortions induced by labor-income taxation and by other government policies that affect
the margin between consumption and leisure or consumption and work. Hence, having a
good estimate of the elasticity of labor supply has very broad and significant implications
for understanding economic fluctuations and for assessing the effects of changes in public
policy.
Drawing with a broad brush, one can paint the picture that macroeconomists, trying to
explain substantial cyclical movements in labor hours in the face of modest cyclical movements in the real wage, see evidence that the substitution effect is large. Labor economists,
looking at regressions of labor hours on fluctuations in the real wage or regressions of labor
hours on the variation in the real wage over the life cycle, see evidence that the substitution
effect is small. Direct evidence on the size of the substitution effect is muddied by several
difficulties with the evidence.
o It is hard to find temporary, exogenous movements in the real wage that could identify
movements in labor supply;
o Fluctuations in the shadow wage within a long-term relationship between firms and
workers can look quite different from fluctuations in the observed wage in standard

data series; and
o Many workers may face constraints on their labor hours imposed by their employers,
so that they are not able to respond freely to variations in the real wage.
These issues affect the evidence contemplated both in the macroeconomics and labor economics literatures.
In this paper we propose an alternative to directly inferring the substitution effect from
the relationship between wages and labor supply. The equality of income and substitution
effects implies that one can infer the size of the substitution effect from the size of the
income effect. Thus, we estimate the income effect and use that estimate, together with
restrictions from a theory of labor supply, to infer the substitution effect.
We estimate the size of the income effect using a module designed by us in the Health
and Retirement Study (HRS) which asks respondents to imagine what they would do
if they won a sweepstakes that would pay them an amount equal to last year’s family
income every year as long as they live. We analyze this data using a structural model of
household labor supply that imposes the restriction that income and substitution effects
cancel. The model is based on the dynamic optimization problem of the household. It has
several other features needed to capture important features of behavior. First, it allows for
nonseparabilities between consumption and labor. These can account for a drop in observed
consumption at retirement because working increases the marginal utility of consumption.
Second, it integrates the decisions of married partners about consumption and labor supply.
Finally, to match the observed fact that few people work less than 20 hours per week, our
structural model allows for fixed utility costs of going to work. This final feature is very
important for the analysis of the labor supply response to the sweepstakes because many
households report that they would quit work entirely rather than smoothly reducing hours.
Section 2 of the paper presents this theory. Section 3 discusses how to implement it to
infer elasticities of labor supply from the response to wealth shocks. Section 4 applies this
framework to inferring labor supply elasticities from the survey responses to winning the
sweepstakes. Section 5 shows how to relate these estimates to alternative measures of the
labor supply elasticity. Section 6 discusses estimates of labor supply elasticities and other
relevant parameters from the literature and discusses the pros and cons of the survey and
econometric approaches. Section 7 discusses the implications of our estimates.

2

2

Theoretical Framework for Labor Supply

This section develops a theory of labor supply in a life-cycle, permanent income setting. It
has the following main features that distinguish it from other theoretical frameworks.
1. The long-run elasticity of labor supply is zero.
2. Utility is nonseparable in consumption and labor.
3. Working incurs a fixed as well as a variable cost in utility terms.
4. For married couples, labor supply decisions are integrated.
A zero long-run elasticity of labor supply is a more precise statement of what we referred
to in the introduction informally as “income and substitution effects canceling.” Nonseparability between consumption and labor and nonconcavity of the utility function due to
fixed costs of going to work require rederiving basic labor supply relationships in that more
general context. To begin with, we need to derive the functional form implications of cancellation between income and substitution effects in this more general context. Then we
need to derive the structural model of labor supply when consumption and labor are not
additively separable and there are fixed costs of work.
These features of the theory complement each other in significant ways. Basu and
Kimball (2002) give an extended argument that allowing for nonseparability between consumption and labor is especially important in a context where one wishes to maintain
cancellation between income and substitution effects and gives references to a number of
papers that have found direct evidence for nonseparability between consumption and labor.
Moreover, the nonseparability has an important interaction with the nonconvexity in labor
supply. The nonconvexity causes workers to move abruptly from work to non-work. The
nonseparability between consumption and labor allows for jumps in consumption across
these labor market transitions even when the household is maximizing utility intertemporally, anticipates the labor-market transition, and faces no borrowing or lending constraints.

2.1
2.1.1

Long-run labor supply elasticity close to zero
Motivation

What is the evidence that convinces a wide range of economists that the long-run labor
supply elasticity is approximately zero?
3

First, looking across the cross-section of countries, there is remarkably little variation in
hours of work across a very broad range of income levels.1 Except for very poor countries,
hours of work cluster around forty hours per week. Though there is a slight negative
relationship between the level of per capita income and hours per week, that relationship
is very weak: a tripling of per capita income perhaps yields a reduction of an hour or two
in average weekly hours.2
Second, there is very little time trend in the hours worked within a country. Pencavel
quotes Klein and Kosobud (1961) that the constancy of family labor supply since World
War II is one of the “great ratios of economics.”3 There is only a modest decline in hours
compared to the very dramatic increases in income and consumption.
Third, the cross-sectional evidence on labor supply suggests that it is very hard to
explain differences in amount of work across individuals by differences in their wage rates.
That is, low income individuals tend to work about the same number of hours as high
income individuals. Even when this extensive literature finds cross-sectional evidence of a
non-zero long-run labor supply elasticity, the point estimate is typically very small. This
evidence is discussed further in Section 6.2.
2.1.2

General implications for functional form

It is useful to embody the evidence for approximate cancellation of income and substitution
effects or an approximately zero long-run labor supply elasticity in a restriction on utility
that, for simplicity, imposes a long-run labor supply elasticity that is exactly zero. If
households spent exactly their income in each period, what we would mean by equality
of income and substitution effects would be that multiplying both the real wage and the
amount of non-labor income—and thereby consumption—by the same positive constant
would leave the marginal rate of substitution between consumption and labor consistent
with that higher real wage. To allow for a nontrivial consumption-saving decision, and
possible non-concavities in the utility function, it is convenient to define a zero long-run
elasticity of labor supply directly in terms of tradeoffs between consumption and labor.
1

See Abel and Bernanke (2001, p. 84), who take this as one of the stylized facts of economic growth.
Of course, there is heterogeneity in hours. Hours of work in Europe are lower than in the United States.
These differences are not, however, a function of per capita income, and instead likely arise from differences
in tax systems or differences in taste. Note that taxes and transfers can easily change the after-tax wage
to consumption ratio and so generate differences in labor hours even if the long-run labor supply elasticity
is zero.
3
See Pencavel, 1986, p. 10. There are trends in labor supply within family, i.e., that women are working
more and that men are working less. Per capita income has increased by a factor of over three while average
weekly hours have fallen from 40.3 to 34.2 hours per week.
2

4

Labor Supply Function: We derive a labor supply function Ns (W/C) that depends
only on the ratio of the real wage to consumption: W/C, or in the case of a couple, the
ratios of both partners’ real wages to household consumption, W1 /C and W2 /C. Many of
the differences in weekly hours obvious to casual empiricism can indeed be associated with
an obvious difference in the ratio W/C. For example, the long hours of doctors no doubt
owe something in many cases to high levels of debt coming out of medical training that
depress consumption C in relation to the real wage W . The high hours young lawyers in big
law firms are willing to put up with may owe something to law-school debts but probably
even more to the very high implicit wage that arises from the effect of additional effort on
the probability of making partner in the law firm. The average male retirement age has
been declining over the last few decades. This is what one would expect if increased female
earnings have added more to household consumption, thereby causing male W/C to fall.
In terms of utility theory, let felicity (the instantaneous utility function) be given by
U (C, N ), where C is total consumption expenditure by the household and N is a vector
of the labor hours of various members of the household. To impose a zero long-run labor
supply elasticity, formally, we assume preferences scale symmetric in consumption.
Preferences Scale Symmetric in Consumption: U (C, N ) exhibits scale symmetry
in consumption if
U (C 0 , N 0 ) = U (C, N )
implies that for any positive α,
U (αC 0 , N 0 ) = U (αC, N ).
In other words, the utility function allows the difference between the labor vector N and
the new labor vector N 0 to be compensated by a given proportional increase in consump0
0
, regardless of the initial level of consumption. Thus, the marginal rate of
tion CC = αC
αC
substitution between consumption and labor is proportional to the original level of consumption, where we can look at the marginal rate of substitution between points far apart
as well as points that are only an infinitesimal distance apart.
Besides scale symmetry in consumption, in order to establish a convenient representation of the utility function, we need the completeness condition that for any N and N 0 in a
feasible set Γ which includes the zero vector, there is a proportional change in consumption
that can compensate for that difference in the labor vector:
5

∀N , N 0 ∈ Γ, ∃C 0 s.t.
U (C 0 , N 0 ) = U (1, N ).
Proposition 1: If U (C, N ) is scale symmetric in consumption and satisfies the completeness condition above, then
U (C, N ) = Ω(Ce−f (N ) ) = Ω(eln(C)−f (N ) )
for some pair of real-valued functions Ω and f (N ).
Proof: For each N , let f (N ) be the solution to
U (e−f (N ) , 0) = U (1, N ).
That is, relative to not working, the labor vector N has the same effect on utility as
multiplying consumption by e−f . Such a solution exists by the completeness condition.
Then by scale symmetry in consumption,
U (C, N ) = U (Ce−f (N ) , 0) = Ω(Ce−f (N ) )
where Ω is defined by
Ω(x) = U (x, 0).
Remarks: In practice, it is convenient to model utility as homogeneous in consumption.
This corresponds to
Ω(x) = −

(1 − α) −α/(1−α)
x
,
α

where α indexes the degree of complementarity between consumption and labor. (We will
discuss this nonseparability more below.) The overall utility function becomes
U (C, N ) = −

(1 − α) −α/(1−α) [α/(1−α)]f (N )
C
e
α

6

when α 6= 0 and Ω(x) = ln(x) or
U (C, N ) = ln(C) − f (N )
when α = 0. This form of the utility function—multiplicatively separable between consumption and the labor vector when α 6= 0 and additively separable between consumption
and the labor vector when α = 0—is called the King-Plosser-Rebelo (1988) form of the
utility function. It arose originally in the context of finding a utility function consistent
with a steady growth path for an economy. The additional features here are (1) having a
labor vector for a household instead of a single summary measure of labor for a representative consumer and (2) allowing for the possibility of nonconcavity of the utility function
because of fixed utility costs of working. The theory above about how to impose a zero
long-run labor supply elasticity is general enough to handle both of those features.

2.2

Structural model of labor supply

Consider a household maximizing
E0

Z ∞

e−ρt U (C, N , ν)dt,

0

where C is total consumption expenditure by the household, N is a vector of the labor of
the various potential workers in the household and ν is an exogenous vector of demographic
variables which evolves stochastically over time.4 In particular, the death of a household
member or the departure of a household member at maturity generates a change in ν. The
household can freely borrow and lend at the real interest rate r and faces fair annuity and life
insurance markets which allow the household to smooth its marginal utility of consumption
UC (C, N , ν) = λ over time and over all stochastic changes in ν. If, in addition, the real
interest rate r is equal to the utility discount rate ρ, optimization requires the household
to keep the marginal utility of consumption λ constant over time as well as over stochastic
changes in ν. Note that λ is not only the marginal utility of consumption, it is also the
costate variable giving the marginal value of real wealth in the household’s dynamic control
problem.
4

Our model of the family is unitary. Blundell, et al. (2001) consider a non-unitary model that, like
our model, also allows for discrete choice of whether or not to work. They find some support for their
non-unitary model, but also cannot reject the unitary model.

7

We abstract from all other kinds of uncertainty besides uncertainty in the household demographic variables in ν—except for the very unlikely (and totally uninsured) hypothetical
events we asked respondents to contemplate in our survey questions. These hypothetical
events, in particular winning a sweepstakes, would change the value of λ. We will consistently put a hat (ˆ) over variables to indicate the values they would take after one of the
events described in our survey questions. Values without a hat are the original values a
household would choose in the absence of such an event.
In our choice of functional form, the most important consideration is to build in the
observed zero long-run labor supply elasticity. In line with the results of the previous
section, extended to allow for dependence of felicity on demographics, this leads to
U (C, N , ν) = −

(1 − α) −α/(1−α)
C
[ψ(ν) + αg(N )]1/(1−α) ,
α

(1)

where ψ(ν) = eαf (0,ν) and g(N ) = α−1 [eαf (N,ν) − eαf (0,ν) ]. Obtaining the limiting utility
function as α → 0 requires adding the exogenous quantity ψ(ν)
+ψ(ν) ln(ψ(ν)) to the utility
α
function in (1) and a messy application of L’Hopital’s rule. This yields the intuitive result
U (C, N ) = ψ(ν) ln(C) − g(N ).

(2)

As discussed above, α measures the degree of complementarity between consumption and
labor—or equivalently, the degree of substitutability between consumption and leisure. α = 0
corresponds to additive separability, while α = 1 corresponds to perfect substitutability
between consumption and leisure. α ∈ (0, 1) corresponds to consumption being a partial
substitute for leisure.5
Given α ∈ [0, 1), disliking additional labor is equivalent to g(N ) being an increasing
function of N . We assume that the household acts as a unit, maximizing the joint utility
of its members. For any given total amount of household expenditure, the utility from consumption depends on how many people that expenditure is spread over. The function ψ(ν)
can be thought of as a household equivalency scale. It determines the level of consumption
needs when no one in the household is working. The flexibility of the function ψ allows
one to deal with whatever degree of returns to scale there are in household consumption.
Aside from the assumptions embodied in the form above—a zero long-run elasticity of
5

Basu and Kimball (2002) argue that the degree of complementarity between consumption and labor
theoretically should be linked to the elasticity of intertemporal substitution for consumption, but because
the real interest rate is assumed constant here, intertemporal substitution in consumption plays no real
role in this analysis. Therefore, we focus on the degree of complementarity between consumption and labor
that does matter for our analysis and calibrate α accordingly.

8

labor supply and constancy of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution—when there is
more than one potential worker in the family, we consider the convenient benchmark of a
g(N ) function that is additively separable in the labor of the various potential workers in
the family:
g(N ) =

X

gi (Ni ).

i

As an obvious normalization,
gi (0) = 0.
The best way to explain our solution method is to think first of what one would do if
the utility function were additively separable between consumption and labor, i.e., α = 0.
The current-value Hamiltonian for the logarithmic case (2) would be
H = ψ(ν) ln(C) − g(N ) + λ[W · N − C + rA + Π],
where W is a vector of wage rates for various household members, A is the value of financial
assets earning real interest rate r, and Π is the non-labor, non-interest income of the
household. Because of the additive separability between consumption and labor, to study
labor supply in this logarithmic case, one could focus on the optimization subproblem
max λW · N − g(N ),
N

or equivalently, for each potential worker i, after dividing through by λ one could focus on
the optimization subproblem
max Wi Ni − λ−1 gi (Ni )
Ni

(3)

for each Ni .
We find that when α 6= 0, so that consumption and labor are not additively separable, by maximizing first over consumption conditional on labor quantities, we obtain an
optimization subproblem for labor supply that is an exact counterpart of the optimization
subproblem (3), but with λα−1 in place of λ−1 .
When α 6= 0, the household maximizes the current value Hamiltonian

9

1−α
H=
C −α/(1−α) [ψ(ν) + αg(N )]1/(1−α) + λ[W · N − C + rA + Π].
α




As emphasized in the introduction, a key element of the analysis is that gi (Ni ) will typically
embody a fixed utility cost of working, such as the utility cost of commuting time. Therefore, [ψ(ν) + g(N )]1/(1−α) will not usually be concave in N . Because of the non-concavity
in N , the solution method that works best is to solve for the optimal value of consumption expenditure C and substitute this value back into the Hamiltonian before tackling the
more difficult task of maximization over N . We rely on Pontryagin’s Maximum Principle
that—even when non-concave—the Hamiltonian must be maximized over all of the control
variables as a necessary condition for maximization.
The first-order condition for optimal consumption is
∂H
= C −1/(1−α) [ψ(ν) + αg(N )]1/(1−α) = λ.
∂C
Solving for consumption,
C = λα−1 [ψ(ν) + αg(N )] = λα−1 [ψ(ν) + α

X

gi (Ni )].

(4)

i

Define baseline consumption B by
B = λα−1 ψ(ν)

(5)

and job-induced consumption Ji for each potential worker i in the household by6
Ji = αλα−1 gi (Ni ).

(6)

Then total consumption equals baseline consumption plus the job-induced consumption of
each worker in the household:
C=B+

X

Ji .

(7)

i
6

We will consistently maintain the assumption that 1 > α ≥ 0. However, if α were negative—something
that is a theoretical possibility—job-induced consumption would be negative. This highlights the fact that
Ji is “job-induced consumption” in a very broad sense. Ji includes every way in which working makes one
choose to consume more or less.

10

Because it represents every interaction between work and consumption, job-induced consumption must be construed quite broadly. It includes both (1) work-related consumption
(such as childcare, transportation to and from work, the extra expense of food at work,
and the extra expense of clothes suitable for work), and (2) extra time-saving consumption (such as easy-to-prepare foods at home, house-cleaning and house-repair services, and
household conveniences). Baseline consumption and the job-induced consumption for each
worker play a key role in the analysis at a later stage.
Substituting the underlying expression for optimized consumption into the Hamiltonian,
the Hamiltonian maximized over C—which we can call H̄—is

(1 − α) −α/(1−α)
C
[ψ(ν) + αg(N )]1/(1−α) − λC + λ[W · N + rA + Π]
α
λα [ψ(ν) + αg(N )]
− λα [ψ(ν) + αg(N )] + λ[W · N + rA + Π]
=
−α/(1 − α)
(
)
λα−1 ψ(ν)
α−1
= λ rA + Π −
+ W · N − λ g(N )
α

H̄ = −

By Pontryagin’s maximum principle—which operates with exactness in continuous time—
the household maximizes H even though H is non-concave. Maximizing H over both C
and N is the same as maximizing H̄ over N . So the vector of labor hours N solves
i
λα−1 ψ(ν) X h
+
Wi Ni − λα−1 gi (Ni ) .
max λ rA + Π −
N
α
i
)

(

(8)

Maximizing the expression in (8) requires solving the optimization subproblems
max Wi Ni − λα−1 gi (Ni )
Ni

(9)

for each Ni . Thus, it is as if there were a money-metric disutility of work λα−1 gi (Ni ) for
each potential worker i. Note that job-induced consumption Ji is always equal to α times
the money-metric disutility of work λα−1 g(Ni ).
The structure of (9), the optimization subproblem for Ni , is the same regardless of the
shape of gi (Ni ). But to get any further in the analysis we need more structure on gi (Ni ).
While leaving the functional form vi (·) below for the variable disutility of labor supply
general as long as possible, we will now commit to (1) a fixed utility cost of working as
the source of nonconcavity in the utility function, and (2) a multiplicative work aversion
parameter as one of the dimensions in which individuals differ from one another. Let
11




gi (Ni ) = 

0
if Ni = 0
Mi [Fi + vi (Ni )] if Ni > 0

or, defining



χ(Ni ) = 

0 if Ni = 0
,
1 if Ni > 0

gi (Ni ) = χ(Ni )Mi [Fi + vi (Ni )].

(10)

Here Mi is the work aversion parameter, Fi is a positive number that models the fixed
utility cost of going to work and vi is a function satisfying vi (0) = 0, vi0 (N ) > 0, vi00 (N ) > 0
and vi0 (168) = ∞. (Ni is measured in weekly hours; 24 hours a day, seven days a week is
168 hours a week.)
Substituting in for gi (Ni ), the maximization subproblem (9) becomes
max Wi Ni − χ(Ni )λα−1 Mi [Fi + vi (Ni )].
Ni

(11)

If Ni > 0, the first order necessary condition for optimal Ni in (11) is
Wi = λα−1 Mi vi0 (Ni ).

(12)

Call the solution to this first order condition Ni∗ . Then
λ1−α Wi
.
Mi
!

Ni∗

=

vi0−1

(13)

Because this is a necessary condition for an optimum when Ni > 0, the optimal Ni must
be either Ni∗ or 0. To determine whether the optimal Ni is Ni∗ or 0, we need to compare
the value of the criterion function
Wi Ni − χ(Ni )λα−1 Mi [Fi + vi (Ni )]

(14)

at Ni = 0 with its value at Ni = Ni∗ to see which one is greater.
When Ni = 0, the criterion function (14) is equal to zero. When Ni = Ni∗ , the criterion
function (14) is equal to

12

(

λ

α−1

Mi

λ1−α Wi Ni∗
− Fi − vi (Ni∗ ) = λα−1 Mi {Ni∗ vi0 (N ∗ ) − vi (Ni∗ ) − Fi } .
Mi
)

(15)

The right-hand side of (15) is greater than or equal to zero if and only if
Ni∗ vi0 (Ni∗ ) − vi (Ni∗ ) ≥ Fi .
Define the cutoff value for labor, Ni# , by
Ni# vi0 (Ni# ) − vi (Ni# ) = Fi .

(16)

d
Since dN
[Ni vi0 (Ni ) − vi (Ni )] = Ni vi00 (Ni ) > 0 whenever Ni > 0, Ni vi0 (Ni ) − vi (Ni ) is an
i
increasing function of N . This, plus the assumption that vi0 (168) = ∞, guarantees that
there is a unique solution to (16) between 0 and 168. In terms of the cutoff value Ni# that
solves equation (16), the rule for optimal labor supply can be written as

Ni =











Ni∗
if Ni∗ > Ni#
0
if Ni∗ < Ni# ,
either Ni∗ or 0 if Ni∗ = Ni#

(17)

where Ni∗ is given by
λ1−α Wi
.
Mi
!

Ni∗

=

vi0−1

(18)

In practice, we use empirical evidence to determine the cutoff value Ni# directly rather
than to determine Fi . From this point of view, one can see equation (16) the other way
around as a mapping from the cutoff value Ni# to the fixed cost Fi . In terms of Ni# , the
function gi (Ni ) is given by
gi (Ni ) = χ(Ni )Mi [vi (Ni ) − vi (Ni# ) + Ni# vi0 (Ni# )].

(19)

In our empirical implementation in Section 4, we use Ni# ≡ N # of 19 hours per week for
all individuals.
We now have all the elements of the theory to infer elasticities from wealth shocks.
In the next section, we use this theory to provide estimates of the Frisch labor supply
elasticity.
13

3

Implementing the Theory

We use the theory developed in Section 2 to show how to develop a parametric estimate of
the labor supply elasticity based on the survey responses.
The Frisch or λ-constant labor supply elasticity ηiλ is given by differentiating (18) with
respect to the wage, that is,
ηiλ ≡

∂Ni∗ /∂Wi
.
Ni∗ /Wi

(20)

At this point it is useful to specialize the analysis by choice of functional form for the
function v. In particular, suppose that it has the constant elasticity form
vi (N ) =

1
1+ η1
i,
1 N
1 + ηi

(21)

so
ηiλ = ηi .
The constant elasticity of labor supply is a convenient formulation.7 We have explored
other functional forms, but since they do not alter the message of the paper we do not
discuss them here.
The conceptual experiment posed by our survey is to consider how labor supply and
consumption respond to a shock to wealth. Our theory provides a framework for studying
these responses.
As noted above, let variables without hats denote their values before the wealth shock
and variables with hats denote their values after the wealth shock. That is, C, Ji Ni , and λ
are the values of total consumption, job induced consumption, labor, and marginal utility
of wealth prior to the wealth shock and Ĉ, Jˆi , N̂i , and λ̂ are their values after the wealth
shock. Conditional on not quitting, the change in labor supply after the wealth shock is
N̂i
=
Ni

λ̂1−α
λ1−α

!ηi

.

(22)

The wage Wi and the work aversion parameter Mi cancel out because they are unchanged
by the wealth shock. Equation (22) shows the relationship between the change in labor and
7

It is trivial and affects nothing to modify this form of vi (N ) near N = 168 to satisfy the technical
condition that vi0 (168) = ∞. In practice, no one has hours anywhere near 168 and the work aversion
parameter gets calibrated to keep labor hours in the observed range.

14

the marginal utility of wealth. The more elastic is labor supply, the less marginal utility
needs to move down (and so the less consumption needs to move up) to generate a given
decline in labor.
Our theoretical framework allows us to relate marginal utility to observables. Substituting the expression (5) for baseline consumption B into (22) yields
B̂
B

N̂i
=
Ni

!−ηi

.

(23)

Given data on labor, consumption, and job-induced consumption before and after the
wealth shock, one can infer a value of ηi from the above equation. In the case of quits,
Ni#
=
Ni

B̂
B

!−ηi#

(24)

provides a lower-bound on the elasticity where B̂ is baseline consumption evaluated at zero
hours.
Hence, given observations on the change in labor and the change in baseline consumption
from a wealth shock, one can infer the elasticity of labor supply consistent with these choices
by inverting (23) as follows
ln(N̂i /Ni )
ln(B̂/B)

(25)

ln(Ni# /Ni )
.
ln(B̂/B)

(26)

ηi = −
and for those who quit,
ηi# = −

In the additively separable case, baseline consumption equals actual consumption; but
a key theme of the analysis in this paper is to take into account non-separabilities. Recall
that baseline consumption is defined as
B=C−

X

Ji

(27)

i

where C is total consumption and Ji is job-induced consumption for each worker in the
household.
To infer the labor supply elasticity from the joint movements in consumption and la15

bor given above, we must calculate job-induced consumption. Recall that job-induced
consumption is given, for each worker Ji in the household, by
Ji = αλα−1 gi (Ni ).

(6)

Substituting in the expression for gi (Ni ) from equation (19) and noting that χ(Ni ) = 1
when the individual is working yields
Ji = αλα−1 Mi [vi (Ni ) − vi (Ni# ) + Ni# vi0 (Ni# )].
Now substitute λα−1 Mi = Wi /v 0 (Ni ) from the first-order condition for labor (12). This
yields

 0
if Ni = 0
(28)
Ji =
 αWi [v (N ) − v (N # ) + N # v 0 (N # )] if N ≥ N # .
i
i
i
i
i
i
i i
v 0 (Ni ) i
The identical expression gives Jˆi as a function of N̂i , that is,



Jˆi = 

0
αWi
[v (N̂i )
v 0 (N̂i ) i

−

vi (Ni# )

+

Ni# vi0 (Ni# )]

if N̂i = 0
if Ni ≥ Ni# .

(29)

Evaluated at the constant-elasticity functional form (21), the nonzero expression for Ji is


Ji =

1

1
αWi Ni 
1 1 +
ηi
1 + ηi



!1+ η
i
Ni#


Ni



(30)

and similarly for Jˆi . Consider the case when Ni = N # , that is, the individual just overcomes
the fixed cost of going to work. In that case, job-induced consumption is just αWi Ni . As
labor increases above the cutoff, the ratio of job-induced consumption to total labor income
falls—the more so the lower is ηi . Note also that the limit of Ji is zero as ηi goes to zero.
Our data consist of consumption and labor supply, before and after the wealth shock,
that is, C, Ni , Ĉ, and N̂i . Given these data, equation (20), equation (27), and equations
(28) and (29) subject to the functional form (21) for vi (Ni ) yield a value for the labor
supply elasticity ηi . Because of the dependence of job-induced consumption on the labor
supply elasticity, we must solve for ηi numerically.
Labor supply is fairly straightforward to measure. The core HRS asks about labor
hours Ni . Our module on the sweepstakes asks about labor hours N̂i after the wealth

16

shock. Measuring consumption is much less straightforward. In the HRS, consumption
is not measured directly apart from some experimental measures. For both the baseline
consumption C and the post-sweepstakes consumption Ĉ we use the budget constraint and
assume unconstrained intertemporal utility maximization (baseline-consumption smoothing) to infer consumption. In a static, one-period problem, this amounts to saying that
however many hours labor is reduced after the sweepstakes, consumption falls by the wage
times the reduction in hours. The intertemporal version of this makes equal reductions
in baseline consumption each year until the death of one spouse (with everything scaled
down after the household drops to one member) and appropriate reductions in job-induced
consumption each year until retirement. Appendix A details this computation.8
Note that the calculation of the elasticity depends on the change in consumption. Our
procedure might get the level wrong, but it should be much more accurate for the change.

4

Survey Measures of the Labor Supply Response to
a Wealth Shock

In this section we discuss a survey question that we have designed and implemented to
gauge the response of labor supply to a wealth shock. The survey was designed to yield
estimates of the labor supply parameter η that is central to the theoretical discussion in the
previous sections of this paper. The survey was implemented as an experimental module
on the Health and Retirement Study. In this section, we discuss the design of the survey
and how the survey responses can be mapped into the theory that we outline. In the next
section, we discuss the results of the survey and estimate the value of the labor supply
parameter based on them.

4.1

Survey Instrument

The module begins with questions about whether or not the respondent and his or her
spouse or partner work for pay. These responses are used to put the respondent into the
8

In the survey, we attempted to elicit other uses for the wealth windfall other than increasing consumption or decreasing work, e.g., giving away to charity. This question was not successful and we decided to
infer consumption as described in the text. Taking into account other uses of the windfall would increase
the implied labor elasticity, i.e., consumption would rise less as a result of the sweepstakes, so any change
in labor would be a response to a smaller increase in the W/C ratio.

17

appropriate branch of the module.9 The sweepstakes is described to all respondents as
follows:
Suppose you won a sweepstakes that will pay you [and your (husband/wife/partner)]
an amount equal to your current family income every year for as long as you [or
your (husband/wife/partner)] live. We’d like to know what effect the sweepstakes money would have on your life.
Working respondents are then asked about their labor supply responses to winning the
sweepstakes. First, the survey asks whether the workers would quit work entirely after
winning the sweepstakes. Second, for those who would not quit, the survey asks whether
they would reduce hours and if so, by how much. For single workers and for married workers
whose spouse does not work, the questions are as follows:
“Would you quit work entirely?”
If the answer is “no” to quitting, the survey asks “Would you work fewer hours?”
If the answer is “yes” to fewer hours, the survey asks “How many fewer hours?”
Married respondents who do not work, but whose spouse does work, are asked for a
proxy response for their spouse. When both members of the couple work, the respondent
is asked the questions for both the respondent and the spouse.
The survey also includes follow up questions about whether the respondents who do
not quit would look for a more pleasant job at reduced pay and about how they would use
the extra income. These questions do not play a role in our main analysis. As discussed in
footnote 8, taking into account alternative uses of the windfall from the sweepstakes would
lead to higher estimates of the labor supply elasticity.

4.2

Survey Implementation

The sweepstakes module is an experimental module on the Health and Retirement Study
(HRS). The HRS is a panel dataset of individuals 50 years and older and their spouses.10
Our module gives us the data on the labor supply response of individuals to winning
the sweepstakes. The main HRS data provides us with extensive information on income,
9

The questionnaire for the module is available online at the HRS WWW site
http://hrsonline.isr.umich.edu.
10
The HRS is a nationally-representative sample except that blacks and residents of Florida are oversampled. See the HRS WWW site for detailed information about the HRS.

18

current hours of work, and so on, that allow us to make the computations outlined in
Section 3. Our module was on HRS 1994 (Wave 2) and HRS 1996 (Wave 3). The baseline
interview of the HRS is conducted in person. Subsequent waves, including those containing
the module, are conducted by telephone. Experimental modules are asked of a randomly
selected subset of HRS households. They are placed at the end of the survey so that their
experimental nature does not affect responses to the main HRS questionnaire.
The HRS data has both an individual and household structure. We make use of both
the individual and household structure in our analysis. As discussed above, the sweepstakes
question is asked of only one respondent in the household. The respondent is asked to give
a proxy response for his or her spouse, if applicable.
Across the two waves, the module was asked of 2,660 respondents. Of these, 2,069 had
spouses and 531 were single. Hence, there were 4,669 potential individuals in our data
set. Of these 1789 were not working according to their response in the module. We lose
1,115 observations owing to missing data on the main HRS (e.g., age, hours, wages) and
377 observations owing to missing or invalid responses to the module. This leaves us with
1,388 observations for the analysis.

4.3
4.3.1

Labor Supply Response to Winning the Sweepstakes
Overall results

The responses to the sweepstakes question imply very high labor supply elasticities. Table
1 shows the basic results by marital status. Each entry in the table is the fraction of
individuals in each type of family (expressed as a percent) who would make the labor
supply choices indicated in the rows. The bottom row of the table gives the number of
observations.
o Somewhat over half the individuals report that they would quit work after winning
the sweepstakes that pays their current family income for life.
o A substantial minority—about one-fifth of individuals—would not change their hours
of work at all.
o The remaining individuals would reduce their hours of work.
Regardless of the parametric model, the high fraction of those who quit will imply a very
high elasticity of labor supply in aggregate. The high fraction of those who quit also
highlights the importance of taking into account nonconvexities in labor supply.
19

4.3.2

Flexibility of hours

Not quitting work could be consistent with unconstrained maximization as long as workers
are far from the quit/not-quit margin. It could also be affected by whether a respondent
can flexibly adjust hours at a job since many employers mandate the workweek as one
of the features of the job. The HRS asks whether hours of work are flexible and if not,
whether the worker works more or less than desired. The majority of workers in the HRS
report that their hours are not flexible. This inflexibility could affect the response to the
sweepstakes question. In particular, workers in inflexible jobs might be compelled to quit
in response to a wealth shock even though they would prefer to cut hours were their job
flexible.
Table 2 shows the labor supply responses to winning the sweepstakes as a function
of flexibility of hours. Of the 1,388 respondents, 29.8 percent (414 respondents) report
having hours that are flexible down, 64.3 percent (892 respondents) report hours that are
inflexible downward, and 5.9 (82 respondents) do not give an answer.11 There is only a
small excess propensity to quit work after winning the sweepstakes for those workers with
inflexible hours. Moreover, the fraction of inflexible workers who say they would reduce
their hours is about the same as for those with flexible workweeks. Hence, inflexibility
should not have a major impact on our results. As we discuss in section 6.3, this ability
of respondents to give answers that break free of the actual constraints on behavior they
face in their current situation is an important potential benefit of the experimental survey
approach. Apparently, our respondents do embrace the counterfactual of hours flexibility
in answering our question about the sweepstakes, as we hoped they would.
The right side of Table 2 cuts the data in terms of differences between desired and
actual hours. For those workers who say their hours are inflexible, the HRS asks them
whether they would like to work more or less, and by how much. The responses to the
sweepstakes question are given according to whether desired hours are greater, equal, or
less than actual hours. The “equal” category includes those who are flexible, and those who
are inflexible, but still work their desired schedule. There is no discernible difference in the
rate of quitting among those whose actual hours equal desired hours and those whose actual
hours exceed desired hours, i.e., those who have a repressed desire to reduce hours. This
latter group is somewhat more likely to reduce hours rather than leave them unchanged.
The smaller group that has repressed desire to increase hours has more noticeably different
11

A majority also report not having upward flexibility. This margin is not relevant for the sweepstakes
response.

20

behavior, i.e., is less likely to quit and is more likely to have no change in hours. The
message of this tabulation is that the constraints on changing hours are at least as likely
to push down the estimate of the elasticity as to increase it. Though binding constraints
on reducing hours are more common than constraints on increasing them, constraints on
increasing hours have a bigger effect on the answer to the sweepstakes question.
4.3.3

Family structure, sex, and age

Marital status has a substantial effect on our estimate of the labor supply elasticity. As
shown in Table 1, single individuals are less likely to quit and more likely to leave hours
unchanged or reduce hours than married workers. Among married workers, single earners
are less likely to quit or reduce hours than dual earners. The structural estimates of the
labor supply elasticities presented in the next section account for features of family structure
that could account for differences in behavior across household type. Moreover, differences
in circumstances, e.g., age and income, could explain the differences in behavior by marital
status. We will also investigate these factors in what follows.
The last column of Table 1 shows the individual responses for the dual earners. Table
3 shows the joint distribution of labor supply responses for dual-earner households. Both
members of the couple quitting is by far the most frequent response. Having one member
quit and the other not change is the next most common response. The wife is more likely
to be the worker who quits. When both members of a couple have interior reductions in
hours, the magnitude of the reductions is positively correlated. These results are consistent
with a model that features fixed costs of working, though coordination between spouses
also appears to be a factor.
Table 4 examines the response to the sweepstakes by sex and household type. For
all types of households, females are more likely to quit than males, with proportionate
reductions in no change and reducing hours. The differences are much more pronounced,
however, for the married couples.12 This finding suggests that family labor supply decisions
rather than sex per se accounts for most differences in labor supply decisions between men
and women.
For the sample overall, Table 5 shows there is surprisingly little heterogeneity by age in
quitting work as a response to winning the sweepstakes. Older workers are less likely to cut
hours conditional on not quitting than younger workers. The increase in the “no change”
12

Note that single-earner females are quite similar to dual-earner females in their behavior. In this age
cohort, many single-earner females will have a recently-retired husband, so their situation is similar to
dual-earner females whose husbands also quit in response to the sweepstakes.

21

response with age likely indicates endogenous selection. Those who are still working in
their sixties are more likely to like their jobs for their own sakes.
For the responses by age in particular, but also by other covariates, there are important
interactions with family status. After we discuss the estimation of the behavioral parameters by individual, we will be able to analyze them allowing for such interactions. This
issue is taken up in the next section.

4.4

Estimates of Labor Supply Elasticities from Responses to
Wealth Shocks

In this section we discuss estimating labor supply elasticities. While we apply them to
the evidence from our survey about the labor supply response to winning the sweepstakes,
these techniques could be applied to studying other wealth shocks.
In section 3 we described how to produce an individual-specific estimate of the elasticity
of labor supply. In this section, we present estimates based on the method described there
using the HRS data and the responses to the sweepstakes questions. In addition to these
data, we also need to provide a value of the nonseparability parameter α. We have no way
of identifying this parameter with our data, so we set it to a plausible value and explore
alternatives. We present estimates with α equal to 0.3 as a baseline. In section 6.1 we
discuss the empirical literature relevant for calibrating this parameter. We also consider
cases with α equal to 0.5 to illustrate the effect of a high degree of nonseparability and of
0.1 to illustrate what happens when the utility function is close to separable.
Table 6 presents the ratio of job-induced consumption to total consumption before
ˆ Ĉ—for the three values of α and
and after winning the sweepstakes—that is, J/C and J/
for various responses to the sweepstakes question. Consumption C is a household-level
variable. J and Jˆ are the sum of the two individual values of job-induced consumption for
dual-earner households. The estimates of the ratio before and after winning the sweepstakes
both depend on the individuals’ response to winning the sweepstakes. Those who quit or
reduce hours substantially have relatively high job-induced consumption before winning
the sweepstakes. Given the proportionality between job-induced consumption and the
money-metric disutility of work, these are precisely those who would be forecast to reduce
work more or to quit work after a positive wealth shock because going to their jobs is
relative costly. In contrast, those who would not adjust hours at all have zero job-induced
consumption because they have zero elasticity of labor supply.
For those who quit, the job-induced consumption in the last row of Table 6 is a lower
22

bound. We address the problem of estimating population averages in presence of censoring
later in this section.
The second column of Table 6 shows the ratio after winning the sweepstakes, that is,
after adjusting hours and consumption according to the response of the individual to the
sweepstakes question. Overall, job-induced consumption falls dramatically as a fraction of
total consumption. Individuals mostly work less. Job-induced consumption is zero for those
who quit because they are not working at all. For those who continue to work after the
lottery, total consumption increases dramatically while job-induced consumption remains
at zero (for those who do not adjust hours) or falls (for those who reduce hours).
The pairs of columns with alternative values of α show the effect of varying the degree of
non-separability. For α = 0.5, a higher degree of non-separability, job-induced consumption
is higher. For α = 0.1, a lower degree of non-separability, job-induced consumption is lower.
For a zero value of α, it would be zero.
Table 7 presents the estimates of the utility-function parameters η for the three values
of α. We calculate these parameters for each individual in our sample based on their laborsupply response to the sweepstakes questions and what it implies about the change in their
total and job-induced consumption. See equation (25). The parameter η is zero for those
who do not change hours at all. For those who quit, shown in the last row, we only know
the lower bound η # given in equation (26). For those who reduce hours, we have a non-zero
point estimate of η.
For α equal to 0.3, the median value of the elasticity η for those who reduce hours is
0.59. Among those who reduce hours, there is substantial variation in η depending on how
much they reduce hours in response to the proportionate wealth shock.
Again, for those who quit, we only have a lower bound on η. For α equal to 0.3, the
median value of the lower bound is is 0.88.
The estimate of the elasticity depends on the nonseparability of consumption of labor
parameterized by α. The higher the degree of non-separability, the lower is the value of the
labor supply elasticity η implied by a given reduction in labor supply in response to the
wealth shock. The higher the nonseparability, the higher the job-induced consumption for
the level of labor supply before the wealth shock. A given reduction in labor in response to
the wealth shock corresponds to a lower elasticity the higher is job-induced consumption.
The value of α has noticeable effects on the magnitudes of the estimates of the elasticity,
but not so great as to make the key findings of the paper depend critically on the value of
α as it varies over a range of plausible values. For α equal to 0.5, the median lower bound

23

is 0.80; the median value of the bound for the elasticity is 0.97 for α equal to 0.1.
Individuals have high levels of labor supply elasticity as evidenced by the high fraction
who quit and the substantial reductions in hours among those who do not. Quitting
represents very elastic behavior. Note that this conclusion does not depend on knowing
the magnitude of the fixed cost of going to work. It depends only on the empirically
validated claim that if hours fall below some critical value (19 in our calculations) that few
individuals work. The quitters, because they are so common and because they have very
high elasticities, will tend to dominate the aggregate calculation. The workers who use the
intensive margin are also informative. Most make substantial adjustments, which leads to
high estimates of their labor supply elasticity.
A further lesson of this research is that there is substantial heterogeneity in the labor
supply elasticity. Differences in preferences will generate different responses to shocks and
policy interventions. We emphasize this point elsewhere for risk tolerance and intertemporal substitution. See Barsky, et al. (1997).13 Notwithstanding the substantial heterogeneity
in labor supply responses, it is useful to provide a summary, average measure of the elasticity of labor of supply. For the majority of individuals who quit work after winning the
sweepstakes, we have only a lower bound on their elasticity, so simple sample statistics do
not convey the central tendency of the results. To provide this central tendency, we present
estimates using the standard truncated normal regression model, that is, we assume that
ηi = Xi0 β + i

(31)

describes the individual Frisch elasticity, where the i subscript denotes the individual. The
covariates Xi include a constant and observables that might account for heterogeneity. The
i is a mean zero disturbance that accounts for unobserved heterogeneity.14 We observe
the individual elasticity if the individual does not quit, and the lower bound ηi# , otherwise.
Under the assumption that i is distributed normally, this is simply a Tobit model with
known, variable truncation points.
Table 8 presents the estimates of this censored regression model for the individual
elasticities for the case where α is equal to 0.3. The first column of Table 8 reports the
13

Note that the heterogeneity documented here is for the elasticity of labor supply. There is also substantial heterogeneity in the level of labor supply: individuals who appear quite similar based on observables
work different amounts. Our model takes into account this heterogeneity through the work aversion parameter Mi . These fixed effects, however, drop out of the calculation of the elasticity. See equation (22).
14
Those who do not change hours at all have an exactly zero elasticity. Hence, a logarithmic model is
inappropriate.

24

specification with a constant only. The results are not surprising in light of Table 7. The
mean elasticity is 1.004 with a very small standard error. This point estimate is higher
than the median lower bound for the quitters. Given that quitters make up much of the
sample, their behavior dominates the results. The standard error of , denoted σ, is 0.765.
This sizeable estimate reflects the substantial heterogeneity in the individual elasticities
discussed above. This heterogeneity is observed for the non-quitters and censored for the
quitters.15
Table 8, Column (2), adds in controls for household type. Households with single
individuals are the excluded category. The married households, particularly those with
two earners, have higher labor supply elasticities than single workers. The dual-earners
have elasticities 0.379 greater than singles on average and 0.239 (0.379 - 0.140) greater
than married single earners. Recall that our analytic framework accounts for the most basic
features of family structure. The family budget constraint integrates the joint labor market
decisions of members of couples and these decisions account for fixed costs of working.
Specifically, it takes into account the differential hours and wages of dual-earners and that
having one spouse quit is not as drastic as having both quit. Taking these factors into
account, though important, does not fully account for the effects of family structure. A
richer parameterization could account for differences in behavior by family structure. For
example, the leisure of members of couples might have nonseparabilities that cause them
to quit simultaneously. For single-earner couples, these non-separabilities could well be
weaker than for dual-earner couples given that ex ante only one member of the couple is
working. Similarly, single individuals might socialize more through their jobs, and thus
have a fixed benefit of working that partially offsets the fixed cost of working. Our model
permits one to speculate about these factors (and in future work estimate them) because
it controls for how income affects family labor supply decisions.
By being imbedded in a life-cycle setting, the model accounts for the differential impact
of winning the sweepstakes based on age. Age per se should not effect the labor supply
elasticity. The results show that including controls for age do not explain the dispersion in
the labor supply elasticity. Table 8, Column (3), includes controls for roughly equally-sized
age groups (with the youngest group omitted). Age is not economically or statistically
significant. Hence, at least over the relatively narrow age range of the HRS, our model can
account for behavior without having the elasticity be age-dependent.
The last column of Table 8 includes controls for income quintile (lowest quintile omit15

We have done the same calculations for the high and low job-induced consumption cases. For α = 0.5,
the mean labor supply elasticity is 0.908; for α = 0.1, it is 1.125.

25

ted). Though the estimated parameters bounce around somewhat, there is no systematic
pattern of labor supply elasticity as a function of income. Thus, there is no clear relationship between income and labor supply elasticity. Again, it is a victory for the theory that
income does not directly explain the estimate of a preference parameter.
Table 9 considers how other variables covary with labor supply. Column (1) adds sex
and race. Females have somewhat more elastic labor supply than do men, but the difference
is quite small compared with the finding of the literature (discussed below) that the labor
supply elasticity is much larger for women than for men. The model accounts for factors
other than preferences that can make women more likely to quit work. These include
working few hours and therefore being both closer to the quit margin and having relatively
high job-induced consumption. Moreover, to the extent that wives earn less than husbands,
the model accounts for the differential impact of wives quitting on household consumption.
Hence, it can account for substantial differences in behavior between men and women
without attributing this behavior to a substantial difference in a utility-function parameter.
In contrast to sex, race has essentially no explanatory power for labor supply elasticity. As
with income, there is no good reason to expect race to directly affect preferences.
Recall that respondents were asked to respond to the sweepstakes question for their
working spouses. It is possible that the uses of a proxy response could systematically affect
the results. Table 9, Column (2) adds a dummy variable for whether the individual had
such a proxy response. The coefficient of the dummy is small and statistically insignificant,
which indicates that the use of the proxy responses do not systematically bias the findings.
As a final attempt to find correlates that predict the estimated elasticities, Table 9,
Column (3) includes dummies for educational attainment (with the “some high school”
category excluded). Those with post-graduate education have significantly lower labor
supply elasticities than those who did not attend college.16 The finding that individuals in
the highest education class have substantially lower labor supply elasticities is intriguing.
It could be related to the choices that induced that level of education in the first place.
Clearly, unobserved factors, e.g. ability, affect educational choices, so these factors may well
be the correlates of labor supply elasticities. In any case, it is a salient and striking finding
that those who chose to get more education have relatively low labor supply elasticities.
16

Recall that heterogeneity in the level of labor supply is differenced out in our estimates.

26

5

Alternative Measures of Labor Supply Elasticity:
Theory and Evidence

Given our assumption of a zero long-run elasticity of labor supply, there is a direct relationship between the Frisch labor supply elasticity and other familiar labor supply elasticities.
In this section we discuss how to translate our estimates of the Frisch labor supply elasticity into estimates of the marginal expenditure share of leisure `, the consumption-constant
labor supply elasticity η C , and the utility-constant labor supply elasticity η U . We also
show how to derive implications for the uncompensated labor supply elasticity η X for one
member of a dual-earner household (and for a single or single-earner when consumption is
not equal to labor income initially). In the constant elasticity functional form we use in
this paper, η λ = η, but all local relationships in this section hold more generally. Appendix
B gives the derivation of the results that are stated in this section.

5.1

Review of Elasticity Concepts

Let us briefly review the economic significance of these labor supply elasticity concepts.
In a frictionless world, the marginal expenditure share of leisure ` is the fraction of an
extra dollar a household would spend on reducing labor hours to get more leisure. Given
normality of leisure so that it is positive, ` is the absolute value of the local marginal
propensity to earn.
The utility-constant labor supply elasticity η U is the theoretical substitution effect, that
is, the percentage increase in labor hours when the household moves along an indifference
curve to a point with a 1 percent higher slope, representing a 1 percent higher real wage.
When income and substitution effects cancel in the simple case where consumption equals
labor income, the utility-constant labor supply elasticity equals the absolute value of the
local marginal propensity to earn, η U = `.
We noted above that when labor supply is scale-symmetric in consumption, labor supply
can be represented as a function N s (W/C). The consumption-constant labor supply elasticity η C is the elasticity of this function with respect to the ratio W/C. The consumptionconstant labor supply elasticity equals the Frisch elasticity in the additively separable (α
equal zero) case. The consumption-constant labor supply elasticity is especially useful for
comparative steady-state analysis of permanent changes in marginal tax rates.
Finally, in a frictionless world the marginal-utility-of-wealth-constant labor supply elasticity or Frisch labor supply elasticity η λ represents the sensitivity of labor supply to a
27

temporary increase in the real wage. That is, if the real wage increases temporarily by 1
percent, labor supply would increase for the same period of time by η λ percent. In the
frictionless world, the Frisch elasticity governs intertemporal substitution in labor supply
and is tightly linked to the effect of the real interest rate on labor supply. Macroeconomic
models often are calibrated in terms of the Frisch elasticity. It is the elasticity concept
relevant for understanding the response of labor to transitory, cyclical changes in the real
wage.
The raw data from our survey is the change in labor supply as a result of a specified
wealth shock. The raw marginal propensity to earn, MPE, is the fraction labor income falls
relative to the income flow from the sweepstakes, i.e., the wage times the hours reduction
divided by the annual income. For those who do not adjust hours it is zero. For those who
quit, it equals one in absolute value for individuals whose labor income is the sole source
of household income. For others, its absolute value is between zero and one. The MPE
is typically used as a nonparametric measure of wealth effects. [See Imbens, Rubin, and
Sacerdote (2001), for example.]
Table 10 shows for different values of the raw MPE how these different labor supply
elasticity concepts relate to each other numerically in the simple case where a single-earner
household consumes its labor income each period. The uncompensated elasticity is zero by
construction in this specification. (This simplification allows us to calculate the elasticities
analytically. The income equals consumption restriction, which would hold for liquidityconstrained households, makes the model a static one.) The relevant formulas are discussed
below. What leaps out of the table is that while η U (the “substitution effect” in its pure
form) is numerically equal to the marginal expenditure share of leisure ` (equal to the
absolute value of the local marginal propensity to earn) when income and substitution
effects cancel, the numerical values of the consumption-constant elasticity η C and Frisch
labor supply elasticity η λ can be substantially larger and—at the upper end—quite sensitive
to the size of the income effect as measured by `.
The top panel of Table 10 gives the estimates for the separable case where α = 0.0.
The bottom panel gives them for the non-separable case with α = 0.3 that we focus on in
Section 4. The comparison of these tables highlights how non-separability affects the key
parameters. There is little effect on the local MPE. There are however, substantial effects
on the elasticities. For a given MPE, increasing the non-separability parameter α increases
the consumption-constant elasticity and decreases the Frisch elasticity. (See the discussion
of Table 11 for further discussion of the effect of α on the estimates.)

28

5.2

Formulas and Estimates

In this section, we present the formulas for the local marginal propensity to earn, consumptionconstant labor supply elasticity and utility-constant labor supply elasticity. See Appendix
B for the derivation of these formulas. Because of the importance of dual-earner families
empirically, it is important to have formulas that are valid for dual-earner households as
well as single and single-earner households.
We then use these formulas to construct individual-specific measures based on our
survey. Table 11 presents averages of these measures based on the same statistical model
used in Tables 8 and 9. Before turning to the structural estimates of these parameters,
we consider the raw data. The MPE is -0.373 on average. It is not very different across
household types. The table shows individuals MPEs for members of dual-earner households.
The dual-earner MPE at the household level is the sum of the two individual MPEs. The
household MPEs are much larger for the dual earners than the single or single-earners.
The female dual-earner MPE is relatively low, since females contribute a relatively low
fraction of family income in these data. Hence, even in studying the raw data, the lessons
of the model concerning joint labor supply and the importance of relative wages within the
household becomes apparent.
The Local Marginal Propensity to Earn: In a dual-earner household, the absolute
value of the local marginal propensity to earn for individual i is given by
`i =

ηiλ

Wi Ni
P
C + (1 − α) j ηjλ Wj Nj

!

.

In a single or single-earner household, this reduces to
` = ηλ

WN
C + (1 − α)η λ W N

!

.

The local marginal propensity to earn is greater in absolute value than the raw MPE.
The parameters are evaluated at the initial level of hours. Convexity of the Engel curve
mandates that the local value will be greater than the raw MPE, which averages over a
large change in labor input.17 Our results imply that, absent frictions, individuals would
17

Even aside from our particular functional form, we consider the argument for a convex interior-solution
portion of the Engel curve strong (with N on the horizontal axis and C on the vertical axis). Imagine
gradually increasing the amount of non-labor income. As labor hours fall, it seems plausible that—up to
the point where fixed costs lead a worker to quit—inducing each hour of reduced labor will require at least
as great a percentage increase in consumption as the previously reduced hour. This makes the interior-

29

spend on average almost 60 percent of a wealth shock in reduced labor input.
The Utility-Constant Labor Supply Elasticity: In a dual-earner household the
utility-constant labor supply elasticity is given by
ηiU

=

ηiλ

C
P
C + (1 − α) j ηjλ Wj Nj

!

.

In a single or single-earner household, this reduces to
U

η =η

λ

C
C + (1 − α)η λ W N

!

.

Note that when consumption is equal to labor income, η U is equal to the local marginal
propensity to earn in the single and single-earner case, but not in the dual-earner case.
However, when η1U and η2U are averaged with labor income weights, the value is equal to
the sum of the local marginal propensities to earn times the consumption to total labor
income ratio:
P

j

X
ηjU Wj Nj
C
=P
[ `j ].
j Wj Nj
j Wj Nj j

P

This means that in dual-earner households, it is the sum of the marginal propensities to
earn one should look at to guess the average sizes of the other labor supply elasticities
associated with the substitution effect.
The mean utility-constant labor supply elasticity is 0.793. As with the Frisch elasticity
analyzed in greater detail in Tables 8 and 9, the estimated elasticity varies with household
type and to a much lesser extent by sex. Except in the single-earner, consumption-equalslabor-income case, η U will not equal exactly `. For the single households, they are very
close. In the dual-earner households, ` is substantially smaller than η U because the money
for reducing labor hours must be divided between two spouses, reducing the size of the
individual `.
The Consumption-Constant Labor Supply Elasticity: In a dual-earner household, the consumption constant labor supply elasticity, holding the wage ratio between
members of the household constant, is
solution portion of the Engel curve at least as convex as the Engel curve for a constant-semielasticity form
of v. Of course, the fixed costs effectively make the Engel curve concave around N # , but we can still get
a relatively high lower bound on the elasticity when people quit.

30

ηiC

=

ηiλ

!

C
C −α

P

j

ηjλ Wj Nj

.

In a single or single-earner household, this reduces to
C

η =η

λ

C
C − αη λ W N

!

.

In the separable case with α = 0, the consumption-constant and Frisch elasticity are the
same. The consumption-constant elasticity will be greater than the Frisch elasticity for
positive values of α.
For the value α of 0.3 in Table 11, the consumption-constant elasticity exceeds the
Frisch elasticity by about fifty percent. What accounts for the relationships among these
elasticities? The estimates of `—and the closely linked η U and η C —come from the slope
of the Engel curve at the initial value of N . Given η C , the formula relating η λ to η C
algebraically pushes η λ down for a given value of η C , since consumption must increase to
keep λ fixed as the real wage increases and this increased consumption reduces the rise in
labor hours from the higher wage.
Why is `—and therefore η U and η C —higher when α is higher? The discrete change in
C and N is treated as data here. It is the curvature of the Engel curve that determines the
relationship between the global MPE and the local MPE. A convex Engel curve means that
the slope at the initial value of N will be flatter (yielding a higher local MPE) than the
slope of the secant on the Engel curve that determines the global MPE. A higher value of
α makes the Engel curve more convex because as non-labor income (from the sweepstakes
winnings) increases, reductions in N hold down the increases in C substantially at first,
but as the marginal disutility of working falls, the effect of hours reductions on job-induced
consumption becomes much less important. Therefore, consumption rises more rapidly
with increases in non-labor income at low levels of N where variations in job-induced
consumption lose most of their force.

5.3

Uncompensated Labor Supply Elasticity

The uncompensated labor supply elasticity ηiiX for household member i is defined as the
effect of an increase in the real wage Wi when all of the additional labor income is devoted
to additional consumption and the other household member’s real wage is unchanged. The
31

uncompensated elasticity is often what ends up being estimated in econometric studies
because of the difficulty of holding utility, consumption, or marginal utility constant in an
empirical specification.
The definition of η U and η C above involve varying both wages proportionately.18 But
in the case of the uncompensated elasticity η X , it is interesting to look at what happens
when only one wage changes holding the other wage constant, since this is what is typically
estimated econometrically. In the dual-earner household, let us call the individual we
are focusing on individual 1. The uncompensated labor supply elasticity for individual 1,
varying only W1 is
X
η11
= η1λ

C − W1 N1 + (1 − α)η2λ W2 N2
P
C + (1 − α) j ηjλ Wj Nj

!

In a single or single-earner household, this reduces to
X

η =η

λ

C − WN
C + (1 − α)η λ W N

!

C − WN
=`
.
WN




Even for single and single-earner households, devoting the extra labor income to consumption is not quite the same as increasing consumption by the same ratio as labor income or
by the same ratio as the wage itself, so scale symmetry in consumption does not lead to a
precisely zero uncompensated labor supply elasticity unless consumption is equal to labor
income initially. For a dual-earner household, the fact that the other spouse’s wage is held
constant makes it possible for the uncompensated labor supply elasticity to be far from
zero even when scale symmetry in consumption holds.
Using these formulas, Table 11 shows the average values of the uncompensated labor
supply elasticities for males and females in each family structure (allowing for the censoring
when an individual quits). The average value is 0.327. While not zero, this value is
substantially smaller than the various compensated measures. Hence, our quite substantial
compensated elasticities are consistent with the much lower uncompensated elasticities that
researchers have come to expect to find in data.
For singles, whether male or female, our theory implies an uncompensated elasticity
close to zero. For single earners, the higher average level of non-labor income makes the
men’s elasticity modestly positive and women’s somewhat higher. The uncompensated
18

Because of our separability assumption, this is not an issue for ηiλ ; we do not need to specify the
behavior of the other wage to think about ηiλ .

32

elasticity is largest for dual earners, especially women.
These average values for the uncompensated labor supply elasticity are well in line
with the standard empirical finding that women have positive elasticities . For men, the
standard empirical estimates of the uncompensated labor supply elasticity are slightly
negative, where these numbers are modestly positive.19

6

Experimental Survey versus Econometric Evidence

This section discusses how our approach compares to the literature. The first subsection
concerns estimates of how much consumption drops at retirement, which bear directly on
the parameter α. The second subsection discusses econometric evidence concerning labor
supply elasticities. The final subsection compares the survey and econometric approaches
to quantifying preference parameters.

6.1

Quantifying α

There are various ways other research could identify α. As we note above, it is related
to the amount that observed consumption C falls when a worker quits working holding
lifetime resources constant. There is a variety of evidence in the literature that shows that
consumption does fall after retirement.
Hamermesh (1984), using the Retirement History Study, shows that consumption early
in retirement is about 15 percent higher than can be sustained by remaining lifetime resources, so that consumption must fall later in retirement (and might have changed further
at the point of retirement.)
Banks, Blundell, and Tanner (1998) present estimates based on a cohort-level analysis
of British consumption expenditure data. They find a 35.2 percent drop in consumption
19

This may point to some degree of departure from strict scale symmetry in consumption. Fortunately,
our main conclusions are robust to small departures from exact scale symmetry in consumption. It would
be difficult to fully analyze the effects of large wealth shocks (like the sweepstakes we asked people to
contemplate) without the structure we imposed with the help of the assumption of exact scale symmetry
in consumption. But we show in a Technical Appendix (Kimball and Shapiro, 2003) that given particular
values of the local marginal propensities to earn, as one could theoretically get from looking at the effects
of small wealth shocks, the inference from those local marginal propensities to earn to the size of η λ , η C
and η U is not very sensitive to small departures from exact scale symmetry in consumption. Because we
are analyzing the effects of wealth shocks, we believe that the estimated local marginal propensities to earn
are likely to be quite robust to modest departures from exact scale symmetry in consumption. Therefore,
we find it reassuring to know that the mapping from the local marginal propensities to earn to the other
elasticities is not very sensitive to modest departures from exact scale symmetry in consumption.

33

unconditional on income and other covariates except unemployment. See Banks, Blundell,
and Tanner (1998, Table 1, Column 2). This unconditional drop is probably their estimate
most analogous to our parameter α. Their figure 3 also shows substantial cumulative
drops in consumption growth around retirement, which lead to a permanently lower postretirement level of consumption.
Bernheim, Skinner, and Weinberg (2001), using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,
find reductions of about 30 percent in consumption in the two years following retirement.
The reductions are sharpest for low wealth households. For high wealth and income households, there are no such reductions. (See their Figure 4.) The interaction of wealth with the
change in consumption growth supports their interpretation of the finding as representing
the effects of inadequate wealth accumulation.
Hurd and Rohwedder (2003) also find a drop in consumption of about 15 percent, but
used a novel component of the Health and Retirement study to present evidence that it is
anticipated. This anticipated drop is consistent with what our non-separable formulation
predicts. Hurd and Rohwedder have a similar interpretation of their findings, i.e., that
job-induced consumption declines after retirement. Ameriks, Caplin, and Leahy (2002)
have similar findings from a survey of TIAA-CREF participants.
Aguiar and Hurst look at the effect of the time budget constraint on various components
of nondurable consumption. They find that some components of nondurable expenditure
(e.g. food) decline around the age of retirement while other components of nondurable
expenditure (e.g. entertainment) rise around the age of retirement, but overall, nondurable
expenditure excluding housing declines by 9% between age 60 and age 68, while nondurable
expenditure including housing declines by 5%. Since average labor hours (of the household
head) decline by a factor of about 5/12 to 12.5 hours a week at age 68 from 30 hours a
week at age 60, this suggests a value of alpha in the approximate range .12 to .22.
Hence, the value of α of 0.3 that we highlight in the presentation of the results is within
the range of estimates of how much consumption falls at retirement, though it is on the
high side of the range.20 On the other hand, if the drop in consumption at retirement does
owe to a lack of foresight, as suggested by some authors, then the evidence on changes
of consumption at retirement may overstate the value of α, making the calculations with
α = 0.1 more relevant.
20

Basu and Kimball (2002), using aggregate time series to estimate the nonseparability of consumption
and labor, find a somewhat larger value of α.

34

6.2
6.2.1

Evidence on Labor Supply
Labor supply elasticity

Though at broad brush, the econometric evidence on labor supply elasticities from the
cross-section and the life-cycle support the notion that elasticities are small, the extensive
literature is subject to varying interpretations. This section has a brief survey of empirical
evidence on labor supply.
Overall, there is very little evidence that male labor supply responds at all to wages
(see Pencavel, 1986, Card, 1994) in the cross-section. If anything, the uncompensated labor
supply elasticity η X is negative; that is, the income effect exceeds the substitution effect.
The simple average of estimates reported by Pencavel is -0.12 (p. 69). Card (1994, p. 57)
suggests that the finding of weakly higher hours for more highly educated workers calls into
question the conventional wisdom of a negative relationship between wages and hours. Yet,
in any case, whether the estimates show a positive or negative relationship of hours and
wages, the estimated effects are very small [see Technical Appendix (Kimball and Shapiro,
2003)].
Estimates for women tend to be positive, often substantially so. (See Heckman and
Killingsworth, 1986). Evidence surveyed by Blundell and MaCurdy (1999, Table 1) based
on models of non-linear budget sets show a similar pattern of zero uncompensated elasticities for men and uncompensated elasticities close to one for women. Hence, apart from
married men, where we find a higher elasticity than is typically found in the literature, our
estimates of the uncompensated elasticity reported in Table 11 are broadly consistent with
what is found in the literature. Moreover, as our theory and findings make clear, marital
status is more important than sex in understanding labor supply elasticity. We have not
been able to detect a consensus view from the labor economics literature on the role of
marital status in the empirical estimates of labor supply elasticity.
The intertemporal approach to estimating labor supply elasticities [MaCurdy (1981),
Altonji (1986), Browning, Deaton, and Irish (1985), Ziliak and Kniesner (1999)] generates
estimates of the Frisch labor supply elasticity.21 The estimates range for a low of around zero
in Browning, Irish, and Deaton (1985) to positive but small in MaCurdy (1981). Lee (2001)
shows, however, that MaCurdy’s estimates are biased down owing to the weak instrument
21

These studies—though they assume separability between labor and consumption—are akin to ours in
producing an estimated parameter that corresponds to a structural utility function parameter. Altonji in
particular takes the cancellation of income and substitution effects, i.e., wages and consumption having
equal and opposite coefficients in his specification, as the benchmark for judging the estimates.

35

problem. Lee’s point estimates using LIML and a longer sample period to overcome the
econometric problems with 2SLS are centered around one-half. In work that accounts for
the participation margin, Blundell, Meghir, and Neves (1993) find Frisch elasticities of
about 0.5 to 1 depending on number of children for married women taking into account
the participation margin. Hence, our estimate of one is high relative to most estimates,
but given biases in the data that attenuate the coefficients of wages (see next section), our
estimates are not wholly out of line with what this evidence indicates.22
Mulligan (1998) finds larger intertemporal elasticities than the earlier work. He does so
by including older workers, who have declining wages and declining hours, in the sample.
Other authors typically exclude these workers.23 Mulligan’s use of this variation in the data
is controversial. See the discussions by Hall (1998) and Pischke (1998). This controversy
highlights the difficulties with finding suitable variation in the data to identify structural
labor-supply parameters.
Recent work in labor economics has looked for circumstances where workers face temporary wage fluctuations and where they have flexibility in responding to them. Oettinger
(1999) finds that baseball park vendors respond quite elastically to changes in their effective wages arising from level of attendance at games. Farber (2008) finds that taxicab
drivers’ labor supply responds strongly to high-frequency variation in their implicit wage.24
Fehr and Götte (2002) also find elastic behavior in a field experiment varying the wages of
bicycle messengers. Hence, this recent work based on experimental or quasi-experimental
variation in wages finds a higher elasticity than is typically found in econometric studies.
6.2.2

Home production

One strand of the home production literature, initiated by Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright
(1991) among others and surveyed in Greenwood, Rogerson and Wright (1995), has argued
that the substitution effect is larger than the income effect. This literature accounts for the
facts discussed in Section 2 by productivity in home production being equal to productivity in market production—an assumption that has the same effect as assuming preference
22

Moreover, both Altonji (1986) and Card (1994) note the poor quality or absence of consumption data
necessary to produce estimates in this framework.
23
Mulligan (p. 91) explains the low comovement of hours and wages early in the lifecycle, when wages
are rising sharply but hours are relatively flat, as the result of on-the-job training.
24
Camerer, Babcock, Loewenstein, and Thaler (1997), in an early contribution to this emerging literature,
suggest that taxi drivers target daily income rather than responding to implicit wages in deciding how
much to work. Farber raises questions about their statistical methodology that call this specific result into
question.

36

shocks that exactly cancel the effects permanent changes in the real wage would otherwise
have on labor hours. In order to explain all three facts just mentioned, productivity in
home production must have an almost perfect correlation with market productivity internationally, over time and cross-sectionally. We consider this unlikely. But the much
weaker assumption that productivity in home production has a significant positive correlation with market productivity over the life cycle [see Rupert, Rogerson, and Wright
(2000)] can significantly raise one’s estimate of the Frisch elasticity of labor supply. In
general, as Greenwood, Rogerson and Wright (1995) point out, models of home production are equivalent to models with the usual reduced-form utility functions, but with what
look like preference shocks to the reduced-form utility function interpretable as changes
to factors like the household production technology. Unless there are strong restrictions
on the sources and structure of these shifters of the reduced-form utility function, all the
arguments we give about the shape of the reduced-form utility function go through even
after considering household production.
If instead, the substitution effect is larger than the income effect as one strand of the
home production literature argues, the Frisch elasticity implied by our data would be larger
than what is given in our tables.
6.2.3

Marginal propensity to earn

Evidence on the MPE from the literature is also disparate. Pencavel cites estimates ranging
from zero to -0.7, though he discounts the larger ones. Ashenfelter and Heckman (1973)
report a median estimate of -0.27, not too far from what we find. These estimates are
typically based on the role of non-labor income in labor supply, which is typically hard
to measure and relatively small. Evidence from tax changes, especially the British studies
discussed by Pencavel (1986) and Blundell and MaCurdy (1999), show larger MPEs.
In constrast, negative income tax experiments typically find small MPEs. Given that
income and substitution effects go in the same direction in these experiments, this evidence
points away from elastic behavior.
There are a few studies that look at how wealth windfalls affect labor supply. Joulfaian
and Wilhelm (1994) study the role of inheritances on consumption and labor supply. They
find that inheritances have only a small effect on consumption and an even smaller effect
on labor supply. There are reasons to believe, however, that these estimates are attenuated
relative to true utility function parameters. As they point out, but cannot fully correct
for, inheritances may be anticipated. Moreover, they are typically very small, so small as
37

to not overcome the frictions affecting behavior discussed in the next section.
In an important study that closely parallels our design, Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote
(2001) survey state lottery winners about their labor supply. This study has the important
features that we advocate, i.e., an experimental design with large shocks (for at least some
of the respondents). They also take into account the fundamental nonlinearity owing to
quits by including a quadratic term.25 Their headline results seem to suggest relatively
low MPEs, but these include values of zero for the non-workers. Additionally, unlike
our structural estimates that take into account the differences in the cost of quitting as a
function of time to retirement, it is hard to compare their results across ages. The raw MPE
in the Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote results for the 55 to 65 age group, which substantially
overlaps the HRS sample, is -0.291 (= −0.124 − 0.167, p. 791), which is only a little smaller
than our comparable figure of -0.373. They find smaller MPEs for younger workers. Hence,
the findings from the hypothetical sweepstakes are quite similar to those of the actually
lottery winners. They also find little difference between men and women. As the discussion
in the previous section shows, these ranges of estimates imply high structural elasticities
of labor supply.

6.3

Econometric versus Experimental Survey Methodology

This paper offers a different type of evidence based on response to survey questions that
pose thought experiments. Though this kind of survey evidence has its own set of difficulties, it overcomes some substantial problems with the econometric approach. Econometric
identification has a number of rigorous requirements that are very difficult to meet in
practice.
First, there must be sufficient signal in the data to identify the parameter of interest.
We argue in our introduction that the signal for identifying the long-run elasticity of labor
supply is very strong. In contrast, the available signal for identifying the income and
substitution effects separately is typically quite weak. Pencavel (1986) and Card (1994)
both emphasize how frictions make it very difficult for actual behavior to reveal preference
parameters. Blundell and MaCurdy (1999, p. 75) stresses that even in social experiments,
it may be difficult for individual behavior to overcome frictions. The experiments last only
25

It has some limitations owing to the nature of the data, e.g., there is a small sample of winners with
large winnings, the authors made a conscious decision not to survey the winners about their spouses’
behavior (fn. 6), and those who buy lottery tickets are unlikely to be a random cross section of the
population. Yet, as with our study, the large, exogenous signal in their data should help compensate for
other limitations.

38

for several years. Moreover, they are not sufficiently large to affect the economic and social
context in which the experimental subjects operate. The problem of low signal also affects
studies of income effects. Many shocks to non-labor income or wealth used to identify
wealth effects are simply too small to overcome the frictions that impinge on labor supply
decisions.
Second, measurement error and other data problems are a source of attenuation biases
and other biases in econometric analyses. In the analysis of labor supply, the difficulty in
measuring the wage heads the list of measurement difficulties. Difficulties arise as pure
measurement issues, for example, when individuals make errors in reporting their wages
in surveys or when wage rates must be inferred from periodic flows of income divided
into periodic hours. Even when a wage rate is accurately measured, the spot wage paid
might not be allocative for current labor supply. Workers in all but the shortest-term
employment relationships are likely to vary effort in line with the needs of the employer
in return for a compensation package that delivers appropriate wages over a fairly long
horizon. This averaging out of effort and compensation cannot keep wages from adjusting
to changes in effort in the long run, but can certainly operate over a horizon of a year or
two. Finally, identification of labor supply relies on being able to decompose wage changes
into temporary and permanent shifts.
Measurement issues with non-human wealth are perhaps even more severe than those
for wages, especially in the datasets used to study labor supply. Most workers have little
non-labor income, so this variable has little signal. Changes in measured non-labor income
tend to be subject to substantial noise. Moreover, whatever changes there are in this
variable might not correspond to wealth shocks, e.g., they might be anticipated, so they
would not result in a contemporaneous change in labor supply even were there no frictions.
Hence, either cross-sectionally or in the time series, there is little signal in non-labor income
to explain variation in labor supply.
Third, econometric identification requires exogenous variation in the data. Labor supply choices, however, are typically made jointly with other economic decisions—particularly
the level of consumption. Moreover, the unobserved factors jointly affecting labor supply,
wages, and non-human wealth can easily confound results. Much of the labor literature
seeks exogenous instruments or natural experiments to overcome these problems. In addition, panel data techniques are frequently used to control for time-invariant confounding
factors. Both instrumental variables techniques and panel data techniques make significant
demands for data—such as availability of instruments and a sufficiently long panel—and on

39

the econometric model—such as the exogeneity of instruments and the constancy of unobserved effects. The recent work that uses field experiments or quasi-experimental variation
in wages does suggest that elastic behavior is obscured in econometric studies using more
conventional data.
Our survey approach is designed to overcome these difficulties with the econometric
approach. It parallels the experimental approach in building in features to the empirical
design that are meant to get directly at the object of analysis—in this case labor supply
elasticities.
o The survey approach confronts the respondent with an exogenous shock. Winning
the hypothetical sweepstakes is entirely exogenous. All respondents in the sample
receive the same treatment.
o In our design, the shock confronting the respondent is large. Specifically, it is meant to
overcome the inertia in behavior in the face of shocks caused by frictions in markets
and in individual behavior. While an actual experiment could achieve this same
outcome in principle, delivering wealth shocks equal to lifetime income would not be
practical.
o The survey approach has much more modest data requirements than the econometric
approach. In particular, the survey approach does not rely on having tightly accurate
measures of wages and of non-labor income.
o The survey approach yields a “within” estimator. It differences out unobserved factors
as does the panel approach. The survey approach, however, has the advantage that it
does the differencing at a point in time instead of across time as in the panel approach.
Hence, unlike the panel approach, there is no need to assume that unobserved effects
are time invariant in order to control for them.
Hence, the survey approach provides a valuable complement to the econometric approach.
As noted above, the econometric approach has difficulties inherent to analyzing data on
actual realizations of economic data. For some purposes, it may be desirable to have
the labor supply estimates reflect those limitations, for example, by reflecting frictions
that confound estimates of preference parameters. For example, consider a one-month
reduction in the payroll tax rate. Even if the labor supply elasticity is high, most economists
would expect a payroll tax holiday to have a negligible effect on labor supply owing to the
difficulties of changing work schedules for a month or two. For some purposes, e.g., a
40

reduced-form analysis of similar shocks to policy, this low effective elasticity might be the
correct answer: it describes what might be the actual response to a particular type of policy
given the frictions faced by firms and workers. But for purposes of identifying a preference
parameter that controls the labor supply response in general, this estimate would be very
misleading.26 Pencavel is quite pessimistic about the ability of standard approaches to yield
estimates of preference parameters because of the complexity and frictions of behavior in
actual markets:
I am not suggesting that the preferences of workers have nothing to do with
their market work decisions, only that what I call below the canonical model
may not be the most useful characterization of the way in which preferences
and opportunity come together to determine outcomes in the labor market.
(Pencavel, 1986, p. 6.)
Our survey approach is meant to overcome the canonical difficulties faced by the empirical
labor literature in estimating preference parameters per se.
The survey approach is not, of course, without its own set of difficulties. Economists
typically complain that responses to hypothetical questions are unreliable. While we admit
that hypothetical responses are subject to errors, these errors must be balanced against the
advantages of the approach. Apart from errors introduced by respondents, our approach has
all the advantages of an exogenous experimental treatment, which is totally uncorrelated
with any and all unobserved factors that one might otherwise worry about. While the
experimental survey approach has potential problems, it overcomes problems that pervade
virtually all of the existing empirical literature. Hence, it is necessary to balance the
potential problems with hypothetical questions against the benefits of the experimental
design. Moreover, there is a declining marginal product argument to considering evidence
from experimental surveys. The existing empirical literature, though vast, has not firmly
established estimates of the key preference parameters we seek to estimate by our approach.
New techniques are needed to overcome the well-known limitations of existing empirical
26

Even when frictions are important, the underlying preference parameter can be central to understanding what is going on. For example, it is likely that many of movements in hours that occur over the
business cycle are initiated by employers rather than by workers. Because of the potential for institutional
coordination, frictions may be much smaller for employer-initiated hours changes than for worker-initiated
hours changes. If frictions for employer-initiated hours changes are indeed small in a business cycle context,
the underlying labor-supply elasticity might be central to understanding the cyclical hours decisions of a
firm that has a long-term relationship with its workers and does not want to alienate them by excessive
variation in hours.

41

approaches and the data that are available to implement them. The experimental survey
approach has this potential to provide distinctive evidence about preference parameters.27

7

Implications and Conclusions

This paper uses a theoretical framework for relating income and substitution effects in
labor supply. The framework accounts for optimization over time, for the joint behavior of
members of couples, and for fixed costs of working. The motivation for linking income and
substitution effects is that it is very difficult to find data that reliably identify substitution
effects from observed variation in wages. Our strategy is to use reliably estimated income
effects from an experimental setting with large shocks to infer substitution effects.
Our estimate of the constant marginal utility of wealth (Frisch) labor supply elasticity
is about one. This estimate is high relative to conventional estimates from the labor
supply literature. The estimate is not as high as used in some of the macroeconomics
literature. Prescott (1986) assumes a Frisch elasticity of at least 2 in an additive-separable
specification. Our estimate goes a long way toward filling the gap between what the
microeconomic evidence appears to say and what a dynamic general equilibrium model
needs in order to deliver the observed degree of labor fluctuations. Although there has
been substantial work in dynamic general equilibrium modeling since the early real business
cycle models to account for fluctuations without extreme assumptions about labor supply
elasticity, the typically calibrated elasticities are similar to those in Prescott (1986).
High estimates of labor supply elasticities also have implications for public finance.
With parameters as large as we find, the long-run effects of taxation on labor supply are
likely to yield very substantial distortions and dead-weight burdens.
Finally, this work carries a methodological lesson. It is very difficult to infer preference
parameters from data generated by actual economies. The main variation in the data
is not exogenous. Even when instruments are available, the signal in the data may be
small relative to the rigidities and frictions determining behavior. The experimental survey
27

There are other potential difficulties with surveys, emphasized more by researchers in cognitive psychology and in survey methodology, than in economics. These include biases arising from the framing
and ordering of survey questions and from the mode of the survey. Our survey has the advantage of being
implemented as part of a well-established and professionally conducted survey of a representative sample of
the HRS’s target population. Our survey instrument was subject to editing by staff of the Survey Research
Center (SRC) that is expert in the technical and cognitive aspects of surveys, and to pretesting using
standard SRC procedures. While these procedures do not eliminate problems of framing and mode effects,
our survey did have the advantage of being implemented by survey professionals as part of an ongoing
study. Further work along these lines is needed to quantify mode and framing effects.

42

approach holds the promise of designing studies to infer key preference parameters. That
said, we should acknowledge the converse: rigidities and frictions may mean that preference
parameters do not translate into behavior in a simple way. Elasticity estimates such as
ours do not necessarily predict significant responses to small, temporary changes in wages
precisely because of the frictions and rigidities that make econometric inference difficult.

43

Appendices
A

Imputing the Change in Baseline Consumption from
the Life-Cycle Model

Consumption before winning the sweepstakes is imputed from income and an age-appropriate
saving rate. Baseline consumption before winning the sweepstakes is then imputed from
P
B = C − i Ji . Baseline consumption after winning the sweepstakes is imputed by adding
the change to baseline consumption implied the life-cycle model:
∆B = B̂ − B.
This appendix lays out how we impute ∆B from our data. We will use the fact that
equations that hold before winning the sweepstakes hold after winning the sweepstakes
once hats have been added to the appropriate variables.
If we use Bt to designate baseline consumption t years in the future and B0 = B to
designate baseline consumption now, equation (5) implies that
B0 = λα−1
ψ(ν0 )
0
and
Bt = λα−1
ψ(νt ).
t
As mentioned above, r = ρ and the fair annuity and life insurance markets imply that
λt = λ0 . Therefore,
Bt =

B0 ψ(νt )
.
ψ(ν0 )

(32)

The fair annuity and life insurance markets allow one to focus on expected present
values. But it is important not to double-count. Therefore we define Υ as non-labor,
non-interest income. The lifetime budget constraint looks like

44

A0 + E0
= E0
= E0
=

Z ∞
0

Z ∞
0

X Z Ri −ai
i

Z ∞
0

e−rt Υ(νt )dt +

0

e−rt

pi (ai + t)
Wi,t Ni,t dt
pi (ai )

e−rt Ct dt + Q
e−rt [Bt +

X

Ji,t ]dt + Q

i

Z ∞
X Z Ri −ai
pi (ai + t)
B0
E0
e−rt ψ(νt )dt +
Ji,t dt + Q
e−rt
ψ(ν0 )
pi (ai )
0
0
i

where A0 is the current net worth of the household, ai is the current age of worker i, Ri
is the retirement age for worker i (for now assumed exogenous), pi (ai + t)/pi (ai ) is the
probability of living to age ai + t conditional on having lived to age ai , Wi,t Ni,t is labor
income for worker i conditional on living to time t, and Q is the expected present value of
bequests and other gifts from the household.28
Now let us take the “first-difference” of the two extreme ends of equation (33): the
after-sweepstakes values of each term minus the original values of each term. The only
change to the sum of initial net worth and the expected present value of exogenous noninterest, non-labor income is the expected present value of the sweepstakes winnings. The
text of the survey questions states that the sweepstakes pays an amount equal to last year’s
total family income as long as you [or your partner] live. Given the low rate of inflation
during the relevant sample period, we assume that the respondents interpret this to mean
that the sweepstakes pays the same real amount every year. Thus, denoting the expected
present value of the sweepstakes winning by L and last year’s total family income by Y ,
L=Y

Z ∞

e−rt

0

p1 (a1 + t)
dt
p1 (a1 )

(33)

for a single respondent and
L=Y

Z ∞
0

"

e

−rt

#

p1 (a1 + t) p2 (a2 + t) p1 (a1 + t) p2 (a2 + t)
+
−
dt
p1 (a1 )
p2 (a2 )
p1 (a1 )
p2 (a2 )

(34)

for a couple, using the approximation of independence in mortality.
R
Substituting in L for the change in A0 + E0 0∞ Υ(νt )dt
28

Both here and in the corresponding expressions below, when a household member works is paid for
less than 52 weeks per year, both the labor income Wi,t Ni,t and the job-induced consumption Ji,t need to
be multiplied by the actual number of weeks worked per year divided by 52.

45

L +

X Z Ri −ai
i

=

e−rt

0

pi (ai + t)
Wi,t [N̂i,t − Ni,t ]dt
pi (ai )

X Z Ri −ai
(B̂0 − B0 ) Z ∞ −rt
pi (ai + t) ˆ
E0
e ψ(νt )dt +
[Ji,t − Ji,t ]dt + [Q̂ − Q].
e−rt
ψ(ν0 )
pi (ai )
0
0
i

Solving for ∆B = B̂0 −B0 using the notation ∆ more generally for changes from the original
situation to the after-sweepstakes situation,

(

X Z Ri −ai
ψ(ν0 )
pi (ai + t)
R∞
∆B =
· L+
e−rt
Wi,t [∆Ni,t ]dt
−rt
E0 0 e ψ(νt )dt
pi (ai )
0
i

−

X Z Ri −ai
i

0

)

−rt pi (ai

e

+ t)
∆Ji,t dt − ∆Q .
pi (ai )

The income effect of the sweepstakes is the impetus for any reduction in labor supply.
Thus, for a given change in labor hours reported by the respondents, the larger is ∆B, the
smaller the estimate of the labor supply elasticity. This is important to keep in mind as we
make the necessary assumptions to operationalize equation (35). For instance, we begin
by assuming that ∆Q = 0—no change in bequests. This biases the estimate of the labor
supply elasticity downwards as compared to the likely increase in bequests as a result of
the winning the sweepstakes. The assumption of constant real sweepstakes payments also
biases the labor supply elasticity downward if the respondent’s interpretation of the survey
question is constant nominal payments. The other rough and ready assumptions we make
in order to operationalize (35) are ∆Ri = 0 and the simplifying pair of assumptions
Wi,t ∆Ni,t = Wi,0 ∆Ni,0 = Wi [N̂i − Ni ]
and
∆Ji,t = ∆Ji,0 = Jˆi − Ji
for the years leading up to retirement. If the household would gradually adjust labor
hours downward as retirement neared, the constant elasticity of labor supply assumption
implies that ∆N and the closely linked but smaller value of ∆J would gradually get smaller
instead of staying the same size—up to the point where the fixed costs led to retirement.
46

In itself, this tends to bias the labor supply elasticity estimate upwards. But the earlier
retirement due to wining the sweepstakes would result in increased values of ∆N , coupled
with smaller increases in ∆J, and so tend to bias the labor supply elasticity estimate
downwards. Modeling both of these factors precisely is beyond the scope of this paper,
because it requires calibration of the evolution of the aversion to work parameter M with age
(the subject of related work), but we believe that the bias from ignoring earlier retirement
is larger than the bias from ignoring the smaller absolute reductions in hours as initial hours
fall towards retirement. Thus, we defend the simpler calculations we make as reasonable
conservative benchmarks, even though they are not precisely accurate.
The only other assumption necessary is a functional form for ψ(νt ), the household
equivalence scale at time t. Our households have only one or two adults.29 For singleperson households, we normalize ψ(νt ) = 1. For dual-person households, we set ψ(νt ) = 20.7
based on the evidence on scale-economies in household consumption reviewed by Citro and
Michael (1995, p. 176).

B

Relationships Among Local Labor Supply Elasticities

This appendix gives a very brief background for the equations for various elasticities in
terms of the Frisch labor supply elasticity in the context of the functional form used in this
paper.30 We will derive these equations for the dual-earner case. The single earner case is
easy to obtain by setting one of the wages to zero.
One key equation for determining elasticities is (13):
λ1−α Wi
.
Mi
!

Ni∗ = v 0−1
Inverted, (13) implies
v 0 (Ni ) =

λα−1 Wi
.
Mi

(35)

Totally log-differentiated, (13) implies
29

We do not make adjustments for children, which are infrequent in the HRS sample.
See the Technical Appendix (Kimball and Shapiro, 2003), for a demonstration of how these formulas
hold in much greater generality.
30

47

d ln(Ni ) = ηiλ [d ln Wi + (1 − α)d ln λ]

(36)

where d ln Mi = 0 and
ηiλ

v 0 (Ni )
=
.
Ni v 00 (Ni )

Note that setting d ln λ = 0 yields
d ln(Ni ) = ηiλ d ln Wi .
Also, combining equations (4), (10) and (16),
C = λα−1 {ψ(ν) + α

[v(Nj ) − v(N # ) + N # v 0 (N # )]}.

X

(37)

j

Totally differentiating (37) and using (35) yields

d ln C = −(1−α)d ln λ+αλα−1

X
j

X Wi Ni
Mj v 0 (Nj )
dNj = −(1−α)d ln λ+α
d ln Ni . (38)
C
C
j

Treating W1 , W2 and the initial level of C, N1 and N2 as data, and α, η1λ and η2λ as
known parameters, the objective is to calculate the size of d ln Ni in response to particular
changes in d ln W1 , d ln W2 and d ln λ. Equations (36) and (38) are used in calculating every
elasticity below.
To find `i , set d ln W1 = d ln W2 = 0 in (36) and calculate
Wi Ni
−Wi dNi
= ηiλ
`i =
P
P
dC − j Wj dNj
C + (1 − α) j ηjλ Wj Nj

!

.

(39)

In finding both η U and η C , we set d ln W1 = d ln W2 = d ln W . This equal proportional change in both wages gives an elasticity concept appropriate for thinking about the
macroeconomic labor supply elasticity. The Technical Appendix (Kimball and Shapiro,
2003) discusses other elasticity concepts. For ηiU , the additional equation is
dC = W1 dN1 + W2 dN2 .

(40)

In words, (40) says that the household moves along an indifference surface. For ηiC , the
48

additional equation is
dC = 0.
In both cases, straightforward but tedious algebra yields the expressions for ηiU and ηiC
given above in the main text.
X
, set d ln W2 = 0 and use the additional equation
Finally, to find η11
dC = d(W1 N1 + W2 N2 ) = N1 dW1 + W1 dN1 + W2 dN2 .
X
Again, straightforward but tedious algebra yields the expression given in the text for η11
.

49

References
Abel, Andrew B. and Ben S. Bernanke. 2001. Macroeconomics, 4th ed. Addison-Wesley.
Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2008. “Deconstructing Lifecycle Expenditure.” Unpublished.
Altonji, Joseph G. 1986. “Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro
Data.” Journal of Political Economy 94, Issue 3, Part 2: S176-S215. June.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, and John Leahy. 2002. “Retirement Consumption: Insights
from a Survey.” NBER Working Paper No. 8735.
Ashenfelter, Orley and James Heckman. 1973. “Estimating Labor-Supply Functions,” In Income
Maintenance and Labor Supply. Glen Cain and Harold Watts, eds. Chicago: Markham.
Banks, James, Richard Blundell and Sarah Tanner. 1998. “Is There a Retirement-Savings
Puzzle?” American Economic Review 88, Issue 4: 769-788. September.
Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997.
“Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health
and Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 537-579.
Basu, Susanto and Miles Kimball. 2002. “Long-Run Labor Supply Elasticity and the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution for Consumption.” University of Michigan working paper.
Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 1991. “Homework in Macroeconomics:
Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Political Economy 99: 11661187, December.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, Jonathan Skinner, and Steven Weinberg. 2001. “What Accounts for the
Variation in Retirement Wealth Among U.S. Households?” American Economic Review 91(4):
832-857.
Blundell, Richard, Pierre-Andre Chiappori, Thierry Magnac and Costas Meghir. 2001.
“Collective Labor Supply: Heterogeneity and Nonparticipation.” Institute for Fiscal Studies,
London Working Paper 01/19.
Blundell, Richard and Thomas MaCurdy. 1999. “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches.” In Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics Vol.
3A. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Blundell, Richard, Costas Meghir and Pedro Neves. 1993. “Labour Supply and Intertemporal
Substitution.” Journal of Econometrics 59: 137-160.
Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton and Margaret Irish. 1985. “A Profitable Approach to Labor
Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life Cycle”. Econometrica, 59: 503-44.

Camerer, Colin, Linda Babcock, George Loewenstein, and Richard Thaler. 1997. “Labor Supply
Of New York City Cabdrivers: One Day At A Time.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2):
407-441.
Card, David. 1994. “Intertemporal Labour Supply: An Assessment.” In Advances in
Econometrics: Sixth World Congress, ed. C.A. Sims.
Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael, eds. 1995. Measuring Poverty: A New Approach.
National Academies of Science: Washington, DC.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Richard Rogerson and Randall Wright. 1995. “Household Production in
Real Business Cycle Theory.” In Thomas F. Cooley, ed., Frontiers in Business Cycle Research.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Farber, Henry S. "Reference-Dependent Preferences and Labor Supply: TheCase of New York
City Taxi Drivers" American Economic Review 98 (2008) 1069-1082.
Fehr, Ernst and Lorenz Götte. 2002. “Do Workers Work More if Wages are High? Evidence
from a Randomized Field Experiment.” Institute for Empirical Research in Economic,
University of Zurich, Working Paper No. 125.
Hall, Robert E. 1998. “Discussion.” In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds. NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 1998. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1984. “Consumption During Retirement: The Missing Link in the Life
Cycle.” Review of Economics and Statistics 66(1): 1-7
Heckman, James and Mark R. Killingsworth. 1986. “Female Labor Supply: A Survey” In Orley
C. Ashenfelter, and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam:
North Holland.
Hurd, Michael and Susan Rohwedder. 2003. “The Retirement-Consumption Puzzle:
Anticipated and Actual Declines in Spending at Retirement.” NBER Working Paper No. 9586,
Cambridge.
Imbens, Guido, Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote. 2001. “Estimating the Effect of
Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of
Lottery Players.” American Economics Review 91(4): 778-794.
Joulfaian, David and Mark O. Wilhelm. 1994. “Inheritance and Labor Supply.” Journal of
Human Resources 29(4): 1205-1234.
Kimball, Miles S. and Matthew D. Shapiro. 2003. “Technical Appendix: General Relationships
Among Local Labor Supply Elasticities: ” Unpublished, University of Michigan. Available at
http://www.econ.lsa.umich.edu/~shapiro/.

King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio R. Rebelo. 1988. “Production, Growth and
Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model.” Journal of Monetary Economics 21: 195232.
Klein, L.R. and R. F. Kosobud. 1961. “Some Econometrics of Growth: Great Ratios of
Economics.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 75(2): 173-98.
Lee, Chul-In. 2001. “Finite Sample Bias in IV Estimation Of Intertemporal Labor Supply
Models: Is the Intertemporal Substitution Elasticity Really Small?” Review of Economics and
Statistics 83(4): 638–646.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. 1981. “An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Setting.”
Journal of Political Economy 89: 1059-1085.
Mulligan, Casey B. 1998. “Substitution over Time: Another Look at Life-Cycle Labor Supply.”
In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Oettinger, Gerald S. 1999. “An Empirical Analysis of the Daily Labor Supply of Stadium
Vendors.” Journal of Political Economy 107(2): 360-392.
Pencavel, John. 1986. “Labor Supply of Men: A Survey.” In Orley C. Ashenfelter, and Richard
Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 1. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Pischke, Jörn-Steffen. 1998. “Discussion.” In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds.
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1998. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Prescott, Edward C. 1986. “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measurement.” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 10, Fall.
Rupert, Peter, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright. 2000. “Homework in Labor Economics:
Household Production and Intertemporal Substitution.” Journal of Monetary Economics 46(3):
557-579.
Ziliak, James P. and Thomas J. Kniesner. 1999. “Estimating Life Cycle Labor Supply Tax
Effects.” Journal of Political Economy 107(2): 326-359

Table 1
Labor Supply Responses to Winning the Sweepstakes
(Percent of Responses)
Single-earner,
Change in labor
Total
Single
married
No change
21.3
31.4
27.4
Reduce hours
22.5
32.4
18.8
By less than 10 percent
0.4
1.0
0.4
10-25 percent
5.3
7.2
4.6
26-49 percent
9.3
11.1
8.5
50 percent
6.1
11.1
3.9
more than 50 percent
1.4
1.9
1.3
Quit
56.3
36.2
53.8
Number
1388
207
457

Dual-earner,
married
14.5
22.0
0.1
5.2
9.3
5.9
1.4
63.5
724

Note: Percent of responses in column. Totals may not add to 100.0 due to rounding.
“Reduce hours” are all respondents who reduce hours. Next rows show those reducing
hours by particular percentages.

Table 2
Labor Supply Responses to Winning the Sweepstakes, by Flexibility in Labor Hours
(Percent of Responses)
Change in labor
Flexible Inflexible Missing Desired versus actual hours
Actual Actual Desired
exceeds equals exceeds
desired desired actual
No change
23.2
19.7
28.1
16.5
22.1
27.5
Reduce hours
21.5
21.7
35.4
26.4
20.9
24.2
By less than 10 percent
0.5
0.3
0.0
1.2
0.0
0.8
10-25 percent
6.0
4.6
9.8
4.5
5.6
5.8
26-49 percent
8.9
9.0
14.6
13.5
7.7
10.0
50 percent
4.8
6.5
7.3
4.5
6.4
7.5
more than 50 percent
1.2
1.4
3.7
2.7
1.2
0.0
Quit
55.3
58.5
36.6
57.1
57.0
48.3
Number
414
892
82
333
935
120
Note: Percent of responses in column. Totals may not add to 100.0 due to rounding.
“Reduce hours” are all respondents who reduce hours. Next rows show those reducing
hours by particular percentages.

Table 3
Labor Supply Responses to Winning the Sweepstakes, Dual Earners
(Frequency of Responses)
Wife:
Change in labor
Husband:
No change
By less than 10 percent
10-25 percent
26-49 percent
50 percent
More than 50 percent
Quit

Total

No
change

By less
than 10
percent

By 1025
percent

By 2649
percent

By 50
percent

By more
than 50
percent

Quit

Total

34
0
2
8
2
2
44
92

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2
0
14
0
0
0
10
26

8
0
8
20
12
0
8
56

10
0
2
12
12
0
4
40

0
0
0
2
2
2
2
8

64
2
24
36
18
8
350
502

118
2
50
78
46
12
418
724

Table 4
Labor Supply Responses to Winning the Sweepstakes, by Sex
(Percent of Responses)
Single-earner,
Total
Single
married
Change in labor
male female male female male female
No change
22.7 19.8
34.8
30.4
29.4 24.5
Reduce hours
25.3 19.8
32.6
32.3
23.0 12.8
0.1
0.6
0.0
1.2
0.0
1.1
By less than 10 percent
10-25 percent
6.6
4.1
8.7
6.8
5.9
2.7
26-49 percent
10.9
7.7
15.2
9.9
10.4
5.9
50 percent
5.6
6.5
6.5
12.4
4.5
3.2
more than 50 percent
1.9
1.0
2.2
1.9
2.2
0.0
Quit
52.0 60.3
32.6
37.3
47.6 62.8
Number
677
711
46
161
269
188

Dual-earner,
married
male female
16.3 12.7
26.0 18.0
0.3
0.0
6.9
3.6
10.8
7.7
6.4
5.5
1.7
1.1
57.7 69.3
362
362

Note: Percent of responses in column. Totals may not add to 100.0 due to rounding. “Reduce hours” are all respondents who reduce
hours. Next rows show those reducing hours by particular percentages.

Table 5
Labor Supply Responses to Winning the Sweepstakes, by Age
(Percent of Responses)
Age (years)
Change in labor
28-53
54-56
57-58
59-61
62-71
No change
17.2
18.7
21.3
24.8
25.7
Reduce hours
25.3
27.2
22.1
19.0
16.5
By less than 10 percent
0.3
0.9
0.4
0.0
0.0
10-25 percent
6.4
4.8
6.8
4.6
3.9
26-49 percent
9.8
12.7
8.0
7.8
6.8
50 percent
6.4
7.3
6.0
5.2
4.9
more than 50 percent
2.4
1.5
0.8
1.3
1.0
Quit
57.4
54.1
56.6
56.2
57.8
Number
296
331
249
306
206
Note: Percent of responses in column. Totals may not add to 100.0 due to rounding.
“Reduce hours” are all respondents who reduce hours. Next rows show those reducing
hours by particular percentages.

Table 6
Ratio of Job-Induced Consumption to Total Consumption
Before ( J / C ) and After ( Jˆ / Cˆ ) Winning Sweepstakes
(Median)
Change in labor
No change
Reduce hours
By less than 10 percent
10-25 percent
26-49 percent
50 percent
more than 50 percent
Quit*
*

α = 0.3
Before
After
0.0
0.0
0.119
0.041
0.017
0.007
0.075
0.027
0.126
0.042
0.146
0.052
0.189
0.057
0.161
0.0

α = 0.5
Before
After
0.0
0.0
0.190
0.067
0.029
0.011
0.120
0.043
0.201
0.068
0.233
0.086
0.299
0.095
0.255
0.0

α = 0.1
Before
After
0.0
0.0
0.042
0.014
0.006
0.002
0.026
0.009
0.044
0.015
0.051
0.017
0.066
0.019
0.057
0.0

For quitters, the J/C ratios are lower bounds.
Note: Median individual estimate. α = nonseparability parameter. “Reduce hours” are
all respondents who reduce hours. Next rows show those reducing hours by particular
percentages.

Table 7
Individual-Specific Elasticity of Labor Supply η
(Median)

η

Change in labor
No change
Reduce hours
By less than 10 percent
10-25 percent
26-49 percent
50 percent
more than 50 percent
Quit*

α = 0.3
0.0
0.59
0.09
0.28
0.58
0.81
1.00
0.88

α = 0.5
0.0
0.56
0.09
0.27
0.54
0.75
0.93
0.80

N
α = 0.1
0.0
0.64
0.09
0.29
0.62
0.88
1.08
0.97

295
312
5
74
129
84
20
781

For quitters, the elasticities are the lower bounds, η # .
Note: Median individual estimate. η = Frisch labor supply elasticity.
α = nonseparability parameter. “Reduce hours” are all respondents who reduce hours.
Next rows show those reducing hours by particular percentages.
*

Table 8
Average Labor Supply Elasticity: Censored Regression Estimates
Constant

(1)
1.004
(0.034)**

Dual-earner, married
Single-earner, married

(2)
0.763
(0.059)**
0.379
(0.067)**
0.140
(0.069)*

Age 54 to 56 years
Age 57 to 58 years
Age 59 to 61 years
Age 62 years and older

(3)
0.761
(0.078)**
0.384
(0.069)**
0.142
(0.070)*
-0.006
(0.066)
-0.017
(0.077)
0.030
(0.076)
-0.022
(0.081)

Second income quintile
Third income quintile
Fourth income quintile
Fifth income quintile
σ
Observations

0.765
(0.020)**
1388

0.752
(0.020)**
1388

0.752
(0.020)**
1388

(4)
0.767
(0.064)**
0.335
(0.078)**
0.111
(0.073)

-0.094
(0.076)
0.196
(0.087)*
0.079
(0.086)
-0.031
(0.086)
0.747
(0.020)**
1388

Note: Censored normal regressions. The parameter σ is the standard error of the
disturbance in the censored regression model. Dependent variable is the Frisch labor
supply elasticity η calculated at α equal to 0.3. The parameter σ is the standard error of
the disturbance in the censored regression model. Censoring is at individual-specific
cutoffs η # for those who quit after winning the sweepstakes. Excluded category for
household type is single. Excluded category for age is 53 years and younger. Excluded
category for income quintile is the first quintile.
*
Significant at the 5 percent level.
**
Significant at the 1 percent level.

Table 9
Average Labor Supply Elasticity: Censored Regression Estimates
Constant
Dual-earner, married
Single-earner, married
Female
Black

(1)
0.655
(0.069)**
0.425
(0.069)**
0.196
(0.072)**
0.121
(0.047)*
0.062
(0.079)

Proxy response by spouse

(2)
0.653
(0.069)**
0.399
(0.073)**
0.167
(0.076)*
0.123
(0.047)**
0.063
(0.079)
0.055
(0.049)

High school diploma
Some college
College degree
More than college degree
σ
Observations

0.752
(0.020)**
1388

0.753
(0.020)**
1388

(3)
0.721
(0.086)**
0.412
(0.069)**
0.190
(0.071)**
0.117
(0.047)*
0.037
(0.078)
0.015
(0.070)
-0.098
(0.082)
-0.102
(0.092)
-0.226
(0.087)**
0.746
(0.020)**
1386

Note: Censored normal regressions. Dependent variable is the Frisch labor supply
elasticity η calculated at α equal to 0.3. The parameter σ is the standard error of the
disturbance in the censored regression model. Censoring is at individual-specific cutoffs
η # for those who quit after winning the sweepstakes. Excluded category for household
type is single. Excluded category for education is less than high school graduate.
*
Significant at the 5 percent level.
**
Significant at the 1 percent level.

Table 10
Marginal Propensity to Earn and Alternative Labor Supply Elasticities:
Calibrated Values in a Static Model
Raw Marginal
Propensity
to Earn
(|MPE|)
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70

Marginal
Consumption
Expenditure
-constant
Share of Leisure
Elasticity
(ℓ)
(ηC)
α=0.0
0.00
0.00
0.07
0.08
0.14
0.16
0.21
0.26
0.28
0.38
0.34
0.51
0.40
0.67
0.46
0.86
0.52
1.09
0.58
1.36
0.63
1.71
0.68
2.15
0.73
2.72
0.78
3.50
0.82
4.59

Frisch Elasticity
(ηλ)
0.00
0.08
0.16
0.26
0.38
0.51
0.67
0.86
1.09
1.36
1.71
2.15
2.72
3.50
4.59

α=0.3
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.05
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.10
0.14
0.17
0.16
0.15
0.21
0.27
0.25
0.20
0.28
0.39
0.35
0.25
0.35
0.54
0.47
0.30
0.42
0.72
0.59
0.35
0.49
0.94
0.74
0.40
0.55
1.23
0.90
0.45
0.62
1.61
1.08
0.50
0.68
2.13
1.30
0.55
0.74
2.90
1.55
0.60
0.81
4.15
1.85
0.65
0.87
6.51
2.20
0.70
0.93
12.67
2.64
Notes. See text for description of the static model. The utility-constant elasticity, ηU,
equals the marginal expenditure share of leisure (ℓ). The uncompensated elasticity, ηX, is
zero by construction.

Table 11
Marginal Propensity to Earn and Alternate Labor Supply Elasticities:
Average Censored Regression Estimates
Raw Marginal
Propensity to
Earn
(|MPE|)
0.373

Marginal
Expenditure
Share of Leisure
(ℓ)
0.581

Utilityconstant
Elasticity
(ηU)
0.793

Consumptionconstant
Elasticity
(ηC)
1.499

Frisch
Elasticity
(ηλ)
1.004

Single
Single Earner
Dual Earner

0.358
0.405
0.338

0.588
0.617
0.519

0.561
0.742
0.908

1.267
1.265
1.689

0.743
0.912
1.156

-0.008
0.169
0.555

Single, Male
Single, Female
Single Earner, Male
Single Earner, Female
Dual Earner, Male
Dual Earner, Female

0.340
0.363
0.407
0.393
0.366
0.285

0.564
0.594
0.605
0.638
0.562
0.438

0.545
0.566
0.667
0.881
0.856
0.969

1.360
1.228
1.199
1.374
1.656
1.705

0.731
0.745
0.837
1.052
1.106
1.210

-0.004
-0.009
0.089
0.309
0.412
0.706

All

Uncompensated
Elasticity
(ηX)
0.327

Note: Estimates based on complete model described in main text. Estimates of mean parameters using censored normal estimates
(see text). Elasticities are calculated at α equal to 0.3.

