NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SECURITIES LAWS, DISCLOSURE, AND NATIONAL CAPITAL MARKETS IN
THE AGE OF FINANCIAL GLOBALIZATION
René M. Stulz
Working Paper 14218
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14218

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

The Ohio State University, NBER, and ECGI. I am grateful for excellent scientific assistance from
Rose Liao, for useful conversations with Craig Doidge and Ingrid Werner, and for comments from
Ray Ball, John Coates, Oliver Hart, Howell Jackson, Christian Leuz, Andrew Karolyi, Stew Myers,
Doug Skinner, Abbie Smith, participants at the 2008 Journal of Accounting Research Conference,
at the 2008 WFA meetings, and at a seminar at Ohio State. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Securities Laws, Disclosure, and National Capital Markets in the Age of Financial Globalization
René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 14218
August 2008
JEL No. F30,F36,G10,G15,G32
ABSTRACT
As barriers to international investment fall and technology improves, the cost advantages for a firm's
securities to trade publicly in the country in which that firm is located and for that country to have
a market for publicly traded securities distinct from the capital markets of other countries will progressively
disappear. However, securities laws remain an important determinant of whether and where securities
are issued, how they are valued, who owns them, and where they trade. The value of public firms depends
on these laws, so that identical firms subject to different laws are likely to have different values. We
show that mandatory disclosure through securities laws can decrease agency costs between corporate
insiders and minority shareholders, but only provided the investors can act on the information disclosed
and the laws cannot be weakened ex post too much through lobbying by corporate insiders. With financial
globalization, national disclosure laws can have wide-ranging effects on a country's welfare, on firms
and on investor portfolios, including the extent to which share holdings reveal a home bias. In equilibrium,
if firms can choose the securities laws they are subject to when they go public, some firms will choose
stronger securities laws than those of the country in which they are located and some firms will do
the opposite. These effects of securities laws can be expected to become smaller if differences in national
laws and their enforcement decrease and if the costs of private solutions to manage corporate agency
conflicts that are substitutes for securities laws fall.

René M. Stulz
The Ohio State University
Fisher College of Business
806A Fisher Hall
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210-1144
and NBER
stulz_1@cob.osu.edu

If capital can move freely between countries to take advantage of the best investment
opportunities, are national capital markets still relevant? If they are still relevant, why are they? Is it
still in a country’s national interest to have strong capital markets? Does it even make sense to talk
about the competition between national capital markets1 in an age of globalization? We attempt to
make progress towards answering these questions in this paper.
A country’s capital markets are the markets in which firms and government institutions raise
capital publicly and where securities representing claims to capital are traded. Capital markets
perform key functions of the financial system.2 They allow investors to pool resources to finance
firms and manage risk through diversification and hedging. They enable price discovery. However,
capital markets do not have a monopoly on performing these functions. Firms can raise capital from
financial intermediaries as well, so that capital markets compete with financial intermediaries. The
relative importance of intermediated sources of capital versus public sources of capital for firms can
change over time as technologies and regulations evolve.

As capital markets perform their

functions better, they displace intermediated finance and firms can raise capital more cheaply. A
country’s capital markets perform better than the capital markets of other countries if firms can
finance themselves at lower cost on that country’s markets than elsewhere.
In a world where countries are closed to international capital flows, firms can only raise capital
domestically. In such a world, each country would be concerned about the performance of its
national capital markets because the cost of capital for firms raising funds publicly would be
determined on these markets. However, if capital can flow freely among countries, firms raise
capital where it is cheapest. In a fully integrated world, we would expect national capital markets to
be irrelevant. If a country’s capital markets functioned poorly in such a world, firms would simply

1

Much attention has been paid recently to the competitiveness of U.S. capital markets. See, for example, the
Interim Report of the Committee on Capital Market Regulation (November 30, 2006), Zingales (2008), and
Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2008). See also related news reports, such as “London calling” Forbes (May 8,
2006); “Wall Street: What went wrong?” The Economist (November 25, 2006); and “Is Wall Street losing its
competitive edge?” Wall Street Journal (December 2, 2006).
2
See Merton (1990) for an analysis of the functions of the financial system.

2

ignore these capital markets as sources of capital. The welfare consequences from having poorly
functioning national capital markets would be extremely limited because firms and investors could
bypass these markets freely. There would be no national interest at stake for a country in having
well-functioning capital markets.
Technological changes over the last two centuries have dramatically altered the importance of
location for capital markets, so that there is no operational reason to have national capital markets.
Investors anywhere in the world have virtually access to the same price information at the same
time. The location of the trader is irrelevant for trading on electronic exchanges. The location of the
exchange itself is irrelevant. There is no operational reason for the computer systems that make
possible the trading of American stocks to be located in the U.S. Economies of scale in trading
imply that, in a frictionless fully integrated world the trading of securities would not be organized
by countries.
The fact that portfolios of investors are still heavily biased towards securities issued and traded
in their own country, a phenomenon described as the home bias, shows that, despite the free flow of
capital, we are far from a fully integrated world in which countries are irrelevant for the issuance
and trading of securities.3 A major reason for why countries are not irrelevant is that they have
different laws and enforce them differently. The laws that apply uniquely to publicly traded
securities are securities laws. By securities laws, we mean broadly the laws and regulations which
affect the trading and issuance of securities in a country. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer
(2006) show that these laws differ substantially across countries and that laws that mandate
disclosure are strongly associated with the development of stock markets.
Otherwise identical securities subject to different securities laws are different securities.
Securities laws affect capital markets in a country in at least two different ways: by imposing
obligations on firms that issue securities publicly (issuer rules) and by having rules that apply to the

3

See Kho, Stulz, and Warnock (2008) for evidence that the home bias is still strong.

3

trading of securities (trading rules).4 An example of issuer rules is the requirement for firms in the
U.S. to make periodic disclosures. Restrictions on trading by insiders in the U.S. are examples of
trading rules. We investigate the impact of both issuer and trading rules in a world of financial
globalization and show how they can affect where firms’ securities are traded, the extent to which
firms access public markets, firm valuation, the cost of equity capital, and investor portfolios.
The issuer rules in the U.S. are mainly mandatory disclosure rules. Consequently, we restrict
our investigation of issuer rules to mandatory disclosure rules. Much of the literature on mandatory
disclosure evaluates whether firms disclose suboptimally because benefits from disclosure at the
firm level are lower than benefits for society as a whole (see Leuz and Wysocki (2008) for a
review). For instance, Zingales (2004) points out that “General Motor disclosure helps investors
evaluate Ford, but GM will never internalize this benefit.” Such a view assumes that it is clear that
the positive externalities of mandatory disclosure outweigh the negative ones, a presumption that
Romano (2001) and others have questioned. Our approach to mandatory disclosure sets aside the
issue of externalities and shows that securities laws enable private parties to reduce agency costs in
a way that they could not otherwise.
To examine the impact of issuer rules, we use a simple model of an all-equity firm selling
shares in an initial public offering (IPO) to investigate how securities laws affect the cost of
external finance in a world of financial globalization. We show that agency costs create a wedge
between the cost of outside equity for the entrepreneur and the expected return on the firm’s equity
required by investors. We assume that investors are risk-neutral (consequently, there is no risksharing benefit to disclosure as there is, for instance, in Dye (1990)), so that the required expected
return on equity for investors is the same for all firms. The problem the entrepreneurs face is that
they cannot credibly commit ex ante to take actions in the future that are valuable to outside
shareholders but are not ex post optimal for themselves. After the IPO, the firm’s insiders would
like to disclose less than they committed to disclose before the IPO. In the model, disclosure is
4

See Siems (2008).

4

valuable because the information disclosed can be used to force the firm to take actions that
maximize shareholder wealth. If entrepreneurs cannot resolve this time-inconsistency problem, they
receive less for the shares they sell than otherwise. We show that strong securities laws help resolve
this problem and hence help maximize the entrepreneurs’ proceeds from IPOs, but the fact that
securities laws enable firms to commit to disclosure that they could not commit on their own does
not mean that securities laws necessarily improve economic welfare, since the deadweight costs of
these laws could exceed the value of their benefits. Further, while earlier authors, especially Rock
(2002), have discussed the fact that securities laws help firms commit to disclosure, we show that
the usefulness of securities laws depends heavily on the extent to which they lead to credible
disclosure and that outside shareholders or the state can act on the information disclosed to force
the firm to pursue a course of action that is valuable to outside shareholders. We demonstrate that
firm values, ownership, and cost of external finance differ across countries because securities laws
affect production decisions.5
In a world with free capital flows, differences in securities laws across countries can have a
large impact, but these differences are mitigated when firms can choose to subject themselves to the
securities laws of other countries than of their own. In some countries, firms can issue securities
abroad and, in some cases, even opt out of the securities laws of their country. The resulting
equilibrium of where a firm issues securities and where its common stock trades depends on the
discretion firms have and the costs they bear to subject themselves to the securities laws of a
different country than the one in which they are located.
If securities laws can be ranked by their strength, firms in countries with weak securities laws
can benefit from choosing to subject themselves to stronger securities laws.6 In the absence of
cross-border trading and listing costs, new firms would list only in the country with the optimal
5

Shleifer and Wolfenson (2002) and Stulz (2005) derive implications for firm value and ownership when
laws result in different rates of consumption of private benefits out of firm cash flows. Our results in this
paper do not rely on differences in the rate of consumption of private benefits.
6
See Coffee (1999) and Stulz (1999) for developments of the idea that foreign firms can rent institutions,
including securities laws, from other countries.

5

securities laws as long as trading costs are low in that country and investors do not exhibit a
preference for shares which trade locally. However, with cross-border trading costs, shares are
likely to trade in the home country of firms, especially when investors have a preference for shares
issued by firms of their country. We show that if listing on a second exchange has costs and firms
are necessarily subject to the securities laws of their country of incorporation, only the firms that
suffer the most from their inability to commit will be willing to cross-list and they will choose to
have a second listing in a country with stronger securities laws. These conclusions assume that
securities laws from one country are equally enforced on domestic firms as they are on foreign
firms; if this assumption is not correct, the benefits to firms from adopting another country’s
securities laws are lower.7
When investors evaluate investments in common stocks, they consider the net expected return
of stocks. Two stocks with the same gross expected return can have very different net expected
returns after expected trading costs and information acquisitions costs are taken into account.
Securities laws can affect the cost of trading for investors, their information acquisition costs, the
precision of their estimates of the distribution of returns, and the stocks they know. We examine the
impact of securities laws on the portfolio choices of investors. To the extent that securities laws
affect investors differentially, they can lead to differences in portfolios and in particular to a home
bias. Further, such differences can affect the expected return of securities.
If investors had no preference for securities of their home country and a country’s laws left
firms going public free to choose securities laws they are subject to, as proposed by the legal
scholars who favor issuer choice,8 firms would have an initial public offering (IPO) in the country
that has securities laws that entrepreneurs prefer. If entrepreneurs want to maximize proceeds at the
IPO, they would choose securities laws that help them commit to maximizing the value of the

7

Note that if securities laws cannot be ranked using a single index but instead are multi-dimensional, the
securities laws of one country might be optimal for firms of a certain type from other countries, while
securities laws from another country might be optimal for other types of firms.
8
See, for instance, Romano (2001).

6

shares for minority shareholders. In equilibrium, with issuer choice, all trading could still migrate to
one exchange if cross-border trading costs disappear. Firms on that exchange would differ in the
securities laws they are subject to.
Though there can be a case to allow securities law choice for new firms, there is no convincing
case to allow existing firms to escape strong securities laws without overwhelming support by
shareholders because such an action could benefit insiders at the expense of minority shareholders.
After the IPO, insiders may prefer securities laws that put few constraints on them. They might
therefore want to find ways to be subjected to weaker securities laws since doing so would benefit
them at the expense of minority investors. In a political economy context, our analysis predicts that
entrepreneurs want strong securities laws and investors want to prevent laws from being diluted. In
contrast, at least some incumbent insiders want to dilute securities laws. Conflicting objectives
between incumbent insiders, minority shareholders, and new entrants have been discussed in other
contexts in the finance literature (see, for instance, Rajan and Zingales (2003)).9 It is therefore easy
to understand why insiders of established firms would lobby to relax securities laws, but all this
relaxation might achieve is to redistribute wealth from minority shareholders to insiders at the
expense of economic growth. For securities laws to perform their role as a commitment device, it is
necessary that they have sufficient support and that the likelihood that they will be watered down
substantially through lobbying by incumbents is low. To the extent that securities laws increase the
value of firms, they have to be designed to have enough support so that the disclosure commitment
they represent is strong. More discretion in the choice of securities laws for existing firms may well
make an equilibrium with strong securities laws unsustainable because the constituencies
supporting each law would be too weak.

9

There is a growing literature that emphasizes political determinants of investor protection. This literature,
among other contributions, shows that incumbent corporate insiders can create coalitions with other political
forces. For instance, Pagano and Volpin (2005) develop and test a model in which investor protection can be
decreased because of a political alliance between workers and incumbent managers against investors.

7

The paper proceeds as follows. In the first section, we explore the implications of technological
progress and financial globalization for the role of national capital markets. In the second section,
we develop a model which enables us to assess the role of the issuer rules of securities laws across
countries in Section 3. In Section 4, we investigate the impact of securities laws on the portfolio
choices of investors across countries and hence on the required expected return of investors on
securities. In Section 5, we consider more broadly the advantages and disadvantages of allowing
more freedom for firms to choose the laws and regulations that apply to the securities they issue and
attempt to forecast how the role of national capital markets will evolve. We conclude in section 6.

1. National markets, financial globalization, and transaction costs
At the end of World War II, the financial markets of most countries were completely
segmented. In most countries, resident investors could not trade securities with foreign investors
and firms could not raise capital abroad. If a country’s capital market is segmented from the rest of
the world, the cost of capital of its firms is determined within the country. Suppose that capital
markets are perfect except for insurmountable barriers to international capital flows and that
investors optimize the tradeoff between the expected return and the variance of their portfolio. In
this case, the capital asset pricing model (CAPM) holds within a country. With the CAPM, the
expected return on a security is equal to the risk-free rate plus the product of the security’s beta
coefficient and the risk premium on the market portfolio. With complete capital market
segmentation, two securities that give the right to identical streams of dividends are priced
differently across countries because the market portfolio, the risk-free rate, the market risk
premium, and the beta coefficient of the securities all can differ across countries.
Since the end of World War II, barriers to international investment have progressively been
removed. These barriers have mostly disappeared for trade in financial assets among developed
countries and for a number of emerging countries. They still exist, however, in varying degrees, for
a large number of emerging countries. Keeping the assumptions that capital markets are perfect, but

8

now assuming that there are no barriers to international investment, the CAPM holds
internationally.10 In this case, two securities that give the right to identical streams of dividends
issued in different countries trade for the same price.
With perfect capital markets and free capital mobility, the expected return on a security does
not depend on the country in which it trades or the country in which it was issued. There are no
differences in the cost of capital across countries. The concept of a national capital market is
meaningless. It would make no difference to a firm whether it issues a security in its own country or
issues it in another country. Investors would require the same expected return irrespective of the
country in which a security trades or is issued. If there is no risk of interruption of cross-border
trade, where a security trades becomes a matter of indifference when capital markets are assumed to
be perfect.
With perfect capital markets, there are no trading costs. Suppose now that the only departure
from perfect markets is that it is costly to process trades. This trading cost can differ across trading
venues, so that the selection of a trading venue for a trade is no longer a matter of indifference.
Historically, when the costs of cross-border trades were high, it would have been reasonable to
assume that local trades in local shares had a lower processing cost than if these trades were made
abroad. However, cross-border costs are much lower now. To the extent that there are economies of
scale in operating exchanges, there is a threshold level of cross-border costs such that, if crossborder costs are lower than this level, national exchanges stop making economic sense.
Consider the case where the trading technology and the cost of trading inputs are the same
across countries. The demand for trading of a security as a function of the cost of trading is
downward-sloping. Malkmäki (1999) investigates cost and output statistics for 37 stock exchanges
and demonstrates that there are substantial economies of scale in trading activities.11 Empirical

10

See Karolyi and Stulz (2003) for the precise conditions that have to be met for the CAPM to hold
internationally.
11
He distinguishes two functions of exchanges, one that is a trading function and the other that is a companyspecific function. The company-specific function involves the collection of company-specific information and

9

evidence shows that there are economies of scale to trading, so that the marginal cost is decreasing.
Figure 1 shows the marginal cost function of the trading technology. We assume that there is
perfect competition, so that the trading cost for investors is the marginal cost. We assume further
that there are two countries, with similar demand curves for trading, but the locations of the demand
curves differ because one country is much larger than the other. Suppose first there are no crossborder trading costs. If investors from each country trade in their own country, the investors in the
small country pay CS per trade, while investors in the large country pay CL and, consequently, pay
much less per trade than the investors in the small country. If all investors trade in one country, the
cost of trading is CL+S, which is lower for all investors. In the absence of cross-border costs, the
trading could be located anywhere – it does not have to be located in the large country or in the
home country of the firm.
Suppose now that there is a cross-border trading cost. In this case, the outcome is either that all
trading takes place in the large country or trading takes place in both countries. If the cross-border
cost is small enough, investors in the small country will still trade at a lower total cost if they trade
in the large country. If the cross-border cost exceeds the gains from the economies of scale,
however, investors in the small country will be better off trading at home. In that case, securities
would trade in both countries.
If the only departure from perfect markets is transaction costs, there would be no reason for a
firm’s securities to trade mostly in the country in which the firm is located. If a security were to
trade in only one country, it would be much more likely that it would trade in the U.S. than in any
other country because so much of world equity wealth is held in the U.S. In this case, there would
be no room for a home bias if investors optimize the tradeoff between the mean and variance of the
return of their portfolios. However, suppose that, following Fama and French (2007), investors have
a taste for some securities. Let’s assume that their taste for securities is that they have a preference

the management of listings. He only finds evidence of economies of scale in the trading function in his
dataset. For the larger exchanges, he also finds economies of scale for total cost.

10

for securities issued by firms of their own country that trade in their own country. In this case, we
would expect that a firm’s securities would trade first in the firm’s home country and, if they trade
elsewhere, they might trade in the U.S. because U.S. investors would most likely be the second
most important source of demand for these securities.
The determination of the trading location for a security becomes more complicated if liquidity
is taken into account. The literature on multi-market trading makes predictions on the location of
trading. In that literature, liquidity considerations can reinforce the economies of scale of trading,
making it more likely that all the trading for a security will take place in one location, in the
absence of frictions in the trading process. Pagano (1989) develops a model with adverse selection
in which it is possible for trade to take place on multiple exchanges when trading costs differ across
exchanges. His model does not account for economies of scale in trading and assumes a fixed cost
to trade. In his model, whether all trading is concentrated on one exchange or not depends on the
conjectures of the traders. However, the model is one where traders choose the exchange and are
stuck with their choice. If instead traders can arbitrage across exchanges, the outcome is to have all
trades take place on one exchange. Chowdry and Nanda (1991) extend the models of Kyle (1985)
and Admati and Pfleiderer (1988) to allow simultaneous trading on multiple markets. In their
model, liquidity clusters on one market. Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (1998) extend the model
of Glosten and Milgrom (1985) to multi-market trading. They emphasize the importance of
transparency between markets. In their model, incremental information costs make it cheaper for
local investors to trade locally. As these incremental information costs disappear, trading may
cluster on one market. Finally, Baruch, Karolyi, and Lemmon (2007) have no information
acquisition costs. They assume, however, that the market makers on one exchange do not see the
order flow on the other exchange, so that a market maker provides liquidity more cheaply if a
security’s return is highly correlated with the returns of other securities whose order flow he
observes. This can lead to preferred trading locations for securities, but multiple exchanges remain
in existence because market makers have a comparative advantage in providing liquidity for some

11

securities on each exchange. However, with financial globalization and electronic trading, none of
these arguments for trading on multiple exchanges imply a role for countries. Further, some of these
arguments have much more force when communication between exchanges is slow. It no longer has
to be as long as the exchanges or market makers release information quickly.
There is a large literature that examines whether investors closer to a firm geographically are
better informed. Though much of that literature shows that geography gives investors an
informational advantage,12 there are exceptions. For instance, Grinblatt and Keloharju (2000) find
that foreign investors perform better in Finland. With physical trading, the geographic
informational advantage would make it advantageous for trading to be located close to firms
because the traders who receive more and better information about these firms would be located
there. Gehrig (1998) therefore predicts that the informationally-sensitive trading will take place
where the information is produced and aggregated. Consequently, differences in access to
information could offset economies of scale in trading.
In recent years, electronic trading has become increasingly dominant. Rather than having
traders congregate in a pit or at a post, the traders meet over the internet. Computers are replacing
trading floors. In a world of electronic trading in which markets are perfect except for trading costs,
the location of the computers is irrelevant. No investor would have reasons to care whether the
computers through which trading takes place are located in one country or in another. There are no
cross-border costs for electrons. Consequently, cross-border trading costs caused by distance have
disappeared. As cross-border trading costs approach zero, economies of scale of trading dominate
the benefits that come from having local exchanges if the only market imperfection is the existence
of transaction costs. Importantly, differences in information across investors have no impact on the
location of trading when the exchange is electronic. The reason is that electronic trading completely
separates the location of trading from the location of traders. With electronic trading, however, the
costs of setting up a trading venue are low, which fosters competition and innovation. This low cost
12

See Choe, Kho, and Stulz (2005) for a partial review of the international literature on this issue.

12

of entry can lead to the emergence of trading venues that cater to investors with specific demands
that are not met or are met poorly by existing venues. Eventually, however, this fragmentation may
fall as the most successful trading venues find better ways to accommodate different types of
investors.13 Again, however, there is no good reason for these trading venues to be country-based.
With electronic trading, investors and market makers can be located anywhere where they have
an internet connection. If market makers for stocks issued in a country are located in that country,
they can make a market even if the exchange on which these stocks trade is located elsewhere. The
fact that stocks might trade through a computer in a country that has a different currency is not a
problem since the currency in which trading takes place does not have to be the currency of the
country in which trading occurs. Time zones are not an issue because computers do not have to
observe time zones.
We know from the field of microstructure that the organization of financial markets affects the
cost of trading and the efficiency of markets. Consequently, countries might differ in how their
markets are organized and trading might be cheaper in some countries than others. With free capital
flows, the markets with lower transaction costs would obtain more listings. If trading costs were the
only market imperfection and cross-border trading costs were trivial, there would be no reason for
stocks to trade in a country when another country has better trading mechanisms. Eventually, all
trading would take place on one electronic exchange.
With the analysis of this section, when cross-border costs are trivial, the benefits to a country
from having the most efficient exchange are limited. All trading will take place on that exchange.
However, firms from all countries will benefit equally from the efficiency of that exchange. As a
result, firms in another country will not suffer from being in a country that does not have the most
efficient exchange. From this perspective, there would be no national interest in having the most
competitive capital markets.

13

See Blume (2007).

13

A central prediction of the transaction costs model is that firms that list in another country
besides the country they come from would list in the U.S. The reason for this prediction is
straightforward: there is more equity wealth in the U.S. than in any other country. Therefore, the
U.S. is where the biggest amount of trading besides home-country trading would be if investors
optimize the mean and variance tradeoff of their portfolio after taking into account a preference for
home-country shares. Yet, many firms that list outside of their country do not list in the U.S.
Doidge et al. (2008b) show that in 2005 the U.S. exchanges had 30% of the world’s cross-listings.
Further, most firms do not have a cross-listing.14 It follows therefore that other considerations must
affect the listing decision.

2. Going public and the role of securities laws
The previous section ignores the agency conflict between corporate insiders, such as managers
and controlling shareholders, and the outside shareholders. We now extend our analysis to
incorporate this conflict. To simplify and focus the analysis, we analyze a firm’s IPO. We assume
that an entrepreneur has a project. The project is scalable, so that the entrepreneur may gain more
from the project by raising outside equity. The agency problem is that, after the IPO, the
entrepreneur or her successors running the firm maximize their own welfare and can take actions
that reduce the value of the shares they sold to outside investors. This agency problem can be so
extreme that a firm with a positive net present value (NPV) project may not be able to go public.
We argue that securities laws can help mitigate this problem and therefore reduce the cost of
external finance for entrepreneurs.

2.a. A model of the IPO firm
To make these arguments clearer and more precise, we build on the models developed in
Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) and Stulz (2005). Our model has three dates: 0, 1, and 2. We
14

See Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2005).

14

consider an entrepreneur with wealth W0 at date 0 who has an investment opportunity available at
date 0. With this opportunity, an investment of capital K will return μK, where μ is a random
variable. The size of the investment opportunity has an upper-bound of Ω, so that K ≤ Ω. There is a
risk-free asset which has a gross return of r from date 1 to date 2. (For simplicity, we assume that
the gross return is zero from date 0 to date 1.) The entrepreneur can sell shares to outside
shareholders. The outside shareholders and the entrepreneur are assumed to be risk-neutral for
simplicity.
At date 0, outside investors know E0(μ), which is the expected value of μ before the
entrepreneur raises funds. The entrepreneur learns E1(μ) at date 1, after raising funds but before the
investment becomes irreversible. After E1(μ) becomes known to the entrepreneur, she can either
start production or not. If she does not start production, the firm liquidates and shareholders receive
a liquidating dividend in proportion to their ownership. The outside shareholders receive no
information about E1(μ), except for the information that the entrepreneur decides to reveal to them.
The distribution of E1(μ) is such that, with probability p, μ is lognormally distributed with mean μ+
and with probability (1 – p) it is lognormally distributed with mean μ-. We assume that μ+ > r > μ-.
Note that the assumption can be satisfied if E0(μ) < r. The standard deviation of μ, σ2, does not
depend on the realization of E1(μ). If the expected value of μ turns out to be μ-, the project is
expected to return less than the risk-free asset. Consequently, if markets were perfect, production
would not take place if E1(μ) = μ-.
At date 2, the payoff from production is realized and the entrepreneur can extract private
benefits at the rate f which she chooses optimally. Consumption of private benefits has a cost for
the entrepreneur which is a convex function of f, 0.5bμf 2K. The entrepreneur is assumed to pay this
cost out of her own pocket. This cost may arise, for instance, from enforcement actions when the
entrepreneur is caught consuming private benefits or may be incurred when the entrepreneur has to
take expensive steps to disguise consumption of private benefits. The cash flow left in the firm after
extraction of private benefits, (1 – f), is distributed as a liquidating dividend.

15

In a neo-classical world, the entrepreneur would raise outside equity to invest Ω at date 0, and
at date 1 the entrepreneur would start production if E1(μ) > r and would return the money to the
investors otherwise. We call a project that has E1(μ) ≥ r (E1(μ) < r) a project with a positive
(negative) NPV at date 1. If the entrepreneur can consume private benefits out of the cash flows
generated by the project at date 2 and benefit from starting production in the project when it has a
negative NPV, the size of the investment in the project may be limited by the entrepreneur’s wealth
because the entrepreneur has to co-invest with outside investors. In this model, co-investment by
the entrepreneur reduces the incentives of the entrepreneur to start production at date 1 when
production has a negative NPV and to extract private benefits at date 2. The entrepreneur will
choose the rate of expropriation at date 2 after the realization of the cash flows. She chooses her coinvestment before going public at date 0. As the entrepreneur’s proportional ownership of the firm,
α, increases, the gain to the entrepreneur from expropriation at date 2 falls. To see this, note that the
entrepreneur only gains (1 - α) from increasing expropriation marginally, but incurs a marginal cost
equal to bf. The gain from expropriation falls as ownership increases, but the cost does not
decrease. We take Ω to be large enough that it is not binding when the entrepreneur consumes nontrivial private benefits in equilibrium.
The entrepreneur consumes her wealth at time 2. Wealth not invested in the firm is invested in
the market. However, in equilibrium, the entrepreneur has no reason not to invest all her wealth in
the firm if the firm goes public. If production takes place, the entrepreneur’s wealth at date 2, W2, is
given by:

W2 = α (1 − f ) μ K + f μ K − 0.5bμ Kf 2

(1)

If production does not take place, W2 is equal to αKr . The entrepreneur maximizes E(W2). She
does so backwards by first solving for f at date 2. Her optimal amount of expropriation is given by:

f =

1− α
b

(2)

16

At date 1, the entrepreneur solves for the decision of whether to keep the money of investors or
abandon production and return money to investors. Solving the condition that has to be met for
production to start, production starts provided that:

(1 − α ) 2
α ( E1 ( μ) − r ) + 0.5
E1 ( μ) ≥ 0
b

(3)

Note first that the neo-classical rule is to produce only if E1(μ) is equal to or higher than r. With the
neo-classical rule, the size of the firm is given by Ω. It immediately follows from equation (3) that
if the firm goes public, so that α < 1, the neo-classical rule holds only if b = ∞. As long as the
entrepreneur can consume private benefits at date 2 at the expense of outside shareholders, she has
an incentive to start production even if the project has a negative NPV at date 1 because she would
not be able to extract private benefits if she were to liquidate the firm at date 1.
At date 0, the entrepreneur chooses the scale of the project, K, and her ownership, α. For the
sake of brevity, we only discuss the entrepreneur’s optimization problem for the case where
production always takes place at date 1. In this case, the entrepreneur’s optimization problem can
be written as:

⎡
(1 − α ) 2 ⎤
max K ,α ⎢α + 0.5
⎥ KE0 ( μ)
b ⎦
⎣
s.t. (1 − α ) (1 − f * ) E0 ( μ) K ≥ ( K − W0 )r

(4)

The rationality constraint implies that outside shareholders require their expected return to be at
least equal to the riskless interest rate. There is no reason for the entrepreneur to choose a solution
where the rationality constraint is not binding since the entrepreneur could increase her welfare by
making the constraint binding. Substituting the solution for the rate of diversion into the rationality
constraint, we obtain:

E0 ( μ ) K (1 − α ) 2 E0 ( μ ) K
(1 − α )
−
= K − W0
r
b
r

17

(5)

The first term in this equation is the price at which the shares not retained by the entrepreneur
would be sold in a world without consumption of private benefits at date 2. The second term is the
amount by which the shares are discounted because of the consumption of private benefits. The
proceeds from the sale of shares to outside investors are equal to the amount of outside funds
invested in the project. Remember that b is the parameter which affects the cost of consuming
private benefits for the entrepreneur. As b becomes small, the discount becomes large. For small
enough b and/or small enough E0(μ), the rationality constraint cannot be satisfied, so that the
entrepreneur cannot sell shares to outside shareholders. A lower b requires higher ownership by the
entrepreneur, which can only be achieved by decreasing the scale of the project.
The entrepreneur faces a tradeoff in choosing ownership. A greater α reduces the extent to
which outside shareholders discount the value of the firm and therefore allows management to raise
external funds at a higher price. However, at the same time, a greater α limits the scale of the
project since the entrepreneur’s co-investment is limited by her wealth. The entrepreneur chooses
her ownership so that the marginal cost and the marginal benefit from ownership equate.
Given optimal ownership, the entrepreneur chooses whether to produce at date 1. If μ- is low
enough, production makes no sense because the expected payoff on production is so low that the
loss on the entrepreneur’s own investment exceeds the expected gain from private benefits.
However, if μ- is not too low, production will take place even when it has a negative NPV because
it enables the entrepreneur to extract private benefits at date 2. The following Proposition
characterizes the production decision of the entrepreneur at date 1:

Proposition 1
Assuming that the entrepreneur sells shares to outside shareholders:
1) If α *( μ − − r ) + 0.5

(1 − α*) 2 −
μ ≥ 0 , where α* is the optimal value of α and satisfies
b

18

(1 − f *)(r − (1 − α*)(1 − f *) E0 ( μ )) = (α * +0.5bf *2 )(1 − 2 f *) E0 ( μ) , production starts at date 1
even if the project is a negative NPV project.
2) If α *( μ − − r ) + 0.5

(1 − α*) 2 −
(1 − α*)2 +
μ < 0 and α *( μ + − r ) + 0.5
μ ≥ 0 , where α *
b
b

satisfies

(1 − qf *)( r − (1 − α * )(1 − f * ) pμ + ) = (α * + 0.5bqf *2 )(1 − 2 f * ) pμ + + (1 − 0.5bqf *2 )(1 − p ) r
pμ +
, then production starts only if E1 ( μ ) = μ + as with the neoclassical rule.
and q =
+
pμ + (1 − p )r

With our model, an entrepreneur with a positive NPV project at date 0 may be unable to raise
outside funds for the project because with external funds she could consume private benefits at date
2 and hence choose to produce at date 1 even when the project is revealed to be a negative NPV
project at that date. If the entrepreneur could commit to only produce at date 1 if E1(μ) = μ+, she
might be able to raise funds. Though the entrepreneur would find it advantageous to commit not to
produce if E1(μ) = μ-, such a commitment is not credible in our model because ex post the
entrepreneur is always made better off by starting production as long as μ- is not too low. In this
model, the inability to commit to produce only if the project is a positive NPV project always
decreases the proceeds from the IPO and hence decreases the size of the firm.
We assume that investors are rational. Consequently, they discount the value of shares sold to
them to reflect their expected losses because of moral hazard. No investor protection is required to
insure that investors are treated fairly: their expected payoff is exactly the one they anticipate.
However, the fact that investors protect themselves against some outcomes by reducing the price
they are willing to pay for shares is extremely costly to entrepreneurs and to economic welfare
because some good projects are not implemented. Laws that protect investors by excluding some
investment outcomes can be welfare-enhancing if, by excluding these outcomes, they raise the price

19

that investors are willing to pay for shares and make it possible for entrepreneurs to undertake
positive NPV projects. Paradoxically, in this model, the investor protection of securities laws
benefits the entrepreneur.

2.b. Private solutions
We assume that the entrepreneur wishes to maximize the proceeds from the IPO. The
entrepreneur could raise the most funds and hence maximize her profit from the project if she could
commit to consume no private benefits at date 2 and to start production only if she has a positive
NPV project at date 1. We call this policy the golden rule. Though it is ex ante optimal for the
entrepreneur to commit to follow the golden rule, it is not ex post optimal for her to do so in the
setting of our model. Consequently, investors cannot rely on promises by the entrepreneur – they
would not be time consistent. There is a wide array of tools suggested in the literature that the
entrepreneur could use to commit to the golden rule. We review these tools in turn and examine
their limitations in resolving the agency problem in our model.
The most obvious tool is to increase the entrepreneur’s ownership share. If the entrepreneur
does not go public, she will always follow the golden rule in our model. However, this tool cannot
solve the problem because of the entrepreneur’s wealth constraints. The cost of increasing her
ownership share is that the size of the firm is inversely related to her ownership share, which
reduces the extent to which she can take advantage of her project.
Consider next corporate disclosure policy. By committing to truthfully disclose the NPV of the
project at date 1 and the payoff from production at date 2, the entrepreneur makes it more costly not
to follow the golden rule. In particular, investors would know if the entrepreneur does not follow
the golden rule and could sue to make her follow that rule. Grossman (1981) shows that a firm will
disclose information provided that it cannot lie, investors know it has the information, and
disclosure is costless. In our model, the firm can lie and disclosure is costly to the insiders. It
follows that a stronger mechanism is required for the entrepreneur to credibly commit to truthful

20

disclosure. Such a mechanism would be a contractual commitment to the investors to use an auditor
at date 1 and at date 2. With such a commitment, investors could sue the entrepreneur if there is no
auditor report.
The difficulties with the use of an auditor are two-fold. First, the entrepreneur does not benefit
from having an auditor ex post. She would therefore be better off if she could find a way to escape
her commitment to use an auditor. Second, though it is easy to verify that the entrepreneur has
failed to hire an auditor, investors would have to coordinate to enforce the contract and would have
to be willing to pay for this enforcement. Such a situation could lead to free-riding and to
insufficient enforcement. Furthermore, enforcement of disclosure would work poorly with class
action lawsuits because disclosure would prevent investors from suffering future damages rather
than compensate investors for damages they have already suffered.
Generally, the entrepreneur could choose bonding mechanisms and governance mechanisms
that would make it more difficult for her to renege on her commitments. In particular, she could
enter contracts that impose large penalties if she does not disclose and that require the posting of a
bond. There are problems with such an approach, however. First, the entrepreneur will always have
incentives to state that she has a positive NPV project at date 1. To enforce the contract, therefore,
outsiders will have to be able to verify that the firm indeed has the positive NPV project, which
may be expensive. Second, as emphasized in Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore
(1988), it may be difficult to write such a contract because not all possible situations that the
entrepreneur might face after the IPO can be defined at the time of the IPO. Third, the posting of a
bond involves transaction costs and also means that the entrepreneur has fewer resources to invest
in the firm.15

Finally, any plausible contractual mechanism requires enforcement actions by

shareholders. Such a mechanism may therefore be incompatible with dispersed ownership.
Other ownership arrangements than dispersed ownership may facilitate the emergence of
private solutions. As a result, if securities laws are poor, we would expect these arrangements to be
15

See Klein, Crawford, and Alchian (1978) for some of the problems involved in posting a bond.

21

more important, but at the same time it is possible that when such arrangements are pervasive, the
demand for strong securities laws is weaker. For instance, blockholders could play an important
role in monitoring management. Laeven and Levine (2008) find support for an important role of
monitoring blockholders in Europe. Financial institutions could also be more involved in the
monitoring of management. In countries where bank finance is more important, public disclosure
might be less important because banks have access to non-public information. Further, throughout
the world, the growing importance of institutional investors and the increasing ease with which
pools of funds from these investors can be assembled make private solutions easier as firms can
choose to bypass the public markets and use private equity financing with contractual arrangements
that offer efficient ways to address corporate agency problems.
A complementary approach for the entrepreneur is to devise governance mechanisms that limit
her ability to take advantage of minority shareholders. The obvious difficulty with such
mechanisms is that they have to be credible. With good laws and good enforcement of these laws,
the governance mechanisms are more credible to investors. Aggarwal, Erel, Stulz, and Williamson
(2008) show that firm-level governance mechanisms are complementary mechanisms with good
country-level investor protection. In their paper, firms from common law countries are more likely
to adopt governance attributes which restrict the discretion of insiders.
In the model, the firm can liquidate at date 1 if it has the low NPV project. Consequently, if the
firm financed itself with short-term debt maturing at date 1 instead of outside equity, it would have
a built-in mechanism to insure that it invests optimally at date 1 because the new investors at date 1
would only invest if they can expect to earn the risk-free rate over the second period. In this case,
all projects that have too low productivity to be financed at date 1 would not be undertaken. At date
1, the firm would issue equity if it has the high NPV project and uses the proceeds to pay off the
debt. For short-term debt to be a solution for the date 1 problem, it has to be that the entrepreneur
does not benefit from starting production at date 1 with the lenders’ money. In other words, the debt
contract has to be enforceable at low cost.

22

The simplicity of our model makes the short-term debt solution more attractive than it actually
is. Consider a production process that takes two periods such that, in contrast to our model, the
stock of capital changes randomly during the first period. At the end of the first period, the firm
learns its productivity for the second period. In this case, a drop in the stock of capital during the
first period would lead to default on the debt. Depending on the bankruptcy mechanism, there is
some chance that the positive NPV growth opportunity would be lost. Alternatively, the firm could
issue less debt at date 0, but then the scope for inefficient production would increase. The debt
solution runs into trouble as well if the continuation decision occurs at a random date. In this case,
the firm would have to refinance short-term debt.
It is important to note that all the private solutions discussed so far rely heavily on the use of
the legal system for their implementation. An expensive and ineffective legal system will reduce the
usefulness of these solutions. Reputation mechanisms can be implemented without the use of the
legal system.16 One often hears that reputation will make it suboptimal for the entrepreneur to take
advantage of minority shareholders. In our model, there is no role for reputation because the
entrepreneur has nothing to gain from behaving. Reputation can make it optimal for the
entrepreneur not to take advantage of minority shareholders provided that there is some chance that
the entrepreneur will raise more funds in the future, in which case building a reputation would pay
off when she subsequently raises funds.
If the model were to be extended to multiple periods, reputation could play more of a role. At
the same time, however, contractual solutions become more complex and less feasible in multiple
period models. With incomplete contracts, insiders have more opportunities ex post to engage in
behavior that affects investors adversely.

16

See Gomes (2000) for a model of how reputation can work for an IPO firm.

23

2.c. Securities laws.
All the private solutions to the commitment problem of the entrepreneur have limitations. In
this section we examine whether there are conditions such that securities laws can help the
entrepreneur solve the commitment problem when the private solutions we examined cannot do so.
We find that securities laws can help resolve some – but not all – of the problems the entrepreneur
faces in credibly committing to the buyers of equity through mandatory disclosure. We restrict our
attention to the benefits to the entrepreneur of disclosure at date 1 and ignore the role of laws and
regulations on the cost of consumption of private benefits at date 2, b, which have been examined
both theoretically and empirically already.17 It is important to note, however, that disclosure laws
affect the ability of insiders to consume private benefits, so that b is likely to be higher in countries
with stronger securities laws (see Ferrell (2007)).
Suppose that the securities laws require that the entrepreneur has to disclose E1(μ) at date 1 and
that the disclosure is credible because the disclosure requirement is strictly enforced. Upon
disclosure, the state or investors could act to prevent production if production is not optimal. With
such a law, production would be less likely to take place if E1(μ) = μ-. Whether the neo-classical
rule would be followed would depend on the mechanisms that investors have to constrain corporate
insiders from pursuing negative NPV policies. In fact, if the law worked extremely well, so that the
entrepreneur can never produce if E1(μ) = μ-, such a law would eliminate the time consistency
problem and would increase firm value by eliminating suboptimal production. It is important to
note that enforcement by investors does not have to involve legal action. Any mechanism which
permits outside investors to affect the production decision in the state of the world where E1(μ) = μincreases firm value – for instance, a hostile bid or the threat of such a bid could lead insiders to not
produce in that state of the world. If enforcement by investors is costly, there will be cases where
insiders pursue negative NPV projects. As enforcement costs increase, the benefit of the law in

17

See, for instance, Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002), La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (2002),
Durnev and Kim (2005), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), and Stulz (2005).

24

reducing suboptimal production falls so that, at some point, the law has no effect. Forcing
disclosure is therefore not enough.
Could such a law do harm? Not if enforcement of the law is costless and if the only disclosure
required is the one that the entrepreneur would like to credibly commit to but cannot do so without
the help of the law. Under these conditions, the law would be superior to a firm disclosure policy.
Of course, in reality the law and its enforcement are not costless. Suppose that the law is indeed
perfectly designed so that it elicits the optimal disclosure if followed by the firm. It would have to
be enforced and enforcement would have a cost. The enforcement of a securities law by
government does not require coordination among shareholders. As a result, part of the cost of
enforcing private disclosure agreements is eliminated. Free-riding by shareholders means that
enforcement of private disclosure agreements will be suboptimal. Public enforcement of disclosure
laws eliminates the free-riding problem. Further, public enforcement has resources and punishments
that shareholders do not and cannot have.
Disclosure does not, by itself, eliminate suboptimal production. The disclosure mechanism
prevents suboptimal production through private enforcement of optimal production. Such private
enforcement may be costly. Therefore, even if mandatory disclosure is costless, the elimination of
suboptimal production may not be. For the mandatory disclosure solution to be preferable to the
private solutions, it has to be that the total cost of eliminating suboptimal production with the
mandatory disclosure solution is not so high that private solutions that only reduce suboptimal
production are preferable. Further, a law might impose additional costs on firms by forcing them
to disclose other items or by punishing the entrepreneur when she should not be. Such additional
costs could make the mandatory disclosure solution inferior to some types of private solutions.

3. Securities laws and financial globalization.
We now investigate the role of securities laws in a world of integrated financial markets. In this
section, we focus on firms’ supply of equity and assume a perfectly elastic demand for equity as

25

before. To simplify the analysis, we assume that investors discount expected cash flows from shares
at the risk-free rate irrespective of where the shares are issued or traded. Risk-neutral investors
would discount expected cash flows that way in a world where there are no restrictions or costs to
cross-border trades in securities. To emphasize that our results do not come from differences in the
cost of consuming private benefits across countries, as determined by b, we assume b to be the
same across countries unless we say otherwise. Our analysis therefore focuses on differences in
disclosure requirements across countries at date 1. The section concludes with a brief discussion of
how our results are affected if b is allowed to increase with stronger securities laws.
To analyze the impact of securities laws, we consider two countries. We assume that country G
has better securities laws than country B in that, at date 1, E1(μ) is disclosed in country G but not in
country B and the disclosure enables investors to costlessly enforce the neo-classical investment
policy. We investigate later the case where enforcement costs are positive. There are no barriers to
international investment. Both countries have exactly the same distribution of projects. In each
country, there is a continuum of projects. Each project has the same characteristics as the project
analyzed in Section 2, so that the project of firm i has an expected return of E0(μi) as of date 0.
E0(μi) is a monotone function of i, with i ∈ [0, U ] , and, for any firm i, (1/ λ) μi+ = E0 ( μi ) = λμi− ,
with λ > 1. In the following, we drop the subscript i to simplify the notation.
We use our model to compare the cost of external finance, firm creation, valuation, and insider
ownership in the two countries. We first discuss the case where a firm domiciled in a country is
subject to the securities laws of that country. We then turn to the case where a firm can choose to be
subject to stricter or weaker securities laws. In each case, we discuss the impact of stricter securities
laws when they have a deadweight cost for firms. In the last part of the section, we discuss some
important limitations to our analysis.

26

3.a. Firms are subject to the securities laws of their country only.
In our model, investors have the same expected return irrespective of securities laws. For an allequity firm, it might be tempting to conclude therefore that the cost of external finance is the same
for all firms when viewed from the entrepreneurs’ perspective. However, this would not be correct.
The agency problems we focus on create a wedge between the cost of capital for the entrepreneur
and the expected rate of return required by investors.
The entrepreneur’s perspective on the cost of capital differs from the investors’ perspective.
The entrepreneur focuses on how much she has to pay to secure the outside financing she seeks.
Outside financing has costs for the entrepreneur. These costs differ between countries G and B. In
country B, the entrepreneur starts production at date 1 even if the project has a negative NPV.
Because of this suboptimal production, the entrepreneur consumes private benefits at date 2 in
country B that would not be available to the entrepreneur in country A because she could not have
started production. As a result of the disclosure differences between country G and B, the
entrepreneur bears the deadweight costs from producing suboptimally in country B, including the
costs of consuming private benefits following suboptimal production, but not in country G. These
deadweight costs are the difference in the cost of external finance in country B relative to country
G. It follows that outside finance is cheaper for the entrepreneur in country G than in country B. In
addition:

Proposition 2

Assuming that (1) countries B and G differ only in disclosure requirements at date 1, so that b is the
same in both countries, (2) a firm in country B and a firm in country G have exactly the same
project, and (3) production always takes place for the firm in country B irrespective of E0(μ) if the
firm goes public, it follows from the fact that country B has weaker disclosure requirements at date
1 than country G that:

27

(1)

If the firm in country B has an IPO, then the firm in country G has an IPO as well. If the
firm in country B stays private, it may still be optimal for the firm in country G to have
an IPO. Consequently, a larger fraction of firms will go public in country G than in
country B.

(2)

The firm in country B will be smaller than the firm in country G because external
finance is more expensive for the entrepreneur in country B than in country G.

(3)

The firm in country B will have lower output per unit of capital on average before
managerial diversion than the firm in country G since the entrepreneur in country B will
invest in the negative NPV project whereas the firm in country G will only invest in
positive NPV projects.

(4)

Tobin’s q will be higher for the firm in country G than in country B.

(5)

The entrepreneur in country G will retain fewer shares than the entrepreneur in country
B.

(6)

Foreign investors will hold a larger fraction of shares in country G than in country B.

It is important to note that in the model developed so far, securities laws benefit entrepreneurs
but not investors. Despite this, it turns out that the portfolios of individual investors depend on the
securities laws of the countries they invest in. In fact, individual investors invest a larger share of
their portfolios in securities of the country that has better securities laws. However, individual
investors do not invest more in country G because they care about securities laws. Remember that
in our model investors are risk-neutral and have rational expectations. The expected return of shares
is the same for firms irrespective of their country. The greater weight of securities of country G in
the portfolios of individual investors simply results from the fact that in countries with better
securities laws the entrepreneurs can sell a larger fraction of their firms to the public at the IPO.
There is evidence that insiders have higher ownership in countries with weaker investor

28

protection.18 It is important to note, however, that an index of attributes of securities laws need not
be correlated with ownership in our model for two reasons. First, as we have shown, securities laws
alone are not sufficient to yield our results. Investors have to be able to take actions following
disclosures. Second, the level of enforcement of securities laws is critical and enforcement differs
considerably across countries.
In our model, country G has better securities laws than country B. Consider now the portfolio
of an individual investor who is not a corporate insider. First, assume that the individual investor
resides in country G. For a firm with a given market capitalization, a larger fraction of shares will
be available to individual investors if the firm is from country G than from country B.
Consequently, if an individual investor holds the world market portfolio of shares available for
trading by portfolio investors (i.e., the world market portfolio constructed from shares not held by
insiders, as in Dahlquist et al. (2003)), she will overweight country G compared to the weight of
market capitalization of that country in the world market portfolio of all shares. An individual
investor from country B would behave in the same way. It follows from this that individual
investors will appear to overweight shares from countries with better securities laws. Assuming that
corporate insiders are local residents, a larger fraction of shares from country B will be held by
resident insiders than shares from country G. As a result, residents in country B will appear to
overweight shares from country B and residents in country G will appear to overweight shares from
country G. It follows that variation in the quality of securities laws can worsen the home bias even
though individual investors have no preference for better securities laws in our model.19

18

See La Porta et al. (1999) for an analysis of ownership across the world. Stulz (2005) provides evidence on
insider ownership as a fraction of a country’s market portfolio, using Worldscope data (see Dahlquist,
Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003) for a discussion of the weaknesses of the Worldscope data) and
provides references to alternative explanations. An obvious difficulty with ownership measures is that
institutional investors unrelated to insiders can have large stakes in the U.S., giving the appearance of
concentrated ownership for firms where insiders control a small fraction of shares.
19
Dahlquist et al. (2003) show how different levels of insider ownership can help explain the home bias. Kho
et al. (2008) extend this analysis to account for existence of a comparative advantage in monitoring for local
investors. In their analysis, poorer laws imply a greater monitoring role for local investors, so that even fewer
shares are available for foreign investors.

29

The analysis conducted so far assumes that there are no costs to stricter securities laws and their
enforcement is costless. Suppose first that securities laws in country G are costly, so that
participation in public markets has a deadweight cost of c. It immediately follows that raising
outside funds is now more costly for a firm in country G. Firms which have an investment
opportunity that has low expected productivity will now decide not to raise outside funds.
Consequently, fewer firms will go public in country G.
Consider next the case where there is a fixed cost for investors to enforce good policies
following disclosure by a firm that E1(μ) = μ-. In this case, the entrepreneur will start production
when E1(μ) = μ- as long as μ- is high enough so that it is not worth it for investors to expend
enforcement costs. If μ- is lower than this threshold, production will not start because investors
would incur enforcement costs to prevent wasteful production. If investors expect to have to pay
costs of enforcement, the expected rate of return they require to invest in firms will reflect expected
enforcement costs. Lombardo and Pagano (2002) develop a model where monitoring costs affect
the expected return on equity and where these costs depend on laws and their enforcement. The
enforcement costs discussed here are part of the monitoring costs they posit in their model. In the
absence of a mechanism of collective action, there would be no enforcement by atomistic
shareholders. Consequently, in the absence of such a mechanism, firm values would be higher if a
large monitoring outside shareholder emerged who would find it worthwhile to pay the cost of
enforcement.

3.b. Firms can choose the securities laws they are subject to.
Suppose now that financial globalization makes it possible for a firm in country B to choose to
be subject to the securities laws of country G. We assume that a firm from country B subjects itself
to the securities laws of country G by going public in country B as well as in country G. As a result,
the firm will be subject to the securities laws of both countries. Given the assumed difference in
securities laws between countries B and G, any firm going public would choose to be subject to the

30

securities laws of country G if there were no cost to do so. The reason is that the outside investors
rationally discount the share price to reflect the ex-post incentive problems. Therefore, the
entrepreneur bears all the costs of being unable to tie her hands ex ante to follow the golden rule
and will benefit from a credible commitment not to start production when E1(μ) = μ-.
The situation changes if there is a fixed listing cost L for a firm from country B to become
subject to the securities laws of country G. With such a cost, some firms from country B will
choose to be subject to the securities laws of country B only. It is interesting to investigate which
entrepreneurs from country B will choose to IPO in country G if there is a fixed cost L for a firm in
country B to list in country G. There are both direct and indirect benefits to a listing in country G
for a firm in country B. We explore these two benefits in turn.
We define the direct benefits as the benefits that accrue to the entrepreneur if she changes
nothing in her actions except that the firm is liquidated at date 1 in the bad state of the world, i.e.,
the state where E1(μ) = μ-. There are two direct benefits. First, the entrepreneur now pays the
deadweight costs of private benefits only in the good state where E1(μ) = μ+, so that these costs fall.
Second, firm value increases, so that the IPO proceeds increase. The increase in firm value keeping
f and K constant is:

Direct gain in firm value = (1 − p ) K − (1 − p )(1 − f )

μ−
K −L
r

(6)

It immediately follows from this expression that the direct gain in value (1) falls as the
probability (1 – p) of the bad state decreases, (2) increases as the rate of consumption of private
benefits increases, (3) falls as the expected return to production in the bad state increases, and (4)
falls as the listing cost increases.
The indirect gain from the listing is that the entrepreneur can raise more funds and hence
benefit more from the investment opportunity in the good state. To see this, note that as firm value
increases keeping f constant, more funds are raised. The entrepreneur will want to invest these

31

funds in production, so that K will increase. The benefit from increasing K increases with the
expected return of production in the good state. Consequently, everything else equal, firms that
have higher productivity will benefit more from listing in country G.
We now have the following result:

Proposition 3
Compared to firms from country B that do not list in country G, the firms from country B that
list in country G have the following characteristics:
(1) Cross-listed firms are larger.
(2) Cross-listed firms have better operating performance.
(3) Cross-listed firms have a higher Tobin’s q than firms from country B that are not crosslisted, but have a lower Tobin’s q than similar firms from country G.
(4) Cross-listed firms will have more diffused ownership.
(5) Foreign investors will hold a larger fraction of the cross-listed firms.

See appendix for proof.

Karolyi (2006) reviews the evidence on cross-listed firms. This evidence shows that cross-listed
firms are larger firms and have higher valuations. There is now substantial empirical evidence that
foreign firms listed in the U.S. have a greater Tobin’s q than foreign firms that are not listed in the
U.S. Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2008) show that this valuation difference holds from 1990 to
2006. Foreign firms that list on an U.S. exchange become subject to U.S. securities laws. However,
these firms also become subject to monitoring from information intermediaries, so that this
monitoring may contribute to the valuation difference.
Doidge et al. (2004) also predict that cross-listed firms have a higher Tobin’s q. In that paper,
the mechanism that leads to a higher Tobin’s q for cross-listed firms is different from here. In

32

Doidge et al. (2004), a firm cross-lists because it has good investment opportunities that it cannot
finance because of excessive consumption of private benefits by the controlling shareholders.
Through cross-listing, the firm subjects itself to laws that constrain the consumption of private
benefits and can raise additional funds to finance the growth opportunity. Here, the rate of
consumption of private benefits at date 2 is the same in both countries, so that securities laws do not
reduce the rate of consumption of private benefits at date 2. Instead, by subjecting itself to the
securities laws of country G, a firm from country B bonds itself to a legal regime where it will not
be able to overinvest at date 1. Hence, the cross-listed firm makes decisions that are better for
shareholders notwithstanding their consumption of private benefits at date 2.
Empirical evidence on foreign ownership of shares in companies with ADR programs is
consistent with our predictions. In particular, Ammer, Holland, Smith, and Warnock (2006) show
that firms with ADR programs have greater ownership by U.S. investors than other firms from the
same countries. The impact of cross-listing on share ownership by foreign investors results simply
from the fact that more shares of cross-listed firms are available to portfolio investors because the
entrepreneur retains fewer shares at the IPO. Doidge, Karolyi, Lins, Miller, and Stulz (2008) show
that cross-listed firms have lower insider ownership. Further, Ayyagari and Doidge (2008) provide
some evidence that insider ownership falls after a cross-listing.
If the securities laws of country G impose no costs on firms, firms from country G will not list
in country B at the IPO. However, suppose that there is a cost c to being subject to the securities
laws of country G and that this deadweight cost applies as well to firms in country B that choose to
list in country G. We assume that there is a listing cost L for a firm to list outside its country. With
these assumptions, some firms in country G will list at the IPO in country B as long as the listing
cost is less than c. The firms from country G that list in country B will be firms for which
preventing investment in the bad state has little value compared to saving the cost c - L. The type
of firm that would not list in country G is therefore a low productivity firm.

33

We assumed throughout the analysis that the constraint on the size of the investment
opportunity is not binding when consumption of private benefits is an issue. It is useful to relax this
assumption in our discussion of foreign listings. Suppose that the constraint is binding for a firm
even when the entrepreneur consumes non-trivial private benefits. In this case, there is no indirect
benefit to a firm from country B in listing in country G. Further, when a firm from country G lists
in country B, it does not suffer from losing the indirect benefit of good securities laws, which is to
enable firms to raise more outside funds. With this extension, it therefore follows that firms whose
investment opportunities are not easily scaleable have less to gain from good securities laws. We
would therefore expect small firms from country G to be more likely to IPO in country B.
As mentioned in the introduction, there has been much debate on the costs of regulation in the
U.S. and how these costs affect the competitiveness of the U.S. capital markets. In our model, if the
U.S. is country G, an increase in the cost of securities laws necessarily reduces the fraction of
foreign firms that list in the U.S. The impact of an increase in c on U.S. firms depends on the cost
of listing abroad for U.S. firms. If that cost is prohibitive, then an increase in c means that fewer
U.S. firms go public. Alternatively, however, consider the case where the cost on U.S. firms of
listing abroad is the same as listing in the U.S. In that case, if there is no increase in the cost of
listing abroad, some of the firms that would not have gone public in the U.S. had the foreign listing
cost been prohibitive may now choose to list abroad. The U.S. firms that would list abroad would
be similar to those firms from country B that chose not to list in the U.S.
With our analysis, entrepreneurs with highly profitable projects find it optimal to be subjected
to strong mandatory disclosure laws, while entrepreneurs with less profitable projects find the costs
associated with such laws to be too high. If entrepreneurs in country G only have the choice of not
going public, going public being subject to the securities laws of country G, or going public being
subject to the securities laws of country B, we would see some firms from country G go public in
country B. However, it could also be possible to have different applicable laws in country G for

34

different types of firms, so that entrepreneurs would have the option to go public in country G being
subjected to weaker mandatory disclosure laws. We discuss this possibility more in Section 5.
In our analysis, we have assumed that the only benefits of cross-listing are due to securities
laws. This is an excessively simplistic view. For instance, U.S. markets could be more liquid and
more efficient, which would benefit cross-listing firms. One might argue that this attribute of U.S.
markets partly results from securities laws, but it is a different benefit from the one we have
focused on. The cross-listing cost could be viewed as a net cost of cross-listing after all the costs
and benefits of cross-listing separate from those discussed in this paper have been taken into
account. Suppose now that the liquidity of foreign markets increases relative to the liquidity of U.S.
markets. In this case, L would increase and consequently the number of cross-listings would fall.
Similarly, if country B were to adopt securities laws more similar to those of country G, crosslistings would fall and perhaps even disappear if eventually securities laws have the same impact on
firms in both countries.

3.c. Some important limitations of the analysis.
The analysis in this section relied implicitly on the assumption that securities laws can be
ranked, so that some countries have better securities laws than others. With the model developed
here, better securities laws are those that reduce the likelihood of overinvestment at date 1. There
can be good reasons why, for some firms, more disclosure is costly. Our model does not account for
costs associated with disclosure. The literature on disclosure has focused on the costs to firms of
divulging information that could be helpful to competitors (see Leuz and Wysocki (2008) for a
review). Recently, Almazan, Suarez, and Titman (2007) have shown that under some circumstances
transparency can reduce firm-specific investments by stakeholders. Transparency can also have
political costs (see, for instance, Leuz and Oberholzer-Gee (2006) and Durnev and Fauver (2007)).
Further, as shown by Hermalin and Weisbach (2007), better disclosure can be costly for managers,
so that in equilibrium firm value can be maximized for shareholders with less than complete

35

disclosure. All these disclosure costs can lead to a situation where a firm in country B might
maximize shareholder wealth by not listing in country G. If a type of disclosure is optimal for one
type of firms but not for another, a securities law might not be optimal for all firms. In such a
situation, securities laws cannot be ranked in a simple way. Further, countries could then compete
by providing securities laws that meet the needs of firms better. Such competition could lead to
better securities laws if enough firms can choose the securities laws they are subject to. We discuss
issues related to issuer choice of securities laws in the Section 5.
Our analysis assumes that the entrepreneur chooses the firm’s charter to maximize IPO
proceeds. It is legitimate to question this assumption for several reasons. First, variables that proxy
for agency costs seem to be at best only weakly related to insider ownership in the U.S. (see, for
instance, Hellwege, Pirinsky, and Stulz (2007)). Second, there are good reasons to believe that
some entrepreneurs value control for its own sake rather than to divert cash flows for their own
consumption (Hart (2004)). In the U.S., as shown by Field and Karpoff (2002), firms often choose
to go public with anti-takeover charter provisions, which may reduce IPO proceeds. In this case,
our model would have less predictive power because ownership would also depend on the
preferences of the entrepreneur for control.
We emphasized earlier that enforcement costs are a critical component of the efficacy of
securities laws. For the mechanism we have focused on in our analysis of securities laws to work, it
is necessary that the information disclosed can be used to change the actions of firms. It is also
necessary that the securities laws themselves are enforced effectively.20 It may well be that
information disclosed by a firm in country B has different implications than the same information
disclosed by a firm in country G. For instance, information disclosed by a firm in country G might
be used by bidders in the market for corporate control, but there might be a much more limited

20

Jackson and Roe (2008) show that resources committed to enforcement result in more robust public
markets. Coffee (2007) shows striking differences in enforcement expenditures between the U.S. and the
U.K. Berglof and Pajuste (2005) show that in countries with poor enforcement, such as Eastern European
countries, firms disclose less than is required by the law.

36

market in country B. Information disclosed in country G might be effectively used to prevent a
firm in country G from taking some actions through legal channels, but the judiciary might be
inefficient in country B or the corporate laws might limit legal recourse drastically.
It could be that the securities laws of country G can be enforced more effectively on firms from
that country than on firms from country B. Siegel (2005) provides some evidence of differential
enforcement of U.S. securities laws between U.S. firms and foreign firms. In this case, the gain
from cross-listing would be smaller and fewer firms from country B would obtain a listing in
country G.
We assume that the cost of consumption of private benefits for the entrepreneur, parameterized
by b, is the same in country G and country B. We would expect b to be higher in country G. An
increase in b in country G would have similar effects to mandatory disclosure at date 1. Note
further that an increase in the cost of consumption of private benefits reduces the benefit to the
entrepreneur from suboptimal production at date 1, so that suboptimal production becomes less
likely. A decrease in the fraction of cross-listed firms does not, therefore, mean that adverse
developments took place in the U.S. that made cross-listings less advantageous. Such a decrease
could result from positive developments abroad.

4. The investors’ demand for equity.
In this section, we examine how securities laws can affect the expected return required by
investors on equity. In a world of financial globalization, we claim that securities laws can lead to
market segmentation in that securities with identical expected cash flows that trade on different
markets can have different expected returns. We consider first laws that affect insider trading and
the importance of private information in the flow of information concerning a firm’s stock. We then
examine how securities laws affect monitoring and information gathering by investors. Finally, we
consider the marketability restrictions often present in securities laws.

37

4.a. Securities laws, insider trading, and disclosure.
There is a vast literature on the economic consequences of insider trading. Though some argue
for the removal of penalties on insider trading on a variety of grounds, there is generally broad
support in finance for the view that insider trading affects adversely the cost of trading and market
liquidity. The argument is straightforward: In the presence of insider trading, market makers have
to widen the bid-ask spread to be compensated for losses made to insiders.21
Amihud and Mendelson (1986) show that investors optimally focus on their return on securities
net of expected transaction costs. Everything else equal, we would therefore expect securities that
have higher transaction costs to have higher expected returns before transaction costs. There is
some debate in the literature as to whether it is so. For instance, Spiegel and Wang (2005) conclude
that, after controlling for idiosyncratic volatility, the relation between transaction costs and
expected returns is at best weak.
Rather than looking at transaction costs, some authors investigate whether stocks for which a
greater fraction of the information flow consists of private information have greater expected
returns. Diamond and Verrechia (1991) show that disclosure can lead to a lower cost of capital by
attracting large investors to a firm because its stock becomes more liquid, but an adverse effect of
disclosure is that it reduces the risk-bearing capacity of market makers, so that complete disclosure
is not optimal in their model. More recently, Easley and O'Hara (2004) develop a model in which
firms with more private information have a higher expected return because uninformed investors
are disadvantaged when trading the stocks of such firms. As it becomes more costly to trade on
insider information, we would expect more of the information flow to be composed of public
information. Relatedly, laws that require more disclosure also increase the share of public
information in the information flow. In the Easley and O’Hara (2004) model, investors who have no
private information in a stock will underweight that stock.
21

See, for instance, DeMarzo, Hagerty, and Fishman (1998).

38

Greater disclosure affects the information available to investors when they form expectations
about variances and covariances of securities. Ex ante, a portfolio will be less risky as investors can
estimate variances and covariances more precisely.22 Investors who can forecast variances and
covariances of certain securities better than others are likely to overweight these securities on
average.
It follows that the composition of the information flow about securities affects their expected
return and the holdings of investors. Everything else equal, firms would want to reduce the share of
private information in the information flow of their securities by credibly committing to disclosing
information that can be disclosed by the firm at low or no cost. Through such a disclosure policy,
firms would reduce the opportunities for insider trading or trading on private information, lower
trading costs, and enable investors to more accurately estimate the variances and covariances of the
stocks they hold.23 Such an optimal disclosure policy would not, however, eliminate all insider
trading, so that there would still be value to laws that limit insider trading. For reasons already
discussed, a discretionary disclosure policy that is optimal ex ante is not necessarily optimal ex post
for insiders. Securities laws can make the optimal disclosure policy time-consistent by punishing
firms that depart from that policy.
The considerations discussed in this section have several important empirical implications.
First, differences in securities laws could lead to differences in expected returns across countries
even if securities markets are fully integrated in that there are no barriers to international
investment. In fact, these differences could persist even if all investors hold the world market
portfolio. Existing evidence on insider trading shows that countries where insider trading laws are
enforced have a lower cost of equity (Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002)) and that insider trading laws
22

Lambert, Leuz, and Verrecchia (2007) show that greater disclosure has a direct effect which is to increase
the precision with which investors estimate variances and covariances. They also document an indirect effect,
which is that disclosure changes firm investment policy, which can increase or decrease the precision of
estimates of variances and covariances.
23
The relationship between firm disclosure and insider trading profits is not necessarily negative. Bushman
and Indjejikian (2005) show that firm disclosures can increase the trading profits of insiders at the expense of
other informed traders.

39

are associated with more information production by analysts (Bushman, Piotroski, and Smith
(2005)). Hail and Leuz (2006) provide evidence that stronger securities laws are associated with
lower expected returns on equity. Strikingly, their evidence shows that the adverse impact of
weaker securities laws on firms’ cost of equity capital is reduced by capital market integration. In
this paper, capital market integration has such an impact to the extent that firms can subject
themselves to stronger securities laws. Second, differences in securities laws can give preferred
habitats in shares to investors. Access to private information about a firm makes it a more attractive
investment for an investor, so that the investor is expected to overweight that firm in her portfolio
(Easley and O’Hara (2004)). Securities laws affect the relative importance of private information in
the information flow of a firm. It seems reasonable to believe that resident investors have greater
access to private information. Countries where the laws are such that private information’s share in
the information flow is higher will have higher expected returns and a greater home bias on
average.
Empirical results by Leuz, Lins, and Warnock (2008) fit the preferred habitat theory. They
show that non-resident investors hold portfolios more heavily weighted towards countries with
better securities laws. Differences in securities laws that affect resident and non-resident investors
equally cannot explain their finding. For their finding to be explained with rational investors, it
must be that some investors require a lower compensation for holding securities from countries
with weaker securities laws and that these investors are resident investors.
There are at least two difficulties with the private information explanation of the home bias,
however. First, at times private information is bad, so we would expect that at times domestic
investors are underweight in domestic firms because they have bad information. Second, some
empirical evidence indicates that foreign investors trade more than domestic investors.24 If domestic
investors receive better signals than foreign investors, we would expect them to trade more, not
less. The solution to this problem is that it may be optimal for privately informed investors to
24

See Tesar and Werner (1995).

40

become monitoring shareholders. Such shareholders monitor the actions of the firm and influence
them, but for them selling shares is a last resort.25
Securities laws which regulate disclosure can do so based on where a firm is incorporated or on
where it trades. To the extent that the securities laws of a country require disclosure from firms that
trade within a country, they might lead firms from other countries where disclosure is less regulated
to choose to list in that country. A country’s laws that restrict insider trading can only be laws that
restrict insider trading within the country. As a result, such laws make the location of trading
relevant. However, a firm that chooses to cross-list in a country that has good insider trading laws
does not get the full benefit of these laws unless it can and does give up its listing in its home
country if that country has poor insider trading laws. Otherwise, insiders could just choose to trade
in the home country of the firm and not in the country where the firm is cross-listed. However, if
investors prefer securities trading in their own country, it will generally not be optimal for a firm to
give up its domestic listing.
A cross-listing that commits a firm to better disclosure reduces the flow of private information
for its shares. We would therefore expect that the expected return on cross-listed firms to be lower
than the expected return on comparable firms that do not have a cross-listing. Hail and Leuz (2006)
find evidence of a lower cost of equity for firms that cross-list on U.S. exchanges. The lower
expected return implies a higher Tobin’s q.

4.b. The impact of marketing restrictions.
Securities laws can restrict the marketing of shares to investors in a country. For instance, U.S.
firms that choose to IPO abroad to avoid U.S. securities laws have to do so in a way that will keep
their shares from being acquired by U.S. investors over an initial period. Specifically, Regulation S
provides a safe harbor for firms that IPO abroad, but only to the extent that they have less than 500

25

For an analysis of monitoring shareholders and their impact on the home bias, see Kho et al. (2008).

41

U.S. shareholders.26 When a firm has more than 500 U.S. shareholders, it becomes subject to U.S.
securities laws even if it had its IPO abroad. Consequently, in our analysis of Section 3, if the U.S.
is country G, a U.S. firm that has an IPO abroad would have to proceed so that U.S. investors
cannot acquire its shares. In this section, we study the impact of such restrictions.
Suppose first that there are no cross-border transaction costs. In this case, a U.S. firm would not
be affected by the marketing restrictions as long as foreign investors can reasonably hedge their
holdings of the U.S. firm and that the cost of doing so is trivial. The foreign investors would hold
the outstanding supply of the shares of the U.S. firm and would hedge their holdings partly. The
U.S. firm would not suffer from the marketability restriction. If there are cross-border transaction
costs, hedging would be more expensive, so that there would be a cost for the U.S. firm to face
marketability restrictions. Generally, investors will not be able to hedge the full risk of the shares.
In this case, that risk will not be shared optimally across the world when there are marketability
restrictions. Consequently, there will be a greater risk premium for shares that are subject to such
restrictions.27 This risk premium will increase if domestic investors have a taste for shares issued by
domestic firms trading locally or have, for any other reasons, a comparative advantage at holding
these shares.
It may well be, however, that the main problem faced by firms that seek to escape U.S.
securities laws is simply that they are hard to escape for firms that want their shares to have a liquid
market. There is probably no effective way for firms to list shares abroad in a way that will
guarantee that the majority of the shares are not held by U.S. investors, in which case firms become
subject to the periodic disclosure requirements.

26
27

See Fox (1997).
For evidence of such a risk premium see, for instance, Stulz and Wasserfallen (1995).

42

5. Issuer choice and the future of national capital markets.
The legal literature has debated the question of issuer choice intensely, with a number of
scholars arguing that a firm should be able to pick the securities laws it wants to follow – be it
across countries or across a menu of laws offered within a country.28 Issuer choice has potentially
two important benefits. First, it allows a firm to choose the securities laws that are optimal for it.
Second, to the extent that countries or regulators derive benefits from having more firms subject to
their securities laws, it fosters competition among countries in providing more attractive securities
laws for firms. In this section, we examine the implications of our analysis for the issuer choice
question and raise some additional considerations that are relevant for answering this question.
In much of the analysis in this paper, the main benefit of securities laws is that they facilitate a
firm’s commitment to policies that are ex ante optimal for the firm. These laws benefit the
entrepreneurs and the economy. Their benefit to investors is through their impact on the economy
as a whole. With our model, if securities laws are well-conceived, new firms would pay to be
subject to those laws. There is therefore no reason, with this model, for firms not to have the right
to choose the securities laws they are subject to.
If securities laws reduce the importance of private information in the flow of information about
a firm, a firm would want to commit to reduce the importance of private information in the flow of
information and the obstacle of doing so would be the credibility of the commitment. In this case,
entrepreneurs would want to be subject to securities laws if they helped them achieve the
commitment they seek. The case for letting firms choose the securities laws that help them the most
would seem strong under that scenario. However, if securities laws lead to disclosures that enable
investors to obtain more precise estimates of variance and covariances, this benefit increases when
more firms are subject to securities laws. In this case, one might argue, following Fox (1997), that
there is an argument not to have issuer choice within a country and to subject all securities trading
in a country to its securities laws.
28

See Fox (2002) for a review.

43

With some exceptions, the debate on issuer choice has largely assumed that securities laws are
developed in a vacuum. However, they are affected by political forces. It is therefore not surprising
that the laws and regulations resulting from all these forces do not correspond to the laws and
regulations that would result from theoretical models that maximize social welfare. The regulators
are subject to political influences and to lobbying by those who have a stake in the regulations and
in how they are enforced. Regulators have their own interests at heart as well. Diffuse stakeholders,
such as individual investors or entrepreneurs who might be considering an IPO, may not have the
same ability to influence regulators than incumbent insiders. Given the nature of the benefits of
securities laws, some laws and regulations could be worse than no laws and regulations at all.
Coates (2001) points out that issuer choice arguments have received little support from issuers. He
argues that this could be because the SEC has been responsive to issuers and that, as a result,
regulations already offer much choice to issuers. Further, with the current system, regulatory
uncertainty is limited for issuers because their ability to influence outcomes makes prohibitively
costly forms of regulation highly unlikely.
Political influences on securities laws and their implementation can sharply reduce their
usefulness when they are viewed as instruments to enable entrepreneurs to commit to actions that
are not ex post optimal for them. In Section 2, the benefit of securities laws depends heavily on the
difficulty for firms to change the laws they are subject to, on the belief that these laws will keep
constraining firms rather than be weakened, and that they will not change in ways that impose large
additional costs on firms. To the extent that securities laws are a commitment device for
entrepreneurs, they are always subject to pressure from incumbent corporate insiders to be
weakened as well as pressure from politicians to perhaps change them to protect investors better or
sometimes in costly ways to show their responsiveness in times of crisis. From that perspective,
issuer choice could lead to less credible securities laws because, as argued by Coates (2001), it
might make them less stable. After all, if some firms are not subject to securities laws, incumbent
insiders can argue that they are at a disadvantage to those firms. Politicians might also focus on

44

these firms during an economic crisis and use them to justify new stronger laws. Further, there are
economies of scale in enforcing securities laws, so that if they cover a large number of firms the
costs of enforcement are lower and the enforcement is less subject to budget pressures. Recent
regulatory developments in the U.S. that make it easier for foreign firms to exit U.S. securities laws
may not be helpful to foreign firms from this perspective because they reduce the value of the
commitment they make when deciding to subject themselves to U.S. securities laws.29
Little attention has been paid in the issuer choice debate on the issue of whether stock market
participation is affected by having all firms trading in a country subject to the same securities laws.
It is true that in an efficient market firm value would reflect the securities laws that affect the firm,
so that investors who do not know all the implications of securities laws would still buy fairly
priced securities. However, willingness to participate in the stock market is likely to depend on
investors believing that stock market investment is a fair game. It seems difficult to believe that
such a belief could thrive in a world where local firms are subject to different securities laws.

6. Conclusion.
Historically, the trading of securities on organized capital markets has been close to the
geographic location of the issuer. Many reasons account for this phenomenon. In particular,
distance was an obstacle to the rapid diffusion of information and cross-border trade was restricted
and expensive. With financial globalization, barriers to cross-border trade in securities have
decreased dramatically. Transaction costs reasons for trading of securities to stay local have largely
disappeared. Technological progress has sharply reduced the role of distance in the diffusion of
information. Economies of scale in trading are becoming a more compelling reason for trading not
to be organized according to geography. Yet, securities issued in a country typically are subject to
some or all of the laws of that country. Consequently, securities differ by their country of issuance.

29

See Fernandes, Lel, and Miller (2007) find that the market reacted negatively to the announcement of the
change in regulation for some firms.

45

When it comes to firms, their value, the distribution of their ownership between insiders and
outsiders, the extent of ownership by foreign investors, and the expected return of their equity all
depend on the securities laws these firms are subject to.
We show that a critical contribution of securities laws is to help corporate insiders to commit
to policies that maximize shareholder wealth that are not optimal ex post for corporate insiders.
With this view of securities laws, they are only valuable to the extent that they are properly
enforced, that they do not impose excessive costs on firms, and that investors can use the
disclosures they force firms to make to prevent firms from taking actions that diminish shareholder
wealth. Importantly, the function of securities laws we emphasize has no necessary impact on the
expected rate of return on equity from the perspective of investors but it reduces the cost of external
finance for entrepreneurs because it enables them to sell equity to the public at a higher price. With
this function of securities laws, better securities laws lead to more firms going public, to firms
taking fuller advantage of investment opportunities, to firms having more ownership by dispersed
shareholders including foreign shareholders, and to firms being valued more highly. Though good
securities laws are associated with greater foreign ownership in our model, this is not because
investors have a preference for investments in firms subject to better securities laws, but rather
because more shares from such firms are available to the public. Other functions of securities laws,
such as those that decrease the relative importance of private information in the information flow of
securities, affect directly the expected rate of return on equity and portfolio holdings.
Firms can choose to subject themselves to better securities laws by having their securities trade
in countries which have such laws. There is ample empirical evidence that firms behave that way.
As long as some countries have better securities laws than others, both in terms of the laws
themselves as well as their enforcement and the opportunities investors have to act on information
disclosed because of the laws, national capital markets will stay distinct because securities that
trade on them differ in the laws they are subject to. However, there is no reason to believe that
differences across countries in securities laws will not erode over time, which will decrease the

46

benefits of U.S. listings for foreign firms. Further, the growing importance of institutional investors
may also make private solutions to manage agency conflicts more effective and less costly, thereby
decreasing the contribution of securities laws in helping to manage these conflicts.

47

Transaction
Cost
CS
∆CS

S
L

CL
CL+S

VS

VL

VL+S

Volume

Figure 1. Countries S and L both face the same transaction technology which has economies of
scale as the volume of transactions increases. The lowest transaction cost is attained if there is only
one market as long as there are no cross-border transaction costs. By trading in country L, the
investors from country S save ΔCS. If they incur a cross-border trading cost greater than ΔCS, they
will not move.

48

References
Admati, A., and P. Pfleiderer, 1988, A theory of intraday patterns: Volume and price variability,
Review of Financial Studies 1, 3-40.
Aggarwal, R., I. Erel, R. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2008, Differences in Governance Practices
between U.S. and Foreign Firms: Measurement, Causes, and Consequences, Journal of Financial
Economics, forthcoming.
Almazan, A., J. Suarez, and S. Titman, 2007, Firms' stakeholders and the costs of transparency,
NBER working paper, Cambridge, MA.
Amihud, Y., and H. Mendelson, 1986, Asset pricing and the bid ask spread,
Journal of Financial Economics 17, 223-249.
Ammer, J., S. B. Holland, D. C. Smith, and F. E. Warnock, 2006, Look at Me Now: What Attracts
U.S. Shareholders?, NBER working paper 12500.
Ayyagari, M., and C. Doidge, 2008, Does cross-listing facilitate changes in corporate
ownership and control?, unpublished manuscript, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
Baruch, S., G. A. Karolyi, and M. L. Lemmon, 2007, Multimarket trading and liquidity: Theory and
evidence, Journal of Finance 62, 2169-2200.
Berglof, E., and A. Pajuste, 2005, What do firms disclose and why? Enforcing corporate
governance and transparency in Central and Eastern Europe’, Working Paper, Stockholm School of
Economics, Stockholm, Sweden.
Bhattacharya, U., and H. Daouk, 2002, The world price of insider trading, Journal of Finance 57,
75-108.
Blume, M., 2007, Competition and fragmentation in the equity markets: The effects of regulation
NMS, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Bushman, R. M. and R. J. Indjejikian, 1995, Voluntary disclosures and the trading behavior of
corporate insiders, Journal of Accounting Research 33, 293-316.
Bushman, R. M., J. D. Piotroski, and A. B. Smith, 2005, Insider trading restrictions and analysts'
incentives to follow firms, Journal of Finance 60, 35-66.
Choe, H., B. C. Kho, and R. M. Stulz, 2005, Do domestic investors have an edge? The trading
experience of foreign investors in Korea, Review of Financial Studies 18, 795-829.
Chowdhry, B., and V. Nanda, 1991, Multimarket trading and market liquidity, Review of Financial
Studies 4, 623-656.
Coffee, J. C., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
governance and its implications, Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.
Coffee, J. C., 2007, Law and the market: the impact of enforcement, University of Pennsylvania
Law Review 156, 229-258.

49

Coates, J. C., 2001, Private vs. political choice of securities regulation: A political cost/benefit
analysis, Virginia Journal of International Law 41, 531-582.
Dahlquist, M., L. Pinkowitz, R. M. Stulz, and R. Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance and the
home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.
DeMarzo, P. M., M. J. Fishman, and K. M. Hagerty, 1998, The optimal enforcement of insider
trading regulations, Journal of Political Economy 106, 602-632.
Domowitz, I., J. Glen, and A. Madhavan, 1998, International cross-listing and order flow migration:
Evidence from an emerging market, Journal of Finance 53, 2002-2028.
Diamond, D., and R. Verrecchia, 1991, Disclosure, liquidity, and the cost of capital, Journal of
Finance 56, 1325-1359.
Doidge, C., G. A. Karolyi, and R. M. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the US worth
more?, Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.
Doidge, C., G. A. Karolyi, and R. Stulz, 2008, Has New York become less competitive in global
markets? Evaluating foreign listing choices over time, NBER working paper, NBER, Cambridge,
MA.
Doidge, C., G. A. Karolyi, K. Lins, D. Miller, and R. Stulz, 2008, Private benefits of control,
ownership, and the cross-listing decision, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Durnev, A., and L. Fauver, 2007, Stealing from thieves: Firm governance and performance when
states are predatory, McGill University Working Paper, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
Durnev, A., and E. H. Kim, 2005, To steal or not to steal: Firm attributes, legal environment, and
valuation, Journal of Finance 60, 1461-1493.
Dye, R., 1990, Mandatory versus voluntary disclosures: The cases of financial and real
externalities, The Accounting Review 65, 1-24.
Easley, D., and M. O'Hara, 2004, Information and the cost of capital, Journal of Finance 59, 15531583.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French, 2007, Disagreement, tastes, and asset prices, Journal of Financial
Economics 83, 667-689.
Ferrell, A., 2007, The case for mandatory disclosure in securities regulation around the world,
Brookly Journal of Business Law 81.
Fernandes, N., U. Lel, and D. Miller, 2007, Escape from New York: The market impact of SEC
Rule 12h-6 on foreign private issuers, SMU Working Paper.
Ferrell, A., 2007, The case for mandatory disclosure in securities regulation around the world,
unpublished working paper, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, MA.
Field, L. C., and J. M. Karpoff, 2002, Takeover defenses of IPO firms, Journal of Finance 57, 18571889.

50

Fox, M. B., 1997, Securities disclosure in a globalizing market: Who should regulate whom?,
Michigan Law Review 95, 2501-2632.
Fox, M. B., 2002, US perspectives on global securities market disclosure regulation: A critical
review, European Business Organization Law Review 3, 337-370.
Gehrig, T., 1998, Cities and the geography of financial centers, University of Freiburg working
paper.
Glosten, L. R., and P. R. Milgrom, 1985, Bid, ask and transaction prices in a specialist market with
heterogeneously informed agents, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 71-100.
Gomes, A., 2000, Going public without governance: Managerial reputation effects, Journal of
Finance 55, 615-646.
Grinblatt, M., and M. Keloharju, 2000, The investment behavior and performance of various
investor types: a study of Finland's unique data set, Journal of Financial Economics 55, 43-67.
Grossman, S. 1981, The information role of warranties and private disclosure about product quality,
Journal of Law and Economics 24, 461-488.

Grossman, S. J., and O. Hart, 1986, The costs and benefits of ownership: A theory of
vertical and lateral integration, Journal of Political Economy 94, 691-719.
Hail, L., and C. Leuz, 2006, International Differences in the Cost of Equity Capital: Do
Legal Institutions and Securities Regulation Matter?, Journal of Accounting Research 44,
485-531.
Hail, L. and C. Leuz, 2006, Cost of capital effects and changes in growth expectations around U.S.
cross-listings, ECGI working paper, ECGI.
Hart, O., 2004, The wrong way to avoid a corporate scandal, Financial Times, January 9.
Hart, O., and J. Moore, 1988, Incomplete contracts and renegotiation, Econometrica 56, 755-786.
Helwege, J., C. Pirinsky, and R. M. Stulz, 2007, Why Do Firms Become Widely Held? An Analysis
of the Dynamics of Corporate Ownership, Journal of Finance 62, 995-1028.
Hermalin, B. E., and M. S. Weisbach, 2007, Transparency and Corporate Governance, NBER
Working Paper No. 12875.
Jackson, H. E., and M. J. Roe, 2008, Privae and public enforcement of securities laws: Resourcebased evidence, unpublished manuscript, Harvard Law School.
Karolyi, G. A., 2006, The World of Cross-Listings and Cross-Listings of the World: Challenging
Conventional Wisdom, Review of Finance 10, 73-115.
Karolyi, G. A., and R. Stulz, 2003, Are assets priced locally or globally?, in G. Constantinides, M.
Harris, and R. Stulz, eds.: The Handbook of the Economics of Finance (North-Holland Publishers,
New York, N.Y.).

51

Klein, B., R. G. Crawford, and A. A. Alchian, 1978, Vertical Integration, Appropriable Rents, and
the Competitive Contracting Process, Journal of Law and Economics 21, 297-326.
Kho, B.-C, F. Warnock, and R. Stulz, 2008, Financial globalization, governance, and the home bias,
The Ohio State University Working Paper.
Kyle, A. 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica 53, 1315-1335
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 2006, What works in securities laws?, Journal
of Finance 61, 1-32.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-De-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 2002, Investor protection and
corporate valuation, Journal of Finance 57, 1147-1170.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer, 1999, Corporate Ownership around the World,
The Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.
Lambert, R., C. Leuz, and R. E. Verrecchia, 2007, Accounting information, disclosure, and the cost
of capital, Journal of Accounting Research 45, 385-420.
Laeven, L., and R. Levine, 2008, Complex ownership structures and corporate valuations, Review
of Financial Studies 21, 579-604.
Leuz, C., K. V. Lins, and F. Warnock, 2008, Do foreigners invest less in poorly governed firms?,
Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Leuz, C., and F. Oberholzer-Gee, 2006, Political relationships, global financing, and corporate
transparency: Evidence from Indonesia, Journal of Financial Economics 81, 411-439.
Leuz, C., and P. Wysocki, 2008, Economic Consequences of Financial Reporting and Disclosure
Regulation: A Review and Suggestions for Future Research, University of Chicago Working Paper.
Lombardo, D., and M. Pagano, 2002, Law and Equity Markets: A Simple Model, in Joe McCahery,
Pieter Moerland, Theo Raaijmakers, and Luc Renneboog, eds.: Corporate Governance Regimes:
Convergence and Diversity (Oxford University Press).
Malkamäki, M., 1999, Are there economies of scale in stock exchange activities?, Bank of Finland
Discussion Papers.
Merton, R. C., 1990, The Financial-System and Economic-Performance, Journal of Financial
Services Research 4, 263-300.
Pagano, M., 1989, Trading Volume and Asset Liquidity, Quarterly Journal of Economics 104, 255274.

Pagano, M., and P. F. Volpin, 2005, The Political Economy Of Corporate Governance,
American Economic Review 95, 1005-1030.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales, 2003, The Great Reversals: The Politics Of Financial
Development In The Twentieth Century, Journal of Financial Economics 69, 5-50.

52

Rock, E., 2002, Securities regulation as lobster trap: A credible commitment theory of mandatory
disclosure, Cardozo Law Review, 675-704.
Romano, R., 2001, The need for competition in international securities regulation, Theoretical
Inquiries in Law 2.
Shleifer, A., and D. Wolfenzon, 2002, Investor protection and equity markets, Journal of Financial
Economics 66, 3-27.
Siems, M., 2008, The foundations of securities law, unpublished working paper, University of
Edinburgh.
Siegel, J., 2005, Can foreign firms bond themselves effectively by renting US securities laws?,
Journal of Financial Economics 75, 319-359.
Spiegel, M. I. , and X. Wang, 2005, Cross-sectional Variation in Stock Returns: Liquidity and
Idiosyncratic Risk, Yale ICF Working Paper No. 05-13
Stulz, R. M., 1999, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.
Stulz, R. M., 2005, The limits of financial globalization, Journal of Finance 60, 1595-1638.
Stulz, R. M. and W. Wasserfallen, 1995, Foreign equity investment restrictions, capital flight, and
shareholder wealth maximization: Theory and evidence, Review of Financial Studies 8, 1019-1057.
Tesar, L. L., and I. M. Werner, 1995, Home Bias and High Turnover, Journal of International
Money and Finance 14, 467-492.
Zingales, L., 2004, The costs and benefits of financial market regulation, ECGI Working Paper
Series in Law, ECGI.
Zingales, L., 2007, Is the U.S. capital market losing its competitive edge?, Journal of Economic
Perspectives, forthcoming.

53

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1
(1) When production always takes place at date 1, we solve for K using the rationality constraints of
the outside shareholders:

K=

W0
E ( μ )(1 − f * )
1 − (1 − α ) 0
r

(A1)

Using the solution for K, we can rewrite the entrepreneur’s optimization problem as
2

max α

α + 0.5bf *
E 0 ( μ )W0 r
r − (1 − α )(1 − f * ) E 0 ( μ )
2

α + 0.5bf *
Let G (α ) =
. The first-order condition for the entrepreneur’s
r − (1 − α )(1 − f * ) E0 ( μ )
optimization

problem

is

met

if

G’(α)

D(α ) = r − (1 − α )(1 − f * ) E0 ( μ ) . Thus, G (α ) =

=

0.

N (α ) = α + 0.5bf *

Let

2

and

N (α )
.
D(α )

Consequently:

G ′(α ) =

(

)

(

2

)

N ′(α ) D − ND ′(α ) (1 − f * ) r − (1 − α )(1 − f * ) E 0 ( μ ) − α + 0.5bf * (1 − 2 f * ) E 0 ( μ )
=
D2
D2

The first-order condition of the objective function is:

(1 − f *) (r − (1 − α*)(1 − f *) E0 ( μ)) = (α * +0.5bf *2 )(1 − 2 f *) E0 ( μ)

(A2)

It can be verified that the second-order condition holds when the first-order condition is met.
(2) When production only takes place if E1 ( μ ) = μ + , we solve for K using the rationality
constraint of the outside shareholders:

54

K=

W0
((1 − f * ) pμ + + (1 − p)r )
1 − (1 − α )
r

(A3)

We can rewrite the entrepreneur’s problem as

max α

α ( pμ + + (1 − p) r ) + 0.5bf *2 pμ +
W0 r
r − (1 − α )((1 − f * ) pμ + + (1 − p) r )

Proceeding in the same way as for part (1), we obtain the first-order condition of the objective
function:
(1 − qf * )( r − (1 − α * )(1 − f *) pμ + ) = (α * + 0.5bqf *2 )(1 − 2 f *) pμ + + (1 − 0.5bqf *2 )(1 − p ) r

where q =

(A4)

pμ +
.
pμ + + (1 − p)r

It can again be verified that the second-order condition holds.

Proof of Proposition 2
(1) The entrepreneur in country G can always mimic the entrepreneur in country B. Since the
entrepreneur in country G does not start production at date 1 when the project’s
productivity is μ − , she can always raise more capital at date 0 than the firm from country
B everything else equal. If K = W0 for the entrepreneur in country B, K > W0 is possible for
the entrepreneur in country G since K from equation (A2) is higher than K from equation
(A3).
(2) For ease of presentation, we abuse notation slightly. Let K G (α ) and K B (α ) denote the
project size given insider ownership, respectively in country G and country B. From the
rationality constraints in the two countries, we have the following:

K B (α ) =

W0 r
r − (1 − α )(1 − f * ) E 0 ( μ )

55

K G (α ) =

W0 r
⎛
(1 − p) ⎞
r − (1 − α )(1 − f * )⎜⎜ pμ + +
r⎟
(1 − f * ) ⎟⎠
⎝

Clearly, K G (α ) > K B (α ) . Furthermore, it can be verified that K B′ (α ) < 0 .
We will show below that α G < α B . Therefore, K G (α G ) > K B (α G ) > K B (α B ) .
(3) The firm in country B has lower expected output per unit of capital before the
entrepreneur’s diversion of private benefits, since the average expected output in country G
is μ + , whereas in country B, the average expected output is E 0 ( μ ) .
(4) Tobin’s q in this model is given by (1 − f B ) E 0 ( μ ) for the firm in country B and

(1 − f G ) pμ + + (1 − p)r for the firm in country G. Since we show below that α G < α B
and f =

1− α
, f
b

B

< f G , i.e., the entrepreneur diverts more when she has less cash

flow ownership. However this effect on q is second order when compared to the
other two more dominant effects. First, she diverts cash flow only when the state is
good, i.e. E1(μ) = μ+ in country G; whereas in country B she always expropriates. Second,
she will not invest in negative NPV projects in country G but she will in country B.
(5) From proof of Proposition I, we know that the first-order conditions for the maximization
problem the entrepreneur faces in country B and country G are obtained by setting the
following expressions to zero:

LB (α ) = (1 − f * ) ( r − (1 − α )(1 − f * ) E0 ( μ ) ) − (α + 0.5bf *2 ) (1 − 2 f * ) E0 ( μ )W0 r

J G (α ) = (1 − qf * ) ( r − (1 − α )((1 − f * ) p μ + + (1 − p )r ) )
− (α + 0.5bqf *2 ) ⎡⎣(1 − 2 f * ) p μ + + (1 − p )r ⎤⎦

56

We can now prove that for a given level of α, LB (α ) > J G (α ) . Consequently, since

both LB (α ) and J G (α ) have to decrease in α for the second-order conditions to be
satisfied, the only way that both first-order conditions can be satisfied is if α is greater in
country B than in country G. To see this, note that:

LB (α ) − J G (α )

= (1 − f )(1 − α )(1 − p ) ⎡⎣ r − (1 − f ) μ − ⎤⎦ + (α + 0.5bf 2 ) (1 − p ) ⎡⎣ r − (1 − 2 f ) μ − ⎤⎦
− ⎡⎣ f (1 − q ) r − 0.5bf 2 (1 − p ) r ⎤⎦
By definition, q =

pμ +
> p . Therefore,
pμ + + (1 − p)r

L B (α ) − J G (α ) >

(1 − f )(1 − α )(1 − p ) ⎡⎣ r − (1 − f ) μ − ⎤⎦ + (α + 0.5bf 2 ) (1 − p ) ⎡⎣ r − (1 − 2 f ) μ − ⎤⎦
− ⎣⎡ f (1 − p ) r − 0.5bf 2 (1 − p ) r ⎤⎦
Rearranging the terms, we obtain the following expression:

LB (α ) − J G (α )

[

]

(

)

> (1 − α )(1 − f ) 2 + (α + 0.5bf 2 )(1 − 2 f ) (1 − p) r − μ − + 0.5 f (1 + α )(1 − p )r > 0
It follows from this expression that LB (α ) > J G (α ) .
(6) Since all firms raise capital in our setup and firms in country G has lower insider
ownership α G < α B , it follows that more shares are available to outside shareholder in
country G.

57

