                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE SHORT—RUN DEMAND FOR MONEY:
                        A RECONSIDERATION



                         Robert   J. Gordon



                      Working Paper No. 142l




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1981




I am grateful to Stephen Goldfeld, Michael Hamburger, and Paul
Spindt for providing data, to Nathan Balke for research assistance,
to William Barnett, James Davidson, Ian Domowitz, Stephen Goldfeld,
Stephen King, David Laidler, and Andrew Rose for their comments on
a closely related earlier paper (198a), to James Clause for his
insightful criticisms of an early version of this draft, and to
Joan Robinson for her masterful handling of the production process.
This research has been supported by the National Science
Foundation. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                   BER Working Paper 1/1421
                                                   August 1984

                    The Short—Run Demand for Money:
                           A Reconsideration


                                ABSTRACT



     The partial—adjustment approach to the specification of the short—
run demand for money has dominated the literature for more than a
decade. There are three basic problems with this approach. First, the
same lag structure is imposed on all variables, and each independent
variable enters only as a current value. In contrast a rational
individual would respond to different variables (income, interest rates,
prices) with quite different lags. Second, when the general price level
is subject to gradual adjustment hut can move quickly in response to
supply shocks, the influence of these supply shocks should enter with a
negative sign. Third, the estimated equation for real balances may not
be a money demand equation at all, but rather its coefficients may
represent a shifting mixture of demand and supply responses.

     The empirical work examines several alternative dynamic specifica-
tions, including a generalized partial adjustment framework and the
error—correction model. Both of the latter specifications exhibit
greater structural stability after 1973 than the standard partial
adjustment specification, and the generalized partial adjustment model
also yields relatively small errors in post—sample dynamic simulations.
Shifts in coefficients as the sample period is extended after 1973 are
consistent with the interpretation that the real balance equation no
longer traces out structural demand parameters, hut rather a mixture of
demand and supply responses.




                                           Robert J. Gordon
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Northwestern University
                                           Evanston, IL 60201

                                           (312) 492—3616
                                        TABLE OF CONTENTS


  I •   INTRODUCTION.               •   •••••                 .           1


  II. DISTINGUISHING THE SHORT—RUN AND LONG—RUN FUNCTIONS                 4

           The Standard Approach                      .                   4
           The Short—run Demand for Money: Who Needs It?                  6

III. ADJUSTMENTATTHEINDIVIDUALLEVEL                                  12

           Portfolio Adjustment Costs for an Individual              12
           Revision of the Standard Formulation
              of Short—run Dynamics                .                 15

 IV.    TIlE AGGREGATE LEVEL.                                        19

           TheGradua1Ad1ustientofprjces                              19
               Figure 1                                              23A
          Money Demand orMoney Supply Function?                      24
          A New Interpretation of Parameter Instability              27

  V. DYNAMIC SPECIFICATION AND ERROR CORRECTION                      28

          Dynamic Specification itt        the   General
              Single—Equation Case                                   29
          Application to the Short—run Demand for Money              33

 VI. EMPIRICAL RESULTS                                               36

          BasicResults for theSixModels                              36
              Table 1                                                36A
          The Carter Credit Controls and
              Shifts inMonetaryRegimes                               41
              Table 2....                                            42A
              Table 3           •
                                                                     43A
          The 1981—83 "VelocityPuzzle                                44
              Table 4                                                45A

VII. CONCLUSION                                                      46

          Relation of Empirical Results to Preceding Analysis        46
          Verdict on the Alternative Models of Dynamic Adjustment.   48

          References                                                 50
                            I. INTRODUCTION

     Slightly more than a decade ago, the demand for money was one of

the least controversial topics in macroeconomics, both in its underlying

theory and in the stability and plausibility of empirical coefficient

estimates. Conference sessions on the demand for money were an oasis of

tranquility when compared to the controversial state of Phillips curves

and aggregate supply macroeconomics in general. While the theory of the

long—run demand for money remains essentially intact, a cloud of

uncertainty now hangs over the entire subject of the short—run demand

for money. This general air of discomfort originates partly in the

much—researched "Goldfeld puzzle" (1976) of too little money and too

much velocity in the mid—1970s and has been reinforced by the more

recent puzzle of too much money and too little velocity in 1981—83.

     But there are deeper issues at stake as well. The empirical

relationships estimated under the heading of "short—run money demand"

even on pre—1973 data yielded a large coefficient on the lagged depen-

dent variable and were plagued by substantial residual autocorrelation.

While "inertia" in the adjustment of real money balances was usually

explained as resulting from portfolio adjustment costs, LaidiLer (1982)

and Gordon (1984a) have suggested that the short—run money demand

function may be partly a Phillips curve in disguise. Sluggish adjust-

ment of real balances may reflect inertia in aggregate price adjustment

as well as inertia in portfolio adjustment, and some of the post—1973

instability in the short—run money demand function may he a side effect

of shifts in the Phillips curve that occurred as a result of supply

shocks in 1973—75.

    The recognition of inertia in the inflation process leads to other
                                   2




reasons for doubt that a short—run structural demand for money function

can be identified (Cooley—Leroy, 1981; Coats, 1982). The usual function

explains real balances as depending on current output and interest rates

and lagged real balances. If prices are sticky, then the burden of

achieving short—run adjustment to changing output and interest rates

must be carried by the nominal money supply. If the central bank in an

attempt to stabilize interest rates allows the money supply to respond

instantly and fully to changes in output and interest rates, then these

passive shifts in the money supply function will trace Out the desired

short—run money demand function. But if the central bank abandons

interest rate stabilization and instead targets the growth rate of the

nominal money supply, then roles are reversed and output and interest

rates become endogenous variables responding to money. Although the

Federal Reserve neither completely stabilized short—term interest rates

nor monetary growth for any substantial interval during the post—Accord

period, nevertheless there is widespread agreement that over time the

Fed shifted its emphasis from interest rate stabilization to monetary

aggregate targeting. If this shift did take place, then coefficients in

conventional equations in journal articles on the "demand for money" may

actually represent a shifting mixture of demand and supply responses.

    This paper attempts to provide a new interpretation of the short—

run demand for money that emphasizes the multiple relations among the

four major variables that enter the standard money demand function——the

nominal money supply, real output, the price level, and the interest

rate. Even the most recent investigations and literature surveys on the

"Coldfeld money demand puzzle" give little attention to the other

functional relations that involve the four variables. These include the
                                   3




short—run Phillips curve that explains price changes as depending on the

level and change in output and (at least implicitly) past changes in

money; the short—run money supply function that relates the money supply

to the monetary base, interest rates, reserve requirements, and the

discount rate; the money reaction function that relates the monetary

base to one or more determinants of money demand, including output,

prices, and interest rates; and the closely related equations describing

the evolution of the rate of change of money as depending on past

monetary changes and unemployment, used for the purpose of proxying the

concept of "anticipated monetary change" in the work of Barro (1977),

Barro—Rush (1980) and their followers. The existence of these "other"

relationships linking money, output, the price level, and the interest

rate suggests that the short—run money demand functions estimated

heretofore may be better viewed as "interesting reduced forms rather

than as structural equations that provide estimates of coefficients

corresponding to structural parameters derived from the theory of

portfolio behavior. Shifts in coefficients in these reduced forms rry

not reflect changes in portfolio behavior but rather (a) movements of

variables in the "other' equations that are incorrectly omitted from the

equation explaining real balances (e.g., supply shocks and price con—

trols in the Phillips curve equation), (b) instability in the coeffi-

cients in the "other" equations, or (c) a shift in control regimes by

the central bank.

     In addition to its discussion of specification issues in this

multi—equation context, the paper provides new econometric estimates of

equations explaining nominal or real money balances. The primary

emphasis in the empirical section is on loosening the constraints on
                                   4




dynamic adjustment behavior that have been almost universally imposed

in the short—run money demand literature. In particular, equations with

otherwise identical sets of explanatory variables are estimated for

several different classes of dynamic adlustment models, including the

conventional "Koyck log level" approach, first—difference changes, and

the "error—correction" model advocated by David Hendry (1980a, 1980b),

James Davidson (1984a, 1984b), and their collaborators. Differences in

results with the alternative dynamic models are discussed within the

multi—equation context, and each model is subjected to dynamic post—

sample simulations over the decade since 1973 and the four years after

the shift in monetary control regimes in late 1979.

     In light of the large literature on the conventional approach,

including the recent surveys by Laidler (1977, 1980) and by Judd and

Scadding (1982), no attempt is made here to review systematically the

papers that address the issues under discussion. Instead, the emphasis

in the theoretical section is on establishing links between the short—

run demand for money function and related topics in time series

macroeconometrics, and in the empirical section is on interpreting

coefficients estimated for alternative models of the adjustment process

in light of the foregoing theoretical analysis.



        II. DISTINGUISHING THE SHORT—RUN AND LONG—RUN FUNCTIONS


The Standard Approach


     The long—run and short—run concepts of the demand for money are

distinguished by the absence of adjustment costs in the former and their

presence in the latter. Allowing upper—case letters to stand for log
                                                5




levels (and reserving lower—case letters subsequently for growth rates),

the long—run demand for real balances in logs (M —             Pt)    depends on a

vector of variables (X):


            M — Pt    =
(1)                           f(Xt),   or


                          =
                               f(X)    ÷


The long—run demand for money function assumes that tastes are constant

and that individuals can adjust their holdings of money instantly and

costlessly to any change in the. vector of the variables (X) that

determine money holdings. A universal feature of every theory of the

long—run demand for money is homogeneity of degree one with respect to

the price level. The demand for money is a demand for real balances,

and in fact this distinction between real and nominal balances is

sometimes invoked to support the feasibility of identifying a demand for

money function that is separate from a money supply or money reaction

function.

      Because of adjustment costs, actual real money balances (M—P) are

not always equal to the desired amount (M—P). Only a portion (n) of

the gap between desired and actual real balances is closed in a single

discrete time period (denoted by the subscript "t"), implying that the

current level of real balances is a weighted average of the desired

level and of lagged real balances:


                      =
(2)         Mt — Pt           n(M_P)       +
                                               (l_n)(Mi_Pi),         0 < q   1.



When (1) and (2) are combined, the demand for real balances can be

written:
                                         6




(3)           Mt —     = flf(X)   +
                                      (l—n)(Mi_Pi).
When the vector "X" is made to include real output, a short—term market

interest rate, and the interest rate on savings deposits, (3) is exactly

the specification used in Goldfeld's original paper (1973) and that

yields a post—1972 prediction puzzle.

        The long—run function (1) asks how much money individuals would

hold in hypothetical alternative circumstances in which the elements of

the "X" vector take on different values. The short—run function

attributes the sluggish adjustment of the observed values of real

balances in response to the more volatile "K" changes to postulated

portfolio adjustment costs, with unity minus the estimated coefficient

on the lagged dependent variable (1—(1—n)) = n interpreted as the

portfolio adustrnent coefficient, and (1—n)/n as the average adjustment

lag. The formulation (3) is not the only possible representation of

adjustment costs. Below we examine the implications of several

variations, including adjustment costs for nominal rather than real

balances (as suggested by Goldfeld, 1976), and separate adjustment

processes for nominal balances and prices.


The    Short—run Demand for ionev:     Who Needs It?

        The   concept of the long—run demand for money plays such a central
role    in macroeconomic theory that it is    difficult to imagine living
without it. Numerous theoretical exercises in monetary theory,

including the study of optimal inflation and other long—run issues, are

based on the standard twin assumptions that the supply of money is

exogenous and that the demand for money is stable. Often in such models

the price level does the necessary quick maneuvering to equate the
                                       7




demand for nominal balances to the exogenous supply. Similarly, stable

long—run money demand functions, both at home and abroad, are key

ingredients in the monetary theory of the balance of payments and the

more recent monetary theory of exchange rate determination. In

macroeconomic theory for the closed economy, it has become common to

specify aggregate real demand (Q) as an inverted money demand function,

e.g., Q = c(M—P) +   v,   with interest rates omitted and v treated as white

noise.

     What seems less clear is the need for a short—run money demand

function. This startling assertion may seem even more preposterous to

the large number of economists who have struggled to find a stable

empirical function. But there are good reasons to doubt the need for

this concept, from both a monetarist and a Keynesian perspective.

     Monetarists, while providing the intellectual underpinnings for

central bank monetary targets, usually show disdain for and disinterest

in short—run relationships, reflecting their long time horizon in

interpreting economic behavior (M. Friedman, 1968). Thus there was

little consternation in the monetarist camp at the velocity collapse of

1981—83. Even though this velocity shift implied that nominal GNP in

late 1983 was about 10 percent lower than would have been predicted in

mid—1981 based on the historical growth of velocity, most monetarists

seemed unperturbed by this shift, and none were observed to confess the

need to abandon monetary targets under such circumstances.' This

indifference to drift in the predictions of short—run money—demand




1The 10 percent figure is the cumulative shortfall of Mi velocity in the
eight quarters of 1982 and 1983 from the 1969—80 trend. The correspond-
ing figure for M2 is 9 percent.
                                          8




functions may reflect the general monetarist belief that any deflection

of nominal GNP from the previously anticipated path will be reflected

mainly in prices rather than output over any but the shortest time
               2
perspective.

        Keynesians also have good reasons to be unperturbed by instability

in the short—run demand for money function. Some economists, mostly of

the Keynesian persuasion, have examined the possibility that the central

bank might target nominal GNP rather than one or more monetary

aggregates. tn one version of nominal GNP targeting, a desired growth

path of nominal GNP is chosen that yields the socially optimal

combination of inflation (p) and detrended output (Q), given the

constraint imposed by the economy's reduced—form Phillips curve:


(4)        Pt =    Pti   +        +   +


Here for convenience only one lagged value of inflation is entered,
                                                                        z
represents a vector of supply shock" variables, and c is an error

term.    (4) can be combined with the identity:


(5)                      +y   -
                                  q
where      —
               q   is excess nominal GNP growth, i.e., the excess of actual

nominal GNP growth (ye) over the trend or 'natural" growth rate of




2lronically, in light of his earlier writings that stress the long run,
M. Friedman has recently made widely publicized forecasts based on
extreme short—run quarter—to—quarter relationships. See Guzzardi (1984)
and M. Friedman (1984).


3Support and analysis can be found in Bean (1983), Feldstein (1984),
Gordon (1983), Hall (1983), Meade (1978), and Tobin (1980, 1983).
                                   9




output (q). This creates a two—equation model of the dynamic response

of output and inflation, that explains the behavior of Pt and      given

the exogenous variables z, t and q. When an empirical estimate of

(4) is combined with (5), an optimal path of nominal GNP growth can be

determined that minimizes the policymakers' loss function.

     If the primary short—run links between the policy instruments under

the Fed's immediate control and the nominal GNP target are short—term

interest rates, then there is little reason for concern with the short—

run demand for money function. Once a nominal GNP target path is chosen

from simulations of (4) and (5), the central bank would use its

influence on short—term nominal interest rates to "lean against"

deviations of forecast nominal GNP growth from the target path without

any reference to the money supply.4 In the context of nominal GNP

targeting, then, the supply of one or more arbitrarily defined monetary

aggregates would be shifted from central stage to backstage.5

     It may require some mental readjustment for the economics

profession to demote the money supply to a second—order economic




4The scope for stabilizing nominal GNP through an interest—rate feedback
rule is demonstrated in Gordon (1984c).


51n this sentence the phrase "arbitrarily defined" refers to the
meaninglessness of the current distinction between Ml and M2. The
balances that I use for all my transactions in a "Fidelity USA" account
are included in M2, not Ml, whereas the "NOW" and "Super NOW" accounts
that provide inferior services at greater cost are included in both Ml
and M2. The distinction between MI and M2 tells us more about the
distribution of income and wealth than about the transaction motive for
holding money balances, since the only harrier to establishing a multi-
purpose interest—paying account like the Merrill—Lynch CMA or Fidelity
USA is a purely transitory entry deposit of $10,000 or $20,000. This
entry fee is transitory, because one can write a check against it the
instant the account is established and thereafter maintain an average
balance of close to zero.
                                   10




variable for short—run analysis. But events have now shown to be

obsolete the major reason to pay attention to money, that is, its

presumed causal connection with inflation. When the two years 1981—83

are compared with the decade average for 1970—80, the growth rate of Ml

accelerated by 2.6 percentage points and that of M2 by 0.7 percentage

points. If most economists had been told in 1980 that this acceleration

of monetary growth was about to occur, they would have predicted that

there would be a further acceleration in inflation. Yet, as everyone

knows, the actual outcome was a sharp reduction in the inflation rate,

from 9.2 percent in 1980 to 4.2 percent in 1983 for the GNP implicit

deflator.6 The recent experience conflicts with the much—quoted maxim

that "inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon" and

suggests its replacement with a new truism that (at least in the long

run) "inflation is always and everywhere an excess nominal GNP growth

phenomenon." That is, when output is growing at its long—run trend rate

and the output ratio    is zero, (5) becomes:


                  —
          Pt =


     The foregoing argument can be related to the role of money in the

simple IS—LM model of undergraduate macroeconomics textbooks. Once the

IS and LM curves are combined to form the economy's aggregate demand

schedule, there is no reason for special attention to the money

supply. If the supply of money is determined by the central bank




6The growth rate figures for Ml and M2 are quarterly rates expressed on
an annual basis for the eight quarters 1981:Ql through 1983:Q4 compared
with the average for the 44 quarters between l970:Q1 and 1980:Q4.
Inflation figures are annual averages.
                                   11




through its conduct of open market operations and discount rate policy,

those instruments (together with fiscal policy) are then the arguments

of the aggregate demand function. Most of the "big issues" in

macroeconomics, particularly the determinants of output fluctuations and

inflation, can be stated in terms of the interaction of this aggregate

demand schedule with an aggregate supply function, without need for

separate reference to the IS or LM curves. The one important topic that

requires the IS—LM apparatus, rather than the aggregate demand curve, is

the dependence of the interest rate on the mix of monetary and fiscal

policy. But even here the money supply is unimportant once the central

bank targets on nominal GNP, since now the "mix" issue can be translated

into a positive dependence of the natural rate of interest on the fiscal

deficit for any given level of nominal GNP.

     These questions about the need for the short—run money demand

concept are related to Benjamin Friedman's (1977) critique of short—run

monetary targets. Friedman argued that an intermediate target procedure

based on the money stock hinders policymakers from making optimal use of

available information, but nevertheless money may still be an important

information variable. We argue that in a short—run context there is no

need for one or more monetary aggregate concepts to intervene between

the central bank's direct operating instruments and its ultimate

objective of controlling nominal GNP. The money stock continues to be

interesting only to the extent that its past values help the central

bank forecast deviations of nominal GNP growth from target, or to the

extent that money directly determines nominal GNP over and above the

contributions of the primary operating instruments of the central bank——

unborrowed reserves and short—term interest rates.
                                    12




                 III. ADJUSTMENT AT THE INDIVIDUAL LEVEL


Portfolio Adjustment Costs for an Individual


      Equation (2) above is the standard approach to modelling the short—

run adjustment of real money balances for an individual. This approach,

which goes back to Eisner—Strotz (1963) and Griliches (1967), views an

agent as facing a tradeoff between the costs of being off his long—run

money—demand function (1), and transactions costs that are incurred in

proportion to the change per period in real balances. If we write the

two types of costs (K1 and K2) in quadratic form, and use the i

subscript to denote individual variables, we have:


(6)         K1 =

(7)         K2 =

The cost—minimizing adjustment will take place according to (2), with

the adjustment parameter n =

      However, doubt about the appropriateness of this adjustment

formulation arises from a consideration of alternative shocks to which

our representative agent may be subjected. Let desired holdings of real

balances in time period t depend on the expected level of the

individual's real income (Q) and of the opportunity cost of holding

money (R), where Rt is properly interpreted as the difference between

the interest paid on alternatives to money and the own—interest on

money:


(8)      f(X) =        ctQ+ a2Re.

The standard approach to the specification of the short—run demand for
                                     13




money assumes that we can maintain the individual adjustment equation

for analysis with aggregate data. Thus, dropping the "i" subscript,

when Q and R are replaced by their own current values, and (6) is

substituted into (3), and we allow for an error term, we have the

standard Goldfeld specification:


                    =
(9)        Mt —                           + (l_rD(M 1—   +
                                                             Ut.

      This formulation implies that actual money holdings adjust with the

same coefficient (n) to changes in either output or interest rates. Yet

a consideration of individual portfolio behavior suggests that in

general the adjustment to income and interest rate changes should be

quite different.

      Let us examine an agent's reaction to the following hypothetical

events:

          A. An anticipated increase in real income due, say, to a

scheduled wage increase occurs on January 1. There is clearly no

adjustment cost in raising real balances if wages are paid in the form

of money. When income is paid in the form of money, as still occurs for

most labor income, dividends, and some kinds of proprietors' income, the

relevant portfolio adjustment cost is not in raising real money balances

in response to higher income, but rather in reducing the initial receipt

through reallocation to other forms of assets, e.g., savings accounts,

bonds, and equities.7

          B. An unanticipated increase in real income causes no more




7The major type of income paid in a form other than Ml is accrued
interest on assets not included in Ml, where interest is credited to the
account rather than paid by check.
                                    14




adjustment cost in raising real balances than a fully anticipated

 increase, as long as income is paid in the form of money. The main

difference in the case of an income •surprise" is the presumed greater

magnitude of portfolio reallocation costs. For an individual managing a

portfolio consisting only of Ml and a savings account, when higher

income is expected in advance, Ml can he temporarily depleted in

anticipation of the forthcoming payment (thus reducing the excess to be

transferred to savings), whereas this advance depletion cannot occur in

the case of an income surprise.

        C. A government transfer payment distributed in the form of

money, the classroom example of "helicopter money" or "money rain," is

identical to any other form of income surprise received in the form of

money. There is no portfolio adjustment cost in raising real balances,

but only in reducing them as part of the process of portfolio

reallocation.

        D.   If financial markets operate efficiently, then changes in

interest rates are unanticipated. Real money balances adjust slowly to

changes in interest rates for two reasons, both the delay in adjusting

expectations of the interest rate level in the determination of M, and

the partial closing of any gap between M and     due to transaction

costs. Thus at the individual level gradual adjustment of real balances

makes sense for interest rates but not for real income, leading us to

question the specification in (3) that forces an identical adjustment

speed on each component of the "X" vector of independent variables.

        E. From the individual point of viet, an open—market operation

is like any other cause of a change in interest rates. The government

bond purchase changes interest rates enough to induce sufficient
                                             15




portfolio holders to shift from bonds to money. A government transfer

financed by bond issue can he viewed as a combination of cases C and E,

with the recipients of the transfer payment actually paid in money,

while a concurrent open—market purchase shifts the portfolio of other

individuals by enough to leave the money supply constant.

          F. Finally, consider a "price surprise" due to a higher price

of energy. Real income and real balances decline simultaneously. There

is no adjustment cost, because the individual does not control the price

level. The decline in real balances occurs effortlessly, without any

transactions taking place. Once again, as in the cases A, B, and C, the

change in real balances is observed to occur simultaneously with the

occurrence of the shock, with no adjustment lag or transaction cost

incurred.


Revision of the Standard Formulation of Short—run Dynamics


       Two changes are suggested by this discussion for the standard

dynamic adjustment formulation in equations (2) and (3) above. First,

the absence of adjustment costs in response to a price surprise suggests

that it is costly to adjust nominal rather than real balances, so that

equation (2) should be rewritten in nominal form:


            Mt =      XM   +
(2')                           (1—X)M1, implying

(3')        Mt =   Xf(X)       + Xl   +
                                          (X)M.
For estimation purposes (3') can be rewritten


(10)        Mt — Pt    =   Xf(X)      +
                                          (I—X)(M1—P).

We can see that (10) is equivalent to the original "real' adjustment
                                      16




formulation (3), with the addition of a previously omitted variable, the

rate of inflation:


(10')         Mt — Pt    Xf(Xt) +                    —
                                    (l—X)(M_i—P_i)       (l—A)(P—Pi).

In Goldfeld's classic paper (1973) that later yielded the "Goldfeld

puzzle," the real adjustment hypothesis was used as in (9). But in his

reexamination of the puzzle, Goldfeld (1976) shifted to the nominal

adjustment hypothesis. That this switch occurred after the 1973—75

"price surprises" is understandable, although Goldfeld (1976) did not

explicitly discuss the implausibility of (2) nor give more than cursory

attention to "price effects" (pp. 702—4).

        The nominal adjustment scheme of (2') is more plausible than the

real adjustment hypothesis of (2), but it still constrains the adjust-

ment of real balances to all the components of the X vector to he

identical. An interesting point to note about (10) is that dPt/dMt
= 1/X > 1,     whereas in the long run dPt/dM = 1.       This implausible

structure is another symptom of the more general problem that the

reasons given for gradual adjustment of nominal or real money balances

in the case of an individual actually imply overshooting and non—

gradually—adjusting price behavior in the aggregate.8

     The basic problem encountered in cases A, B, and C, the fact that

income is paid in the form of money, can he surmounted by distinguishing

between money holdings at the end of the last period and at the

beginning of this period, If we denote money holdings at the beginning

of a period as M't and at the end of a period as M, and if we designate




8i am grateful to Jim Clouse for this point.
                                       17




       as the receipt of money at the beginning of the period in the form

of expected or unexpected income or a government transfer payment, then

         Mt_i +   m.
Thus (2') is replaced as the adjustment equation by:9


                       XM +
(2")
                              (l)(lt_i+mP.
       To provide a specific example of the implications of (2") for

empirically estimated money demand equations, let us adopt as a

hypothesis about expectations that the income concept relevant for money

demand (Q) is Friedman's "permanent income' (1959), estimated from a

geometrically declining distributed lag, and that the interest rate is

expected to follow a random walk:




                             j=0

(12)              =
                       Ri.
When (11) and (12) substituted into (8), and then into (2"), we have:


(13) Mt =              + a1(1)•=0 Q     + c2R1   +   p1   +
                                                              (1—X)(Mi
                                                                         +
                                                                             m).
                                   j


       Now let us assume that a windfall gain in real income occurs (c'),

and that it is paid out in rioney at the beginning of the period

(c = mi).      Then with the additional simplifying assumption that income




9Coats (1982) derives an equation in the form (2") but does not pursue
its implications as in (13) — (15) below. Laidler (1982) also intro-
duces the distinction between individual money holdings at the end of
last period and at the beginning of this period.
                                            18




in all previous periods has been a constant equal to Q0, so                  =

Q0
     +

we obtain from (13):


(14) Mt =      X[a0
                      +
                          a1Q0+   a2Ri +   P]    +
                                                     [1—X(1-a1(1—fl]c   +
                                                                            (l_X)Mtr
The second term in brackets is the coefficient on the current innovation

in income, and this is quite different from the coefficient (Xc) that

is implied by the conventional approach (7). More generally, allowing a

separate innovation over each period in the past, (14) can he general-

ized to:


                =           +                             +
(15)
           t                    a1(Q0+(1-)                    2Ri + Pl
                      +


An inspection of (15) reveals three aspects of dynamic adjustment that

are ignored in the conventional specification (9). These are (a) the

inclusion of lagged terms as well as the current term for real output,

(b) the difference in the coefficient on the current output innovation

from the geometric structure of the coefficients on lagged output inno-

vations, and (c) the different adjustment lag for output changes than

for interest rate changes. A further feature of this analysis is the

dependence of the coefficient on current output on the assumption that

all of the current income innovation is paid in the form of money.

If only a fraction is paid as money, the coefficient would he different,

and in an aggregate time series context the coefficient on income might

change over time with shifts in payment practices and technology.
                                    19




                        IV.   THE AGGREGATE LEVEL


     The preceding analysis follows the usual practice of making no

distinction between the individual and aggregate level. The "i"

subscript was introduced in the statement of adjustment costs perceived

by an individual in equations (6) and (7), but otherwise variables were

written without the "1" subscript, as if the reference agent's behavior

could be treated without qualification as identical to that of the

aggregate economy. Laidler (1982) has also examined the distinction

between the individual and aggregate levels, and has developed alter-

native interpretations of the coefficient on the lagged dependent

variable appearing in equations like (3) or (10). We shall not repeat

here his analysis of the distinction between portfolio adjustment costs

and the formation of expectations about permanent income, Rather, we

provide here a further analysis of two other issues that arise at the

aggregate level. Individuals are price takers and are not concerned

with price adjustment, but prices must somehow adjust at the aggregate

level; problems introduced by gradual price adjustment are examined in

the next section. Subsequently we examine problems introduced by the

possibility that nominal money is partly or completely exogenous at the

aggregate level.


The Gradual Adjustment of Prices


     Much of my recent research has emphasized an approach to macro-

economic analysis that combines the long—run neutrality aspects of the

natural rate hypothesis with the short—run gradual adjustmnt of prices

("NRH—GAP"). In Gordon (1982a) I showed that this approach could make

sense of the behavior of output and price changes in quarterly data back
                                     20




to 1890 and could explain postwar observations with a standard error

several orders of magnitude smaller than the parallel research of Barro

and Rush (1980). Some of the implications of gradual price adjustment,

together with proposed explanations of sticky price behavior in product

markets, are provided in Gordon (1981) and Okun (1981). Here we examine

the main implications for the dynamic specification of short—run money

demand equations.

       Laidler (1982) derives an adjustment equation in which agents are

always on their demand function for nominal balances, but in contrast

the aggregate price level adjusts slowly to its equilibrium level. Here

we allow gradual adjustment of both nominal balances and the price

level, and derive a more general dynamic specification of which

Laidler's is a special case. To make this more general analysis

possible, it is necessary to assume that current nominal GNP (Ye) is

predetermined. Implicitly we assume that nominal GNP evolves as a

function of a set of past variables, including hank reserves, interest

rates, government spending, and tax rates.

       Then, given the current value of nominal GNP, we define two

equilibrium concepts, the equilibrium price level and the equilibrium

money stock as follows:


(16)           =    — Q,   and


(16') M = Y         -
                        v(x).
Here in (16) the equilibrium price level (Pt) is defined as that which

will make the predetermined current level of nominal GNP         compatible
with the 'natural' level of real GNP (Q), which is assumed to he

exogenous. In (16') the equilibrium money supply (Mt)   is   defined as
                                                               21




that which will be demanded at the current level of nominal CNP, given

the velocity of money, which is written as a function of the explanatory

variables in the long—run money demand function [V(X)]. Since nominal

GNP can be decomposed into the current price level and current real CNP

       =       +   Q),   (16') is identical to the long run demand for money

function (1) above, with f(X) =                                 — V(Xt).       Nominal balances adjust in

the standard way, from (2'), with an error term now added:

                              *
(17            N = t
                         AM
                              t       + (1—X)M
                                                 t—i
                                                       ÷ c
                                                                M
                                                                t
In   this section we simplify the exposition by ignoring the distinction

in (2") between money at the end of one period and the beginning of the

next.

           Now let us assume that the price level (Pt) adjusts gradually to

its equilibrium level (P), except when there is a "price shock" (e):


(18)            P =
                              *
                                      +
                                          (l—v)P1      +       c.p
We can add more substance to (18) by replacing the                                     term with a

coefficient times the supply shock vector from (4) plus a serially

uncorrelated error term

                                  *                                        p
(18')              Pt = liPt + (l_i.1)P                    +          +
                                                                y3z

This       formulation implies that supply shocks are ignored in the

determination of P.'0




10This is consistent with the idea that adverse supply shocks have an
inflationary impact only to the extent that nominal wages fai to
decline to their lower equilibrium level.   In this context    is
interpreted as the "no shock natural output level" that ignores the
transitory decline in output after a supply shock that occurs as a
                                               22




       To derive the implications of these assumptions for the behavior of

real balances, we first combine (16) and (16') to eliminate                              then

substitute the resulting relation between M and P into (17), and then

use the resulting expression to substitute for P in (18'), yielding:


(19)        Pt =   (l)1             —         — v(x)j         +
                                                                  ![u(M_    (l-X)M1 —

                                                    + Y3zt +

With some further manipulation, we can write the implied equation for
real balances:




(20)       M         =
                                *
                                    — v(x)j    +
                                                    Xtt—1
                                                     1




                         +                               +           -          —
                             P(l_X)(I

       This form (20) is a convenient one for discussing the implications

of gradual price adjustment. First, we note that if agents are always

on their money demand function, then X =                 1.       If we neglect the supply

shock and error terms, and if we recall that                        —
                                                                         V(X)       f(X), then
(20) reduces to:


                 Pt =                   +
(21)                         1if(X)         (1—)(M—p1),

which is Laidler's result (1982, equation 23).h1 Laidler claims that

lags in price adjustment (p < 1) provide the "best available explana—




UThis result is also repeated in equation (9) in Laidler's comment on
Gordon (1984a).
                                   23




don" of the presence of the lagged dependent variable in an equation

like (21), although from (20) we can see that the matter is more in-

volved if A   1, in which case there are two lagged dependent variables

(Mt—Pt_i and Mt_i—Pt_i), each with coefficients that depend on both the

speed of price adjustment (ii) and of portfolio adjustment (A).

     Another implication of the analysis, omitted from (21) but present

in (20), is that the supply shock variables (zt) belong in the money

demand equation with a negative sign. The supply shock variables that

turn out to be relevant in the Phillips curve (4) are serially

correlated and have, taken together, a uniformly positive influence on

inflation during almost every quarter between i973:Q1 and 1975:Q4.



                         (Insert Figure 1 here)



Figure 1 plots the cumulative values of z against the prediction error

of the Coldfeld money demand specification (6), and shows that the two

move together with opposite signs.2

     To summarize this section, we note that our basic equation (20) can

be related to the standard Goldfeld specification (3) if we make just

two changes. First, we nust set the two adjustment coefficients equal




'2The inflation equation is that estimated in Cordon—King (1982), where
the supply shock vector contains four variables, all of which are
positive during most or all of the 1973—75 period, (a) the change in the
personal consumption deflator minus the change in that deflator net of
expenditures on food and energy, i.e., the effect on consumption prices
of changes in the relative prices of food and energy, (b) the change in
the relative price of imports, (c) the change in the effective exchange
rate of the dollar, and (d) a dummy for the rebound after the Nixon
price controls that is in effect during 1974:Q2 through 1975:Q1. The
top frame plots the dynamic simulation forecasting error of the equation
in this paper shown below in this paper in Table 1, column (1).
       .200•



                                          SUPPLY SHOCKS
        100-


       .0D.

Lii
       .000




      —.100


                       GOLDFELD ERROR


                        I    I                                 I   -     ________   -   I
      —.200      1
          112   191.        1975   1$16   i71          1978   19Th     10 ii 12             193   1924




                                          Figure   1
                                        24




to each other (ii   = A),   and, second, we must drop the price innovation

terms. This yields:


     (22)    —       = Af(X)     +
                                     (l_X)(Mt i_Pci) + M.

Thus the Goldfeld specification is a special case that constrains the

two adjustment speeds to be equal and ignores the presence of an error

term in the price equation. Because that omitted error term is serially

correlated, given the evidence produced by studies of inflation, it is

not surprising that serial correlation has been present in estimated

versions of (22).


Money Demand or Money Supply Function?


     At, the individual level, prices, income, and interest rates are all

taken to be exogenous, and agents are assumed to adjust nominal balances

in response to changes in these exogenous variables. To convert a

specification derived at the individual level into one appropriate for

estimation with aggregate data, it must he assumed in parallel fashion

that the aggregate nominal money supply is completely passive in the

face of changes in each argument in the demand for money function. But

when the money supply or monetary base is set by the central hank in a

way that nkes money respond less than completely to the arguments of

the money demand function, the estimated parameters cannot reveal the

parameters of the demand for money function. This "impossibility

theorem" has been discussed by Cooley and LeRoy (1981), who claim that

the interest elasticity of money demand cannot be identified. Here we

examine identification and simultaneity issues in the context of two

specific feedback rules for the central bank.
                                                            25




        In this discussion we use a stripped—down demand function for real

balances:


(23)
                 —            = aQ           +             +


in   an economy that also has a money supply function relating nominal

money balances to the monetary base (B), the same interest rate (R), and

an error term:


                     =
(7L         MS
                         1B   t
                                  -i-

                                         2t
                                         R        --




The first of two alternative monetary control rules, the central bank

sets the interest rate at some desired value plus an error:

                          *         R
(25)        R =          Rt
                              +
                                  Ct.

Implementation       of this rule makes the monetary base endogenous with

respect to the arguments of the money demand function and the errors in

the money supply and interest rate equations:


(26)        B = _- [P                   +
                                            a1Q
                                                       +
                                                           (a2_2)(R*   +   c)   +   —




Possible    difficulties in estimating the money demand function (23)

include inconsistency in the case of (a) correlation between                                  and

       or (b) an effect of the current money supply on R, which will

make c correlated with Rt, or (c) autocorrelation of                                    together with

an effect of the lagged money supply on R.

       The problem becomes much worse if the Federal Reserve follows a

feedback control rule for the monetary base, allowing the desired base

B to respond to output and the inflation rate:


(27)        B =          B0
                              +             + 2tt—1
                                                     26




In (27) the coefficients                and 11)2     are   negative if the Fed pursues a

countercyclical policy. With partial adjustment of the actual base to

its desired value, we have:

                          *                          B
(28)      Bt =                + (l—)Bi           +


                 = [B0         +         +                     +
                                                                   (1—)Bi   +   E.
When (24) is used to substitute for Br_i in (28), and then (28) is

substituted back into (24) for B, we can write the money supply as:


(29)             =
                         1[B0      ÷         +
                                                 2 tt—l 2t         +


                 ÷ (1—4)[M51 2Rtl —                             +s     +


With some rearrangement we can rewrite (29) as an equation that

determines real balances:


(30)         —
                 P        =     [        -           +             + (1_)(i_P1)
                     +
                         2t        —
                                       (l—)R
                                                      —
                                                           (11)2XPPi)
                     +        — (1—4)c5          +


Here we have real balances determined by all the familiar variables in

the standard Goldfeld specification (9) — — Q, R, and lagged M—P. There

are a few additional variables, but we have already seen that these were

arbitrarily excluded from (9), including the lagged interest rate Rt_i

(which appeared above in (15)), and inflation (which appeared as an

innovation in (20) as well as directly in (10')). We note also that the

error term is serially correlated, a usual feature of estimated versions

of (9).
                                      27




A New Interpretation of Parameter Instability


        It is clear that estimation of an equation containing most or all

of the variables in (30) may tell us nothing about the parameters in the

underlying money demand function, if the central bank has followed a

control rule like (28). More important, the interpretation of any such

estimated equation will he strongly influenced when the central bank

shifts from an interest rate rule like (25) to a base rule like (28).

For instance, in the Goldfeld equation the coefficient on output should

be positive when (25) is in effect, but it may shift to negative when

(28) is in effect, since in (30) the output coefficient appears in the

form 8P1, with        and    positive and    negative. Similarly, under

the interest—rate rule, the coefficient on the interest rate should be

negative (although it may he biased by correlation between the two error
         R        d
terms        and c). But in (30) the coefficient on the current interest

rate is positive and equal to 82, the interest elasticity in the money

supply function, while the coefficient on the lagged interest rate is

zero. The closer       is to zero, the closer the interest rate effect

approaches a first difference with a positive sum of coefficients. Only

if base adjustment in (28) is instantaneous does the lagged interest

rate effect disappear.

        Some investigators have estimated money demand equations over vary-

ing sample periods, with the stated intention of studying changes in the

income and interest rate elasticities of the demand for money. Yet such

coefficient shifts may tell us more about changes in policy rules than

about the characteristics of the underlying money demand function. This

task is made particularly difficult in the tJnited States by the eclectic

behavior of the Fed, which in some periods has "leaned against the wind"
                                       28




of changing interest rates without stabilizing them completely, while in

other periods has attempted without much success to stabilize the growth

rates of one or more monetary aggregates. Thus the typical policy

regime has been a mixture of interest rate and money stabilization, and

as a result the coefficients in a Goldfeld—type specification are likely

to represent a blend of money demand parameters with the supply param-

eters of (30), and shifts in the estimated coefficients are as likely to

tell us about shifts in the policy mix as about responses of money

demand behavior.


               V. DYNAMIC SPECIFICATION AND ERROR CORRECTION


     The previous analysis suggested that the standard approach to the

specification of money demand equations is subject to serious problems

of misspecification and identification. Simple examples indicated that

the usual Coldfeld specification imposes several arbitrary exclusion

restrictions, including (a) the omission of lagged output variables in

addition to current output, (b) the imposition of the same lag distribu-

tion on output and one or more interest rate variables, and (c) the

omission of variables to represent supply shocks or other sources of

systematic shifts in the price level. The identification problem arises

because (d) an econometric equation linking real balances to output and

interest rates, with assorted lagged money and price terms, may be

derived from either a model of money supply or money demand. The co-

efficients in the standard equation can he interpreted as parameters of

money demand only if the central bank has followed a regime of interest

rate stabilization, and instability in coefficients of standard equa-

tions may   tell   us more about shifts in central hank regimes than about
                                             29




shifts in money demand behavior.

       The empirical section of this paper estimates equations in which

real balances appear on the left—hand side, and standard explanatory

variables (output and interest rates) appear on the right—hand side.

The novelty consists of examining results for several alternative

arrangements of these variables to determine the effect on previous

results of dynamic misspecification (points a and b above); the

introduction of proxies for supply shocks from my previous work on

inflation to determine the importance of point (c) above, and an

interpretation of remaining shifts in coefficients in terms of the money

supply vs. money demand identification issue, point (d) above.


Dynamic Specification in the General Single—Equation Case


       The standard partial adjustment model is only one of several

alternative arrangements of variables, within the general class of

autoregressive distributed—lag equations:

                         N
           do(L)Y =                      +
(31)
                         1=1
                               d.(L)X.
where d(L) is a polynomial in the lag operator (L). Hendry, Pagan, and

Sargan (1982), hereafter liPS, present a useful "typology" of alternative

types of dynamic models based on the first—order version of (31):13


(32)           =     +           +           + 3—i   +



This   is assumed to be a structural relationship, with X weakly

exogenous and the error term assumed to be white noise. The notable




'3An earlier exposition of the typology is provided by Hendry (1980a).
                                   30




features of (32) are that both current and lagged explanatory variables

appear, in addition to the lagged dependent variable, and that both Y

and X are entered as levels rather than differences. The standard

partial adjustment model that has dominated the money—demand literature

is a special case of (32):


             =
                   + lt + 83't—1 ÷ e,
where 82 in (32) is assumed to be zero.

     HPS develop a taxonomy of nine different versions of (32), differ-

ing in the assumed parameter restrictions, of which partial adjustment

(33) is only one. In this section we contrast (33) with two of the

eight other possibilities that seem most promising for the study of the

short—run dynamics of money demand, that is, the first—difference and

error—correction models. Interested readers are referred to HPS for the

full typology of nine models, which they point out

       "describe very different lag shapes and long—run responses of Y

        to X, have different advantages and drawbacks as descriptions of

        economic time series, are differentially affected by various

        misspecifications and prompt generalisations which induce

        different research avenues and strategies." (HPS, 1982, p. 27)

     The most important weakness of partial adjustment is the

possibility of invalid exclusion of X_1 (or in the more general case

all relevant lags of Xe). In turn this may result in reaching the

erroneous conclusion that speeds of adjustment are slow when in fact

they are not. Further, many derivations of partial adjustriient equations

like (33) entail that e is autocorrelated, leading to the usual

statistical problems. These two problems interact, since the
                                        31




coefficient 83 is biased upward in the presence of positive serial

correlation, leading to an overstatement of the mean adjustment lag

               Goldfeld and his followers uniformly adopt the Cochrane—
831(183).
Orcutt "rho—correction" method of correction for serial correlation and

obtain significant positive values of rho, with little comment regarding

the implication that the original untransformed equation like (33) may

he misspecified (either by imposing 82 = 0 or by omitting one or more

relevant explanatory variables).

       "Differenced data" models are another special case of (32) that

impose two restrictions, 83 =    1   and 82   —8i:


(34)          =      + 8x   +
                                e.
Here we retain our earlier notational device of using lower case letters

to represent differences in logs in contrast to upper—case letters that

continue to represent log levels. Differencing is often recommended as

a simple way to achieve stationarity and to avoid the spurious

regression problem, e.g., by Granger and Newbold (1974) and Plosser and

Schwert (1978). In an earlier paper on money demand (1984a) I showed

that a differenced data specification for the Goldfeld variables yields

much smaller post—1972 errors in dynamic simulations than the log—level

partial adjustment specification, especially when the dependent variable

is differenced nominal rather than real money. However, this result is

subject to the same criticism as any application of the general




'4Further, Hendry (1980), p. 97, shows that the skewness imposed on the
lag distribution by (33) yields a mean lag that is 50 percent higher
than the median lag when    is estimated to be 0.95, as sometimes occurs
in money demand studies.
                                               32



differenced    form, that the equilibrium solution to (34) is left

indeterminant. In fact, if f3, = 0 and et in (34) is white noise, then

there is no long—run relationship between the levels of Y and X.

        This disadvantage of the differenced format is avoided by shifting

to the "error—correction mechanism' (ECM) that has been studied and

advocated by David Hendry (1980a), James Davidson (1984a), and their

various    co—authors, with applications to the study of U. K. money demand
equations in Hendry (1980b), and Davidson (1984b). The ECM takes the
original    general dynamic equation (32) and imposes the restriction that

   ÷ 2 +           = 1:

                   =
                       o + 1x        +
                                         (1_3)(X_Y)t
                                                       +   e.
Notice that the differenced equation (34) is a special case of (35) that

imposes the additional restriction that                =
                                                           1, implying that since
    =          =           The phrase "error correction comes from the fact

that with y =      x =    e =   0, from (35) we have Y      X, so that the term

(X—Y)t_i measures the "error" in the previous period, and agents

"correct" their decision about Y in light of this disequilibrium. The

differenced format of (34) by contrast allows the level of                  to wander

about without any tendency toward correction.

        Some of the examples in the literature have assumed that in equi-

librium Y has a unitary long—run elasticity to changes in X.               If we we

let g represent the steady state growth rate of both X and Y, then we

can substitute into (35) and obtain:


           g =            + 1g   +
                                     (l—3)(x—Y),

implying
                                                  33


                              —
                                   (1—81)g
(37)         Y = X+
                              1
                                      83

The proportionality assumption might be appropriate for relations that

seem to exhibit a unitary elasticity over a long period, e.g., the

demand for M2 in the U. S. where the velocity of M2 is observed to be

roughly constant since 1960. For the study of some other relationships,

e.g., the demand for Ml, the proportionality assumption may not be

appropriate, and the ECM model can he written:


(38)     y    = 81xI.
                  I
                        + (1—8.)(X—Y), +
                             -)    L1                  (8,+8.+8—1)X1+
                                                         I Z J    LL      eL

              = Süx + Si(x—Y)_i              +
                                                 cS2Xi,

and the restriction               = 0 in (35) can be tested directly. If the

restriction is rejected, then the long—run form becomes



                                  +        — (1—81)g
(39)         Y = _______________________
                          1
                                   83

       Almost all of the empirical applications of the ECM have been to

U. K. data, and it      remains         to be seen whether this approach can shed

light   on the short—run behavior of the demand for money in the U. S. At
least in principle, the main advantage of                 the   ECM approach over simple
differencing is that it provides a sensible long—run interpretation, as
in   (37) and (39).


Application    to the Short—Run Demand for Money

       The empirical section of the paper studies the sensitivity of
coefficient    estimates, post—sample dynamic simulation errors, and Chow

test measures of structural shift to alternative forms of dynamic

specification, while maintaining a uniform sample period and set of
                                     34




explanatory variables. In each equation the dependent variable is the

level or first difference of the log of real Ml, using the GNP deflator

as the price index to deflate Ml. The explanatory variables are real

GNP, the GNP deflator, the Treasury bill rate, the savings deposit rate,

and the lagged dependent variable.

     The only difference in the data used in this paper, compared to

most earlier research, concerns the interest rate variables. As stated

above in connection with (8), the interest rate that enters into the

money demand equation should he the opportunity cost of holding money.

Previous research on the demand for Ni, by including a short—term market

rate like the Treasury bill or commercial paper rate, as well as the

savings deposit rate, has implicitly assumed that own—return on Ml is

zero. Here we enter both the Treasury bill rate and savings deposit

rate as the excess over the own—return on Ml, using a series for the

latter provided by Michael Hamburger. The Hamburger own—rate series

measures only the pecuniary return on Ml, not the implicit services

received by holders of demand deposits, and ranges from zero before 1963

to a modest 1.3 percent in late 1983. This figure represents the

weighted average of the zero pecuniary return on currency and

conventional demand deposits, with the positive rates received on NOW,

super NOW, and other interest—bearing accounts in Ml. The savings

deposit rate is the average of one series provided by Goldfeld and one

by Hamburger. While these are similar before 1974, after that date they

differ, and so we used an unweighted average of the two.

    Our choice of alternative dynamic specifications is mOtivated in

part by the analysis of the short—run demand for money in the earlier

sections of the paper. Our suggestion that the demand for real balances
                                    35




should respond with different lags to changes in output, prices, and the

interest rate is pursued by introducing a set of additional uncon-

strained distributed lags into the standard partial adjustment formula-

tion. Our analysis of supply shocks is followed up by introducing a

proxy for the effects of supply shocks into the equation for real

balances. Finally, the identification problem introduced by the

possible existence of a money supply or reaction function helps to guide

our interpretation of shifts in coefficients after 1973.

       The alternative models of dynamic specification begin with Model A,

the standard partial adjustment equation used by Goldfeld and most of

his followers. This corresponds in our general notation to (33), which

has the notable features that no lagged values of any independent

variables are included, and only a single lag of the dependent variable.

Model B introduces a proxy for supply shocks into the same partial

adjustment specification. Model C loosens the dynamic restrictions

imposed by the usual partial adjustment model by adding four lags of

each explanatory variable, as well as the second through fourth lag of

the dependent variable. This generalized dynamic model explaining the

log level of real balances        in terms of the lagged values of N

explanatory variables (X) can he written as:


               =
(40)
                         j=O
                                         j1 N+1,j Y_ +      e.
Model 1) is like C but loosens the restriction in the Goldfeld formula-

tion that excludes the current and lagged price level, which amounts to

imposing the assumption that the demand for real balances is homogeneous

of degree zero in prices instantaneously. Models C and D share with B

the inclusion of the same proxy for supply shocks, in each case entered
                                            36




as a current value and four lagged values.

        Model E is the differenced data format for the change in the log of

real balances. This is estimated in an unrestricted format that is

parallel to (40) and includes the current value as well as four lagged

changes for each independent variable, and four lagged changes of the

dependent variable. This is the generalization of the "differenced

data" model suggested by HPS (1982, P. 27):

                          N     L                  L
(41)-
            -t
            v    =   8. + 1     5' 8   x.        + 5'       v         + e
-

                     u i1            j 1,t—j      . 'N+l,j't—i              t



        The last model (F) is the error correction model (ECM), generalized

to be symmetric with (41) by allowing for multiple lags:



(42)         =
                 o   1=1 3=0
                               iji,t_j + N+l(X_Y)t_l +
                                                                i=1
                                                                      N+i+1Xt_L_1+ et.


Here the differenced independent variables are entered exactly as in

(41). Then comes the error correction term. The final set of terms

consists of each independent variable, entered as one additional lag

beyond L, to test the possible non—proportionality of Y to X in the

steady state.


                               VI.   EMPIRICAL RESULTS


Basic    Results for the Six Models

        Results are shown in Table 1.       The    six columns correspond to the
six   models, estimated over the sample period 1956:Q3—1972:Q4. In

addition to the coefficients (or sums of coefficients where lagged

variables are involved), and the adlusted R2 and standard error, the

Cochrane—Orcutt "rho" coefficient of serial correlation is shown for the
                                              36A


                                            TABLE 1

                              Alternative Dynamic Specifications
                               for Sample Period 1956:Q3—1972:Q4
                           and Post—1972 Dynamic Simulation Errors

                                Dependent Variable: Real Ml

                   Partial         Add
                 Adjustment,      Supply       Add        Add   Differenced      Error
                No lags on X Shocks           Lags     Deflator     Data      Correction
                     (A)            (B)        (C)       (D)          (E)        (F)

                    0.18**         0.17**     0.06       0.14*
                                                                     0.73        0.68
EP                                                      _O.07**
     t—i
EP t—i                                                              —0.03        0.14

TB
 t—1
                    OOI*          —0.01      —0.01      —0.01

ERTB                                                                —0.03*      —0.05
  t—i
SD                 _0.U3*         _U.03*     —0.01      -0.01

ESD
  t—1
                                                                    —0.11k      —0.13

Eyz.                              _1.72*     —0.44      —2.26       —0.35       —0.05

E(M—P)t.            0.63**         0.60**     0.87**     0.71**
                                                                    —0.24       —0.93
E(M—P).
                                                                                 0.14
 L5
Q.._                                                                            —0.07

R5                                                                              -0.01


R5                                                                              —0.00

—2
                    .992           .992       .994       .995        .523        .563
S.E.E.(%)           0.50           0.48       0.42       0.38        0.45        0.43
p                   0.41*          0.46*

Simulation (%     Errors)
RMSE
     (to   76/83) 4.7/ 11.8      4.3/10.0 4.9/ 9.8 2.0/ 2.4        3.3/ t.3    6.1/ 11.0
Mean Error
  (to 76/83) —3.9/—10.1 —2.8/—8.5 —3.91—8.8            0.6/—0.3   —2.11—5.3   —5.1/—10.0
Note:      Asterisks indicate significance at the 5 percent (*) or 1 percent (**)
             levels. All equations also include constant terms.
                                       37




 Goldfeld specification in the first two columns; this transformation is

 not applied in the other columns where the inclusion of four values of

 the lagged dependent variable is sufficient to eliminate the serial

correlation problem. The bottom of the table lists both root mean—

squared errors and mean errors in dynamic simulations for the 1973—83

period (1973—76 and 1973—83 errors are shown separately). These

simulations are "dynamic" in the sense that they generate the lagged

dependent variable endogenously while treating as exogenous all of the

other variables. The dynamic simulations of the ECM generate the lagged

velocity variable endogenously as the ratio of exogenous P+Q to

endogenous   M.


     The   first   column exhibits the results for the standard "first

order" partial adjustment formulation, model A. The familiar post—

sample dynamic simulation errors occur when the 1958—72 equation is

extrapolated beyond its sample period; the RMSE in the dynamic

simulation for 1973—83 is 11.8 percent, and the mean error is —10.1

percent (that is, actual less than predicted). This is the simulation

error that Is plotted in the bottom frame of Figure 1 above. The long—

run elasticities implied by the coefficients for Model A are 0.49 for

income and —0.11 for the two interest rates taken together; both of

these are smaller than in the original Goldfeld paper, reflecting some

combination of data revisions and our slightly different treatment of

the opportunity cost of holding money. As always occurs with model A,

there is is significant positive serial correlation, as indicated by the

significant estimated "rho" coefficient of 0.41.

     Model B is identical to model A but adds the current and four

lagged values of a proxy for the influence of supply shocks on the rate
                                     38




of inflation. This proxy is taken from my earlier work on the U. S.

inflation process (Gordon—King, 1982), and consists of the actual values

of four variables representing the influence of supply shocks, times

their coefficients estimated in a reduced—form equation like (4) above

that explains the inflation rate.15 The top frame of Figure 1 shows the

cumulative value (i.e., the integral) of this supply—shock proxy. The

proxy has the expected negative sign, and the sum of coefficients of

—1.72 is significant at the 5 percent level. The simulation errors of

model B are unIformly smaller than those of model A, but only by a

relatively small amount.

     Model C contains the same variables as model B but adds four lagged

values of each explanatory variable, as well as lags two through four of

the dependent variable. The additional lags are -jointly significant,

with F(15,41) =   2.00, slightly above the 5 percent significance level of
1.92. However, there is no improvement in the dynamic simulation

errors, which are almost as large as for Nodel A. Also notable is the

substantial drop in the sum of coefficients on the supply shock proxy.

     A further improvement in fit, and a dramatic improvement in post—

sample simulation performance, occurs when the current and four lagged

values of the GNP deflator (P) are added to model C, and these results

are shown as model D. The sum of coefficients on the price variable is

significant at better than the one percent level, and the addition of

the price variable also causes the sum of coefficients on the supply—

shock proxy to jump to —2.26, which just misses significance at the 5

percent level. The F(5,36) ratio on the addition of the filve price




'5Details are given in footnote 12 above.
                                      39




 terms is 3.19, as compared to the 5 percent significance level of

 2.48. Overall, the F(25,36) ratio on the addition of all the 25 extra

 terms in model D, as compared to model A, is 2.76, as compared to the

 one percent significance level of 2.30.

        The dynamic simulation performance of model D is dramatically

 better than any of the others. The root mean squared error for the

 1973—83 simulation is only 2.4 percent, as compared to 11.8 percent for

model A. The mean error is only —0.3 percent, as compared to —10.1

percent. In fact in 1982:Q4, the 40th quarter of the simulation, the

error is only 1.4 percent (alt1tough it grows to 5.2 percent in l983:Q4

as part of the 1982—83 velocity puzzle discussed below).

        The final two columns display results for the two models that

explain the difference of the log of real balances, the differenced—data

model E, and the error correction model F. The standard errors in these

equations are comparable to those in models A through D, since the

variables are defined as differences in logs (for convenience the

stardard errors are multiplied by 100 and displayed as percentages).

Models E and F have lower standard errors than models A and B, but

higher errors than the unrestricted models C and D.      It is interesting

to   note that models D and E have exactly the same   number of degrees of

freedom,   but the sum of squared residuals for the former is 30   percent

less    than for the latter. The simulation performance of model E is the

second best in Table 1, better than any of the others except for model
D. 16




'6The model that performed best in my earlier paper (1984a) was a
"nominal" differenced data equation in which the difference of the log
of nominal money was regressed on the log difference of nominal GNP and
                                   40




     The results for the error—correction model (F) are not particularly

promising. None of the added variables (the lagged levels of velocity,

output, and interest rates) is significant, and the F(4,32) ratio on the

addition of the four level variables not present in model E is 1.83,

well short of the 5 percent significance level of 2.67. Further, the

dynamic simulation performance is as poor as that of model A. The best

thing that can be said about model F is that the error—correction term,

which is lagged velocity (equivalent to X—Y in (42) above) has the

correct sign and is of a plausible magnitude. The signs on the other

level varibles are also correct, and that on lagged output implies a

long—run income elasticity of 0.92 (using equation (39)).

     Proponents of the ECM approach might object that there are too many

variables and too few degrees of freedom in model F as estimated in

Table 1. To address this issue a "truncated model F" was estimated,

with 13 fewer variables. Lags two through four were omitted for output

and both interest rates, and lags one through four were omitted for the

price level. The resulting truncated equation has a slightly lower

standard error and higher adjusted R2, and the coefficient on the error—

correction term is close to the 5 percent significance level. However,

there is no improvement in the post—1972 simulation performance.'7




the other variables in Table 1. A reestimated version of this model
does not fit as well as model E, although it yields a slightly better
simulation performance.


'7The root—mean squared and mean errors for 1973—83 are about the same
as for model F in Table 1, although the 1973—76 errors are smaller
(about the same as those for model E). The long—run income elasticity
is 0.85.
                                   41

The Carter Credit Controls and Shifts in Monetary Regimes

     The technique of dynamic simulation is only one of several possible

ways in which the hypothesis of structural shift can be assessed. Some

writers have objected to the dynamic simulation technique, because it

imposes an overly sharp dichotomy between the dependent variable and the

explanatory variables, since it generates calculated values only for the

dependent and lagged dependent variables while using actual historical

values for the explanatory variables. Our earlier discussion of

identification issues tends to support this reason for skepticism of

dynamic simulation results and suggests that neither output nor interest

rates may usefully be treated •as exogenous during the post—1972 period

if during that period the Federal Reserve attempted (even

unsuccessfully) to stabilize the growth rate of the monetary base or

money supply.

     An alternative measure of structural change is the standard Chow

test. In this section we report results for three different Chow tests,

each of which is based on an F ratio that compares the residual sum of

squares for a shorter period with that for a period with the same

initial date but a later termination date. The first test compares

equations for 1956—72 and 1956—76, thus measuring the significance of a

structural break in 1973:Q1. The second compares equations for 1956—72

and 1956—83, thus providing an alternative measure of the significance

of a structural break in 1973. The third test compares equations for

1956—79 and 1956—83, thus measuring the significance of a structural

break in 1980:Q1,

     In preliminary work on this topic, it became apparentthat much of

the appearance of a structural shift after 1979 could be accounted for

by extremely high residuals in 1980:Q2 and l98O:Q3. These were almost
                                    42




always of opposite sign and roughly equal in magnitude, supporting the

conjecture that the Carter credit controls sharply reduced the money

supply in 1980:Q2 and contributed to a rebound of roughly the same

magnitude in 1980:Q3. The residuals in those quarters each have a value

of between 2 and 3 percent at a quarterly rate, or about 10 percent at

an annual rate. The residual sum of squares in the 1956—83 equation

declines by as much as one—third when these two quarters are "dummied

out," and this seems to be a sensible procedure for such an unusual and

short—lived event (analogous to the treatment of auto or steel strikes

in studies of employment or productivity behavior).

     The results of the Chow tests are shown in Table 2. The first two

columns exhibit the alternative tests for a break in 1973:Ql, and the

third column shows the test for a break in 1980:Q1 (including the two

dummy variables in the extended 1956—83 equation). The results seem to

fall into two groups, models A—D and E—F. In the first four models the

hypothesis of no structural shift seems to be rejected strongly,

although it is interesting to note that the F ratios decline in both

size and significance in making the transition from model A to model

D.   In contrast the hypothesis of no structural shift in 1973 seems to

he accepted for models E and F, and of no structural shift in 1979 for

model F. The truncated version of model F sends mixed signals.

     The results summarized here can be compared with those reported

recently by Rose (1984), whose basic equation is a truncated version of

the error—correction model.18 Rose finds no structural shift in the


18The study by Rose (1984) differs from ours in a number of details,
including the use of seasonally unadjusted data, and a break point of
1974:Q1 rather than 1973:Q1. No attempt has been made here duplicate
Rose's results, and so our guess as to the reason for the partial
difference in his findings must be viewed as a conjecture.
                               42A

                             TABLE 2

                 Chow Tests for Structural Shift

              (Each cell shows an F ratio above and
                    degrees of freedom below;
                     Asterisks as in Table 1)



               1956—72            1956—72             1956—79
              vs. 1973—76        vs. 1973—83       vs. 1980—83



Models
  A            5.14**                359**             3•57**
              (16,61)            (41,61)              (13,89)

  B            2.44**             3.15**               437**
              (16,56)            (41,56)              (13,84)

  C            1.89               2.90**               2.91**
              (16,41)            (41,41)              (13,69)

  D            2.23*              2.36**               2.34*
              (16,36)            (41,36)              (13,64)

 E             1.35                  1.29              1.87*
              (16,36)            (41,36)              (13,64)

 F             1.18               1.43                 1.45
              (16,32)            (41,32)              (13,60)

Truncated F    1.71               2.18**               1.59
              (16,45)            (41,45)              (13,73)
                                                          43



mid—1970s "Goldfeld puzzle" period, but a sharp structural shift in the

1980s. The first column of Table 2 also finds no shift in 1973:Q1 for

the full and truncated versions of model F. However, our results differ

from Rose in finding no evidence of a break in 1980:Q1. This difference

is probably due to the absence of any attention by Rose to the special

nature of the Carter credit control period.

            Further insight on the nature of the post—1972 shift is provided by

Table 3, which exhibits parallel equations for the 1956—72 and 1956—83

o no, n 1   a nor4 n r10 Far s-i-. ra   af   t-ho   inn tl a 1 a  A
                                                      •'—''—--—'-,,     fl
                                                                    ", j—,   nn Cl 1? -   Ti-, 4 a n roe ant- , .- 4 nn


is   intended to focus on the nature of coefficient shifts required by the

various models to "explain" the behavior of real balances in the post—

1972 period, in light of the identification issue raised earlier in the

context of money supply and money reaction functions. There we noted

that a shift by the central bank from an interest—rate stabilization

regime to a monetary base stabilization regime will tend to cause

systematic coefficient shifts in an equation explaining real balances

(see equation (30) above). In particular, the coefficient on output may

shift from positive to negative, there may be a negative effect of the

inflation rate, and the coefficient on the interest rate may shift from

negative to positive.

            There is some support in Table 3 for this analysis. In all three

models there is a marked reduction in the size of the coefficient on

output, and that coefficient even turns slightly negative in column

(6). The coefficient on both interest rate terms declines in absolute

value for models D and F, and the savings deposit rate coefficient

changes sign for model A. Further, in model F the coefficients on both

the inflation rate and the supply shock proxy become significantly
                                                 4 3A


                                              TABLE 3

                          Alternative Dynamic Specifications
                           for Sample Period 1956—Q3--1972:Q4
                       and Post—1972 Dynamic Simulation Errors

                                Dependent Variable: Real Il

                       ttodel   A                  Model D               Model F
               1956—72              1956—83    1956—72   1956—83    1956—72      1956—83
                 (1)                  (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)         (6)

               0.18**            0.11*         0.14*     0.02
                                                                    0.68       —0.01
EP                                            _O.07*     0.00
     t—i
                                                                    0.14       _1.23**

              —0.01*            _Q.03**       —0.01.    —0.01

ERTB.                                                              —0.05       —0.01

              _0.03*             0.03**       —0.01      0.00

ESD
  t—i
                                                                   —0.13       —0.04

Eyz t—i.                                      —2.26     —0.52      —0.05       _1.95*

E(M—P)j        0.63*             0.90-k*       0.71**    i.00
                                                                   —0.93       —0.21

(P÷Q—M)5                                                            0.14       —0.01

                                                                   —0.07        0.04

R5                                                                 —0.01       —0.01


R5                                                                 —0.00        0.00


Dummy 80:Q2                     _0.02**                 _0.02**                _0.02**
Dummy 80:Q3                      0.01                    0.02**                 0.03**
—2
               .992              .999          .995      .991       .563        .718

S.E.E.(%)     0.50               0.65          0.38      0.50       0.43        0.48

p              0.41*             0.41*


Note: Asterisks indicate significance at the 5 percent (*) or 1 percent (**)
         levels. All equations also include constant terms.
                                   44




negative, which would be consistent with the negative coefficient on the

inflation term in the reduced—form real balance equation (30) above,

reflecting the assumed monetary control regime (27) in which the desired

base is negatively related to the inflation rate.

     Models D and F outperform model A by three criteria——goodness of

fit in every sample period, post—1972 dynamic simulation performance,

and the significance of a post—1972 structural shift as measured by a

Chow test. However, neither model D nor F is satisfactory as a model of

the short—run demand for money. In the 1956—83 equation for model D

(Table 3, column 4) no variable is significant except for the lagged

dependent variable and the credit control dummies. The error—correction

model F has no significant coefficients except for the inflation rate,

the supply shock proxy, and the credit control dummies. It is hard to

avoid reaching the conclusion that these long—period equations represent

a rather futile attempt to fit a single reduced—form equation for real

balances to a period when the underlying real balance equation was

"changing its stripes" from something like a partial adjustment model

for money demand (best described for 1956—72 by model D) to something

like a money reaction function of the central bank. The fact that the

coefficients on output in columns (4) and (6) are essentially zero seems

consistent with the notion that the true underlying coefficient shifted

from positive to negative in the wake of the conjectured change in

control regimes.


The 1981—83 "Velocity Puzzle"

     Throughout most of the empirical section of this paper the primary

emphasis has been on an examination of the stability of alternative
                                     45




 models across the 1973 dividing line that marks the beginning of the

 "Goldfeld puzzle" period. An equally interesting period occurred more

 recently, between late 1981 and late 1983. During this interval there

was a sharp decline in the velocity of both Ml and M2 relative to their

 pre—1981 trends, and a corresponding increase in the quantity of real

balances relative to the predictions of most money demand equations.

Flow do the six empirical models fare in explaining the change in   real
balances   over thIs interval?
     The comparison in Table 4   focusses   on two quarters. The first of
these,   1981:04, is the quarter in which most of the dynamic simulations

reach their largest negative value (i.e., actual minus predicted). From

then until the end of the sample period in 1983:03, the simulation

errors uniformly shift in a positive direction. Dynamic simulation

errors are shown for those two quarters in Table 4 for each of the six

models. The top half of the table reports simulation errors for

equations estimated through 1972, and the bottom half reports errors for

equations estimated through 1979. The first three columns refer to

results for the conventional measure of Ml.

     Although the size of the errors differs across the models, with the

smallest absolute value of errors achieved for model D in the top half

of Table 4 and for model B in the hotton half, the conclusions regarding

the 1981:04 through 1983:03 interval are identical. Both simulations of

each of the six models exhibit a marked movement of the error in a

positive direction, i.e., the actual level of real Ml balances increased

relative to the prediction, in most cases by between 5 and 8 percent.

This shift is only slightly less than the 10 percent shortfall of

velocity in this period relative to its trend from 1970 to 1980.
                                     45A

                                   TABLE 4

                  Prediction Errors in Dynamic Simulations
                           in 1981:04 and 1983:03



                     Conventional Ml                 Transactions Ml
Model            1981.IV 1983.111 (2 )—(1)       1981.IV 1981.111 (5)—(4)

                  (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)    (6)

Sample 1956—72

     A           —18.2     —10.6       7.6       —20.7       —16.7   4.0

     B           —16.7     —11.2       5.5       —19.2       —17.4   1.8

     C           —15.6      —9.6       6.0       —18.2       —16.1   2.1

     D           —2.8        5.2       8.0       —7.0        —2.9    4.1
     E           —11.2      —4.3       6.9       —12.0       —8.7    3.3

     F           —17.5     —10.8       6.7       —17.0       —13.6   3.4

Sample 1956—79
    A            —2.6        5.6       8.2       —7.8        —3.6    4.2
    B            —2.5        1.3       3.8       —7.5        —6.7    0.8

    C            —0.5        5.1       5.6       —5.3        —3.2    2,1

    D             3.3       11.8       8.5       —1.5         2.9    4.4

    E            —0.3        5.9       6.2       —2.4         0.6    3.0

    F             0.2        6.0       5.8       —1.0         2.5    3.5
                                   46



     How much of this simulation error can be attributed to financial

innovations which have shifted the composition within Ml of different

types of deposits? While a full examination of alternative monetary

measures is beyond the scope of this paper, results for one alternative

measure are displayed in the right—hand half of Table 4. This is the Ml

transactions measure recently introduced by Spindt (1984), constructed

by a method that weights different components of Ml by their estimated

frequency of turnover. Because this measure places less weight than

conventional Ml on some of the newer components of Ml (e.g., NOW and ATS

accounts), it increases less in 1982 and 1983 than the official measure

of Ml. Corresponding to this is the uniformly smaller 1981—83 shift in

the simulation errors, shown in the far right—hand colunn of Table 4.

The errors are roughly half those calculated with the conventional Ml

measure, suggesting that a substantial part of the 1981—83 velocity

puzzle is attributable to the consequences of financial deregulation

that increased the fraction of Ml consisting of new types of deposits
                                               19
with a relatively low transactions turnover.



                            VII. CONCLUSION


Relation of Empirical Results to Preceding Analysis

     The analytical portion of this paper in sections Il—TV suggested

that the conventional approach to the study of the short—run demand for




  The Spindt transactions Ml concept ( MQ ) is available since l970:Q1
as an index number based in that quarter. Our results for the
conventional Ml have been duplicated using the alternative concept by
linking it to conventional Ml in the transition quarter. These results
are not presented in the earlier tables, because they exhibit few
differences that shed light on the main issues.
                                   47




money is plagued by severe problems of misspecification and

identification. Several problems were suggested through the analysis of

models of individual and aggregate behavior. The first of these led to

the implication that the usual restriction in money demand equations

that includes only the current value of an explanatory variable, and no

lagged values, is unjustified. A model of individual behavior based on

the permanent income hypothesis of money demand yielded a specification

In which numerous lags of income enter, as well as at least one lag on

the Interest rate. This model is supported in our empirical work by the

results for models C, D, E, and F, in which several lagged values of

explanatory output and interest rate variables enter significantly.

     The next suggestion was that the standard money demand equation

might be misspecifiecl if there were gradual adjustment for nominal

balances combined at the aggregate level with gradual adjustment of the

price level. That analysis led to an equation for real money balances

that adds a "supply—shock" variable (zt) to the specification. For

practical estimation my proxy for this variable is the contribution of

various supply shock terms (changes in the relative price of food and

energy, changes in the effective exchange rate, the deviation of

productivity growth from trend, and effects of Nixon price controls) in

the reduced—form equation that I previously developed for the analysis

of U. S. postwar inflation. The proxy variable consists of the actual

values of the supply—shock variables multiplied by their estimated

coefficients in the inflation equation. This supply shock proxy is

statistically significant when added to several of the models,

especially when the sample period is extended to include the 1973—83

period.
                                    48




     The final suggestion In the analytical section was that a shift in

 control regimes by the central bank may shift coefficients in the

 reduced form relation explaining real or nominal balances without

indicating any shift in the underlying parameters of the structural

money demand equation. The consistent tendency in our results for the

coefficient on output to decline in the 1956—83 period as compared to

1956—72 suggests that there may be something to this "regime shift"

interpretation of parameter instability. The result that in several

models the coefficient on inflation becomes more significantly negative

In the 1956—83 period is also consistent with the view that the equation

for real balances mixes together demand and supply parameters.


Verdict on the Alternative Models of Dynamic Adjustment


     This paper provides a preliminary set of evidence on the

consequences of varying the dynamic specification of the "money demand'

relation from the standard partial adjustment approach that is almost

always employed. The results indicate a tendency for the large

"Goldfeld puzzle" errors that emerge after 1972 with the standard

specification to decline sharply in size when the supply shock proxy is

added, and when each explanatory variable is allowed to enter with four

lagged as well as the current value. The verdict on the error

correction approach is thus far mixed. Model D (partial adjustment with

lags) fits better for 1956—72 than rodel F (error correction), hut the

reverse is true for 1956—83. Whereas model D has much smaller errors

than model F in the post—1972 dynamic simulation, model F performs

better in Chow tests and indicates less evidence of a post—1972

structural shift. Both models D and F when estimated for the longer
                                   49



1956—83 period exhibit numerous insignificant coefficients that can he

interpreted as representing a mixture of demand and supply responses.

     The most important conclusion of the paper is not to contribute

"one best equation" which is alleged to be stable over some suhperiod of

past historical data, but rather to contribute a new interpretation of

why such equations are so often unstable. Coefficients in equations for

real balances shift in response to changes in monetary control regimes,

and the changes in coefficients in our alternative models can he

interpreted plausibly as reflecting a shift by the Federal Reserve from

greater emphasis on stabilizing interest rates to stabilizing monetary

aggregates. This interpretation of the estimated equations as

"interesting reduced forms," rather than structural money demand

equations, eliminates the need to rationalize peculiar coefficients,

e.g., the zero coefficient on output in models D and F for 1956—83, or

the large negative coefficient on prices and the supply shock term in

model F. These results are all consistent with the hypothesis that the

Federal Reserve during at least part of our sample period tended to

reduce Ml in response to "good news" on output and "bad news" on

inflation.
                                       50




                                  REFERENCES

Barro, Robert J. "Unanticipated Money Growth and Unemployment in the

      United States." American Economic Review 67 (March 1977), 101—15.

__________ and Rush, Mark. "Unanticipated Money and Economic
      Activity." In S. Fischer, ed., Rational Expectations and Economic

      Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980, 23—48.

Bean, Charles. "Targeting Nominal Income: An Appraisal." Economic

      Journal 93 (December 1983), 806—19.

Coats, Warren L., Jr.      "Modeling the Short—run Demand for Money with

      Exogenous Supply." Economic Inquiry 20 (April 1982), 222—38.

Cooley, Thomas F. and LeRoy, Stephen F. "Identification and Estimation

      of Money Demand." American Economic Review 71 (December 1981),

      825—44.

Davidson, James. "Error Correction Systems." Working paper, January

      1984      (a).


__________      "Money Disequilibrium: An Approach to Modeling Monetary

      Phenomena in the U. K." Working paper, 1984 (b).

Eisner, Robert, and Strotz, Robert H. "Determinants of Business

      Investment." In Commission on Money and Credit, Impacts of

      Monetary Policy. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice—Hall, 1963, 60—337.

Feldstein, Martin. "Monetary Policy." Remarks before the Annual

      Conference of the Export—Import Bank (March 9, 1984).

Friedman, Benjamin. "The Inefficiency of Short—run Monetary Targets and

      Monetary Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 8 (No. 2,

      1977), 293—335.

Friedman, Milton.      "The Demand for Money: Some Theoretical and

      Empirical Results." Journal of Political Economy 67 (August
                                                                                 51




       1959), 327—51.

                      •         "Why Economists Disagree." In Dollars and Deficits.

      Englewood Cliffs: Prentice—Hall, 1968.

__________•                    "Lessons from the 1979—82 Monetary Policy Experiment."

      American Economic Review 74 (Nay 1984), 397—400.

Goldfeld, Stephen M. "The Demand for Money Revisited." Brookings

      Papers on Economic Activity 4 (No. 3, 1973), 577—638.

                               "The Case of the Missing Money." Brookings Papers on

      1_i   L S.f 1£ Sd LILA. S...   fl S.. L .1. V .5. I_J   7I   (s.i,
                                                                    Li JS   '.11Q7A\      AP.'L—7'fl
                                                                                , S.15f1,LJ.f.J  .45.4 S




Gordon, Robert J. "Output Fluctñations and Gradual Price Adjustment."
      Journal of Economic Literature 19 (June 1981), 493—530.

__________•                    "Price              Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the United

       States, 1890—1980." Journal of Political Economy 90 (December

       1982), 1087—1117.

__________•                    "The Conduct of Domestic Monetary Policy." Presented at

       the Bank of Japan, First International Conference on Monetary

      Policy in Our Times. Forthcoming in Conference Proceedings,

      Albert Ando, ed., M.I.T. Press. National Bureau of Economic

      Research Working Paper 1221, October 1983.

___________•                   "The 1981—82 Velocity Decline: A Structural Shift in

       Income or Money Demand?" Monetary Targeting and Velocity,

      Conference Proceedings. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,

       (1984), 67—99 (a).

                     • Macroeconomics, Third Edition. Boston: Little, Brown &

      Co., 1984 (b).

__________                     "An Exploration of Practical Methods for the Implementation

      of a Nominal GNP Target for Monetary Policy." Paper presented at
                                       52




       the Bank of Canada, Ottawa, April 12, 1984.        (c)

__________    "Supply Shocks and Monetary Policy Revisited." American
       Economic Review 74 (May 1984), 38—43 (d).

__________ and King, Stephen R. "The Output Cost of Disinflation in

       Traditional and Vector Autoregressive Models." Brookings Papers

       on Economic Activity 13 (No. 1, 1982), 205—42.

Granger, C. W. J., and Newbold, P. "Spurious Regressions in

      Econometrics." Journal of Econometrics 2 (1974), 111—20.

Griliches, Zvi. "Distributed Lags: A Survey," Econometrica 35

       (January, 1967), 16—49.

Cuzzardi, Walter, Jr. "The Dire Warnings of Milton Friedman." Fortune

      (March 19, 1984), 27—34.

Hall, Robert E.    "Macroeconomic Policy under Structural Change." In

      Industrial Change and Public Policy. Kansas City: Federal

      Reserve Bank, 1983, 85—111.

Hendry, David F.   "The Simple Analytics of Single Dynamic Econometric

      Equations." Working paper, April, 1980 (a).

___________   "Predictive   Failure and Econometric Modelling in

      Macroeconomics: The Transactions Demand for Money." In P.

      Ormeron, ed., Modelling the Economy. London: Heineman

      Educational Books, 1980, 221—42 (b).

__________ Pagan, A. R., and Sargan, J. D.         "Dynamic Specification."

      London School of Economics Discussion Paper No. A26, (1982),

      forthcoming as a chapter in the North—Holland Handbook of

      Econometrics.

Judd, John P., and Scadding, John L.        "The Search for a Stable Money

      Demand Function." Journal of Economic Literature 20 (No. 3,
                                   53




      1982), 993—1023.

Laidler, David. The Demand for Money: Theories and Empirical

     Evidence. 2nd ed. New York: Dun—Donnelley, 1977.

_________        "The Demand for Money in the United States —— Yet Again."

      In Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer eds., On the State of

     Economics. Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy

      12 (1980).

                 Monetarist Perspectives. Cambridge: Harvard University

     Press, 1982.

Meade, J. B. "The Meaning of Internal Balance." Economic Journal 88

      (September 1978), 423—35.

Okun, Arthur M. Prices and Ouantities Washington: The Brookings

     Institution, 1981.

Plosser, Charles I., and Schwert, C. William. "Money, Income, and

     Sunspots: Measuring Economic Relationships and the Effects of

     Differencing." Journal of Monetary Economics 4 (November 1978),

      6 37—60.

Rose, Andrew. "An Alternative Approach to the American Demand for

     Money." Working Paper, April 1984.

Spindt, Paul A. "Money Is What 1oney Does: Monetary Aggregation and

      the Equation of Exchange." Working Paper, February 1984.

Tobin, James. "Monetary Policy: Rules, Targets, and Shocks." Journal

      of Money, Credit and Banking 15 (November 1983), 506—18.
