                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       ORGANIZATIONAL FRAGMENTATION AND CARE QUALITY IN THE U.S.
                         HEALTH CARE SYSTEM

                                          Randall D. Cebul
                                          James B. Rebitzer
                                           Lowell J. Taylor
                                            Mark Votruba

                                        Working Paper 14212
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14212


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




For helpful comments and suggestions we would like to thank (without implicating) the editors of
this journal, Doug Belew, Kathleen Engel, Mark Hall, Ray Herschman, Jill Horwitz , Robert Rebitzer,
Mark Rukavina, Jonathan Skinner, Katherine Swartz, Bill Whitely, Kathryn Zeiler and participants
in the Fragmented Health Care System conference at the Petrie-Flom Center for Health Law Policy
at Harvard Law School. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Randall D. Cebul, James B. Rebitzer, Lowell J. Taylor, and Mark Votruba. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Organizational Fragmentation and Care Quality in the U.S. Health Care System
Randall D. Cebul, James B. Rebitzer, Lowell J. Taylor, and Mark Votruba
NBER Working Paper No. 14212
August 2008
JEL No. D2,I11,I12,I18,IO

                                             ABSTRACT

Many goods and services can be readily provided through a series of unconnected transactions, but
in health care close coordination over time and within care episodes improves both health outcomes
and efficiency. Close coordination is problematic in the US health care system because the financing
and delivery of care is distributed across a variety of distinct and often competing entities, each with
its own objectives, obligations and capabilities. These fragmented organizational structures lead to
disrupted relationships, poor information flows, and misaligned incentives that combine to degrade
care quality and increase costs. We illustrate our argument with examples taken from the insurance
and the hospital industries, and discuss possible responses to the problems resulting from organizational
fragmentation.


Randall D. Cebul                                    Lowell J. Taylor
Professor of Medicine, Epidemiology,                The Heinz School
 and Biostatistics                                  Carnegie Mellon University
Director, Center for Health Care                    5000 Forbes Avenue
 Research & Policy                                  Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
School of Medicine                                  lt20@andrew.cmu.edu
Case Western Reserve University
rdc@case.edu                                        Mark Votruba
                                                    Weatherhead School of Management
James B. Rebitzer                                   Case Western Reserve University
John R. Mannix Medical Mutual Professor             11119 Bellflower Road
Weatherhead School of Management,                   Cleveland, OH 44106
Case Western Reserve University                     mark.votruba@case.edu
11119 Bellflower Rd
Peter B. Lewis Building, Room 274
Cleveland, OH 44106-7235
and NBER
james.rebitzer@case.edu
       The financing and provision of health care in the United States is distributed across a

variety of distinct and often competing entities, each with its own objectives, obligations and

capabilities. These fragmented organizational structures lead to disrupted relationships, poor

information flows, and misaligned incentives that combine to degrade the quality of health care

in important ways. Many goods and services can be readily financed and provided through a

series of unconnected transactions, but in health care close coordination improves both health

outcomes and the efficiency with which good outcomes are achieved.

       In discussing the effect of organizational fragmentation on the quality of health care, it is

helpful to separate the financing of health care from the provision of care. Medical expenditures

over a lifetime are often large, lumpy, and uncertain, so health insurance plays a central role in

financing care. Insurance for individuals under age 65 is provided largely through employers.

The employer based system leads to high rates of turnover in the relationship between insurers

and their policy holders. People change their health insurance company either when they move

between jobs or when their employer changes insurance companies. For individuals aged 65 and

older, insurance is available from a single, government-run insurance program, Medicare, so

there is a near universal exit from commercial insurance policies around age 65. The first

section of this paper investigates the consequences of our fragmented health insurance system.

Given the high rates of turnover, we ask whether insurers have appropriate incentives to invest in

the future health of their policy holders. We also consider the effect of insurance fragmentation

on administrative costs.

       The second part of the paper concerns the provision of health care, specifically hospitals.

Hospitals have a fragmented structure because of the special role played by physicians.



                                                                                                     1
Physicians are central to resource allocation and care processes in the hospital, yet they are

typically independent of hospital management. The organizational independence and the clinical

interdependence of physicians and hospitals inhibit key clinical process improvements.

Integrating physicians more tightly into process improvement efforts is made difficult by the

sociology of the medical profession and also by legal doctrines that have historically supported

arms-length physician-hospital relationships.

       Any discussion of organizational fragmentation and care delivery must consider the role

of modern information technologies that promise to enhance coordination over time and within

care episodes. Unfortunately the current information infrastructure in health care does not allow

for the seamless flow of information between hospitals, providers and insurers. As we discuss in

section three, the absence of fully interoperable electronic medical records and personal health

records is both a cause and consequence of organizational fragmentation. The absence of fully

portable electronic medical records also creates opportunities for insurers to take on the role of

information aggregators for their policy holders. The ability of insurers to serve this function is

limited by the frequent disruption of their relationships with policy holders as well as the

inherent limitations of the billing data they possess.

       The paper concludes by considering responses to organizational fragmentation.




Fragmentation in Health Insurance



Disrupted Relationships

       Individuals under age 65 largely rely on private insurance plans to finance healthcare.

About 63 percent of the population under age 65 obtain health insurance through an employer


                                                                                                      2
(DeNavas-Walt, Proctor, and Smith, 2007, Table C-3). More than 1.5 million employer groups

purchase health insurance on behalf of their employees from over 1200 registered insurance

companies (based on 2004 firm counts reported by the Census Bureau at

<http://www.census.gov/csd/susb/susb04.htm> and Employer Health Benefit Annual Survey,

2004). The relationship between employers and insurers can take several forms. Large

employers often self-insure, meaning that the firm pays all health care costs each year and hire

insurers only to administer plans. For “fully-insured” employer groups, the insurance company

both administers the plan and bears the financial risk.

       About a fifth of health insurance policyholders cancel their policy in any given year,

(Cebul, Herschman, Rebitzer, Taylor and Votruba, 2007). When an employee leaves the

employer group that purchased a policy on his or her behalf, the insurance relationship is

typically severed. For employers offering multiple plan options, employees may opt out of one

plan in favor of another, or employees may cancel their employer-based plan if they find more

desirable insurance through a spouse’s job or in the direct purchase market. Finally, 38 percent

of the turnover in health insurance coverage is the result of employer groups canceling their

existing policies, often as a prelude to selecting another insurer. Turnover rates are considerably

higher for fully insured employers, a group largely made up of small and mid-sized employers

who are typically less sophisticated about health insurance. Cebul et. al., (2007) report annual

exit rates above 30% in this market with roughly half the turnover due to employers exiting the

insurance relationship.

       In an employer-based health insurance system, labor market mobility is clearly a major

determinant of exit from insurance relationships, but why do so many employer groups switch

their insurance carriers? A likely answer involves search frictions. In a competitive insurance



                                                                                                      3
market, the law of one price prevails and consequently there is little payoff for employer groups

to switch insurers. In an insurance market with moderate search costs, however, insurers have

some degree of market power and the law of one price does not hold. Instead equilibrium is

characterized by a distribution of prices supported on the low end by the marginal cost of

insurance and on the high end by the purchaser’s maximum willingness to pay (Burdett and

Mortensen, 1998; Mortensen, Mortensen, 2003; Lang and Majumdar, 2004; Montgomery, 1991;

Butters, 1977; Manning, 2003). Purchasers who find themselves in the expensive part of the

premium distribution will have incentives to change insurers when a better offer arrives. Thus,

the frequent exit of employer groups from their insurance relationship is quite natural in a search

model, provided that search frictions are not too severe. 1



Incentives to Invest in Future Health

       Inadequate preventive care, especially for those with chronic disease, is one of the most

important quality failures in the U.S. health care system (Institute Of Medicine Committee On

Quality Of Health Care In America, 2001). McGlynn et al. (2003) estimate that only 55% of


1
       Cebul et al. ( 2007) provide estimates of the magnitude of search frictions in the US health
       insurance market. The health insurance market in Switzerland exhibits considerable price
       dispersion, despite competition among insurers and a regulatory structure that supports a high
       degree of product uniformity (Frank and Lamiraud, 2007). Switzerland requires all residents to
       purchase health insurance in a marketplace that features a large number of competing insurers
       The government specifies a uniform basic insurance package. Premiums, which are risk adjusted
       by location, gender and age, can differ between health plans, but within health plans an insurer
       must offer the same premium for individuals having the same age, gender and region of
       residence. In addition to this community rating feature, health insurers must accept every
       applicant for basic insurance, and individuals can switch insurance providers every six months.
       The differences between the maximum and minimum monthly premiums were 65.36 Euros in
       1997 and 88.01 in 2004 (p. 38). The primary deterrent to switching in the Swiss context appears
       to have been psychological—either decision overload, under which the psychological costs of
       processing information as choice increases overwhelms individual’s decision making capacity, or
       status quo bias. Also, Dormont, Geoffard and Lamiraud ( 2007) suggest that the “inertia” in the
       Swiss market is affected by the presence of supplemental policies. Switching costs may be high
       for these policies and insurers may use these supplemental policies as “risk selection” devices.

                                                                                                     4
adults receive recommended levels of preventive care, while adults with a chronic illness – such

as diabetes, asthma, coronary artery disease, chronic obstructed pulmonary disorders (COPD),

and hypertension – receive only 56% of the chronic care recommended by clinical guidelines.

The care of patients with chronic diseases accounts for 75 percent of annual health care

expenditures (National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion 2005). The

complications associated with these conditions accumulate over time, so early interventions can

improve patient care and reduce medical costs. The short expected duration of insurance

relationships undermines insurers’ incentives to invest in preventative care and disease

management. Deficient incentives resulting from short-term insurance relationships are, we

argue, an important contributor to these gaps in care.

        Diabetes disease management offers a useful illustration of the sort of quality problems

we have in mind (for an analogous discussion of bariatric surgery see Avraham and Camara,

2007). Diabetes is a very important chronic disease. According to the Agency for Health Care

Research and Quality (Shojania, Ranji, Shaw, Charo, Lai, Rushakoff, McDonald, and Owens,

2004) seventeen million Americans have diabetes and one in seven either has the disease or is at

risk for developing it. Diabetes related complications account for more than 200,000 deaths

annually, 82,000 amputations, 38,000 new cases of end stage renal disease and 12,000 cases of

blindness. Although there is no cure for diabetes, effective treatment and screening strategies

exist to control co-morbid conditions and to extend the quality and length of life. Yet diabetes

care in the US has consistently failed to meet recommended quality standards and there are

significant gaps in care (Shojania, et al., 2004) .

        Diabetes disease management programs have emerged in the last decade as a strategy to

slow the progression of the disease by aggressively monitoring and controlling blood levels of



                                                                                                   5
glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) and low density lipoprotein (LDL). Implementing these programs

is challenging because they require a combination of education efforts (aimed at patients and

primary care providers) and sophisticated monitoring systems to track patient progress, assess

physician performance, and coordinate information flows between pharmacies, labs, and the

offices of various specialists and primary care providers. Insurers can also improve the patient

adherence to disease management protocols by reducing prices and co-pays to encourage

compliance (Dor and Encinosa, 2004).

       Clearly disease management involves up-front investments for payoffs later in time.

Beaulieu et al. (2007) offer an analysis of the costs and benefits of diabetes disease management

at a specific HMO, Health Partners . They estimate that the program generated a positive social

return that grew over time. The net private return, however, was negative in the first years and

zero over the course of a decade. Policyholder turnover played a significant role in reducing

private returns (see also Gertler and Simcoe’s, 2006; analysis of a different disease management

program).

       Several indirect pieces of evidence also suggest that shortening the insurer-policy holder

relationship may lead to fewer investments in future health. For example, one might expect that

sectors of the labor market with high rates of job turnover should also have shorter insurer-policy

holder relationships and therefore reduced incentives to invest in future health. Fang and

Gavazza ( 2007) find that employees in industries with high turnover rates are less likely to be

offered health insurance from their employer. Should health insurance be offered, employees in

high turnover industries pay higher deductibles and a larger fraction of the insurance premium.

As a result, these employees also spend less on health services and receive less preventative care.

In retirement, however, employees who had worked in high turnover industries have higher



                                                                                                    6
medical expenditures—suggesting that attention to some health problems was postponed. Along

similar lines, Herring ( 2006) finds that in cities with a high degree of employer-induced

insurance turnover, there is a reduction in preventative care visits, but no reduction in acute care

visits.

          If insurer-policy holder relationships are too short to sustain meaningful incentives for

investments in disease management and preventative care, one might expect government

mandates would help reduce the short-fall. Thus we find that 27 states currently mandate

coverage for diabetes self-management and education programs, though disease management

mandates for other conditions remain rare (Bunce, Wieske, and Vlasta Prikazsky, 2007). The

absence of long-term insurance relationships may also help explain the limited effects on health

care costs of the managed care revolution of the 1990s, although other economic factors may

also have played a role (Cooper and Rebitzer, 2006).

          Advocates for disease management often claim that the net savings from these programs

generate a positive return for insurers who invest in them. If this “business case for quality”

were to hold, then shouldn’t insurers have appropriate incentives to invest in at least some kinds

of disease management or other proactive health care? The presence of adverse selection and

search frictions in insurance markets suggest that the answer to this question may be no. An

insurer who offers excellent disease management programs must be concerned about attracting

potentially expensive patients (Beaulieu, et al., 2007). Search frictions create countervailing

incentives for an insurance company. On one hand, imperfect competition allows insurers to

capture a portion of the surplus generated by investments in future health (Cebul, et al., 2007),




                                                                                                       7
which should encourage investment. On the other hand, search frictions discourage investment

by increasing turnover – especially among fully insured employers. 2

       There is currently a heated debate about whether disease management programs yield

monetary savings that more than offset their costs (Congressional Budget Office, 2004). This

focus on the “business case for quality” is incomplete, however, because it fails to consider the

value to patients of improvements in future health and well being that result from these

programs. In principle, insurers could capture some of this value in the form of higher premiums

if they could count on long-term relationships with employer groups or individual policy holders.

For example, policyholders might pay more in the present for an insurance policy that credibly

promises to deliver these chronic disease management services should they be required in the

future. But insurance companies cannot count on such long-term relationships with many or most

insured individuals.

       The problem of short- term insurance relationships is compounded by the near universal

movement of commercial insurance policy-holders onto Medicare at age 65. Many chronic

diseases are not manifest until late middle age so the movement to Medicare shortens private

insurer’s time horizon. For example, the lifetime risk of men developing diabetes in the US is

32.8%. By age 60, 18.09% of men will have developed the disease compared to 30.77% at age

80. (Narayan, Boyle, Thompson, Sorensen, and Williamson, 2003). The payoff to insurers for

disease management of the many late developers of diabetes is obviously diminished when these

policy holders switch to Medicare at 65.


2
       Search frictions also enable insurers to capture returns from investments in future health made by
       individual policy holders or employer groups. Cebul et. al. (2007); and Fang and Gavazza (2007)
       demonstrate that this will lead to additional under-investment. The depressing effect of insurance
       market search frictions on investments in future health is analogous to the effect of labor market
       frictions on investments in general human capital as described in Acemoglu ( 1997) and
       Acemoglu and Pischke ( 1999).

                                                                                                        8
Administrative Costs

       In his presidential address to the Econometric Society, Peter Diamond (1992, p. 1234)

observed, “The administration of health insurance is expensive, and not adequately approached

by a model of ideal insurance with no loading, i.e., with premiums equal to expected benefits.”

Woolhandler, Campbell and Himmelstein ( 2003) calculated that the United States spends $1,059

per capita on the administration of its health care system, which amounts to 31 percent of total

health care expenditures. Canada, in contrast, spends $307 per capita on health care, which is

16.7 percent of its total health care expenditures (p. 768). Much of this difference is due to the

relatively heavy reliance in the U.S. on private insurers, whose underwriting, billing and

marketing activities account for the bulk of overhead costs. If the complexity of insurance

contracts and billing procedures cause hospitals, physicians and employers to build bureaucracies

to negotiate relationships with insurers, then the indirect effects of private insurance on

administrative costs may be a good deal larger than the direct effects. For example, Woolhander

et al. ( 2003) find that hospitals in the United States spend $315 per capita on administration,

compared with $103 in Canada. Similarly, the administrative costs of practitioners are $324 per

capita in the U.S., versus $107 in Canada, while employers spend $57 per capita in the United

States, compared to $8 in Canada. Some have argued that these estimates may be too high, but

even more modest alternative estimates yield substantial differences in administrative costs

between Canada and the US (Aaron 2003). A recent Commonwealth Fund report found that if

administrative expenditures in the United States were scaled back to the levels of Germany and

Switzerland, the savings would be $32 to $46 billion a year (Davis, Schoen, Guterman, Shih,

Schoenbaum, and Weinbaum, 2007, p. 4). Germany and Switzerland have mixed private and




                                                                                                     9
public health insurance systems, so the implication is that substantial savings are possible even if

the United States retained a mixed private and public system.

       Fragmented insurance relationships contribute directly to high administrative costs

because, as we learned from an insurance executive in charge of managing insurance payment

centers, the rapid churn in insurer-policy holder relationships adds an important additional

complexity to the already difficult process of paying claims. Search frictions, which contribute

significantly to high levels of insurance turnover especially in the fully-insured segment of the

insurance market, also require that insurers devote considerable resources to marketing their

products.

       Search frictions may also increase administrative costs by increasing product variety and

complexity. In a market with moderate frictions, insurers can benefit from complexity to the

extent it limits product comparisons. Employer groups accept policies with high premiums and

overly complex contracts, because the information about alternatives is sufficiently poor that the

offer seems better than the available alternatives—at least for a time. There is considerable

scope for product variety and complexity in insurance because of the large number of non-

premium attributes of insurance policies. Products can have different co-pays, deductibles and

caps for different types of services. The list of physicians in the network, the fees for out of

network referrals, and the specific drugs in the formulary can vary as well. Hall (2000) describes

how state insurance regulations for small employer groups further contribute to this complexity.

Woolhandler et al. (2003) note that Seattle alone had 757 distinct health insurance products. Our

own discussions with executives in the insurance industry suggest that this number is not atypical

for metropolitan areas and may be conservative. To the extent that frictions lead to a




                                                                                                    10
proliferation of insurance products, they will also increase the resources required for marketing,

claims processing and administration. 3




Fragmentation in Hospital Governance and Care


       Medical care is delivered both in the hospital (in-patient care) and outside the hospital

(out-patient or ambulatory care). Thirty eight percent of all U.S. health care expenditures in

2004 were for hospital care (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 2007). There are over

5700 hospitals (U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2006) and approximately

19,000 physician practices in the United States (American Medical Association, 2004). Some

hospitals are not-for profit, others are for-profit; some hospitals have a research or teaching

mission and close associations with research universities and medical schools, others focus on

delivering care to particular communities, still others specialize in the treatment of specific

diseases or conditions. The majority of physicians work in small single-specialty groups,

although some large multi-specialty group practices do exist (Wilensky, Wolter, and Fischer,

2006). Some physicians may have “privileges” at more than one hospital and many more split

their time and attention between hospital in-patient care and their office-based practices (Fisher,

Staiger, Bynum, and Gottlieb, 2006).


3
       The fact that search costs lead to an equilibrium distribution of premiums for identical policies,
       also promotes product variety because at each point on the price distribution, insurers will offer a
       different mix of non-price insurance attributes. This argument is made formally in the context of
       labor markets and non-wage job attributes by Lang and Majumdar (2004). Some economists
       have pointed to adverse selection, rather than search frictions, as the cause of the high degree of
       product variation found in insurance (Diamond, 1992). As Hall (2000) describes, even in states
       that attempt community rating, clever insurers do design policies and pricing strategies to deter
       bad risks. These stratagems introduce an excessive number of insurance products and price
       variation into the small group market that further compound search frictions. At a theoretical
       level, the distinction between adverse selection and search frictions may be more apparent than
       real (see Li, 2007).

                                                                                                         11
       Hospitals have a fragmented organizational structure because physicians are central to

resource allocation and care processes in the hospital, yet they are largely independent of

hospital management. The principle of physician autonomy is deeply embedded in the laws and

regulations governing hospitals (Hall, 1988). The doctor-patient relationship and the doctor’s

medical practice are usually separate and legally distinct from the rest of the hospital.

Reimbursement for care that happens within hospitals is made separately to physicians and

hospitals. As Harris ( 1977, p. 468) put it in his seminal article on the internal organization of

hospitals, “The net result is one organization split into two disjoint pieces, each with its own

objectives, managers, pricing strategy and constraints.”

               We argue below that fragmented organizational structures inhibit process

improvement in hospitals leading to waste and inefficiency. The scope for process

improvements in hospitals is hard to measure, but Medicare data on geographic variation in

expenditures and outcomes suggests that inefficiencies may be large. Numerous studies find that

expenditures for individuals in high cost areas are as much as sixty percent higher than health

expenditures for similar individuals in low spending areas. Most of this geographic variation is

unexplained by prices, demographics, or health status. Some regions seem prone to adopt

inexpensive but effective care while other regions are prone to adopt high cost care that offers

little or no measurable benefit (Congressional Budget Office, 2008). For example in Knoxville,

Tennessee, risk adjusted one year survival for a first heart-attack was 69.7 per 100 patients, with

one-year spending of $20,720 compared to 65.6 per 100 patients $47,133 in New York (Skinner,

Staiger, and Fisher, 2006, p.38).   Hospital expenditures are a major contributor to these

geographic variations (Congressional Budget Office, 2008).




                                                                                                     12
Clinical Process Improvement and the Need for Close Coordination

       The organizational independence and the clinical interdependence of physicians and

hospitals can act as a drag on clinical process improvements. To illustrate this point, consider

the process of sterilizing surgical instruments as described in a recent case study of the Stanford

Hospital and Clinics (Zenios, Surman, and Pernas-Giz, 2004). 4 Approximately 50,000

instruments flowed through Stanford Hospital’s operating rooms in 2004. Each instrument needs

to be sterilized, processed and delivered to the correct room at the correct time. As is typically

the case, surgeons at Stanford Hospital were not hospital employees. Surgeons received a salary,

as well as a fee for each surgery. In this case, they were members of Stanford Medical School

faculty and they were free to practice at another facility should they choose to do so. If a

surgeon chose to perform surgeries elsewhere, Stanford Hospital would lose that surgeon’s

expertise, patients, and revenues.

       The process of providing instruments begins with a surgeon filling out a “preference

card” that lists the supplies needed for a surgery. Technicians, who are hourly employees hired

with only a few weeks of on-the-job training, then load the supplies onto a cart. Errors could

occur for a variety of reasons: mistakes in filling out the preference card; technicians gathering

incorrect instruments, perhaps because the bins in which the instruments sat were incorrectly

labeled; or instruments that had not been reassembled properly after previous sterilization. The

location of instruments in the hospital was supposed to be tracked by manual scanners, but

employees frequently failed to scan. Emergencies and poor coordination meant that instruments

were often needed again immediately after a previous use, making the preferred six-hour



4
       We chose this study to illustrate the important role physicians play in process improvements in
       hospitals. The case, and our summary of it, is not intended to demonstrate either effective or
       ineffective handling of an administrative situation.

                                                                                                         13
sterilization process impossible and forcing the use of less desirable “flash sterilization” with

steam. Surgeons had no direct contact with the sterilization process or technicians, and held

operating room nurses accountable for whether the desired instruments were available. Nurses

were harshly blamed by surgeons for instrumentation failures, but nurses who delivered clean

instruments on time achieved “star status” among surgeons. In this setting, some operating room

staff shared instruments between surgical suites. Some nurses kept critical instruments in their

personal lockers. Some surgeons also took instruments with them when they left the hospital.

       Efficient use of surgical instruments requires coordination among a heterogeneous group

that includes surgeons, nurses, anesthesiologists, sterilization technicians, and supply distribution

staff. This sort of cross-functional coordination is generally accepted as crucial for providing

high quality care in many areas. The Institute of Medicine’s comprehensive study of health care

quality, Crossing the Quality Chasm ( 2001, p. 83), lists the creation of effective work teams as

one if its ten rules to redesign and improve care: “In the current system, care is taken to protect

professional prerogatives and separate roles. The current system shows too little cooperation and

teamwork. Instead, each discipline and type of organization tends to defend its authority at the

expense of the total system’s function.” The Institute of Medicine report (p. 83) also highlights

surgical tray set-ups: “Suboptimization is seen, for example, in operating rooms that must

maintain different surgical tray setups for different doctors performing the same procedure. Each

doctor gets what he or she wants, but at the cost of introducing enormous complexity and

possible error into the system. In the new system, people will understand the advantage of high

levels of cooperation, coordination and standardization to guarantee excellence, continuity and

reliability.” For studies of the effect of team coordination on clinical outcomes see Gittell,

(2002) and Gittell et. al. (2000).



                                                                                                    14
       The Institute of Medicine (2001 p. 83) traces the difficulty in forming work teams to the

sociology of health care professions which focuses on “role definition, certification and

licensure, or doing one’s own work as the top priority. These attitudes are especially pronounced

among physicians, and offer little training for work in collaborative settings”. Audet, Doty,

Shamasdin, and Schoenbaum ( 2005, p. 847, Exhibit 2), using the 2003 Commonwealth Fund

National Survey of Physicians and Quality of Care, find that only one-third of physicians report

participating in redesign efforts to improve the performance of the system of care in which they

practice.

Hospital Governance Structure

       While these sociological issues may indeed be impediments to quality improvement

efforts, the fragmented governance structure of hospitals makes the problem worse. Physicians,

as independent contractors, have high-powered incentives for devoting time and attention to their

private practice, to other hospitals where they may have admitting privileges, or to research and

teaching. Getting high levels of physician cooperation for addressing hospital-specific issues

like the sterilization of instruments requires that the hospital offer equally high powered,

countervailing incentives. Monetary incentives linked to the output of a team have been shown

in other settings to be effective motivators (Encinosa, Gaynor, and Rebitzer, 2007; Gaynor,

Rebitzer, and Taylor, 2004), but these sorts of incentives are problematic in settings where the

income and wealth of team members varies as dramatically as they do in a hospital setting.

       If physicians were employed directly by hospitals, then hospitals could structure their job

responsibilities to address these issues (Holmstrom and Milgrom, 1994; and Holmstrom, 1999;

discuss these issues for employment relationships generally). A surgeon employed full time at a

hospital would certainly need compensation sufficient to offset lost income from outside



                                                                                                   15
activities, but once this participation constraint is achieved, then more subtle and finely tuned

non-pecuniary motivators can sustain a high-commitment to broader hospital objectives. A

substantial literature on high commitment human resource systems establishes that employees

can work hard in the interests of the employer in exchange for a combination of good pay,

empowerment, trust, and interesting and fulfilling work (Roberts, 2004, p. 175). In these human

resource systems, employers do not provide high-powered monetary rewards for individual

performance, but instead use a combination of screening, socialization, training in the objectives

of the firm, and peer pressure to sustain high levels of motivation. Encinosa, Gaynor and

Rebitzer (2007) offer evidence on the presence of sociological and economic incentives within

medical groups.



Legal Doctrines Limiting Employment of Physicians by Hospitals

        Given the advantages of close coordination, why don’t hospitals evolve alternative

governance structures that would integrate physicians more tightly? In many European health

care systems—including Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain,

Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain and Sweden--in-patient care is predominately or entirely

overseen by salaried physicians employed by their hospital (European Observatory on Health

Systems and Policies, 2004). But in the United States, two long-standing legal doctrines have

historically discouraged the employment of physicians by hospitals and tilted towards an

independent contractor model: the “corporate practice of medicine doctrine” and the “doctrine of

vicarious liability.”

        The “corporate practice of medicine” legal doctrine has its roots in state laws that prevent

unlicensed entities from providing medical services. These statutes, which trace back to rules



                                                                                                    16
proposed by the American Medical Association in 1847, were motivated in part by a desire to

protect the public from physicians with “divided loyalties,” and in part by a desire to protect the

professional autonomy of medical doctors from encroachments by corporations and hospitals

(Hall, 1988;Huberfeld, 2004; Yessian and Kvall, 1991). The statutes and associated case law

vary from state to state. Historically, the doctrine has effectively prohibited the employment of

physicians by hospitals and other non-physician entities, but the current force of this prohibition

is unclear (Robinson, 1999; Huberfeld, 2004). Yessian and Kvell (1991) find that in 1991 only

five states clearly prohibited hospitals from employing physicians, and even these states had

exceptions for public hospitals, clinics operated by medical schools, and teaching hospitals.

However, in many other states, some confusion still seems to exist about whether hospitals can

employ physicians.

       According to the “doctrine of vicarious liability,” principals are responsible for the

consequences of actions taken by employees in the course of carrying out their duties. Thus, a

hospital that hires physicians as employees accepts malpractice liability that the hospital

wouldn’t otherwise have to bear. Abraham and Weiler (1994) discuss the historical evolution of

hospital liability. 5 Moreover, if the limits on malpractice insurance carried by physicians are

lower than the limits for hospitals, and if the limit on the malpractice insurance acts as an

effective cap on judgments—as Zeiler, Silver, Black, Hyman, and Sage (forthcoming) find in a

study of malpractice payments in Texas from 1990 through 2003—then having physicians rather

than hospitals responsible for malpractice can lower overall malpractice payments. Arlen and


5
       In a world of Coasian bargaining, the equilibrium expected costs of malpractice (and hence
       incentives to avoid malpractice) are not influenced by who is held liable for malpractice damages
       For example, a shift in liability from independent physicians with hospital privileges to hospitals
       would be compensated for by an offsetting reduction in the compensation of physician
       employees. Arlen and MacLeod (Arlen and MacLeod, 2003, Arlen and Macleod, 2005a, Arlen
       and MacLeod, 2005b), make this point in the context of managed care organizations.

                                                                                                        17
MacLeod (2005b) present a theoretical analysis of this issue in the context of managed care

organizations. 6 Abraham and Weiler ( 1994) argue that the current system of vicarious liability

offers insufficient incentives for hospitals to undertake the systematic process analysis and

improvements required to improve patient safety. For purposes of tort law, employment is

defined by supervision and control. Thus, a hospital that relies largely on physicians as

independent contractors would forgo some of the legal advantages of this set-up should it attempt

to supervise, train and otherwise exercise authority over physicians under its administrative

control.

       If the doctrine of vicarious liability was a powerful enough legal force to inhibit the

integration of physicians with hospital operations, why did it not also inhibit the efforts of

managed care organizations to regulate physician practice patterns? Part of the answer is that

managed care organizations are covered under the federal Employee Retirement Security Act

(ERISA), that restricts damages to the cost of denied coverage (and thus disallows compensatory

or punitive damages) and preempts malpractice suits under state law (Arlen and MacLeod,

2003). To be clear, ERISA does not preclude malpractice suits under state law for negligent care

delivered by physicians employed by managed care organization. Managed care organizations

may, however, escape liability under state law if their physicians are independent contractors

(Arlen and MacLeod, 2003).

       Although legal doctrines and associated case law have created a legal landscape that has

historically discouraged hospitals from employing physicians, hospitals and physicians are

testing the boundaries of these rules and developing new professional practices and



6
       Outside of health care, Rebitzer (1995) found that safety problems at petrochemical plants were
       increased because of employers’ attempts to evade vicarious liability through the use of
       independent contractors.

                                                                                                     18
organizational forms that may integrate physicians more tightly into hospital operations and

process improvement efforts.

Hospitalists

       A particularly noteworthy innovation is the growing use of “hospitalists,” a new medical

specialty in which physicians, often internists, specialize in caring for patients who are in the

hospital. Although there were only a few hundred such specialists in 1996, their number had

risen to 8000 hospitalists by 2004 and rapid growth seems likely to continue (Wachter, 2004).

Sometimes hospitalists are members of medical groups or managed care organizations;

sometimes they are hospital employees (Robinson, 1999). With the shortening length of hospital

stays and the higher level of complexity of care for hospital patients, it makes sense for office-

based physicians to hand off responsibility to a physician stationed in and specializing in hospital

care (Meltzer, 2001).

       Hospitalists would seem to be well-positioned to make investments in hospital specific

human capital and also to participate in process improvements. However, evidence on the

effects of hospitalists has been scarce. Meltzer (2001) discusses two studies that approximate a

random design in that patients were allocated to a hospitalist or non-hospitalist based on who

happened to be on call when the patient arrived. Both studies find that hospitalists modestly

reduce length of stay and charges.

       Hospitalists do create some additional coordination costs, because office-based

physicians hand their patients off to hospitalists when patients enter the hospital (Meltzer, 2001;

Wachter, 2004). Ultimately, the effect of the hospitalist model of in-patient care quality will

depend on the benefits from specialization exceeding the heightened coordination costs.




                                                                                                     19
Integrating Hospitals and Physician Practices

       Coordination of in-patient with out-patient treatment might also be facilitated by having

hospitals integrate with physician practices. In some cases hospitals have acquired physician

practices and placed doctors on salary. The motive for these purchases seems largely to be to

lock-in profitable referrals (Dranove, 2000, p. 130; Robinson, 1999; Casalino and Robinson,

2003) and also to enhance hospital bargaining power (Budetti, Shortell, Waters, Alexander,

Burns, Gillies, and Zuckerman, 2002; Casalino and Robinson, 2003).

        In other cases, hospitals construct alliances with physicians by forming “physician

hospital organizations” or “management service organizations.” A physician hospital

organization is a joint venture between a hospital and physicians that serves as a single agent for

managed care contracting and provides administrative services and utilization review; however,

both the physicians and the hospital retain their identity as separate lines of business. A

management service organization is a free-standing corporation. It provides services to medical

practices, it may be the employer of the non-medical staff, and it may help coordinate planning

and decision making (Burns, 1995). These attempts at vertical integration have generally

produced disappointing results. As Burns and Pauly ( 2002 , p. 134) put it, “The structures that

were put in place to integrate hospitals, primary care providers, and specialists often failed to

fundamentally alter the manner in which physicians practiced medicine and collaborated with

other health care professionals (that is, ‘clinical integration’). As a result, integrated structures

rarely integrated the actual delivery of patient care.” Vertical integration between hospitals and

physicians also poses practical difficulties. The arrangement is almost never exclusive, doctors

and patients are constantly moving in and out of the system due to personal preferences and

geographic convenience (Robinson 1999, p. 192). Indeed, the fraction of hospitals with



                                                                                                        20
physician hospital organizations and management service organizations peaked in 1996 and has

been declining since (Burns and Pauly, 2002).

       To compensate for the lack of clinical integration, health care organizations have

introduced a variety of clever incentive systems to motivate the physicians in the practices they

acquire. These incentive experiments, however, have not met with much success, in part because

many aspects of care integration are non-contractible and in part because incentive pay is too

crude an instrument to achieve the multiple goals of efficiency in production, appropriate

utilization and referrals, and delivery of high quality care (Dranove, 2000, p. 135; Robinson,

1999). Beaulieu and Barro ( 2003) offer a case study of one hospital system’s attempt to

introduce incentives into physician practices they purchased. The primary effect of increased

incentive pay was to cause low performing physicians to leave the practices purchased by the

hospital.

Organizational Fragmentation and Information Technology


       In a fragmented health care delivery system, high quality care requires the smooth flow

of information across diverse providers working within various organizations in both in-patient

and out-patient settings. Pham, Schrag, O’Malley, Wu and Bach ( 2007) provide some evidence

on the scale of coordination required. They studied Medicare patients whose physicians were

included in the Community Tracking Study physician survey. They report that patients with

diabetes see a median of eight physicians in five distinct medical practices. Patients with

coronary artery diseases see a median of ten physicians in six distinct practices. Moreover, the

physician providing the most care is not constant from one year to the next (Pham, et al., 2007).

       The large number of physicians and organizations involved in treatment clearly creates

coordination challenges. There is some evidence suggesting that these challenges influence care

                                                                                                   21
outcomes. Skinner et. al. (2006) report an analysis of regional, risk- adjusted, one year survival

rates for Medicare patients following a first heart attack. After controlling for other aspects of

the quality of care, the average number of different physicians involved in post episode treatment

in a hospital referral region was negatively associated with gains in regional one year survival

rates and positively associated with cost increases. In other words, regions that relied more

heavily on coordination across more physicians were less adept at improving post heart attack

care efficacy and efficiency.

       Modern information technology offers many tools to facilitate coordination and

information flows, but the information technology revolution has been slow in coming to health

care. Survey data collected in 2007-2008 reveals that only four percent of physicians have a fully

functional electronic medical record system in their office and only thirteen percent have a basic

system (DesRoches, Campbell, Rao, Donelan, Ferris, Jha, Kaushal, Levy, Rosenbaum, Shields,

and Blumenthal, 2008). Similarly low rates of IT adoption are reported for electronic medical

records in hospital emergency rooms and outpatient departments (Burt and Hing ( 2005) and

physician order entry systems in hospitals (Cutler, Feldman, and Horwitz, 2005).

       Part of the explanation for the slow implementation of modern information technology is

the fragmented nature of the health care delivery system. As President Bush’s Information

Technology Advisory Committee (2004, p. 7) concluded: “Unlike the nationalized health

systems of many countries, however, the U.S. health care system is deliberately composed of

private, independent hospitals, ambulatory care and long term care facilities, and private

individual and group provider practices. While this arrangement has stimulated competition,

maximized consumer choice, and provided ongoing incentives to excel and to innovate, the free

market system does not inherently generate practical mechanisms for sharing information critical



                                                                                                     22
to patient care.” A report from the Institute Of Medicine Committee On Quality Of Health Care

In America, 2001, p. 154) makes a similar point about the dearth of clinical decision support

systems designed to help physicians avoid errors and implement evidence based treatment

guidelines. “To be effective, CDSS [clinical decision support systems] diagnostic systems

require detailed, patient-specific clinical information (history, physical results, medications,

laboratory test results), which in most health care settings resides in a variety of paper and

automated datasets that cannot easily be integrated. Past efforts to develop automated medical

record systems have not been very successful because of the lack of common standards for

coding data, the absence of a data network connecting the many health care organizations and

clinicians involved in patient care, and a number of other factors.”

       The obvious clinical value of sharing information across providers and the absence of

standards for interoperable electronic medical records creates opportunities for insurers to act as

information aggregators for their policy holders. Insurers can do this because all visits and

procedures that require billing are coded into the records of the insurer. If the billing information

is sufficiently complete, timely and accurate, and if it can be integrated with pharmacy and

laboratory information, it is possible to assemble something approximating a comprehensive

electronic medical record. Insurers are using such ersatz medical records to build clinical

decision support systems to identify gaps in care. Javitt , Rebitzer and Reisman ( 2008) report

the results of a randomized trial of one such system. Patients of physicians exposed to the

system had reduced resource utilization (measured by total charges) and fewer unresolved gaps

in care. Insurance based systems are also being used to adjust co-pays and deductibles to

encourage patient adherence to chronic disease treatment protocols (Chernew, Rosen and

Fendrick, 2007).



                                                                                                   23
       Insurance records, however, have important limitations as a source of clinical

information. Claims data typically arrive slowly and contain far less clinical detail than true

electronic medical records. Insurance-based records also do not follow employees when they

change insurance companies. One insurance industry veteran with whom we spoke said it takes

about a year for an insurance company to collect enough information about a patient to even

know if they are eligible for a disease management program.

       Some of the limitations of insurance based data systems might be mitigated by a system

of personal medical records that are the property of the individual. Companies such as WebMD

work with employers and insurers to feed billing information, as well as pharmacy and lab data,

into each individual’s record. This information belongs to the individuals and stays with them.

If, however, an individual’s next job does not have a contract with WebMD, the flow of

information from the insurer stops. Individuals can continue to add information to their personal

medical record on their own, but this increases the likelihood of gaps and errors.

Responses To Fragmentation


       The organizational fragmentation of the U.S. health care system has its roots in important

market forces (and failures), legal doctrine, government policy and the state of information

technology. Our analysis of fragmentation in insurance relationships suggests that disrupted

insurer-policy holder relationships are likely to lead to insufficient investments in future health

such as preventative care or disease management programs for chronic diseases. Our analysis of

fragmented hospital governance emphasizes the difficulty of implementing important process

improvements.

       Some gains may result from changed government policy, but a good deal will depend on

the development of improved organizational practices, legal doctrine and information

                                                                                                      24
technology. In principle, policymakers could address short-falls in investments in future health

by mandating that insurers deliver the under-provided programs. Attempting to mandate

precisely what care should be delivered is, however, unlikely to achieve fully satisfactory results.

Unless the mandates are compatible with the incentives inherent in short insurer-policyholder

relationships, they are likely to lead to insufficient investments in perfunctory programs, which

in extreme cases may become wasteful sham efforts. Mandates are further complicated by legal

doctrines that dramatically limit the reach of any insurance mandate passed by an individual state

(Avraham and Camara, 2007).

       Policymakers could create incentives for process improvement by linking payments and

care quality. Medicare will be attempting an approach along these lines when it introduces a

policy in fiscal year 2009 that refuses additional payments to hospitals for preventable inpatient

complications, errors, injuries, and infections that could have reasonably been prevented by good

quality assurance processes (Kurtzman, 2007). But in clinical settings, performance measures are

often imperfect. Linking high-powered incentives to these performance measures distorts

incentives in ways leading to “cream skimming” and other undesirable provider behaviors

(Dranove, Kessler, McClellan, and Satterthwaite, 2003). Another important issue with pay-for-

performance is that in a fragmented health care system, it is often unclear which provider should

be held accountable for which outcomes. Pham, et al. ( 2007) investigated the ability of

Medicare to “assign” a primary physician to a particular patient for the purpose of implementing

pay for performance incentive systems. They conclude that it is often not possible to identify a

single physician primarily responsible for care.

       An intriguing alternative approach put forward by Fischer et al., ( 2006) is to create

“accountable care organizations” composed of hospitals and the physicians who treat or admit



                                                                                                 25
patients there. Linking pay to the performance of these artificial entities would create incentives

for improving the many clinical processes that span in-patient and out-patient settings, but

implementing such a system will be tricky. Free-riding issues will likely make it difficult to

provide high-powered incentives across a large group of heterogeneous and loosely affiliated

provider organizations (Gaynor, et al., 2004; Encinosa, et al., 2007). Inducing physicians to

form employment-like relationships with accountable care organizations may not be easier than

employing them in hospitals. Introducing gain-sharing among participants in these organizations

will also require modification of federal laws. For example, Social Security Act Civil Monetary

Penalties Law prohibits hospitals from making a payment to a physician as an inducement to

limit services to Medicare or Medicaid patients under the physician’s care. Similarly, an anti-

kickback statute prohibits payments to reward referrals of patients participating in federal health

care programs. The Stark laws prevent physicians from referring Medicare and Medicaid patients

for health services from entities in which physicians have a financial relationship (Wilensky, et

al., 2006) .

        If mandates and pay-for-performance are overly blunt policy instruments, perhaps more

can be accomplished by reforming insurance markets (Avraham and Camara, 2007). Churn in

insurance relationships results from labor market mobility, the switch to Medicare insurance at

65, and search frictions- with the latter being particularly important for the small employers in

the fully-insured market segment. The easiest of these three causes to address are search

frictions. Introducing a simple, extensively marketed, default insurance policy that employers

could choose if no superior policy is offered will truncate the wide distribution of premiums and

thus reduce turnover.




                                                                                                    26
        Our analysis of fragmentation in hospitals emphasized the legal barriers that discouraged

the tight integration of physicians into quality improvement initiatives in hospitals. The legal

system itself seems to be moving towards removing one of these obstacles—the corporate

practice of medicine doctrine. Additional legal reforms, such as replacing the doctrine of

vicarious liability with an enterprise liability rule under which hospital malpractice exposure

extends to physicians working as independent contractors, could eliminate other obstacles. New

managerial innovations along the lines of the hospitalist approach to in-patient care might also

help to better integrate physicians into hospital care improvement initiatives.

       A final aspect of organizational fragmentation is the balkanized information technology

infrastructure in the health care system. A first step in fixing the system would be the adoption

of common electronic and linguistic communication standards (Swartz, 2006). These standards

will lead to interoperable electronic medical records that should improve coordination among

providers and reduce gaps in care. Analysis of the data in these electronic records will also help

refine evidence-based treatment protocols and complementary clinical decision support tools will

help disseminate best practice. In this way electronic medical records will allow health care to

resemble other industries where continuous experimenting with standardized products and

services are an important driver of efficiency gains (Ramanujam and Rousseau, 2006).

        In the current fragmented system, patients must coordinate their own care across various

providers. Coordination will be made easier by the development of portable patient health

record systems. These records, although less detailed than electronic medical records, will help

patients better manage their own medical affairs – especially when combined with electronic

decision support tools. Many challenging care decisions, however, must be made when

individuals are sick, anxious, financially taxed and otherwise unable to act as effective decision



                                                                                                   27
makers. This fact will limit the degree to which coordination of care by patients can be an

effective response to the organizational fragmentation of the US health care system




                                                                                              28
References

Aaron, Henry J. 2003. "The Costs of Health Care Administration in the United States and
Canada — Questionable Answers to a Questionable Question." New England Journal of
Medicine, 349:8, pp. 801-.

Abraham, Kenneth S. and Paul C. Weiler. 1994. "Enterprise Medical Liability and the Evolution
of the American Health Care System." Harvard Law Review, 108:2, pp. 381.

Acemoglu, Daron. 1997. "Training and Innovation in an Imperfect Labour Market." Review of
Economic Studies, 64:3, pp. 445-64.

Acemoglu, Daron and Joern-Steffan Pischke. 1999. "Beyond Becker: Training in Imperfect
Labor Markets." The Economic Journal, 109, pp. F112-F42.

American Medical Association. 2004. "AMA Physician Masterfile."

Arlen, Jennifer and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2003. "Malpractice Liability for Physicians and
Managed Care Organizations." 2003 New York University Law Review New York University Law
Review, pp. 1929.

Arlen, Jennifer and W. Bentley Macleod. 2005a. "Beyond Master-Servant: A Critique of
Vicarious Liability," in Exploring Tort Law. M. Stuart Madden ed: Cambridge University Press.

Arlen, Jennifer and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2005b. "Torts, Expertise, and Authority: Liability of
Physicians and Managed Care Organizations." RAND Journal of Economics, 36:3, pp. 494-519.

Audet, Anne-Marie J., Michelle M. Doty, Jamil Shamasdin, and Stephen C. Schoenbaum. 2005.
"Measure, Learn, and Improve: Physicians' Involvement in Quality Improvement." Health
Affairs, 24:3, pp. 843-53.

Avraham, Ronen and K. A. D. Camara. 2007. "The Tragedy of the Human Commons." Cardozo
LAw Review, 29:2, pp. 479-511.

Barro, Jason and Nancy Beaulieu. 2003. "Selection and Improvement: Physician Responses to
Financial Incentives." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper:10017.

Beaulieu, Nancy, David Cutler, Katherine Ho, George Isham, Tammie Lindquist, Andrew
Nelson, and Patrick O'Connor. 2007. "The Business Case for Diabetes Disease Management for
Managed Care Organizations." Forum for Health Economics & Policy, 9:1, pp. 1072.

Budetti, Peter P., Stephen M. Shortell, Teresa M. Waters, Jeffrey A. Alexander, Lawton R.
Burns, Robin R. Gillies, and Howard Zuckerman. 2002. "Physician and Health System
Integration." Health Affairs, 21:1, pp. 203.



                                                                                            29
Bunce, Victoria C., J.P. Wieske, and Vlasta Prikazsky. 2007. "Health Insurance Mandates in the
States 2007." Council for Affordable Health Insurance.

Burdett, Kenneth and Dale T. Mortensen. 1998. "Wage Differentials, Employer Size, and
Unemployment." International Economic Review, 39:2, pp. 257-73.

Burns, Lawton R. 1995. "Models of Physician-Hospital Organization: Possibilities and Pitfalls."
Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics Issue Brief, 2:7.

Burns, Lawton R. and Mark V. Pauly. 2002. "Integrated Delivery Networks: A Detour on the
Road to Integrated Health Care?" Health Affairs, 21:4, pp. 128.

Burt, Catherine and Esther Hing. 2005. "Use of Computerized Clinical Support Systems in
Medical Settings: United States, 2001-03." Advance Data From Vital and Health Statistics,
National Center for Health Statistics: Hyattsville, MD.

Butters, Gerard R. 1977. "Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices." Review of
Economic Studies, 44:3, pp. 465-91.

Casalino, Lawrence and James C. Robinson. 2003. "Alternative Models of Hospital-Physician
Affiliation as the United States Moves Away from Tight Managed Care." Milbank Quarterly,
81:2, pp. 331-51.

Cebul, Randall, Ray Herschman, James B. Rebitzer, Lowell J. Taylor, and Mark Votruba. 2007.
"Employer-Based Insurance Markets and Investments in Health." Department of Economics,
Weatherhead School, Case Western Reserve University.

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary National Health Statistics
Group. 2007. "Health Expenditure Data, Health Expenditures by State of Residence."
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/05_NationalHealthAccountsStateHealthAc
counts.asp#TopOfPage.

Chernew, Michael E., Allison B. Rosen, and Mark A. Fendrick. 2007. "Value-Based Insurance
Design." Health Affairs: web exclusive, 26:2, pp. 8.

Congressional Budget Office. 2004. "An Analysis of the Literature on Disease Management
Programs."

Congressional Budget Office. 2008. "Geographic Variation in Health Care Spending."

Cooper, David J. and James B. Rebitzer. 2006. "Managed Care and Physician Incentives: The
Effects of Competition on the Cost and Quality of Care." B.E. Journals in Economic Analysis
and Policy: Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy, 5:1, pp. 1-30.

Cutler, David M., Naomi E. Feldman, and Jill R. Horwitz. 2005. "U.S. Adoption of
Computerized Physician Order Entry Systems." Health Affairs, 24:6, pp. 1654-63.



                                                                                              30
Davis, Karen, Cathy Schoen, Stuart Guterman, Tony Shih, Stephen C. Schoenbaum, and Ilana
Weinbaum. 2007. "Slowing the Growth of U.S. Health Care Expenditures: What Are the
Options?", The Commonwealth Fund.

DeNavas-Walt, Carmen, Bernadette D. Proctor, and Jessica Smith. 2007. "Income, Poverty, and
Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2006,." Current Population Reports, P60-233,
U.S. Census Bureau. U.S. Government Printing Office: Washington, DC.

DesRoches, Catherine M., Eric G. Campbell, Sowmya R. Rao, Karen Donelan, Timothy G.
Ferris, Ashish Jha, Rainu Kaushal, Douglas E. Levy, Sara Rosenbaum, Alexandra E. Shields,
and David Blumenthal. 2008. "Electronic Health Records in Ambulatory Care- a National
Survey of Physicians." New England Journal of Medicine, 359:1.

Diamond, Peter. 1992. "Organizing the Health Insurance Market." Econometrica, 60:6, pp. 1233-
54.

Dor, Avi and William Encinosa. 2004. "Does Cost Sharing Affect Compliance? The Case of
Prescription Drugs." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 10738.

Dormont, Brigitte, Pierre-Yves Geoffard, and Karine Lamiraud. 2007. "The Influence of
Supplementary Health Insurance on Switching Behaviour: Evidence on Swiss Data." Universite
de Lausanne: Institute of Health Economics and Management.

Dranove, David. 2000. The Economic Evolution of American Health Care : From Marcus Welby
to Managed Care Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Dranove, David, David P. Kessler, Mark B. McClellan, and Mark Satterthwaite. 2003. "Is More
Information Better? The Effects of 'Report Cards" On Health Care Providers." Journal of
Political Economy, 111:3, pp. 555-88.

Encinosa, William E., III, Martin Gaynor, and James B. Rebitzer. 2007. "The Sociology of
Groups and the Economics of Incentives: Theory and Evidence on Compensation Systems."
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 62:2, pp. 187-214.

European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies. 2004. "Snapshots of Health Systems:
The State of Affairs in 16 Countries in Summer 2004." The World Health Organization Regional
Office for Europe: Copenhagan.

Fang, Hanming and Alessandro Gavazza. 2007. "Dynamic Inefficiencies in Employment-Based
Health Insurance System: Theory and Evidence."

Fisher, Elliott S., Douglas O. Staiger, Julie P. W. Bynum, and Daniel J. Gottlieb. 2006. "Creating
Accountable Care Organizations: The Extended Hospital Medical Staff." Health Affairs, 26, pp.
w44-w57.

Frank, Richard G. and Karine Lamiraud. 2007. "Choice, Price Competition and Complexity in
Markets for Health Insurance." Working Paper.


                                                                                               31
Gaynor, Martin, James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2004. "Physician Incentives in Health
Maintenance Organizations." Journal of Political Economy, 112:4, pp. 915-31.

Gertler, Paul J. and Tim S. Simcoe. 2006. "Disease Management." SSRN.

Gittell, J. H., K. M. Fairfield, B. Bierbaum, W. Head, R. Jackson, M. Kelly, R. Laskin, S.
Lipson, J. Siliski, T. Thornhill, and J. Zuckerman. 2000. "Impact of Relational Coordination on
Quality of Care, Postoperative Pain and Functioning, and Length of Stay: A Nine-Hospital Study
of Surgical Patients." Medical Care, 38:8, pp. 807-19.

Gittell, Jody Hoffer. 2002. "Coordinating Mechanisms in Care Provider Groups: Relational
Coordination as a Mediator and Input Uncertainty as a Moderator of Performance Effects."
Management Science, 48:11, pp. 1408-26.

Hall, Mark A. 1988. "Institutional Control of Physician Behavior: Legal Barriers to Health Care
Cost Containment." University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 137:2, pp. 431-536.

Hall, Mark A. 2000. "The Structure and Enforcement of Health Insurance Rating Reforms."
Inquiry (00469580), 37:4, pp. 376.

Harris, Jeffrey E. 1977. "The Internal Organization of Hospitals: Some Economic Implications."
The Bell Journal of Economics, 8:2, pp. 467-82.

Herring, Bradley. 2006. "Suboptimal Coverage of Preventative Care Due to Expected Turnover
among Private Insurers." Department of Health Policy & Management, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University.

Holmstrom, Bengt. 1999. "The Firm as a Subeconomy." Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 15:1, pp. 74-102.

Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom. 1994. "The Firm as an Incentive System." American
Economic Review, 84:4, pp. 972-91.

Huberfeld, Nicole. 2004. "Be Not Afraid of Change: Time to Eliminate the Corporate Practice of
Medicine Doctrine." Health Matrix: Journal of Law Medicine, 14:2, pp. 243-91.

Institute Of Medicine Committee On Quality Of Health Care In America. 2001. Crossing the
Quality Chasm: A New Health Care System for the 20th Century. Washington D.C: National
Academy Press.

Javitt, Jonathan C., James B. Rebitzer, and Lonnie Reisman. 2008. "Information Technology and
Medical Missteps: Evidence from a Randomized Trial." Journal of Health Economics, 27:23, pp.
585-602.

Kurtzman, Ellen T. 2007. "A Summary of the Impact of Reforms to the Hospital Inpatient
Prospective Payment System (Ipps) on Nursing Services." The George Washington University,
Department of Nursing Education, School of Medicine and Health Services.


                                                                                             32
Lang, Kevin and Sumon Majumdar. 2004. "The Pricing of Job Characteristics When Markets Do
Not Clear: Theory and Policy Implications." International Economic Review, 45:4, pp. 1111-28.

Li, Jin. 2007. "Job Mobility, Wage Dispersion, and Asymmetric Information." Working paper
Department of Economics, MIT.

Manning, Alan. 2003. Monopsony in Motion: Imperfect Competition in Labor Markets.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

McGlynn, Elizabeth A., Steven M. Asch, John Adams, Joan Keesey, Jennifer Hicks, Alison
DeCristofaro, and Eve A. Kerr. 2003. "The Quality of Health Care Delivered to Adults in the
United States." New England Journal of Medicine, 348:26, pp. 2635-45.

Meltzer, David. 2001. "Hospitalists and the Doctor Patient Relationships." Journal of Legal
Studies, 30.

Montgomery, James D. 1991. "Equilibrium Wage Dispersion and Interindustry Wage
Differentials." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106:1, pp. 163-79.

Mortensen, Dale T. 2003. Wage Dispersion: Why Are Similar Workers Paid Differently.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

Narayan, K. M. Venkat, James P. Boyle, Theodore J. Thompson, Stephen W. Sorensen, and
David F. Williamson. 2003. "Lifetime Risk for Diabetes Mellitus in the United States." JAMA:
Journal of the American Medical Association, 290:14, pp. 1884.

National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion 2005. "Chronic Disease
Overview." http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/overview.htm.

Pham, Hoangmai H., Deborah Schrag, Ann S. O’Malley, Beny Wu, and Peter B. Bach. 2007.
"Care Patterns in Medicare and Their Implications for Pay for Performance." New England
Journal of Medicine, 356:11, pp. 1130-9.

President's Information Technology Advisory Committee. 2004. "Revolutionizing Health Care
through Information Technology." Executive Office of the President of the United States:
Arlington, VA.

Ramanujam, Ranga and Denise M. Rousseau. 2006. "The Challenges Are Organizational Not
Just Clinical." Journal of Organizational Behavior, 27:7, pp. 811-27.

Rebitzer, James B. 1995. "Job Safety and Contract Workers in the Petrochemical Industry
January 1995." Indusrial Relations, 34:1, pp. 40-57.

Roberts, John. 2004. The Modern Firm: Organizational Design for Performance and Growth.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Robinson, James C. 1999. The Corporate Practice of Medicine : Competition and Innovation in
Health Care Berkeley, Calif. : University of California Press.

                                                                                               33
Shojania, Kaveh G. , Sumant R. Ranji, Lauren K. Shaw, Lisa N. Charo, Jennifer C. Lai, Robert
J. Rushakoff, Kathryn M. McDonald, and Douglas K. Owens. 2004. "Diabetes Mellitus Care."
Closing The Quality Gap: A Critical Analysis of Quality Improvement Strategies, Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality: Rockville, MD 2: Technical Review 9 AHRQ Publication No.
04-0051-2 (Contract No. 290-02-0017 to the Stanford University–UCSF Evidence-based
Practice Center).

Skinner, Jonathan S., Douglas O. Staiger, and Elliott S. Fisher. 2006. "Is Technological Change
in Medicine Always Worth It? The Case of Acute Myocardial Infarction." Health Affairs.

Swartz, Katherine. 2006. "Electronic Medical Records-Federal Standards Needed." Inquiry, 43.

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. 2006.
Health, United States, 2006 http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/hus.htm.

Wachter, Robert M. 2004. "Hospitalists in the United States: Mission Accomplished or Work in
Progress?" New England Journal of Medicine, 350 ed.: 1935-36.

Wilensky, Gail R., Nicholas Wolter, and Michelle M. Fischer. 2006. "Gain Sharing: A Good
Concept Getting a Bad Name?" Health Affairs, 26, pp. w58-w67.

Woolhandler, Steffie, Terry Campbell, and David U. Himmelstein. 2003. "Costs of Health Care
Administration in the United States and Canada." New England Journal of Medicine, 349:8, pp.
768-75.

Yessian, Mark R. and Martha B. Kvall. 1991. "State Prohibitions on Hospital Employment of
Physicians." Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General, OEI-
Ol-91-00770


Zeiler, Kathryn, Charles Silver, Bernard Black, David A. Hyman, and William M. Sage.
forthcoming. "Physicians’ Insurance Limits and Malpractice Payments: Evidence from Texas
Closed Claims, 1990-2003." Journal of Legal Studies.

Zenios, Stefanos, Kate Surman, and Elena Pernas-Giz. 2004. "Process Improvement in Stanford
Hospital's Operation Room." Vol. Case: OIT-41. Stanford Graduate School of Business.




                                                                                                34
