NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARKET PENETRATION COSTS AND THE NEW CONSUMERS MARGIN IN
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Costas Arkolakis
Working Paper 14214
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14214

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

¸˛I am grateful to my advisors Timothy Kehoe and Samuel Kortum for their continued guidance and
their support. I am also grateful to Cristina Arellano and Jonathan Eaton for continuous encouragement
and various discussions on the topic. I am indebted to Jonathan Eaton, Samuel Kortum and Francis
Kramarz for providing me with statistics from their data. For their suggestions and comments, I also
would to like to thank George Alessandria, Marios Angeletos, Ariel Burstein, Thomas Chaney, V.V.
Chari, John Dalton, Thomas Holmes, Christos Ioannou, Patrick Kehoe, Erzo G.J. Luttmer, Ellen McGrattan,
Marc Melitz, Fabrizio Perri, Edward C. Prescott, James Schmitz, Robert Shimer, Ina Simonovska,
Farid Toubal as well as various workshop and seminar participants. Financial support from the Heller
Dissertation Fellowship is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining errors are mine. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Costas Arkolakis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Market Penetration Costs and the New Consumers Margin in International Trade
Costas Arkolakis
NBER Working Paper No. 14214
August 2008
JEL No. F12,F15,L11,M3
ABSTRACT
I develop a new theory of marketing costs and introduce it into a model of trade with product differentiation
and firm productivity heterogeneity. In this model, a firm enters a market if it makes profits by reaching
a single consumer there and pays an increasing marginal cost to access additional consumers. This
market penetration cost introduces an extensive margin of new consumers in firms' sales. I calibrate
the key parameters of the model to match data on French firms from Eaton, Kortum and Kramarz,
in particular the higher sales in France of firms that choose to export to more destinations. The model
predicts that most firms do not export, and that a large proportion of firms that export in particular
markets do so in small amounts. These predictions are in line with the French data, but together create
a puzzle for models with a fixed cost of exporting, such as those of Melitz and Chaney. Looking at
the comparative statics of trade liberalization, I find that the model predicts large increases in trade
in goods with positive but little previous trade, in line with Kehoe and Ruhl. The model implies that
these increases can contribute to new trade significantly more than the corresponding increases due
to new exporters.

Costas Arkolakis
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
costas.arkolakis@yale.edu

1

Introduction

Recent empirical research using ﬁrm and plant level data has established that ﬁrms face substantial hurdles when selling to foreign markets: exporters tend to be in the minority, are on
average more productive and larger, and usually export only a small fraction of their output. To
account for the variation of ﬁrms’ entry and performance accross markets, recent new theories
such as those proposed by Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and Kortum (2003) incorporate CES Dixit-Stiglitz demand (product diﬀerentiation) and heterogeneity
in ﬁrms’ productivities together with standard “iceberg” variable costs of trade. The addition of
the assumption of a ﬁxed cost of entry to a country (market penetration cost) by Melitz (2003)
and Chaney (2007) has been shown by Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2005) to be crucial in
order to also account for the positive association between market size and ﬁrm entry. The above
assumptions together with ﬁrms’ productivities being Pareto distributed yield results consistent
with features of ﬁrm level data for large exporters in each given destination, while creating an
extremely tractable framework applicable to a variety of exercises.
This paper proposes a new formulation of market penetration costs in a model of trade with
CES demand and ﬁrm productivity heterogeneity. This formulation intends to broadly capture
marketing costs that the ﬁrm incurs in order to increase its sales in a given market. In the context
of the model, these costs are formulated building on seminal contributions in the advertising
literature such as those of Butters (1977) and Grossman and Shapiro (1984). The formulation
that I introduce implies that market penetration costs are endogenous rather than ﬁxed in the
sense that paying higher costs allows ﬁrms to reach an increasing number of consumers in a
country. Yet, once a consumer is reached, these costs remain ﬁxed with the amount sold per
consumer. The interaction between the per-consumer marketing cost and the variable cost of
trade excludes ﬁrms with low productivity from individual export markets, if their per-consumer
revenue is not suﬃcient to cover the cost to reach the very ﬁrst consumer there.
The new formulation allows my model to retain the main desirable predictions of the ﬁxed
cost models of Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2007) while it implies large deviations on the behavior
of relatively small ﬁrms to each given destination. In fact, I prove that the (uniform) ﬁxed cost
model postulated by the previous literature corresponds to a version of my model with constant

1

marginal costs to reach additional consumers. In addition, assuming that with each additional
marketing eﬀort a ﬁrm reaches a smaller number of new consumers implies that there exist
increasing marginal costs to reach additional consumers. This is in line with empirical evidence
indicating diminishing returns to marketing outlays of ﬁrms. It gives rise to an extensive margin
of consumers in the sales of the ﬁrm, namely the number of consumers that ﬁrms with diﬀerent
productivities sell to. Furthermore, in order to capture eﬀects of market saturation, I also assume
that this number becomes smaller at some geometric rate as the ﬁrm reaches larger fractions of
consumers in a market. This allows for a particular convexity of the marginal cost function which
in turns implies large departures from the CES demand structure only for the relatively smaller
ﬁrms. Each of these ﬁrms exhibits substantial diﬀerences in the number of consumers reached.
However, for relatively large ﬁrms that ﬁnd it proﬁtable to reach almost all consumers, the model
behaves as the model with the standard CES demand.
Previous literature has postulated that ﬁrms incur signiﬁcant ﬁxed costs to export. For
example, Das, Roberts, and Tybout (2005), examine a sample of Colombian exporters for the
period of 1981 to 1991. Using a dynamic model, they estimate (one-time) ﬁxed costs for new
exporters ranging between $300,000 and $500,000 per ﬁrm. Yet, Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz
(2005) (henceforth EKK05) report that in 1986, the smallest 25% of French exporters in a
particular market each sold below $10,000 in that market. My model reconciles the typically
large estimates of ﬁxed costs with evidence on the existence of many ﬁrms exporting small
amounts to particular markets through the extensive margin of consumers mechanism. Relatively
productive ﬁrms choose to reach a large number of consumers in a market, thus incurring large
market penetration costs there. Relatively unproductive ﬁrms (yet productive enough to reach
the very ﬁrst consumer in the market) choose to reach only a few consumers in the market and
thus export tiny amounts.
To quantitatively assess the model, I calibrate its key parameters to match data on French
ﬁrms from EKK05. In particular, I calibrate the parameters of the model determining the
relative sales of diﬀerent ﬁrms to match the higher sales per ﬁrm in France of ﬁrms that also
export to more markets. The remaining parameters of the model are calibrated to generate the
relationship between the number of French ﬁrms entering exporting markets and the size of these
markets, as reported by Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2004) (henceforth EKK04) and EKK05.
2

In particular, the number of French ﬁrms, normalized by French market share, and the average
sales per ﬁrm increase with the size of the exporting market.
In order to corroborate the last fact, EKK05 ﬁnd it essential to incorporate market-speciﬁc
ﬁxed costs that increase with the size of the market with an elasticity less than one. Instead,
I model market penetration costs as a common marketing technology available to all ﬁrms. I
use two realistic assumptions related to this technology, namely that there are increasing returns
to scale with respect to population size of each market and that marketing costs are partially
paid in terms of the importing country’s wages. Given these assumptions, my model provides an
intuitive explanation of the ﬁnding reported by EKK05 as the result of the optimal marketing
decision of ﬁrms aiming to reach consumers in markets with diﬀerent population or per capita
income.
The calibrated model with endogenous market penetration costs is able to deliver a series of
new predictions. I use this new approach, without assuming any other source of ﬁrm heterogeneity, to address existing puzzles in international trade theory.
First, the distribution of small ﬁrms’ sales at each given destination exhibits large deviations
from the Pareto distribution. Given the CES structure and Pareto distribution of productivities,
this deviation is a result of the increase in sales of the relatively small ﬁrms that is faster than
proportionate. Furthermore, the distribution of large ﬁrms’ sales to a given destination is Pareto.
Mechanically, this is because relatively unproductive ﬁrms endogenously select a small number
of consumers while large ﬁrms reach almost all the consumers in the market. In fact, some ﬁrms
ﬁnd it optimal not to enter a market since reaching the ﬁrst consumer is not proﬁtable for them.
Thus, the model quantitatively accounts for the small amounts exported by a large proportion
of the French ﬁrms in each market, while it still predicts that most French ﬁrms do not export.
The small export volume of many ﬁrms has been especially puzzling to the ﬁxed cost model with
CES demand structure and Pareto distribution of productivities.
Second, deviation from the CES structure has important implications regarding the comparative statics of trade liberalization. To illustrate this I extend the methodology of Kehoe and
Ruhl (2003) to data on goods that were positively traded prior to the US-Mexico liberalization
episode. I ﬁnd that the growth rate of the volume of trade of goods is larger the less traded
the goods are before the liberalization. This feature of the data is in sharp contrast with the
3

predictions of existing models of trade that rely solely on the CES Dixit-Stiglitz demand speciﬁcation such as the ﬁxed cost model. These models predict constant growth rates of trade for
all previously positively traded goods, given uniform elasticity of substitution between goods. In
fact, models of this kind were used to predict trade patterns in the case of the NAFTA episode
and they were unable to predict the high growth rates of sales, especially for goods with little
trade prior to the trade liberalization, as Kehoe (2005) points out. I use my model to look at
the comparative statics of trade liberalization, with parameters calibrated to the French data
and a symmetric change in the variable trade costs across goods calibrated to match the overall
increase in trade following the US-Mexico liberalization episode. The model turns out to capture
the higher growth rate in trade for goods with positive but little previous trade.
Finally, I study a new margin of response of aggregate trade ﬂows to decreases in trade costs.
This “new consumers” margin is meant to capture the faster growth of small existing exporters
after a trade liberalization. In my analysis, I decompose the contribution of the three margins to
new trade, the “new consumers” margin, the intensive margin of growth in per consumer sales,
emphasized by Krugman (1980), and the new ﬁrms margin analyzed by Eaton and Kortum
(2002), Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2007). I ﬁnd that a considerable amount of new trade is
generated by new ﬁrms and by sales of previously exporting ﬁrms to new consumers. However,
for small changes in variable trade costs, the contribution of the new consumers margin to new
export sales is larger than the contribution of the new ﬁrms margin. New ﬁrms entering a market,
although numerous, sell a tiny amount.
In summary, this paper is a continuation of the abovementioned theoretical literature incorporating ﬁrm level heterogeneity into international trade theory. This literature has emerged
in response to the recent use of ﬁrm and plant level data to measure the behavior of exporters
along many dimensions (see, for example, Bernard and Jensen (1995), Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998), Aw, Chung, and Roberts (2000), or Tybout (2001) for a review). The empirical
facts summarized by this literature indicate that there exist substantial costs of exporting, as
EKK04 point out. EKK05 ﬁnd that in order to account for a variety of facts related to French
exporters, export costs have to take the form of both variable costs, that rise in proportion to
the amount shipped, and ﬁxed costs as in Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2007). In this paper,
I propose a new approach to modeling market penetration costs of exporting based on a new
4

formulation of marketing costs. This approach, while consistent with the trade data, departs
from the assumption of ﬁxed costs of exporting.
The outline of the rest of the paper is as follows: In section 2, I describe the model and
the new formulation of marketing costs in detail. In section 3, I calibrate the model using a
methodology developed by EKK05. In section 4 and 5 I quantitatively assess the predictions of
the calibrated model. Section 6 concludes.

2

Model

In this section I introduce the model with endogenous market penetration costs. This model
incorporates the assumptions of product diﬀerentiation and ﬁrm productivity heterogeneity using
the monopolistic competition framework proposed by Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2007). It
departs, however, from the existing literature in the demand structure since the fraction of
consumers who have access to a ﬁrm’s good is the result of a decision on the part of the ﬁrm.
Each ﬁrm has to pay an increasing cost to reach additional consumers in a given market and
chooses the number of its consumers in order to maximize its proﬁt.

2.1

Consumer problem and demand for goods

I denote the source country by i and the destination country by j where i, j = 1, ..., N . Country
j is populated by a continuum of consumers of measure Lj . Consumers derive utility from
the consumption of a continuum of goods indexed by ω, according to a symmetric CES utility
function,
l

U =

µZ

ρ

x (ω) dω

ω∈Ωl

¶ ρ1

, 0<ρ < 1,

where Ωl is the set of goods consumer l ∈ L has access to. Ωl is a potential subset of the set of
all the goods sold in the economy Ω.
Each good is produced by a single ﬁrm and ﬁrms diﬀer ex-ante only in their productivities
and their source country i. I consider a symmetric equilibrium where all the ﬁrms with the same
productivity, φ, from the same source country, i, charge the same price in destination country
j, pij (φ), and the same probability that they reach a consumer there, nij (φ), in a manner that
5

I will describe in the next paragraph. I will therefore refer to the type of the ﬁrm (good) by
its productivity, φ, and when necessary by its source country, i. Since there is a large number
of ﬁrms of each productivity, each consumer has access to a fraction nij (φ) of the goods of
ﬁrms with productivity φ from source country j.1 There is a measure of Ji goods that can
be potentially produced by each country, while Mij ≤ Ji is the measure of ﬁrms from source

coutry i operating in country j.2 The productivities of ﬁrms originating in country i are drawn
from a distribution with support [bi , +∞). I denote the density of ﬁrms from source country i
conditional on operating in j, by µij (φ). Given the existence of a large number of ﬁrms of each
type, each consumer has access to a diﬀerent set of goods, Ωl , but to the same measure of goods
produced by ﬁrms with productivity φ from source country i, nij (φ) µij (φ) Mij .
The representative household earns proﬁt ﬂows π j and labor income wj by (inelastically)
supplying her unit labor endowment to the labor market.3 The solution to the maximization
problem of the consumer gives rise to the usual CES Dixit-Stiglitz demand for each good φ
(conditional on the consumer having access to it). The demand of a representative consumer
from country j for a type φ good from country i is given by
xij (φ) = yj
where
Pj1−σ

1

=

N
X

bθυ

Jυ ¡ ¢θ
φ∗υj
υ=1

Z

+∞

pij (φ)−σ
,
Pj1−σ

pυj (φ)1−σ nυj (φ) µυj (φ) dφ , σ =

bυ

(1)

1
>1,
1−ρ

(2)

This is essentially a statement of the Glivenko-Cantelli theorem, which in turn is a direct application
of the Law of Large Numbers (LLN) for i.i.d random variables. In order to apply the LLN, I assume
that ﬁrms reach consumers independently of each other. In the application of the LLN to the case of
a continuum of i.i.d. random variables technical problems may arise (see for example the discussion in
Hopenhayn (1992)). Various remedies have been suggested by diﬀerent authors (see e.g Uhlig (1996)
and references there). As is usual in the economics literature, I assume the applicability of the LLN
without proving the exact conditions under which it applies. This is a highly technical issue beyond the
scope of this paper.
2
Alternatively, one can think of J as the measure of diﬀerentiated varieties of goods available to ﬁrms
to produce. Arkolakis, Demidova, Klenow, and Rodriguez-Clare (2008) show that the extension to a
context with an unbounded pool of entrants and free entry, as in Melitz (2003), gives rise to identical
predictions to one where this measure is ﬁxed as in Chaney (2007). In an appendix available online at
http://www.econ.yale.edu/~ka265/research.htm I provide the same result for my model, together with
a variety of secondary facts and robustness checks about the model and the data in this paper.
3
I assume that consumers own equal share of each ﬁrm originating in their country. Thus, proﬁts of
ﬁrms will be equally distributed among the consumers of their country.

6

and yj = wj + πj denotes the per capita spending which equals the output per capita.
Given the existence of a large number of consumers, each ﬁrm φ reaches a fraction nij (φ) of
the consumers. Total demand for a ﬁrm with productivity φ from source country i and selling
to country j is given by
nij (φ) Lj yj

2.2

pij (φ)−σ
.
Pj1−σ

(3)

Firm

Each operating ﬁrm has to make two choices in order to maximize its proﬁt in each market. The
ﬁrst is to produce the good. This is done using a constant returns to scale production function
q (φ) = φl, where l is the amount of labor used in production and φ is the labor productivity of
the ﬁrm. Delivery of the produced units of the good to a certain destination requires standard
iceberg costs to be incurred in terms of labor. Thus, for a ﬁrm operating in country i and selling
to country j, τ ij > 1 units of the good must be shipped in order for one unit of the good to arrive
at the export destination. For simplicity, I assume that τ ii = 1.4 This process creates the good
that can be used for consumption conditional on a particular consumer having access to it. The
second choice of the ﬁrm is to incurr the required costs to reach a certain fraction of consumers
in each given market. This market penetration cost is described below.
2.2.1

A theory of marketing and the market penetration technology

Marketing costs include the costs incurred by a ﬁrm during the process of promoting its product
and reaching consumers as well as establishing the related distribution channels in order to sell
its product. Evidence about the exact nature of these market penetration costs for the case of
exporting is provided by Keesing (1983) and Roberts and Tybout (1997). The authors discuss
a number of costs reported by managers of exporting ﬁrms in a series of interviews. These data
indicate that ﬁrms must research the foreign market by identifying and contacting the potential
consumers of their good. Hence, they must develop new goods or adapt their existing products to
foreign consumers’ tastes. Finally, the ﬁrms must set up direct or indirect distribution channels
in order to make the good available to the foreign consumers and to inform them about the
4

I further assume τ ij ≤ τ iυ τ υj ∀ (i, υ, j) to exclude the possibility of transportation arbitrage.

7

existence of the good.5 Of course, all these costs have to be incurred in the domestic market in
a similar manner.
Marketing expenditures constitute a considerable amount of the overall spending of the economy. In fact, media advertising amounts to almost 2% of total GDP in the US for the years 2001
to 2004. Taking into account estimates indicating that media advertising spending accounts for
only 40% of overall marketing spending for 2001-2004, the amount of marketing spending could
be as much as 5% of GDP for these years.6 Traditional trade theory has modeled market penetration costs through a ﬁxed cost of entry to each given market. In order to understand the role
that these costs play in international trade, I will develop a formulation guided both by realistic
assumptions as well as certain facts reported for marketing expenditures at the ﬁrm level.
An important ingredient of the formulation of marketing costs I introduce is decreasing returns
to additional marketing expenditure. These dereasing returns may arise as (i) less responsive
consumers are reached or the same consumers respond less to additional marketing eﬀorts, or
(ii) an increasing amount of eﬀort has to be taken in order to reach a consumer that has not
yet been reached. While some evidence supporting this diminishing returns assumption for
marketing exists, most of the motivating studies come from evidence of the best-measured portion
of marketing expenditures, i.e. advertising. In particular, in the most comprehensive study of
the economics of advertising literature up to date Bagwell (2007) mentions that7
“Using various (e.g., logarithmic) measures, a number of studies regress sales on advertising
and oﬀer evidence that advertising’s eﬀectiveness is subject to diminishing returns. In essence,
these studies hold other inputs constant and argue that doubled advertising results in less than
doubled sales [...] On the whole, the studies that evaluate the eﬀectiveness of advertising suggest
5

Roberts and Tybout (1997) mention that ﬁrms can pay third parties to handle the distribution,
which, reportedly, is very frequently the case. If this last activity is characterized by free entry, then
market penetration can simply be reinterpreted as being handled by a third party hired by the ﬁrm.
6
See the report on “US Advertising Volume” from Universal McCann available at
http://www.universalmccann.com and the “Marketing Expenditure Trends” reports of the London Business School, available at www.london.edu/marketing/met.
7
See also Lambin (1976), Simon and Arndt (1980), Sutton (1991) (e.g. p. 51) and Jones (1995). For
a discussion regarding diminishing returns to marketing expenditures, see Saunders (1987). Diminishing
returns to marketing are reasonable. It is eminently rational that marketing search eﬀorts will start
through marketing vehicles that will deliver the best consumer reach or the highest per consumer sales.
Then, as marketing eﬀorts increase additional marketing spending will be less eﬃcient and marginal
sales will decrease as marketing expenditure increases.

8

that advertising often entails diminishing returns beyond a threshold level, where the threshold
level varies across circumstances and may be small.”
The foundation of my theoretical approach will be twofold. On the one hand, I will retain the
framework with product diﬀerentiation and productivity heterogeneity that has proven extremely
useful in trade models. On the other hand, I will develop a consistent framework that captures
the stylized fact about marketing mentioned above while generalizing the seminal contributions
of Butters (1977), Grossman and Shapiro (1984).8 In this framework I envision a cost of market
penetration as the cost of reaching a consumer in that market, while this cost could be thought as
isomorphic to the one of example (i) that was laid out above.9 The simple marketing technology
that I derive from ﬁrst principles has two key properties. It implies increasing marginal costs to
reach additional consumers in a market and increasing elasticity of the marginal cost function.
The parameterization of the marketing cost function regulates the convexity of the marginal cost
function. While the increasing elasticity property deviates from the case of constant elasticity
of less than unity that the empirical studies mentioned above would suggest, qualitatively the
two approaches give the same results for the key questions that I consider. In addition, the
formulation with this last property also allows me to capture a market saturation eﬀect without
any additional modeling.10 It ﬁnally allows for the possibility of constant marginal costs of
reaching additional consumers that is shown to encapsulate the standard uniform ﬁxed cost
framework.
In my analysis, I have to pay particular attention to how the marketing cost to reach a number
of consumers in a country varies across countries (assuming that the cost of sending an ad is the
same across countries). I view countries as distinct markets such that marketing expenditures
incurred for one market cannot inﬂuence the demand of the ﬁrm in another one. The crucial
assumption of diminishing returns in marketing expenditure has to be modeled carefully for
8

See also Stegeman (1991). A more recent paper that comes closer to my approach is Dinlersoz and
Yorukoglu (2006). The authors introduce informative advertisement of a homogeneous good produced
by a continuum of ﬁrms with heterogeneous productivities.
9
In the online appendix I show that there exists an isomorphism with the case of marketing expenditures that aﬀect the sales per consumer rather than the number of consumers reached.
10
Assuming that doubling marketing costs implies less than doubling sales can be explicitly modeled
in our context with the function f + nβ , f > 0, β > 1 and an upper bound on n to capture the eﬀect
of saturation. It is straightforward to show that this assumption will qualitatively generate the same
deviations from the CES demand structure as the ones that the function I introduce below delivers.
However, quantitatively and methodoligically this approach is clearly inferior.

9

countries with diﬀerent populations, denoted by L. In particular, I have to allow the possibility
that the marketing technology exhibits increasing returns to scale with respect to the population
size of each market. To simplify the argument, I lay out two extreme examples. First, I describe
the case of advertising with ﬂyers where each ﬂyer can be given to at most one consumer. This
implies that in order to reach a given number of consumers, the total spending is the same and is
independent of the size of the market. Second, I describe the case of TV advertisements, which
I assume reach a given fraction of the consumers in any given market. In this case, a ﬁrm can
reach double the number of consumers in a country that is twice as large using the same number
of advertisements. My analysis incorporates both extremes as well as all intermediate cases.
For simplicity of exposition I will model marketing technology drawing on a simple example
of informative advertisment, where the advertisement (ad) sent by a ﬁrm is essentially a posting
that contains information about the existence of the good and its price. I start my exposition by
laying the ﬂyers example laid out above and by considering the case where variables are discrete.
I denote by S the number of advertising signals sent by a ﬁrm. Further, I assume that the ﬁrm
sends advertising signals to the consumers independently of other ﬁrms. I assume that potential
consumers are not aware of the price a particular ﬁrm charges unless they observe a signal sent
by the ﬁrm. I denote by n (S) the probability that a consumer sees the ad at least once after S
signals have been seen and I let n (0) = 0.11 Assuming that each new ad reaches one consumer
and that the probability that each ad is seen for the ﬁrst time by a consumer is proportional to
the percentage of people that did not see the ad up to now (ad is randomly thrown),
[n (S + 1) − n (S)] L = 1 − n (S) .
The discrete example, though intuitively appealing, cannot be directly adapted in the context
of my model. Thus, I consider the analog of the above expression for S, L being continuous
variables and n (S) a continuous and diﬀerentiable function,
n0 (S) L = 1 − n (S) .
11

In the context of the maximization problem of the ﬁrm, the amount of marekting of the ﬁrm is
ultimately a function of its productivity and thus, S = S (φ) , n = n (φ). Here, I describe a general
technology and suppress the φ notation until I consider the optimal decision of a type φ ﬁrm.

10

Solving this diﬀerential equation subject to the initial condition n (0) = 0 gives n (S) = 1 −
exp {−S/L}. Inverting this function implies that the number of ads needed to reach a fraction
n of the consumers in a market of size L is given by S = −L log (1 − n).
To generalize the simple case above, I make two distinct assumptions:
Assumption 1 The probability that a consumer sees an ad she has not seen before is given
by
[1 − n (S)]β , β ∈ [0, +∞) .
Assumption 2 The number of consumers who see each ad is given by
L1−α , α ∈ [0, 1] .
The ﬁrst assumption captures the diminishing returns to marketing expenditures. Notice
that higher values of β correspond to more intense diminishing returns. In the case of β = 0, the
returns to marketing are constant, which implies a constant marginal cost to reach additional
consumers.
The second assumption captures the possibility that with a given an ad a ﬁrm can potentially
inform a larger number of consumers about its good in a larger market. The example of TV ads
outlined above corresponds to letting the parameter α = 0, while the ﬂyers example to that of
α = 1. The intermediate cases emerge when α ∈ (0, 1).
Using the two assumptions stated earlier, the technology for reaching new consumers through
ads becomes
n0 (S) L = L1−α [1 − n (S)]β ,

(4)

which incorporates the possibility of returns to scale in marketing technology (L1−α ) and also
allows for increasing marginal costs to reach additional consumers ([1 − n (S)]β ). Solving this
diﬀerential equation subject to the initial condition n (0) = 0 gives
¶1/(−β+1)
µ
S
.
n (S) = 1 − 1 − (−β + 1) α
L
Inverting this last expression and solving for S gives the amount of advertising required by a
11

ﬁrm aiming to reach a fraction n of the consumers in a market of size L. Assuming the labor
requirement for each ad is 1/ψ, the labor cost of reaching n consumers in a market of size L
(market penetration cost) becomes
Lα 1 − (1 − n)−β+1
, α ∈ [0, 1] .
f (n, L) =
ψ
−β + 1

(5)

This is the marketing cost function that I will use in the rest of the paper and thus I delve into
its properties. The marginal cost function is illustrated in ﬁgure 1 for diﬀerent values of β. For
the case of β > 0, the following conditions hold:
f1 (n, L) > 0, f11 (n, L) > 0 ,
¯
∂f (n, L) ¯¯
Lα−1
>0.
=
lim
nL→0 ∂ (nL) ¯
ψ

(6)
(7)

L=L

Expression (6) implies that the marginal cost of reaching new consumers is positive and is
increasing in the fraction of consumers reached. Expression (7) indicates that the cost to reach
the very ﬁrst, or marginal, consumer is positive. The elasticity of the marginal cost function is
larger the larger the fraction of consumers already reached, while the limit of the marginal cost
function as n → 1 tends to inﬁnity and thus no ﬁrm can saturate the market. Given the CES
demand, this implies that the model will behave similar to a standard model for the relatively
large ﬁrms that reach almost all the consumers. Notice that, for β = 0, the marginal cost of
reaching additional consumers is constant. Below, I will show that in the case in which β = 0
my model corresponds to the case of the theory with a ﬁxed cost of exporting.
2.2.2

Marketing costs in terms of foreign and domestic labor

For the marketing activities related to exporting described above, the importing country’s labor is
oftentimes employed (see Keesing (1983) and Roberts and Tybout (1997)). For example, creating
distribution channels in importing countries may require hiring foreign labor for advertising
purposes. Hence, the market penetration costs are paid in terms of the importing country’s
wages. Yet, there is substantial evidence that part of the labor costs for marketing expenditures
are paid in terms of the exporting country’s wages. Therefore, I choose to combine this evidence
12

and consider a general case in which the market penetration cost of each ﬁrm is denominated
both in importing and exporting country’s wages. I make the following assumption:
Assumption 3 The production of marketing requires a bundle of labor services from source
country i and destination country j:
S = ljγ li1−γ , 0 < γ < 1 .
For simplicity, I also assume that γ is the same across countries. I will estimate the value of
all the parameters using trade data in section 3. The total cost of a ﬁrm from source country i
to reach a fraction nij (φ) of the consumers of country j with population size Lj is given by the
following expression (taking into account cost minimization by the ﬁrm):12
wjγ wi1−γ

2.2.3

Lαj 1 − [1 − nij (φ)]−β+1
.
ψ
−β + 1

Firm’s problem

Given the above, the problem that a ﬁrm with productivity φ from source country i solves when
considering whether to sell to market j is given by
½
¾
α
p1−σ
τ ij p−σ
γ 1−γ Lj 1−(1−nij )−β+1
ij
ij wi
πij (φ) = max nij Lj yj P 1−σ − nij Lj yj P 1−σ φ − wj wi ψ
−β+1
nij ,pij

j

j

s.t. nij ∈ [0, 1] .

Total proﬁts of a particular ﬁrm are the summation of the proﬁts from exporting activities
in all the j = 1, ..., N countries (or a subset thereof). For the case where β ≥ 0, the optimal
decisions of the ﬁrm in the multi-country model are (using the results of Proposition 1):
pij (φ) = σ̃

τ ij wi
σ
, σ̃ =
.
φ
σ−1

(8)

Given this markup rule, the optimal market penetration decision for a ﬁrm with productivity
12

For simplicity, I redeﬁne per unit advertisment costs 1/ψ to incorporate an extra term γ γ (1 − γ)1−γ .

13

φ, nij (φ), for the case in which β > 0, is given by the FOC with respect to nij . Thus, for
φ ≥ φ∗ij , the optimal nij solves13
´1−σ
³
τ ij wi
yj σ̃ φ
σ
Pj1−σ
|
{z
}

marginal revenue (net
of labor production
cost) per consumer

wjγ wi1−γ Lα−1
1
j
=
,
ψ
[1 − nij ]β
|
{z
}

(9)

marginal cost
per consumer

where φ∗ij is given by14
φ∗ij = sup {πij (φ) = 0} .

(10)

φ≥bi

In order to decide whether to enter a market or not, a ﬁrm compares the marginal revenue
received from the very ﬁrst consumer with the corresponding marginal cost of reaching her. The
LHS of equation (9) represents the marginal revenue (net of labor production costs) from selling
to an additional consumer. Due to elastic demand, more productive ﬁrms can charge lower prices
and extract higher marginal revenue per consumer. The RHS of the same equation captures the
corresponding marginal cost to reach an additional consumer. The marginal cost of reaching the
very ﬁrst consumer in market j is the RHS of expression (9) evaluated at nij = 0 (as in equation
(7)). Alternatively, one can think of this marginal cost as the expected cost of sending the ﬁrst
advertisement divided by the number of people that see this ﬁrst advertisement,
wjγ wi1−γ /ψ
cost of the ﬁrst ad
=
.
expected number of people that see the ad
L1−α
j

(11)

For the case in which α < 1, the cost to reach the ﬁrst consumer falls as the population
increases since the denominator in expression (11) increases. This allows ﬁrms with lower productivities, which have smaller sales per consumer (see the RHS of (9)), to enter a market with
a larger population. Thus, for α < 1, bigger markets will attract more ﬁrms.
Figure 2 plots the marginal revenue per consumer (net of labor costs) and the marginal cost
13
In order to interpret the LHS and RHS of expression (9) as marginal revenue and marginal cost per
consumer, the derivative with respect to nij Lj has to be applied.
14
I assume that parameters of the model are such that bi ≤ min φ∗ij .
j

14

per consumer. To simplify notation I consider the one country case in the rest of the paragraph,
without any loss of generality. The point of intersection in ﬁgure 2 corresponds to the solution
to equation (9). This intersection gives n (φ) as a function of φ for the case of β > 0. Notice that
since marginal revenue per consumer is higher for higher values of φ, more productive operating
ﬁrms ﬁnd it proﬁtable to pay the cost to reach a higher fraction of consumers.15 Moreover, given
the price level P , there exists a threshold productivity φ∗ such that ∀φ ≤ φ∗ , n (φ) = 0. This
results from the fact that for such low φ’s, the very low marginal revenue net of labor production
costs from the ﬁrst consumer is not suﬃcient to cover the cost to reach her. However, when the
marginal cost to reach an additional consumers is constant, namely when β = 0, the decision
rule is no longer continuous. Firms with φ ≤ φ∗ choose n (φ) = 0 and ﬁrms with φ > φ∗ choose
n (φ) = 1, resulting in the same decision rule as in the theory with ﬁxed costs of Melitz (2003)
and Chaney (2007) The following proposition summarizes the above discussion:
Proposition 1
a) If β > 0, then
i) there exists a threshold φ∗ such that ∀φ ≤ φ∗ , n (φ) = 0,

ii) φ1 > φ2 =⇒ n (φ1 ) > n (φ2 ) , ∀φ1 , φ2 ≥ φ∗ .
b) If β = 0, then

n (φ) ∈ {0, 1} and there exists φ∗ such that ∀φ ≤ φ∗ , n (φ) = 0, and ∀φ > φ∗ , n (φ) = 1.
Proof. a) Part i) This part is proved formally in appendix A. Also, notice that by solving (9)
for n (φ) > 0, we have

15

£
¤−1/β
n (φ) = 1 − L1−α yφσ−1 (σ̃w)1−σ ψP σ−1 / (wσ)
.

(12)

A direct implication of the combination of the assumption of the diminshing returns to marketing
expenditures and ﬁrm heterogeneity is that the marketing to sales ratio will be higher for ﬁrms with
lower sales. A variety of studies reports evidence supporting this prediction (see for example Farris
and Buzzell (1979), Arndt and Simon (1983) and Thomas (1989)). Interestingly enough, this empirical
evidence led many researchers to hypothesize that larger ﬁrms are more eﬃcient in marketing, a claim
not supported in any convincing way by other empirical tests as Arndt and Simon (1983) point out.
My model generates lower marketing to sales ratios for ﬁrms with higher sales, even though every ﬁrm
has access to the same marketing technology.

15

Deﬁne
£
¤−1
(φ∗ )σ−1 = L1−α y (σ̃w)1−σ ψP σ−1 / (wσ)
,

(13)

such that ∀φ > φ∗ , n (φ) > 0. For φ ≤ φ∗ , as shown in appendix A, n (φ) = 0. The above proves
part i) of a).
a) Part ii) From equation (9) and the proof of uniqueness in appendix A, part ii) follows.16
b) As long as β = 0, the marginal cost of reaching an additional consumer wLα−1 /ψ is constant
with respect to n (φ). Thus, every consumer brings the same marginal proﬁt to the ﬁrm. Therefore, the ﬁrm chooses n (φ) = 1 if this proﬁt is positive for all the consumers, and n (φ) = 0
otherwise. Since this marginal proﬁt is strictly increasing in φ, part b) follows.17

2.3

Equilibrium

I deﬁne the cdf and the pdf of the distribution of the productivities of ﬁrms by Gi (φ) and gi (φ)
respectively, with support [bi , +∞). The probability that a ﬁrm is actually operating in the
economy corresponds to the probability that a ﬁrm has a productivity draw φ such that φ ≥ φ∗ij ,
¡ ¢
£
¡ ¢¤
namely 1 − Gi φ∗ij . Thus, the measure of operating ﬁrms is given by Ji 1 − Gi φ∗ij . The pdf
of the conditional distribution of ﬁrms is given by

µij (φ) =





gi (φ)
1−Gi (φ∗ij )

if φ ≥ φ∗ij

(14)

otherwise.

0

I can now summarize the above discussion and deﬁne an equilibrium.
Given the number of potential entrants Ji from country i, an equilibrium for each i, j =
∗

1, ..., N is given by a lower bound threshold productivity φ̂ij ; the measure of ﬁrms operating in
16

In a model with heterogeneous productivity ﬁrms but homogeneous goods, Dinlersoz and Yorukoglu
(2006) also arrive at the conclusion that more productive ﬁrms reach a higher number of consumers
in the country. However, their mechanism is diﬀerent. In their model, each new advertisement is seen
by one consumer with certainty, but costs of sending additional advertisements are considered to be
convex. Firms that charge lower prices have higher probability of being the cheaper option for the
consumer who sees their advertisement. Thus, the expected revenue of each advertisement is higher for
more productive ﬁrms that can charge lower prices, and they choose to reach more consumers.
17
In the case of β < 0 there are decreasing marginal costs to reach additional consumers. Thus, ﬁrms
choose either n (φ) = 0 or n (φ) = 1 as in the case of β = 0. Therefore, without loss of generality, I do not
have to analyze the case where β < 0.

16

each economy M̂ij ; the pdf of the distribution of ﬁrms productivities, conditional on operating,
µ̂ij (φ) , prices p̂ij (φ) , ∀φ ∈ [bi , +∞); a wage rate ŵi ; a per consumer proﬁt π̂ i ; a price index P̂i ;
a consumption plan for the representative consumer x̂ij (φ) and a production plan for each ﬁrm
q̂ij (φ) , n̂ij (φ) , ∀φ ∈ [bi , +∞) such that:
• Given P̂ , ŵ, π̂ and p̂ (φ), the representative consumer solves her maximization problem by
choosing x̂ij (φ) for the goods φ she has access to according to
xij (φ) = ŷj

p̂ij (φ)−σ
, ŷj = ŵj + π̂ j .
P̂j1−σ

³
´
• Given P̂ , ŵ, π̂ and the indirect demand function p̂ qij (φ) , nij (φ) ; P̂j , ŵj , π̂j that comes
from solving the representative consumer’s utility maximization problem, ﬁrm φ, ∀φ ∈

[bi , +∞], chooses q̂ij (φ) , n̂ij (φ) to solve
π (φ) = max

n ³
´
o
Lα 1−[1−nij (φ)]−β+1
q (φ)
p̂ qij (φ) , nij (φ) ; P̂j , ŵj , π̂j qij (φ) − ŵj ijφ − ŵjγ ŵi1−γ ψj
−β+1

s.t. qij (φ) ≤ nij (φ) Lj ŷj

−σ

p̂(qij (φ),nij (φ);P̂j ,ŵj ,π̂ j )
P̂j1−σ

, ŷj = ŵj + π̂j

nij (φ) ∈ [0, 1]
• Firms from country i operate in country j iﬀ φ ≥ φ∗ij where φ∗ij is deﬁned by
i−1
¡ ∗ ¢σ−1 h 1−α 1−γ
1−σ
1−γ
σ−1
= Lj yj (σ̃τ ij wi )
,
ψ̃Pj /yi
φij
h
³ ∗ ´i
• The measure of operating ﬁrms M̂ij = Ji 1 − Gi φ̂ij .
• The pdf of the conditional distribution of operating ﬁrms µ̂ij (φ) is given by (14).
• The price index satisﬁes (2).
• Per consumer proﬁt satisﬁes π̂ =

N
P

υ=1

M̂iυ

R∞
b

π̂ iυ (φ) µ̂iυ (φ) dφ/Lυ .

• The individual goods market clears n̂ij (φ) Lj x̂ij (φ) = q̂ij (φ), ∀φ ∈ [bi , +∞).

17

(15)

• The labor market clears, which given the trade balance can be shown to be equivalent to
(wi + π i ) Li =

N
X

λiυ (wυ + π υ ) Lυ ,

(16)

υ=1

where λij is the fraction of spending by country j on goods from country i.18
To derive stark predictions from the model, I make a particular assumption regarding the
distribution of productivities. Similar to Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple (2004) and Chaney (2007),
I assume that the productivity of ﬁrms is drawn from a Pareto distribution with shape parameter
θ > σ − 1, cdf Gi (φ) = 1 − bθi /φθ , pdf gi (φ) = θbθi /φθ+1 and support [bi , +∞), where bi can

be interpreted as the level of technology.19 The measure of operating ﬁrms becomes Mij =
¡ ¢θ
Ji bθi / φ∗ij .

In the subsequent analysis I will refer to the case of β = 0, that corresponds to the theory

of Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2007), as the ﬁxed cost model and to the case of β > 0 as the
endogenous (market penetration) cost model. I now proceed to study the total sales of ﬁrms as
functions of their productivities. The total sales of a ﬁrm from country i selling to country j and
having productivity φ are given by

nij (φ) Lj
| {z }

yj
|

³
´1−σ
τ w
σ̃ ijφ i
Pj1−σ
{z

.

}
extensive
margin of intensive margin of
consumers sales per consumer
In the ﬁxed cost model, ﬁrms choose nij (φ) = 1 ∀φ ≥ φ∗ij , and thus their sales inherit the
shape of the intensive margin which is of the standard CES Dixit-Stiglitz form. A percentage
change in the productivity of the ﬁrm implies a proportionate change in its sales. The sales in
the intensive margin —even for ﬁrms with φ = φ∗ij — begin at a positive threshold as can be seen
in ﬁgure 4. However, in the endogenous cost model, the simple addition of increasing marginal
18

The exact form of λij will be given later on. For an in-depth analysis of the derivation of the labor
market equilibrium in models with heterogeneous ﬁrms, see Eaton and Kortum (2005).
19
In addition, this assumption allows the model to match the empirically observed distribution of the
sales of ﬁrms (Axtell (2001)). See Kortum (1997), Eaton, Kortum, and Kramarz (2005), Gabaix (1999),
Luttmer (2006), and Arkolakis (2007) for justiﬁcations of using this distribution of productivities.

18

costs to reach additional consumers introduces a new margin in the ﬁrm’s sales: the extensive
margin of consumers. While high productivity ﬁrms reach almost all consumers, low productivity
ones have small sales per consumer and also choose to reach a small fraction of the consumers,
which could be arbitrarily close to zero as seen in ﬁgure 3. If the marginal cost function for
market penetration has increasing elasticity, a feature that the functional form (5) with β > 0 is
endowed with, the changes in the extensive margin will become proportionately smaller for ﬁrms
with larger productivities. The mechanics of the extensive margin will be key for accounting for
observations in the trade data.
Finally, substituting for the equilibrium conditions, the sales of a ﬁrm with productivity φ
from source country i selling to country j can be expressed as:

rij (φ) =

where





Lαj yjγ yi1−γ ψ̃1


 0
θ̃ =

·³

φ
φ∗ij

´σ−1

−

³

φ
φ∗ij

´(σ−1)/β̃ ¸

if φ ≥ φ∗ij

,

(17)

otherwise.

θ
β
ψ
, β̃ =
, ψ̃ =
σ−1
β−1
σ (1 − η)

and η = (σ − 1) / (θσ) is the share of proﬁts out of total income (see appendix B). Observe that
the case of Melitz (2003) and Chaney (2007) emerges by setting α, γ = 0 and taking β → 0:
rij (φ) =




 0

yi ψ̃1

³

φ
φ∗ij

´σ−1

if φ ≥ φ∗ij
otherwise,

with the parameter 1/ψ incorporated in the term 1/ψ̃ being the corresponding ﬁxed cost of
exporting.20

3

Calibration

The model is particularly simple to calibrate by assuming a particular distribution of productivities of ﬁrms and then following a methodology similar to the one developed by EKK05. The
20

Chaney (2007) solves the model with β = 0 allowing for market speciﬁc ﬁxed costs 1/ψij .

19

parameters of the model can be calibrated directly by looking at 1) the relationship between the
number of ﬁrms selling to at least some given number of markets and the sales of these ﬁrms
in France and 2) the relationship between the number of French entrants per country, and the
population and income per capita of that country.

3.1

Parameters determining the relative sales of ﬁrms

I will consider the sales of French ﬁrms in France as a function of the number of other countries
(k)

they serve. I denote by MF F the measure of French ﬁrms selling to France and to at least k ad(k)

ditional countries. These ﬁrms’ total sales in France, TF F , are given by the following expressions
(see appendix D)

β=0:

β>0:

(k)
TF F

=

(k)
TF F

=

(0)
MF F LαF yF

(0)
MF F LαF yF

µ


1

ψ̃ 


(k)
MF F
(0)
MF F

1
ψ̃

µ

(k)

MF F
(0)

MF F

1 − 1/θ̃

¶1−1/θ̃

1 − 1/θ̃

¶1−1/θ̃

,

¶1−1/(θ̃β̃ ) 


³ ´ 
−
 .
1 − 1/ θ̃β̃ 
µ

(k)
MF F
(0)
MF F

(18)

(19)

In the model θ̃ determines the sales advantage of more productive ﬁrms in the intensive
margin of per consumer sales. The parameter β, that regulates adjustments in the extensive
margin of consumers, governs the ability of ﬁrms to reach a larger fraction of the consumers in
a market given that they enter that market.
Figure 6 plots the logarithm of total sales of French ﬁrms in France as a function of the number
of ﬁrms selling to k or more countries. The relationship suggests a slope of 0.35 indicating that
ﬁrms that export to more markets sell also on average more in France. The slope of 0.35 implies
an approximate value of θ̃ of 1.5 for the model with β = 0 (more details are given in appendix
D). However, the ﬁxed cost model overpredicts (by around 77%) the total sales of all French
ﬁrms. Given the parameter θ̃ = 1.5, the model with β = 1 delivers a better ﬁt to the relationship
in the right tail as depicted in ﬁgure 6. The reason for the better ﬁt of the endogenous cost
model is that ﬁrms that sell to only a few destinations are not only the least productive ones,
but also choose to reach only a few consumers in France, that is, nF F (φ) is close to 0. When

20

one accounts for these ﬁrms, the total sales in France increase much slower as a function of the
number of destinations served than the simple ﬁxed cost model would predict. The results of
the above analysis suggest a β closer to 1 rather than to 0. Thus, I choose the value of β = 1 as
a benchmark value for the endogenous cost model throughout the remainder of my analysis.

3.2

Parameters determining total exports and number of exporters

The use of the Pareto distribution allows for analytical expressions for the fraction of spending
by country j on goods from country i,
(1−γ)(1−θ̃)−θ
(τ ij )−θ (bi )θ wi
,
λij = N
P
−θ
θ (1−γ)(1−θ̃)−θ
(τ υj ) (bυ ) wυ

(20)

υ=1

where the λij is a function of trade barriers τ ij , the technology bi , and the wages wi of the
countries.21 Notice that this expression is comparable to the one used by Eaton and Kortum
(2002) in their estimation of the parameter that governs the extent of heterogeneity in the
productivities of ﬁrms, θ. I will use their estimate and set θ = 8.22 Notice that given θ = 8, the
estimation of θ̃ = 1.5 implies σ = 6.33.23
To calibrate the remaining parameters, α and γ, I begin by expressing the total export sales
of French ﬁrms (F ) to country j as:
TF j = λF j Lj yj .

(21)

Alternatively, I can express export sales as the measure of exporting ﬁrms times average export
21

For simplicity, I set Ji = J .
Eaton and Kortum (2002) use data on bilateral trade shares, prices, and distance as a proxy for trade
costs for a cross section of countries. Their estimation corresponds to estimating the parameter governing
the elasticity of substitution between goods for models with the Armington aggregator. Romalis (2005)
estimates the later elasticities using data on trade and tariﬀs studying the countries that joined the
NAFTA. He ﬁnds parameter values for the elasticity of substitution in the range of 6.2 to 10.9, which
are consistent with the estimate of Eaton and Kortum.
23
The value of σ = 6.33 is higher than values used in the business cycles literature (around 2) or values
previously estimated using models of trade with heterogeneous ﬁrms (e.g. Bernard, Eaton, Jensen, and
Kortum (2003) report that σ = 3.79 is the value that allows their model to match the sales advantage
of exporters in the US data). However, the value of σ = 6.33 yields a mark-up of around 1.2, which is
consistent with mark-ups reported in the data (see Martins, Scarpetta, and Pilat (1996)).
22

21

sales per ﬁrm:
TF j = MF j Lαj yjγ yF1−γ
|





1 1
1
³ ´ .
−
ψ̃ 1 − 1/θ̃ 1 − 1/ θ̃β̃
{z
}

(22)

average sales per ﬁrm

Combining the two expressions above, I obtain:

−1





MF j
1
1
1
³ ´ 
= L1−α
yj1−γ (yF )1−γ 
−
j
λF j
ψ̃ 1 − 1/θ̃ 1 − 1/ θ̃β̃

.

(23)

Expression (23) relates the number of French ﬁrms exporting to country j, normalized by
French market share in country j, to the population and output per capita of that country. In
fact, this expression implies that higher entry of ﬁrms in a market is related to higher returns to
scale with respect to population size for the marketing technology (lower α) and lower fraction
of marketing costs paid in terms of importing country’s wages (lower γ). Therefore, by modeling
a common marketing technology across all ﬁrms and making realistic assumptions related to this
marketing technology (assumptions 2 and 3), the model is able to capture a robust ﬁnding of
EKK05: the number of French ﬁrms in a market, normalized by French market share, increases
with the size of the market with an elasticity less than one.
For my estimation I use data on French ﬁrm entry per market from EKK04 and EKK05,
and on population and manufacturing absorption per capita (as a proxy for output per capita),
which I describe in appendix E. Taking natural logarithms of expression (23) I run the following
regression, indicating the data counterpart of the variables with the use of an upper bar (robust
standard errors in parentheses)
ln (MF j /λF j ) = −2.74 + 0.56 ln L̄j + 0.69 ln ȳj .
(.034)

(.628)

(.028)

(24)

The R2 of the regression is .89. The coeﬃcients are less than one, as predicted by the theory.
A formal econometric test rejects the hypothesis that these coeﬃcients are the same at the 1%
level, further supporting the validity of assumptions 2 and 3. The estimation implies that the
cost to reach a given number of consumers decreases with an elasticity of .56 with the size of the
population. It also suggests that around 1/3 of the marketing costs to reach foreign consumers
22

are paid in terms of the importing country’s wages. The value of γ = .31 is diﬀerent than the
ones typically assumed in the literature i.e. γ = 0 —in terms of the exporting country’s wages
only— as in Ghironi and Melitz (2005) or γ = 1 —in terms of the importing country’s wages only—
as is implicit in EKK05. Finally, I use the constant of the regression to determine 1/ψ (see
equation (22)).

4

Market Penetration Costs and Puzzles in International
Trade

In this section I gauge the ability of the endogenous cost model to predict the export behavior of
French ﬁrms and trade ﬂows in the event of a trade liberalization episode using the mechanism
of the extensive margin of consumers. Notice that throughout the rest of my analysis I keep the
parameters of the model that was calibrated using the French data.

4.1

The distribution of sales

In ﬁgure 7 I plot the sales distribution of French ﬁrms to Portugal, which is one of the 113
exporting markets studied by EKK05. The authors report that the characteristics of the sales
distribution of French ﬁrms across markets are very robust. Thus, the choice of an average size
exporting market, such as Portugal, is very representative. A noticeable feature of the sales
distribution across markets is the large proportion of French ﬁrms selling to a particular market
that sell small amounts in that market.
In the model, the sales of a ﬁrm with productivity φ from country i to j are given by equation
(17). I deﬁne the smallest sales (revenues) of ﬁrms from country i to j as rijmin . In the ﬁxed cost
model, the minimum sales in country j that correspond to ﬁrms with productivity φ = φ∗ij are
given by
min
rij
= Lαj yjγ yi1−γ /ψ̃ .

In the case of the endogenous cost model, when β > 0, the minimum sales for ﬁrms with
productivity φ = φ∗ij are
min
rij
=0.

23

£
¤
The distribution of sales, Pr R < r|R ≥ rijmin = Fij (r), can be solved analytically for β = 0, 1

(see appendix C):

β = 0 : Fij (r) = 1 −

β = 1 : Fij (r) = 1 −

Ã

Ã

r
α γ 1−γ
Lj yj yi /ψ̃
r

Lαj yjγ yi1−γ /ψ̃

!−θ̃
!−θ̃

+1

min
r ≥ rij
,

min
r ≥ rij
.

(25)

(26)

In ﬁgure 7, I show that the ﬁxed cost model, parameterized to match the fact that most
ﬁrms do not export, overpredicts the size of the smallest exporters (1st percentile) by a factor of
150. Thus, the model also underpredicts the size of the largest exporters (99th percentile) by a
factor of around 1.7. However, the predictions of the endogenous cost model are closely aligned
with the data. In particular, the model predicts the large number of small exporters —for the 1st
percentile it only overpredicts sales by a factor of 1.5— and improves upon the predictions of the
ﬁxed cost model across all percentiles.
The reason for the improved prediction of the endogenous cost model is the mechanism
illustrated in section 2: ﬁrms with lower productivities not only sell less per consumer, but also
to fewer consumers. The absense of indivisibilities in the marketing costs implies a small size
for the low productivity ﬁrms. This fact combined with the increasing elasticity of the marginal
market penetration cost function captures both the existence of small exporters and the curvature
in the sales distribution of small exporters that EKK05 report. In terms of a sales distribution in
a logarithmic scale, the model with β = 1 would imply that the sales distribution in logarithms
exhibits curvature for relatively small ﬁrms. However, it would still retain a linearity for the
larger ﬁrms as is observed in the French data by each destination as well as in various other
studies on domestic sales of ﬁrms (see Axtell (2001) and Luttmer (2006)). Summarizing, the
model with the extensive margin of consumers, calibrated to match the size advantage in France
of proliﬁc exporters, is able to reproduce the sales distribution of French ﬁrms in each particular
market.

24

4.2

Trade ﬂows and bilateral trade liberalizations

Using the parameters inferred from the size advantage in France of proliﬁc exporters, I will
subject the model to a further test by looking at its predictions in a trade liberalization episode.
The analysis in this dimension is constrained from the unavailability of ﬁrm level data on the
sales of exporting ﬁrms before and after a liberalization episode. Therefore, I will use the best
available proxy which is very dissagregated goods data. I will also make use of the strict mapping
that my model implies, meaning that each ﬁrm produces only one good. Thus, in the rest of this
section I will treat each goods category as if it was produced by one ﬁrm.
I measure the increase in trade ﬂows for the previously traded goods extending the methodology of Kehoe and Ruhl (2003). In particular, Kehoe and Ruhl study the contribution of least
traded goods (including previously nontraded) to the total increase in trade after trade liberalization. Instead, I consider the particular contribution of the least traded goods, conditional on
being positively traded before liberalization, to the total increase in trade after the liberalization.
In my analysis, I use data from the OECD International Trade by Commodity database
(see appendix E for details) on US imports from Mexico recorded in 6-digit Harmonized System
(HS) encoding.24 Below I construct a classiﬁcation of the goods. I call the goods traded before
the liberalization and throughout 1990-92 “previously traded” goods. I divide the “previously
traded” goods in 10 categories with equal number of goods. These categories include goods in
an increasing order of volume of trade: category 10 includes the “previously traded” goods that
were on average most traded in 1990-92, while category 1 the least traded ones. The goods that
were traded in 1997-99 (at least once in these three years) but not throughout all the years of
1990-92 are referred to as “newly traded” goods. I also divide the “newly traded” goods into two
categories depending on whether they were continuously traded throughout 1997-99 (category 1)
or traded in some of these years (category 2). Finally, I will refer to the goods that were traded
in some of the years of 1990-92 but were not traded in 1997-99 as “newly nontraded” goods.
The OECD database provides information on US imports from Mexico for 5402 goods. 2298
of these goods were positively traded throughout 1990-92 and thus each category of “previously
traded” goods consists of 230 goods (with category 10 consisting of 229 goods). The number of
24

In general the reporting of import ﬂows from importing countries is more accurate. The results of
my analysis remain the same if I use reports on exports from Mexico by good category instead.

25

“newly traded” goods is 1767 and 907 of these belong to category 1 of “newly traded” goods,
while the remaining 860 constitute category 2 of the “newly traded” goods. Finally, the dataset
contains 230 “newly nontraded” goods and 1107 goods that were never traded.
Table 1 provides information on the share of trade for each of the categories of traded goods
deﬁned in the previous paragraph. It reports the share out of total trade in 1990-92 and 199799. It also reports the contribution of each of the categories of “previously traded” and “newly
traded” goods to new trade among these goods. In fact, as table 2 shows the share of the
15% least traded goods from the “previously traded” goods in 1990-92 increased to almost 25%
amongst the same goods. A more clear pattern is depicted in ﬁgure 8 where I plot the natural
logarithm of the ratio of imports from 1997-99 to imports from 1990-92 for each category of
“previously traded” goods. The percentage increase of trade ﬂows is higher the less tradable the
good is in 1990-92. My analysis indicates that while “newly traded” goods are numerous, they
also are of small trade volume on average. Thus, a large part of the new goods trade accounted
by Kehoe and Ruhl (2003) can actually be interpreted as new trade of “previously traded” goods
that were least traded before liberalization.
Kehoe (2005), in an evaluation of Applied General Equilibrium (AGE) models used to predict
NAFTA, concludes that no plausible parameterization can make models based solely on the CES
Dixit-Stiglitz speciﬁcation match the trade ﬂows after the NAFTA liberalization. He points out
that this failure is exactly due to their inability to predict high growth in trade for goods with
low volume of trade prior to the liberalization. The endogenous cost model features deviations
from the CES demand structure that can account for the faster growth rates of trade for goods
with little previous trade. In the endogenous cost model even a small decrease in variable
trade costs that brings about a small increase in the marginal revenue per consumer makes a
proportionately larger expansion of the consumer base of these goods proﬁtable.25 The following
proposition formalizes the above argument.
25

In order to generate observationally equivalent results to the ones of the model presented here
alternative explanations have to deviate from the assumptions of CES demand given the CRS production
function. DRS in production is clearly an unrealistic assumption to the extend that it has to be assumed
for the production of the ﬁrm to each destination. Alternative plausible explanations are non-CES forms
of demand such as the one assumed by Melitz and Ottaviano (2007). Apart from the tight association
to the data, the additional quantitative advantage of the approach I follow —for the set of question
I address— is that my framework retains all the previous desirable properties of the Melitz-Chaney
framework pointed out by EKK05 (e.g. the log-linear association between ﬁrm entry and market size)

26

Proposition 2
Assume that all countries are symmetric with τ ii = 1 ∀i and τ ij = τ iυ > 1 ∀j, υ, s.t. j, υ 6= i.

Deﬁne a symmetric trade liberalization as τ 0ii = 1 ∀i and τ 0ij ∀i 6= j such that τ ij > τ 0ij ≥ 1 ∀i 6= j,
and τ 0ij = τ 0iυ ∀j, υ s.t. j, υ 6= i. Then:

The elasticity of trade ﬂows of a good with respect to τ ij , ∀i 6= j, is higher the lower the productivity φ that the good is produced with, for all φ s.t. φ ≥ φ∗ij .

Proof. Normalize wj = 1 ∀j = 1, ..., N . It can be shown that the new τ 0ij i 6= j, given τ 0ii = 1,

results in a decrease of φ∗ij ∀i 6= j. The exact elasticity of trade ﬂows depends on the model’s

parameters and initial level of τ ij ∀i, j. It is, therefore, suﬃcient to focus our analysis on the eﬀect

of a decrease in φ∗ij to trade ﬂows rij (φ). Rewriting (17) and using the normalization wi = 1, ∀i:
µ ∗ ¶(σ−1)/β !
µ ¶σ−1 Ã
φij
φ
σ
1−
rij (φ) = Lαj
, φ ≥ φ∗ij , i 6= j.
∗
ψ φij
φ
|
{z
}|
{z
}
intensive margin extensive margin of
consumers
of sales per
consumer

The objective is to compute the elasticity of trade ﬂows with respect to a change in φ∗ij , namely
ζ = −d ln rij (φ) /d ln φ∗ij . This elasticity is higher for low initial productivity φ,26
σ−1
ζ=
(σ − 1)
+
| {z }
β
|
intensive margin
of sales per
consumer elasticity

"µ

φ
φ∗ij

¶(σ−1)/β
{z

#−1

−1

extensive margin of
consumers elasticity

.

}

Notice that ζ = ζ (φ) and is decreasing in φ and thus decreasing in initial export sales. In fact,
as β → 0 , ζ (φ) → (σ − 1) ∀φ ≥ φ∗ij .
To quantitatively assess the ability of the models to match the patterns of trade ﬂows after
trade liberalizations I choose the reduction in variable trade costs so that the two models match
the total growth in the trade in “previously traded” goods. The ﬁxed cost model requires a 12.5%
decrease in variable trade costs, while the endogenous cost requires only a 9.5% decrease (further
details are given in appendix E). In ﬁgure 8, I plot the two models’ predicted increase in growth
26

Since the general equilibrium eﬀect is the same across goods I set for simplicity ∂ ln φ∗ij /∂ ln τ ij = 1.

27

for each category of “previously traded” goods along with the actual data. The endogenous cost
model delivers a close match to the data, while the ﬁxed cost model falls short of predicting the
empirical pattern.
The interaction between the extensive margin of consumers and CES preferences allows the
endogenous cost model to successfully replicate the increase in trade ﬂows after the introduction
of NAFTA, providing a solution of the puzzle reported by Kehoe (2005). In the next section, I
analyze the role the new consumers margin plays in international trade through its contribution
in new trade ﬂows after a trade liberalization.

5

How important is the new consumers margin in international trade?

In the above analysis I have introduced a new margin of adjustment in export sales, namely
the extensive margin of consumers of each ﬁrm. Aside from the semantics, the new margin is
capturing the faster growth of smaller ﬁrms, which is an implication of the deviation from the
CES demand structure. To evaluate the importance of the growth of small ﬁrms during a trade
liberalization episode, I proceed to decompose the three margins of adjustment of aggregate
trade ﬂows that the model features in the event of a trade liberalization:
i) Intensive margin growth (total growth in sales per consumer)
ii) The new consumers margin (total growth in the extensive margin of consumers)
iii) The new ﬁrms margin (total growth in the extensive margin of ﬁrms)
I refer to the extensive margin of ﬁrms as the number of ﬁrms exporting. The intensive
margin of sales per consumer is the sales of the ﬁrm to each consumer that the ﬁrm reaches in a
market. Essentially, previous literature referred to the intensive margin in what I refer to here as
the extensive margin of consumers multiplied by what I have deﬁned as the intensive margin of
sales per consumer. In the endogenous cost model, as a source country becomes more expensive
each ﬁrm of this country exports to a narrower set of consumers. In contrast, in models with
adjustments mainly in the extensive margin of ﬁrms, more expensive countries mainly export in

28

a narrower set of goods (as in Eaton and Kortum (2002)).27 Finally, in models with monopolistic
competition but homogeneous ﬁrms, as in Krugman (1980), the only adjustment is through the
intensive margin of sales per consumer.
In recent years an increased amount of attention has been given to the new ﬁrms margin. This
attention stems partly from the ability of models that have this margin of adjustment to exhibit
large increases in trade with small decreases in trade costs, without assuming unrealistically high
elasticities of substitution.28 The elasticity of trade ﬂows with respect to changes in variable
trade costs is θ both for the endogenous and the ﬁxed cost model. However, when decomposing
the importance of each of the margins, as shown in the next proposition, the contribution of
the new ﬁrms margin is minimal (at least for small reductions in the variable trade costs). The
following proposition formalizes the above discussion.
Proposition 3
i) The elasticity of trade ﬂows with respect to variable trade costs τ ij is θ.
ii) For small changes in variable trade costs τ ij , changes in the new consumers margin always
dominate the changes in the new ﬁrms margin.
Proof. Both parts of the proof will be shown by performing a decomposition using the Leibniz
rule to separate the three margins. We have that total export sales of country i to j are:
Tij = J

Z

∞

φ∗ij

nij (φ) xij (φ) gi (φ) dφ .

The change in total export sales of country i to country j due to a change in variable trade costs
is given by (following methodology similar to Chaney (2007)):

27

dTij
=J
dτ ij
|

Z

∞

φ∗ij

∂xij (φ)
nij (φ)
gi (φ) dφ + J
∂τ ij
{z
} |

Intensive margin growth

Z

∞

φ∗ij

∂nij (φ)
xij (φ) gi (φ) dφ+
∂τ ij
{z
}

New consumers margin

Evidence on the existence of an extensive margin of goods and ﬁrms in international trade is provided
by Hummels and Klenow (2005) and EKK05 respectively.
28
Ruhl (2005), using a model with adjustment in the extensive margin of ﬁrms, proposes a solution to
the so-called elasticity puzzle, namely the contrast of the low elasticity needed to explain the patterns
of international business cycles with the high elasticity needed to explain the growth of trade following
reductions in trade costs.

29

¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ¡ ¢ ∂φ∗ij
+Jnij φ∗ij xij φ∗ij gi φ∗ij
.
∂τ ij
|
{z
}
New ﬁrms margin

I rewrite this decomposition in terms of elasticities:
d ln Tij
=−
d ln τ ij

(σ − 1)
| {z }

Intensive margin
growth elasticity

−

(θ − σ + 1)
| {z }

New consumers
margin elasticity

+

0
|{z}

(27)

New ﬁrms
margin elasticity

First, notice that d ln Tij /d ln τ ij = −θ, proving part i). For part ii), given the assumption
θ > σ−1 that is required for the integrals to converge, small decreases in variable trade costs cause
a substantial increase in trade ﬂows attributed to the new consumers margin. The corresponding
contribution of the new ﬁrms margin is tiny. This can be veriﬁed from the expression that
represents the part of the derivative related to the new ﬁrms margin: because the extensive
¡ ¢
margin of consumers is close to 0 for small ﬁrms (nij φ∗ij = 0), any small change in the trade

costs that causes new ﬁrms to trade (∂φ∗ij /∂τ ij ) has minimal contribution in the increase in total
export sales.

To provide further intuition of the above result I look at the comparative statics of trade
liberalization and in particular I look at the density of exports for ﬁrms with diﬀerent productivities before and after a trade liberalization. Figure 9 graphs the density of exports for each
level of productivity (total amount exported by ﬁrms of the given productivity) for the endogenous cost and the ﬁxed cost model, before the event of a trade liberalization. In the ﬁxed cost
model, the density of exports inherits the shape of the Pareto distribution of productivities given
the CES demand speciﬁcation. However, in the endogenous cost model, the extensive margin
of consumers is small for ﬁrms with relatively low productivities, and thus the density of sales
is hump-shaped. Thus, deviations from the CES demand for the small ﬁrms imply that the
contribution of these ﬁrms is minor in total export sales. In addition, in ﬁgure 10, I graph the
predictions of the models for the three margins’ contribution to the change in aggregate trade
ﬂows for the calibrated US-Mexico trade liberalization episode with a 9.5% decrease in trade
costs. Consistent with what the theory predicts, relatively small trade cost changes will imply
that adjustments in the new consumers margin will be substantially larger for ﬁrms with small

30

(but positive) numbers of consumers before the trade liberalization. The quantitative decomposition of new trade in the event of a trade liberalization using the model with β = 1 implies that
the percent contribution to new trade of the intensive margin growth, the new ﬁrms margin, and
the new consumers margin is 56.9%, 14.7%, and 28.4%, respectively. In contrast, the ﬁxed cost
model would predict that the percent contribution to new trade of the intensive margin growth
and the new ﬁrms margin is 56.9% and 43.1%, respectively. Thus, my model implies that up to
28.4% of new trade was not correctly accounted for by previous theory.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, I develop a theory of marketing costs that provides a deeper understanding of the
barriers individual ﬁrms face when selling to foreign markets. This theory provides a formulation
of market penetration costs on the basis that additional marketing eﬀorts in a market lead to
increases in the sales of the ﬁrm there, but at a decreasing rate. I model this margin of adjustment as the extensive margin of ﬁrms’ consumers. Incorporated in the workhorse monopolistic
competition trade framework with product diﬀerentiation and ﬁrm productivity heterogeneity,
the interaction of this formulation with the CES demand can account for a number of key observations in trade data. These observations seemed particularly puzzling in the view of models
with a uniform ﬁxed cost of exporting.
The introduction of the new margin of adjustment of ﬁrms’ sales —the new consumers margin—
is capturing the large amount of small exporters we observe in each market. Still, as Arkolakis
and Muendler (2007) show, this explanation is consistent with the introduction of an additional
extensive margin in the sales of the ﬁrms, the one of more goods. Additionaly, the tractability
of the new framework makes it applicable for a variety of new applications. In fact, Arkolakis
(2007) shows that this framework is consistent with a set of new dynamic facts on ﬁrms and
exporters documented by Eaton, Eslava, Kugler, and Tybout (2008).
An important new prediction of the model is that a signiﬁcant amount of new trade in the
event of trade liberalization comes from previously small, rather than new, exporters. This
prediction comes in sharp contrast to the previous theory’s ﬁndings, which emphasize the importance of new ﬁrms for the overall increase in trade after a liberalization. With the increasing
31

availability of ﬁrm-level data, future research can shed light on the empirical validity of the different theories. The parsimonious formulation I develop omits many important features of the
world. However, the new theory has taken important steps toward understanding the role that
market penetration costs can play in the context of a macroeconomic trade model.

32

References
Arkolakis, C. (2007): “Market Penetration Costs and Trade Dynamics,” mimeo, Yale University.
Arkolakis, C., S. Demidova, P. J. Klenow, and A. Rodriguez-Clare (2008): “Endogenous Variety and the Gains from Trade,” forth., American Economic Review Papers and
Proceedings.
Arkolakis, C., and M.-A. Muendler (2007): “The Extensive Margin of Exporting Goods:
A Firm Level Analysis,” mimeo, University of California San Diego and Yale University.
Arndt, J., and J. L. Simon (1983): “Advertising and Economies of Scale: Critical Comments
on the Evidence,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 23(2), 229—241.
Aw, B. Y., S. Chung, and M. J. Roberts (2000): “Productivity and Turnover in the Export
Market: Micro Level Evidence from the Republic of Korea and Taiwan (China),” The World
Bank Economic Review, 14(1), 65—90.
Axtell, R. L. (2001): “Zipf Distribution of U.S. Firm Sizes,” Science, 293(5536), 1818—1820.
Bagwell, K. (2007): “The Economic Analysis of Advertising,” in Handbook of Industrial Organization, ed. by M. Armstrong, and R. Porter, vol. 3, pp. 1701—1844. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Bernard, A. B., J. Eaton, B. Jensen, and S. Kortum (2003): “Plants and Productivity
in International Trade,” The American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268—1290.
Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen (1995): “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufucturing: 1976-1987,” Brooking Papers: Microeconomics, pp. 67—119.
Butters, G. (1977): “Equilibrium Distributions of Sales and Advertising Prices,” The Review
of Economic Studies, 44(3), 465—491.
Chaney, T. (2007): “Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and the Extensive Margins of International Trade,” mimeo, University of Chicago.
33

Clerides, S. K., S. Lach, and J. R. Tybout (1998): “Is Learning by Exporting Important? Micro-Dynamic Evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, pp. 903—947.
Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2005): “Market Entry Costs, Producer Heterogeneity, and Export Dynamics,” NBER Working Paper, 8629.
Dinlersoz, E. M., and M. Yorukoglu (2006): “Informative Advertising by Heterogeneous
Firms,” mimeo, University of Houston.
Eaton, J., M. Eslava, M. Kugler, and J. Tybout (2008): “The Margins of Entry Into Export Markets: Evidence from Colombia,” in The Organization of Firms in a Global Economy,
ed. by E. Helpman, D. Marin, and T. Verdier. (forth.) Harvard University Press, Massachusets.
Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography and Trade,” Econometrica, 70(5),
1741—1779.
(2005): Technology in the Global Economy: A Framework for Quantitative Analysis.
mimeo, University of Minnesota.
Eaton, J., S. Kortum, and F. Kramarz (2004): “Dissecting Trade: Firms, Industries, and
Export Destinations,” The American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 94(2), 150—
154.
(2005): “An Anatomy of International Trade: Evidence from French Firms,” mimeo,
University of Minnesota and New York University.
Farris, P. W., and R. D. Buzzell (1979): “Why Advertising and Promotional Costs Vary:
Some Cross-Sectional Analyses,” Journal of Marketing, 43(4), 112—122.
Gabaix, X. (1999): “Zipf’s Law for Cities: An Explanation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114(3), 739—767.
Ghironi, F., and M. Melitz (2005): “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
Heterogeneous Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 865—915.

34

Grossman, G. M., and C. Shapiro (1984): “Informative Advertising with Diﬀerentiated
Products,” The Review of Economic Studies, 51(1), 63—81.
Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple (2004): “Export Versus FDI with Heterogeneous Firms,” The American Economic Review, 94(1), 300—316.
Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992): “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 60(5), 1127—1150.
Hummels, D., and P. Klenow (2005): “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,” The
American Economic Review, 95(3), 704—723.
Jones, J. P. (1995): New Proof That Advertising Triggers Sales. Lexington Books, New York.
Keesing, D. B. (1983): “Linking Up to Distant Markets: South to North Exports of Manufactured Consumer Goods,” The American Economic Review, 73(2), 338—342.
Kehoe, T. J. (2005): “An Evaluation of the Performance of Applied General Equilibrium
Models of the Impact of NAFTA,” in Frontiers in Applied General Equilibrium Modeling, ed.
by T. J. Kehoe, T. Srinivasan, and J. Whalley, pp. 341—377. Cambridge University Press, New
York.
Kehoe, T. J., and K. J. Ruhl (2003): “How Important is the New Goods Margin in International Trade,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Staﬀ Report, 324.
Kortum, S. (1997): “Research, Patenting, and Technological Change,” Econometrica, 65(6),
1389—1419.
Krugman, P. (1980): “Scale Economies, Product Diﬀerentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,”
The American Economic Review, 70(5), 950—959.
Lambin, J. J. (1976): Advertising, Competition and Market Conduct in Oligopoly over Time.
An Econometric Investigation in Western European Countries. North Holland, Amsterdam.
Luttmer, E. G. (2006): “Selection, Growth, and the Size Distribution of Firms,” forth., Quarterly Journal of Economics.
35

Martins, J. O., S. Scarpetta, and D. Pilat (1996): “Mark-Up Ratios in Manufacturing
Industries: Estimates for 14 OECD Countries,” OECD Economics Department Working Paper,
162.
Melitz, M., and G. Ottaviano (2007): “Market Size, Trade, and Productivity,” forthcoming,
Review of Economics Studies.
Melitz, M. J. (2003): “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate
Industry Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695—1725.
Roberts, M. J., and J. R. Tybout (1997): What Makes Exports Boom? The World Bank,
Washington, D.C.
Romalis, J. (2005): “NAFTA’s and CUFTA’s Impact on International Trade,” NBER Working
Paper, 11059.
Ruhl, K. J. (2005): “The Elasticity Puzzle in International Economics,” mimeo, University of
Texas at Austin.
Saunders, J. (1987): “The Speciﬁcation of Aggregate Market Models,” European Journal of
Marketing, 21(2), 5—47.
Simon, J. L., and J. Arndt (1980): “The Shape of The Advertising Response Function,”
Journal of Advertising Research, 20(4), 767—784.
Stegeman, M. (1991): “Advertising in Competitive Markets,” The American Economic Review,
81(1), 210—223.
Sutton, J. (1991): Sunk Costs and Market Structure. The MIT Press, Massachusetts.
Thomas, L. G. (1989): “Advertising in Consumer Goods Industries: Durability, Economies of
Scale, and Heterogeneity,” Journal of Law and Economics, 32, 163—193.
Tybout, J. R. (2001): “Plant -and Firm- Level Evidence on "New" Trade Theories,” NBER
Working Paper, 8418.

36

Uhlig, H. (1996): “A Law of Large Numbers for Large Economies,” Economic Theory, 8(1),
41—50.

37

Appendix
Appendix A: the maximization problem of the ﬁrm
First, notice that for the case where β > 0 the market penetration cost function inherits an
1−(1−n)−β+1
−β+1
n→1

interiority condition when n → 1 since lim

= +∞. Therefore, when solving for the

maximization problem of the ﬁrm, that is given in the main text, I need only consider the
restriction n ≥ 0.
Rewriting the problem of a type φ ﬁrm in a Langrangian formulation with the additional
constraint that n ≥ 0:
p1−σ
p−σ w
Lα 1 − (1 − n)−β+1
L (φ) = nLy 1−σ − nLy 1−σ − w
+ λn.
P
P φ
ψ
−β + 1
FOC with respect to p:
w
p (φ) = σ̃ ,
φ

(28)

Lα
p (φ)−σ w
p (φ)1−σ
−
w
[1 − n (φ)]−β + λ = 0
−
Ly
Ly
1−σ
1−σ
P
P φ
ψ

(29)

FOC with respect to n :

and λn (φ) = 0, λ ≥ 0.
Using equation (28), (29) becomes
³ ´1−σ
w
y σ̃ φ

σ

P 1−σ

wLα−1
[1 − n (φ)]−β−1 + λ = 0 .
−
ψ

Notice that there exists φ∗ , s.t. ∀ φ ≤ φ∗ this equation holds only for some λ > 0 =⇒

n (φ) = 0 (the constraint n (φ) ≥ 0 is binding). However, ∀ φ > φ∗ the constraint is not binding

and the corresponding n (φ) ∈ (0, 1) is actually the solution to the above equation for λ = 0.

Thus, for φ ≤ φ∗ , n (φ) = 0. For all φ > φ∗ , the optimal n (φ) is given by the solving equation
(9).
I also check the second order conditions in order to derive suﬃcient conditions for this problem
to have a unique solution for n (φ) ∈ [0, 1]. Evaluating the ﬁrst and second principle submatrices
38

of the Hessian matrix,



A=

∂2h
∂p2

∂2h
∂p∂n

∂2h
∂n∂p

∂2h
∂n2



 ,

results in the following derivations (notice that ∀φ > φ∗ n (φ) ∈ (0, 1)):
∂2h
∂p2

∂2h
∂n2

−σ−1

= −σ (1 − σ) n (φ) Ly p(φ)
P 1−σ
α

= (−β − 1) w Lψ

∂2h
∂n∂p

=

∂2h
∂p∂n

= (1 −

−σ−2

+ (−σ − 1) σn (φ) Ly p(φ)
<0,
P 1−σ φ

1
< 0 only if β > 0
[1−n(φ)]β+1
−σ
−σ−1
σ) Ly p(φ)
+ σLy p(φ)
=
P 1−σ
P 1−σ φ

,
0.

Therefore, the principle submatrices satisfy |A1 | < 0 , |A2 | > 0 .
Since the second order condition holds, the unique pair (n (φ) , p (φ)) that solves the equations
(28) and (29), for a given φ > φ∗ , is the unique maximum solving the ﬁrm’s optimization problem
(given the eﬀective price index P ). Therefore, the above formulation gives n (φ) as the solution
of equation (29) ∀φ > φ∗ . In addition, for φ ≤ φ∗ , n (φ) = 0.

Appendix B: the share of proﬁts
In this appendix, I will show that the share of proﬁts out of total income is constant and equal
to η = (σ − 1) / (θσ) .29 Notice that sales in j for a ﬁrm with productivity φ from country i are
given by (17). Total export sales in j from ﬁrms originating in country i are given by expression
(22). The total variable proﬁt from production is simply Tij /σ and thus labor income from
production is Tij (σ − 1) /σ. Total market penetration costs are
mij = Mij

Z

∞

φ∗ij

Lαj wjγ wi1−γ

¡ ∗ ¢θ
1 1 − [1 − nij (φ)]−β+1 θ φij
[θ − (σ − 1)]
.
dφ = Tij
θ+1
ψ
−β + 1
θσ
φ

Total labor income of country i from the bilateral trade relationship with country j equals
income from production of goods and market penetration costs:
wij Lij = (σ − 1) Tij /σ + (1 − γ) Tij [θ − (σ − 1)] / (θσ) + γTji [θ − (σ − 1)] / (θσ) .
Summing over all j and using:
29

For more details, see Eaton and Kortum (2005).

39

a) equality of income and total expenditure

N
P

Tij = Xi ;

j=1

b) total labor income of country i is the sum of labor incomes generated in order to produce and
N
P
sell the good to all the N countries wi Li = wij Lij ;
j=1

c) trade balance condition,

N
P

Tij =

j=1

we have that

N
P

Tji ,

j=1

Xi = yi Li = wi Li / (1 − η) .
Finally, given the above expression, trade balance also implies expression (16).

Appendix C: sales’ distribution
I consider the case of sales of ﬁrms from country i in market j. I proceed to represent the results
as in EKK04 and EKK05 in order to compare the predictions of the model with the data they
report.
Deﬁne by rijmin the sales for the ﬁrm with threshold productivity φ∗ij .The objective is to derive
the distribution of sales denoted by Fij (r). Sales r, for ﬁrms with φ ≥ φ∗ij , are given by expression
(17). Notice the following:
¡ ∗ ¢θ
£
¤
φ
Pr
[Φ
≥
φ]
min
£
¤ = ij θ .
Pr R ≥ r|R ≥ rij
=
∗
Pr Φ ≥ φij
(φ)

However, this can also be written as

¤
£
¤
£
min
= 1 − Pr R < r|R ≥ rijmin = 1 − Fij (r) ,
Pr R ≥ r|R ≥ rij
which implies that
1 − Fij (r) =

¡ ∗ ¢θ
φij
(φ)θ

.

min
are given by
Replacing (30) into (17) obtains that sales for ﬁrms with r ≥ rij

r = Lαj yjγ yi1−γ

´
σ³
min
.
[1 − Fij (r)]−1/θ̃ − [1 − Fij (r)]−1/(θ̃β̃ ) , r ≥ rij
ψ̃

40

(30)

For β → 0, I can solve for the distribution of sales analytically and derive the expression (25).
Therefore, in this case, the sales distribution is Pareto with coeﬃcient −1/θ̃ as in EKK05 and
Chaney (2007). However, the cases that I introduce emerge for β > 0. I can solve for the sales
distribution for some cases analytically. For example, when β = 1, the distribution of sales is
given by expression (26).

Appendix D: calibration
Parameters determining the relative sales of ﬁrms First, notice that in the model there
is a strict hierarchy of destinations depending on φ∗ij , so that no ﬁrm is observed to sell to a less
popular destination without selling to a more popular one. However, this prediction is not always
observed in the data as EKK05 point out. Using entry shocks, EKK05 can generate patterns of
entry that violate hierarchy. Their general setup can also be adapted in the context of my model.
(k)

Denote by Mij the measure of ﬁrms from country i selling to country j, also selling to k or
more less popular markets. The probability that a ﬁrm from country i selling in j also sells to k
or more less popular markets is
(k)

Mij

(0)

Mij

.
(k)

Deﬁne the minimum productivity of a ﬁrm from i selling to j and at least k more markets by φii .
The probability of selling to at least k markets conditional on selling in j can also be written as
Ã

φ∗ij

and thus,
φ∗ij
(k)

φij

(k)

φij

=

Ã

!θ

,

(k)

Mij

(0)

Mij

! θ1

.

(31)

Total sales in market j of ﬁrms from market i selling also to at least k other destinations are
equal to (exploiting the market hierarchy)

(k)

(k)

Tij = Mij Lαj yjγ yi1−γ

1
ψ̃

Z

∞
(k)

φij

"µ

φ
φ∗ij

¶σ−1
41

−

µ

´θ
³
¶(σ−1)/β̃ # θ φ(k)
ij
φ
=⇒
∗
θ+1
φij
φ

(k)

Tij =

bθ
1
Ji ¡ i ¢θ Lαj yjγ yi1−γ
ψ̃
φ∗ij




1
1 − 1/θ̃

Ã

(k)
φij
φ∗ij

!σ−1−θ

−

1

³ ´
1 − 1/ θ̃β̃

Ã

(k)
φij
φ∗ij

!(σ−1)/β̃−θ 
 .

The last expression delivers expressions (18), (19) in the main text with the use of (31) and
setting i, j = F .
Regarding the estimation of β using the relationships derived above, an OLS regression of
the natural logarithm of total sales in France on the natural logarithm of the number of ﬁrms
selling to at least a given number of countries, yields a coeﬃcient of 0.353 and constant of 13.42.
This implies that θ̃ is around 1.546.
Parameters determining total exports and number of exporters The data on population are from the World Development Indicators of the World Bank. In the case of missing values
I use data from Penn World Tables. Data on manufacturing absorption and share of French
ﬁrms’ sales in particular markets are taken from EKK04 (see their paper for details).
A regression of ln M̄F j on ln λ̄F j , ln w̄j and ln L̄j , will result to the following coeﬃcients (robust
standard errors in parentheses, I suppress the constant since it is of no interest):
ln M̄F j = 0.87 ln λ̄F j + 0.52 ln L̄j + 0.67 ln ȳj .
(.030)

(.028)

(.025)

The R2 is 0.913 and the coeﬃcients on ln L̄j and ln ȳj are statistically signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from
each other at the 1% level. The coeﬃcient on ln λ̄F j is close to 1, consistent to what is reported
by EKK04, but not exactly 1 as my theory would imply. Thus, to be able to extract coeﬃcients
that are consistent with the overall analysis based on my model, I used the ones obtained from
the regression reported in the text (which are the coeﬃcients of running the regression reported
in this note but restricting the coeﬃcient of ln λ̄F j to be 1).

Appendix E: data description
Trade by goods data I use data from the OECD International Trade by Commodity database
(www.sourceoecd.org) on imports by good of US from Mexico.30 The data are recorded using
30

A similar pattern to the one I report for the Mexico-US case emerges for the Canada-Mexico trade
liberalization episode.

42

the Harmonized System (HS) 1988 revision (rev. 1) at the 6-digit level of detail and potentially
can include up to 6873 diﬀerent commodities (in the case of US imports from Mexico there is
information on 5404 goods). Data on HS rev. 1 are available from 1990-2000. I only include data
from 1990 to 1999 (10 years) due to inconsistency of the imports of US from Mexico reported
by US and the exports of Mexico to US reported by Mexico, particularly for 2000 (note that the
results do not change even if I include data for 2000). Also note that trade ﬂows of the 6-digit
level add up to aggregate trade ﬂows from 1990-1995. From 1996, there is an average of 1%-2%
of trade ﬂows that are not recorded in the 6-digit trade ﬂows. The reason is that the HS was
revised in 1996 (rev. 2), and the data on trade ﬂows from 1996 onward were initially reported
according to the rev. 2 and then translated to the HS 1988 (rev. 1). In this reclassiﬁcation,
goods that could not be categorized back in rev. 1 were discarded. Even though some of the
trade ﬂows are missing at the 6-digit level, there is no observable persistent inconsistency that
could lead to a mistaken interpretation of the data. Finally, I drop 2 categories of goods from
my sample: special classiﬁcation provisions (code 980100) and Intrastat estimation of missing
declarations of chapter 99 (code 999900).
Grouping the goods First, I analyze in detail how I categorize the “previously traded” goods.
I ﬁrst look at the years 1990-92. I keep the goods being traded throughout all the years 1990-92.
I group the goods that were traded in 1990-92 into ten categories, each with an equal number of
goods. The categories include goods in increasing order of volume of trade during 1990-92 (e.g.
category 1 contains the 10% least traded ones in 1990-92 while category 10 contains the 10%
most traded goods). I compute the ratio of import sales of 1997-99 to 1990-92 for each category
(essentially taking averages over 1990-92 and 1997-99). By considering only the goods that are
traded throughout all years of 1990-92, I avoid including goods that are randomly or very rarely
traded. With this adjustment I also avoid —to some extent— including new goods that tend to
grow for some years after their introduction before reaching steady state levels and could create
a bias towards higher growth of least traded goods. By allowing for goods that stopped being
traded after 1992 to be in the sample I adjust towards selection of only surviving goods that
would create higher growth rates for the least traded goods categories.
Related to the deﬁnition of “newly traded” goods, this deﬁnition is admittedly more favorable
43

towards a higher importance of new goods in the event of a trade liberalization. On the other
hand, the use of the dataset that provides information on goods rather than ﬁrms can create
aggregation bias which will work against the importance of newly traded goods. Because of
the unavailability of ﬁrm level data on trade liberalization episodes, data on goods in very ﬁne
categories of dissagregation, as the ones I use, is the best available substitute.
Mapping the model to the data In order to map the model to the data, I use the assumption
of the theory that each good is produced by one ﬁrm. In the model I am considering the
empirical counterpart of the relationship I computed in the data and thus I map each one of
the 10 categories of the goods to 10% of the ﬁrms in an increasing order of volume of trade
and productivity correspondingly. In particular, I consider the total sales of ﬁrms selling the
goods that corresponds to each category. In fact, since I keep track of the same number of goods
throughout time, I only have to compute the average sales of goods for each category. For the
period before liberalization, average sales of each category in the model are given by
(k)
Tij

=

Lαj

γ

1−γ

(yj ) (yi )

(k)

Tij = Lαj (yj )γ (yi )1−γ

"µ ¶
µ ¶(σ−1)/β̃ #
Z
σ−1
φ
φ
1 φi+1
θφθi
−
dφ =⇒
φ∗ij
φ∗ij
φθ+1
ψ̃ φi

 ³
´
´
³

1

ψ̃ 

σ−1

(σ−1)/β̃
φi+1
φθi
φθi
1
1
−
∗
θ
φij
1/θ̃−1 φi+1
1/(θ̃β̃ )−1 φθi+1
³ ´σ−1
³ ´(σ−1)/β̃
φi
1
1
− φ∗
+ φφ∗i
1/θ̃−1
1/(θ̃β̃ )−1
ij
ij

φi+1
φ∗ij


 ,


where φi , φi+1 is the threshold productivity corresponding to each percentile of ﬁrms and this is
determined through the expression (30). Similarly, for the period after the liberalization (abusing
notation for the rest of this appendix, I denote with a ˜ the ex-post variables),

L̃αj (ỹj )γ (ỹi )1−γ

 ³
´
´
³ ∗
φ∗ij φi+1 σ−1
φij φi+1 (σ−1)/β̃
φθi
1
−
∗
∗
∗
∗
1
1/θ̃−1 φθi+1
φ̃ij φij
 φ̃ij φij³
´
´
³
σ−1
φ∗
φ∗ij φi (σ−1)/β̃
ψ̃ 
1
− φ̃ij∗ φφ∗i
+
∗
∗
1/θ̃−1
φ̃ φ
ij

ij

ij

ij

φθi
1
1/(θ̃β̃ )−1 φθi+1
1
1/(θ̃β̃ )−1




 .


In order to determine the ratio of average sales between the two periods I have to compute
the ratios

φ∗ij

∗
φ̃ij

,

γ
1−γ
L̃α
j (ỹj ) (ỹi )
γ
1−γ
Lα
j (yj ) (yi )

. For the ratio

φ∗ij
∗

φ̃ij

I use the following expression of φ∗ij in terms of yi ,

44

yj , Lj ,
¡ ∗ ¢θ Ji bθi yi1−γ
φij =
λij

µ

1
1−1/θ̃

−

1
1−1/(θ̃β̃ )

L1−α
yj1−γ ψ̃
j

¶

.

Using the assumption that there is no change in Ji , bi ,31
φ∗ij
∗

φ̃ij

=

Ã

1−γ
1−α
λ̃ij (yi )1−γ L̃j (ỹj )
λij (ỹi )1−γ L1−α
(yj )1−γ
j

!1/θ

.

Therefore, the only required information to determine the yet undetermined ratios

φ∗ij

∗
φ̃ij

,

γ
1−γ
L̃α
j (ỹj ) (ỹi )
γ
1−γ
Lα
j (yj ) (yi )

is λij , Lj , yj . I describe how I construct these ratios in the next paragraph.
For the particular calibration exercise that I perform, i corresponds to Mexico (M) and j to
the US (U). Data on LM , LU are from World Development Indicators. To obtain yM , WU , I
use data on manufacturing absorption obtained from the OECD STAN database for the years
1990-92 and 1997-99 and divide these data by the population of each country. Manufacturing
absorption is calculated as gross output minus exports plus imports. I use data for the sectors
that appear in the OECD trade by commodity data, namely i) agriculture, hunting, forestry
and ﬁshing ii) mining and quarrying iii) total manufacturing and iv) electricity, gas and water
supply. Notice that for 1990 the database does not provide data on exports and imports for
US for sectors i),ii) and iv). I choose to consider averages over 1991-92 and 1998-99 for the
manufacturing absorption of US instead of using exports and imports from another source. In
fact the trade sectors i),ii) and iv) is less than 1/10 of the one of sector iii) and inﬂuences the
result to a minimal degree. I ﬁnally pick the ratio λ̃MU /λMU so that I generate the overall
increase in trade among goods traded during 1990-92. This corresponds (all else equal) in a
change of the variable trade cost by around 9.5% for the model with β = 1 and around 12.5 to
the model with β = 0 (see equation 20).
31

Extending to the case where Ji, bi change would deliver the same results (but complicate notation).

45

Share of ’90-’92 trade
Share of ’97-’99 trade
Share of new trade

“Newly
nontraded”
.13
.00
-

“Newly
traded”
1
2
.85 .12
3.46 .30
4.84 .38

1
.01
.17
.26

2
.05
.28
.40

3
.11
.86
1.25

“Previously Traded”
by category
4
5
6
7
8
.23
.45
.86 1.78 3.52
.64 1.68 1.67 2.31 7.23
.86 2.33 2.10 2.58 9.17

9
7.64
9.26
10.11

Table 1: Percentage trade shares of “newly nontraded,” “newly traded,” and “previously traded”
goods

US imports from Mex (6 digit HS) (%)
Endogenous cost model (β = 1)
Fixed cost model (β = 0)

Share of ’90-’92 “previously
traded” goods trade
15.0
15.0
15.0

Share of ’97-’99 “previously
traded” goods trade
25.1
24.9
15.0

Table 2: Percentage trade share of the goods that constitute the 15 % Least Traded “Previously
Traded” goods in 1990-92

Marginal cost

β=1

β=0
α

L

ψ
n =1
Fraction of consumers reached

Figure 1: Marginal cost to reach additional consumers under diﬀerent β’s

46

10
84.28
72.13
65.71

MC of
access

Marginal cost

MR of access for
1
productivity φ

MR of access for
2
1
productivity φ < φ

Lα

ψ
n2
n1
n =1
Fraction of consumers reached

Figure 2: Productivity and market access
Fraction of consumers
reached (n)

Fixed Cost

1
Endogenous Cost

φ

*

Productivity

Figure 3: Fraction of consumers reached and productivity
47

Sales per
consumer
1−σ

 σ wi 
 σ −1 φ 


1−σ
Pj

Lαj −1wγj wi1−γ

wj

σ
ψ
φ*

Productivity

Figure 4: Intensive margin of sales and productivity

Sales
per firm
(Fixed cost)
(Endogenous
cost)

Lαj wγj wi1−γ

σ
ψ
0

φ*

Productivity

Figure 5: Sales per ﬁrm as a function of productivity in the two models
48

1000

Fixed Cost (β=0)

Total sales in France ($ billion) k

Endogenous
Cost (β=1)

Data (EKK05)

100

10
10

100

1000

10000

100000

1000000

Number of firms selling to at least k countries

Figure 6: Total sales in France and number of ﬁrms selling to at least k countries

49

Exports in 1986 ($ thousands)

10000

1000

Fixed Cost
(β=0)

100

Endogenous
Cost (β=1)
10

1

Exports to Portugal (EKK05)

0.1
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Firms percentile

Figure 7: Predicted and actual distribution of export sales of French ﬁrms to Portugal

50

Ratio of total imports in 1997-99 to 1990-92
for each category

148.4
54.6
20.1
Endogenous
cost (β=1) Fixed cost
(β=0)

7.4

↓

↓

2.7
1.0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

US imports from Mexico for previously traded goods
categorized by sales in 1990-92
Figure 8: Predicted and actual ratio of US imports from Mexico in ’97-99 to ’90-92 for each
category of goods.

51

Density of exports (n(φ)x(φ)g(φ))

Productivity

Density of exports (n(φ)x(φ)g(φ)

φ*

φ*

Productivity

Figure 9: Density of exports in the ﬁxed cost and the endogenous cost models

52

Figure 10: Trade liberalization and the margins of trade

53

