                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     FINANCIAL STABILITY, THE TRILEMMA, AND INTERNATIONAL RESERVES

                                            Maurice Obstfeld
                                           Jay C. Shambaugh
                                             Alan M. Taylor

                                         Working Paper 14217
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14217


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2008




Financial support from the Fondation Banque de France through a grant administered by the CEPR
is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Sara Friesen and Seema Sangita for excellent research assistance.
We thank Sebastian Edwards for providing us with his data on financial openness (which update the
indicator described in Edwards 2007); we thank Ross Levine for directing us to data on bank quality;
and we thank Ugo Panizza for providing data on "original sin." For helpful comments we thank Sebastian
Edwards, Kenneth Froot, Olivier Jeanne, Ross Levine, and Dani Rodrik; scholars in workshops at
the Banque de France, Kansas, Manchester, Warwick, Brown, and UCLA; participants at the 10th
Annual International Economics Conference at UC Santa Cruz, the NBER IFM Program Meeting,
the Darden-State Street Emerging Markets Finance conference, the 2nd annual CEGE conference at
UC Davis, the 2008 IEA World Congress in Istanbul; and especially discussants Michael Devereux,
Kathryn Dominguez, and Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Maurice Obstfeld, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Stability, the Trilemma, and International Reserves
Maurice Obstfeld, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 14217
August 2008
JEL No. E44,E58,F21,F31,F36,F41,N10,O24

                                              ABSTRACT

The rapid growth of international reserves---a development concentrated in the emerging markets---remains
a puzzle. In this paper we suggest that a model based on financial stability and financial openness
goes far toward explaining reserve holdings in the modern era of globalized capital markets. The size
of domestic financial liabilities that could potentially be converted into foreign currency (M2), financial
openness, the ability to access foreign currency through debt markets, and exchange rate policy are
all significant predictors of reserve stocks. Our empirical financial-stability model seems to outperform
both traditional models and recent explanations based on external short-term debt.


Maurice Obstfeld                                     Alan M. Taylor
Department of Economics                              Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley                   University of California, Davis
549 Evans Hall #3880                                 One Shields Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                              Davis, CA 95616
and NBER                                             and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu                           amtaylor@ucdavis.edu

Jay C. Shambaugh
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
jay.c.shambaugh@dartmouth.edu
1       Introduction
Over the past decade, the international reserves held by monetary authorities
have risen to very high levels relative to national outputs. More rapid reserve
accumulation, primarily attributable to relatively poor countries, is thought to
have affected the global patterns of exchange rates, of capital flows, and of
real interest rates. Foreign official purchases of dollars have also financed an
unprecedented level of external borrowing by the world’s biggest economy, that
of the United States. The upsurge in global reserve growth confronts economists
with an important puzzle. What has driven it, and is it likely to endure?
    The facts to be explained can be summarized as follows. Starting from the
end of the Bretton Woods era, global international reserve holdings as a fraction
of world GDP grew dramatically—up by a factor of 3.5 from less than 2 percent
in 1960 to 6 percent in 1999—despite the supposed global shift toward more flex-
ible exchange rate arrangements in 1973. Since 1999, reserve accumulation has
accelerated sharply. Asian and some Latin American emerging markets, Japan
among the industrial countries, and oil exporters, notably Russia, have been
the primary drivers of this trend. Since 1990, the average advanced country
ratio of reserves to GDP has held steady at about 4 percent, but the emerg-
ing markets’ average reserve ratio has more than quintupled, from 4 percent to
over 20 percent of GDP.1 These data present both a theoretical and an empir-
ical challenge, but as yet there is little consensus and only modest success on
either front. Indeed some have suggested that the current level of reserves is
excessive—and hence, implicitly, beyond the explanatory powers of a rational
economic framework.2
    We argue that reserve accumulation is a key tool for managing domestic
financial instability as well as exchange rates in a world of increasing financial
globalization. We therefore build on the view—certainly not a new one—that
a primary reason for a central bank to hold reserves is to protect the domestic
banking sector, and domestic credit markets more broadly, while limiting ex-
ternal currency depreciation.3 The need for such protection increases given the
multiplication of risks in more financially open economies, where potential cur-
rency mismatches and a combination of internal drains (runs from bank deposits
to currency) and external drains (flight to foreign currency or banks) can place
extraordinary demands on a central bank’s foreign exchange reserves. In the
empirically prevalent scenarios of “twin” internal and external drains (Kamin-
sky and Reinhart 1999), reserve backing falls when the central bank attempts to
ease domestic illiquidity by acting as a lender of last resort (LLR). Especially for
an emerging market in which domestic bond markets are thin and large-scale of-
    1 Figures are from Flood and Marion (2002) and Jeanne (2007).
    2 See,for example, Summers (2006). Bird and Rajan (2003) and Rodrik (2006) make the
second-best argument that, rather than self-insuring against domestic economic vulnerabilities
by incurring the costs of holding more reserves, countries should attack the sources of the
vulnerabilities directly. We return to this point below. Levy Yeyati (2006) offers a critique of
standard measures of reserve holding costs.
   3 See, inter alia, Feldstein (1999) and Calvo (2006). Later in this paper we trace the

argument back to the seminal work of Thornton (1802).


                                               1
ficial bailouts may spark fears of public insolvency, no practical short-run means
of influencing the exchange rate other than reserve sales may be available.
    We first present a simple theoretical framework for understanding this mech-
anism. We then investigate the empirical determinants of reserve growth in a
broad panel of developing, emerging, and advanced countries. We pursue a sys-
tematic empirical investigation to show that there has been a statistically robust
and economically significant correlation of reserve levels (reserves/GDP) with
financial openness (a measure of cross-border capital mobility), financial devel-
opment (proxied by M2/GDP), and exchange rate policy (using peg indicators).
The three factors are all important and they multiplicatively compound each
other as a determinant of reserve/GDP ratios in our specification. This result
again highlights the role of the trilemma, albeit in a different context. In previ-
ous papers we have emphasized how open capital markets and an exchange-rate
target limit monetary policy autonomy measured by interest rate independence
(Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor 2004, 2005). In this paper we show how
the same policy environment may dictate a large war chest of reserves for LLR
purposes when there is a risk of capital flight.
    These findings do not necessarily deny a role to more traditional determi-
nants of reserve holdings, such as openness to international merchandise trade.
In our simple conceptual framework, these other determinants may well act as
complementary factors affecting the demand for reserves, and in our empirical
work we are careful to control for them. As a matter of statistical significance,
some of these traditional factors appear to matter (e.g., trade) but others do not
(for example, foreign debt). Of course, the channels through which traditional
variables such as trade influence reserve demand can be quite “nontraditional”
in a financially globalized world.
    As a matter of quantitative significance, however, we show through counter-
factual analysis that the key to understanding the evolution of reserves, espe-
cially in recent years, is to include measures of financial openness and financial
development. With the spread of globalization and the growth of banking sys-
tems and financial markets, these variables have shifted profoundly in emerging
markets since the early 1990s. By accounting for those shifts, we can much more
successfully explain the changing patterns of reserve holdings. For example, we
can show (using out of sample predictions) that there was no major deviation
in this pattern after 1997. We can even go a long way toward explaining alleged
outliers such as China. By this historical yardstick, current reserve holdings are
neither inexplicable nor excessive—we find no major underprediction, at least
not systematically, and not for the usual emerging-market suspects. China and
most of emerging Asia hold reserves at levels close to those predicted by the
model, and only in the last years of our sample (2003–04) does China start to
leave a substantial fraction of reserves unexplained. Among the very big reserve
holders, Japan does appear to hold more reserves than the model suggests are
necessary.




                                        2
2     Earlier thinking on the demand for
      international reserves
A long literature has, at different times, emphasized various motives for holding
international reserves.

2.1     From the trade-based Bretton Woods view to sudden
        stops and precautionary accumulation
The modern study of optimal international reserves begins with Heller (1966),
who viewed the demand for reserves by a monetary authority as reflecting opti-
mization subject to a tradeoff between the benefits of reserves and the opportu-
nity cost of holding them. Heller’s work and the work that soon followed envi-
sioned the benefits as relating to the level and variability of balance of payments
flows, primarily imports and exports. Basically, reserves could buy time for more
gradual balance of payment adjustment, so the demand for them was viewed as
a positive function of both the cost of adjustment (through demand compres-
sion, devaluation, and so on) and the likelihood that such adjustment measures
might become necessary at a low level of reserves. While such adjustment-based
variables met with some empirical success, the proxies for reserve costs showed
no robust relationship to reserve holdings, at least when countries were pooled.4
    The collapse of the Bretton Woods regime after 1973 shifted the ground
under the arguments about reserve holdings. At least in the advanced countries,
a new resolution of the trilemma emerged—a move to a different “vertex” with
capital mobility and floating exchange rates. But it was unclear what this move
meant for reserve holdings. On the one hand, a truly floating regime needs no
reserves and a liberalized financial account would minimize the need for reserve
changes to absorb a given set of balance-of-payments shocks. On the other
hand, governments are far from indifferent to the exchange rate’s level and a
liberalized financial account might in and of itself generate more balance-of-
payments instability, possibly augmenting reserve needs.
    As if to support an array of confounding theoretical arguments, global in-
ternational reserves did not decline noticeably relative to output after the shift
to floating exchange rates. The exigencies of the 1980s debt crisis did lead to
a decline in the growth rate of developing-country reserves during the 1980s.
But the new wave of rich-to-poor capital flows starting in the 1990s led to new
thinking on the role of international reserves in a financially globalized world,
one in which currency crises originating in the financial account could inflict
major reserve drains. An important study in this vein is that of Flood and
Marion (2002). They showed that a parsimonious but successful specification
   4 See Williamson’s (1973) magisterial survey of the literature up to the close of the Bretton

Woods system. More recent surveys include Wijnholds and Kapteyn (2001) and Bahmani-
Oskooee and Brown (2002). Because proxies for reserve costs have generally performed so
poorly in pooled samples, we do not include them in our empirical analysis below; one notable
exception, however, was Edwards (1985) who used long-term sovereign spreads rather than
short-term money market spreads.


                                               3
based on earlier work by Frenkel and Jovanovic (1981) remained robust, and
they reinterpreted the balance-of-payments variability regressor central to that
specification in terms of the “shadow floating exchange rate” concept from the
theoretical crisis literature. However, their work left open the possibility that
variability in reserves is a proxy for more fundamental financial variables that
generate reserve (or shadow exchange rate) variability.
    Perhaps the most influential view has been one based on the role of short-
term external debts as drivers and predictors of emerging-market currency crises.
Wijnholds and Kapteyn (2001, n. 13) recount that in December 1997, after the
Korean crisis erupted, the IMF board discussed a rule of thumb for reserve
adequacy incorporating short-term foreign-currency debt. It came to be known
as the Guidotti-Greenspan rule after policymakers Pablo Guidotti and Alan
Greenspan both explicitly proposed the idea in 1999 (see Greenspan 1999).
    The proposal came at a time of mounting concern about “sudden stops”
in capital inflows (Calvo and Reinhart 2000), periods when access to foreign
financing can dry up. A country may be able to pay interest on external debt,
but lack the wherewithal to repay a principal balance that it had expected to roll
over. Guidotti suggested a rule of thumb whereby emerging markets should have
sufficient reserves to cover full amortization for up to one year without access
to foreign credit. The idea was supported by empirical research showing that
short-term external debt appears to be a potent predictor of currency crises. It
is not much of an exaggeration to say that on this view, the economy itself is a
bank, and monetary (as opposed to credit) considerations are inessential.
    Despite its recent notoriety, the Guidotti-Greenspan rule has a hallowed
history going back at least a century. In the second volume of his Treatise on
Money (1930), John Maynard Keynes discussed his view of the then-accepted
principles governing the optimal level of free gold reserves. Because it is so very
explicit and so clearly in line with current discussion (including consideration of
financial integration), the relevant passage is worth quoting at length (Keynes
1971, pp. 247–8):

      The classical investigations directed to determining . . . the appro-
      priate amount of a country’s free reserves to meet an external drain
      are those which, twenty years ago, were the subject of memoranda
      by Sir Lionel Abrahams, the financial secretary of the India Office,
      who, faced with the difficult technical problems of preserving the ex-
      change stability of the rupee, was led by hard experience to the true
      theoretical solution. He caused to be established the gold standard
      reserve, which was held separately from the currency note reserve
      in order that it might be at the unfettered disposal of the authori-
      ties to meet exchange emergencies. In deciding the right amount for
      this reserve he endeavoured to arrive at a reasoned estimate of the
      magnitude of the drain which India might have to meet through the
      sudden withdrawal of foreign funds, or through a sudden drop in the
      value of Indian exports (particularly jute and, secondarily, wheat)
      as a result of bad harvests or poor prices.


                                        4
      This is the sort of calculation which every central bank ought to
      make. The bank of a country the exports of which are largely de-
      pendent on a small variety of crops highly variable in price and
      quantity—Brazil, for example—needs a larger free reserve than a
      country of varied trade, the aggregate volume of the exports and
      imports of which are fairly stable. The bank of a country doing a
      large international financial and banking business—Great Britain,
      for example—needs a larger free reserve than a country which is
      little concerned with such business, say Spain.

    Notice that Keynes here focuses exclusively on external drains, and does
not mention the causal influence of internal drain on external drain that would
surely have appeared more important to him upon witnessing the global finan-
cial crisis that broke out in 1931, the year after the Treatise’s publication. In
this respect his prescriptions mirror the Guidotti-Greenspan perspective, which
likewise concentrates on external drains, largely ignoring the possible role of
domestic residents’ financial decisions.
    In more recent writing, Aizenman and Marion (2003) suggest a precautionary
demand for reserves as a cause of the rising international reserves in East Asia
following the Asian crisis. Aizenman and Lee (2006) estimate an empirical panel
model in which precautionary factors, represented by dummy variables marking
past crises, play an important role in explaining desired reserve levels. Like us,
Aizenman and Lee (2007) find that China is not an obvious outlier. However,
while the authors motivate their regression tests in terms of a theoretical model
of insurance against sudden stops, their econometric results actually say nothing
about the mechanism through which past crises have influenced subsequent
reserve holdings.
    How does the Guidotti-Greenspan precautionary prescription hold up in
practice? Jeanne and Rancière (2006) and Jeanne (2007) estimate optimal inter-
national reserves in a model where the latter serve the role of allowing national
consumption smoothing in the face of random sudden stops.5 Consistent with
Summers’ (2006) observation, they find that countries hold reserves that are ex-
cessive relative to the Guidotti-Greenspan benchmark—in some cases multiples
of short-term external debt. Were it not for this predictive failure, there would
perhaps be no great puzzle over “excessive” reserves.

2.2     An alternative view based on the double drain
What then has been driving reserve accumulation since the late 1990s? To re-
solve the puzzle we consider the concerns of a government facing simultaneous
currency and banking crises, with potential foreign reserve losses that are mag-
nified by its domestic interventions as the lender of last resort. In this context
the failure of trade and debt criteria to explain reserve holdings is more un-
derstandable. Trade and debt arguments for reserve holdings emphasize that
   5 Durdu, Mendoza, and Terrones (forthcoming) likewise focus on potential sudden stops as

a motivation for reserve demand.


                                            5
a negative (capital outflow) balance-of-payments shock can emanate from the
financial account when the export of home assets to foreigners suddenly stops.
But we think it important to recall that similar shocks can arise when the import
of foreign assets by domestic residents suddenly starts.6
    Some illustrative calculations can illuminate the point. A typically “bad”
trade deficit in a developing country might be, say, 5% of GDP, but if this had
to be financed out of reserves in a sudden stop, the implied drain would only be
        1
about 10   % of GDP per week, a slow leak. To ratchet this drain up we might
consider that an imminent crisis could lead to speculative arbitrage even on the
current account side, either via “leads and lags,” or even the outright hoarding
of all hard-currency export receipts offshore. In that case, suppose exports and
imports are, say, a not unreasonable 26% of GDP, so trade is balanced. A
sudden stop (with no export receipts repatriated in the worst-case scenario)
implies that a reserve drain of 12 % of GDP per week will ensue. Given current
levels of emerging market reserve holdings, this faster drain would be a concern,
but would not exhaust reserves very quickly.
    What about the next rationale for reserves, short-term debt? If we suppose
there is also a short-term debt equal to a not atypical 26% of GDP rolling
over continuously, this could add a further 12 % of GDP in weekly financing
needs, getting the reserve drain up to 1% of GDP a week. Conventional drains
of this order of magnitude might be potentially worrying, but to rationalize
current reserve holdings we think it is important to keep in mind the even more
catastrophic double drains that can result from capital flight.
    In the case that we focus on, domestic capital flight is financed through a
drain of domestic bank deposits—so domestic financial stability is inescapably a
central consideration in reserve management policy. To continue with intuition
based on representative estimates, suppose M2 is 20% of GDP. If half of M2
decides to flee the country in a panic, this could happen in the space of a week or
two, and hence reserves equal to 5%–10% of GDP per week might start to drain
out of the country. That flow would be an order of magnitude larger than those
likely to be triggered in a sudden stop by the trade or debt financing channels
noted above. It is the threat of this type of drain that most worries emerging
market policymakers. Absent speedy and credible help from an international
lender of last resort, rapid ouflows of this type would be difficult to manage
without a large war chest.
    In the new era of financial globalization, these flows are not just hypothetical.
A good example of this kind of dynamic is provided by the events in Argentina.
We look first at 1994–95, and developments in the wake of the Mexican “Tequila
Crisis.” Just before the crisis started in December 1994, Argentina’s central
bank reserves were about 11 billion pesos, out of a total money base (M0) of
15 billion pesos (with 1 peso equal to 1 U.S. dollar). M2 was about 50 billion
pesos, or 20 percent of a GDP of roughly 250 billion pesos.
   6 For example, sudden stops and current account reversals are often classified using net

balance of payments flow data, but this may obscure the underlying cause of the flow. How-
ever, as Rothenberg and Warnock (2006) note, many “sudden stop” episodes would be better
described as “sudden flight” events of the kind we have in mind here.


                                            6
    After the crisis, a sudden stop occurred in emerging markets including Ar-
gentina. For the first few weeks no great problem arose in the Argentine domes-
tic banking sector. But in early 1995 a bank run steadily developed. During
this time, demand for money base or M0 held steady at about 14 to 15 billion
pesos until mid-1995. However, the demand for M2 collapsed; bank depositors
took their money to Miami or Montevideo in search of a safe haven. As they
rushed for dollar liquidity in February and March the central bank’s reserves
bled away, falling to a level of just 5 billion pesos by April 1995, meaning that
about one eighth of M2 had been exchanged for central bank reserves (worth
two fifths of M0) in the space of a few weeks.
    If this kind of drain had continued, Argentina’s existing reserves would have
been quickly depleted and convertibility would have ended within weeks or even
days. Yet the plan survived. Despite a 1994 statement that it would tolerate
no more fiscal laxity from Argentina, the IMF (fearing global contagion) rolled
out new loans as the bank run grew to critical proportions in early 1995. The
new injection of dollars kept the plan afloat and was thought to have served
a “catalytic” role in encouraging fresh inflows of private capital. A currency
collapse was narrowly averted.7
    What would have happened without IMF intervention in 1995? It is likely
that the 1995 counterfactual, with no IMF support, would have looked some-
thing like the actual events of 2001–02, when the withdrawal of IMF support in
late November 2001 (in much tougher macroeconomic and fiscal circumstances)
triggered a massive bank run. Already the year 2001 had seen a steady double
drain, with the country losing 11.5 billion dollars of deposits and 10.9 billion
in reserves from January to November. But in the two days after the IMF
withdrew its backing, the drain intensified by an order of magnitude. On the
single day of November 30, 1.4 billion dollars were withdrawn from the banking
system; fully ten percent or 1.7 billion dollars of reserves were lost in the space
of twenty four hours.8
    The convertibility plan died a quick death. First, the “temporary” capital
controls of the corralito were imposed within a couple of days of the IMF’s
departure, and starting in January the trilemma was resolved more definitively
when the peso was allowed to depreciate (it was soon hovering around 4 pesos
per dollar, before steadying at 3). And along the way Argentina suffered an
historic economic and political meltdown.
    In our view, emerging market policymakers now have exactly this type of
double drain in mind, a rapid portfolio shift by domestic depositors which threat-
ens to overwhelm the reserves of a central bank, even one that could be mistaken
for a currency board. As large fractions of M2 decided to leave Argentina, it
was clear that having near-complete backing of M0 would be of little help.
    Based on this line of reasoning, and much more theory and evidence to follow,
we think capital flight is at least as important, and perhaps more important than
sudden stops as a crisis trigger. We agree with Wijnholds and Kapteyn (2001,
   7 The Argentine experiences in 1994–95 and 2001–02 are recounted in great in detail Paul

Blustein’s (2005) book And the Money Kept Rolling In (and Out).
   8 Figures from Levy Yeyati, Schmukler, and Van Horen (2004).




                                            7
pp. 10–11), who argue that even the recent debt-based approaches to reserve
demand, while considering financial globalization, have missed a vital element.
We adopt this broader view of the financial stability concerns of a central bank
faced with a double drain risk, and we and find that the broader view better
fits the data.
    Our conceptual framework therefore builds on crisis-inspired discussions of
banking problems such as those of Velasco (1987), Calvo (1996, 2006), Calvo and
Mendoza (1996), Sachs (1998), and Chang and Velasco (2001), in which a flight
from domestic bank deposits into foreign exchange—a scenario of simultaneous
internal and external drain that occurred in many of the 1990s crises—brings
foreign reserves and the exchange rate under extreme pressure by putting the
banking system into meltdown and activating the central bank’s LLR role.9
    Several papers have highlighted the double drain within the context of the
historical gold standard. In a classic paper, Dornbusch and Frenkel (1984)
employ a standard model of the money multiplier to derive a dynamic model of
gold flows and reserves in a world of imperfect capital mobility. The risk of a
double drain arises when the “confidence effect” is at work and higher interest
rates cause a flight to cash rather than into deposits.10 In an extension of this
model, della Paolera and Taylor (2002, 2003) show that the model predicts a
crisis outcome when a national bank, say, the “banking department” of a gold
standard currency board or a parastatal bank, acts as a lender of last resort
(loosening credit as its reserves fall in a credit crunch).
    Even for present-day currency arrangements, we also emphasize that a drain
which originates as purely an internal matter may spread to the exchange mar-
ket if it sparks fears of government fiscal distress following a banking-sector
rescue.11 As Viner (1939, p. 263) puts it: “A drain . . . which is distinctly of
one type in its origin, may imperceptibly become a drain of another type, or
may, by causing alarm, give rise to another type of drain as well.” Following
up on this view, we see M2, the quasi-liquid deposits of the banking system, as
the variable most naturally tracking the potential pressure on reserves resulting
from a flight out of domestic-currency bank deposits.12
    This broader view of the utility of reserves also has a hallowed history—one
that goes back at least to the British currency turbulence of the late eigh-
teenth and early nineteenth centuries. Writing in his classic Paper Credit of
Great Britain (1802) during Britain’s 1797–1821 suspension of gold convertibil-
ity, Henry Thornton argued that gold reserves were necessary not only to meet
fluctuations in the trade balance (external drains); they also were important
   9 More recent theoretical contributions to the “twin crisis” literature include Goldstein

(2005) and Shin (2005), both of whom focus on the decisions of foreign bank creditors.
  10 For a related analysis, see Miller (1996).
  11 Miller (2000) sketches a scenario in which banking crises lead to currency crises.
  12 Keynes (1971, p. 247), again seeming to ignore the possibility of domestic financial

instability, argues that the maximal sizes of the external shocks necessitating free foreign
exchange reserves are not “likely to bear any stable relationship to the volume of money within
the country, which will depend partly on the national income and partly on the national habits.
They are governed, rather, by the magnitude and variability of the country’s international
business as traders, investors and financiers.”



                                              8
for positioning the Bank of England to head off or respond to internal drains
without collapsing the home economy. He argued explicitly that at a time of
domestic economic distress, attempts to attract gold by shrinking the Bank of
England’s note issue would be self defeating—gold can be accumulated only ex
ante, not ex post.
    Like Keynes, Thornton is worth quoting at length. After pointing out that
some “interchange of gold for paper” is needed to regulate the real value of
paper money, he states (Thornton 1939, pp. 111–2):
     In order to ensure that this interchange shall at all times take place,
     it is important that, generally speaking, a considerable fund of gold
     should be kept in the country, and there is in this kingdom no other
     depository for it but the Bank of England. This fund should be
     a provision not only against the common and more trifling fluctu-
     ations in the demand for coin, but also against the two following
     contingencies. First, it should serve to counteract the effects of an
     unfavourable balance of trade, for this infallibly will sometimes oc-
     cur, and it is what one or more bad harvests cannot fail to cause. It
     is also desirable, secondly, that the reserve of gold should be suffi-
     cient to meet any extraordinary demand at home, though a demand
     in this quarter, if it should arise from great and sudden fright, may
     undoubtedly be so unreasonable and indefinite as to defy all calcu-
     lation. If, moreover, alarm should ever happen at a period in which
     the stock of gold should have been reduced by the other great cause
     of its reduction, namely, that of a call having been recently made
     for gold to discharge an unfavourable balance of trade, the powers
     of any bank, however ample its general provision should have been,
     may easily be supposed to prove insufficient for this double purpose.
    Later in Paper Credit Thornton spells out further his thinking on the role
of reserves in supporting domestic financial markets along with the currency’s
foreign exchange value (Thornton 1939, p. 153):
     The more particular examination of this subject of an unfavourable
     exchange, brings us, therefore, to the same conclusion to which we
     were led in the former Chapter; namely, that the [Bank of Eng-
     land] ought to avoid too contracted an issue of bank notes. The
     absence of gold, though itself an evil, may prevent other evils of
     greater moment. . . . It should farther be remembered, that gold is
     an unproductive part of our capital: that the interest upon the sum
     exported is so much saved to the country: and that the export of
     gold serves, as far as it goes, to improve the exchange, by discharging
     the debt due on account of an unfavourable balance of trade; and
     to prevent the depreciation of our own paper currency, as compared
     with the current money payments of other countries.
   Thornton’s perspective affirms the close interplay between internal and ex-
ternal drains, and thus the interplay between domestic financial stability and


                                       9
currency stability.13
    The credit-market turbulence that erupted in the summer of 2007 has vividly
illustrated that in a world of deeply intertwined financial markets, the potential
need for reserves to counter domestic financial instability is not limited to poorer
countries. For example, a French bank operating in multiple currencies but
lacking access to Federal Reserve lending facilities may well experience a need
for dollar liquidity that the European Central Bank cannot directly meet by
supplying euros.
    If the ECB nonetheless supplies euro credit when dollars are wanted, the eu-
ros will be sold for dollars in the foreign exchange market, depressing the euro’s
dollar price and, contrary to the classical case of LLR support in a closed econ-
omy, incipiently raising euro-zone inflation. The ECB can avoid these pressures
by purchasing the euros it has lent out with dollar reserves—in effect, carrying
out a sterilized sale of dollars. But to do so readily, in the amounts that may
be necessary, it may need to hold substantial dollar reserves. Recognizing such
needs, the Federal Reserve’s Open Market Committee, at its December 11, 2007
meeting, authorized the extension of substantial dollar credits to major foreign
central banks.
    This rationale for reserve holding even by developed countries is not entirely
new, though it has been neglected in the recent discussion of reserve levels, per-
haps because emerging-market crises have been much more frequent and salient
than crises in the industrialized world. Writing more than two decades ago, Gut-
tentag and Herring (1983, pp. 20–21) expressed concern about “banks located in
countries that have adequate LLR facilities for banking activities denominated
in domestic currencies but inadequate facilities for coping with foreign-currency
difficulties. This category . . . may . . . include banks headquartered in countries
with convertible currencies but meager foreign-exchange reserves.”14
  13 Years later, Bagehot (1873) famously expanded on Thornton’s themes. He observed,

“Very large loans at very high rates are the best remedy for the worst malady of the money
market when a foreign drain is added to a domestic drain. Any notion that money is not to
be had, or that it may not be had at any price, only raises alarm to panic and enhances panic
to madness....” Later still, Johnson (1958, p. 157) argued that a larger money supply would
necessitate larger reserves, but he based his analysis on the monetary approach to the balance
of payments rather than on the central bank’s LLR role vis-à-vis the domestic banking system.
  14 Guttentag and Herring also note (p. 13) that “banks headquartered in countries with

very large dollar reserves can attract Eurodollar deposits on more favorable terms than banks
headquartered in countries with relatively small reserves . . . .” This “tiering” phenomenon,
which in the 1970s was most evident in periods of international financial stress, could provide
a collateral benefit to the banks of countries holding large reserves. We have seen no recent
empirical work on this hypothesis, however. Fischer (1999) argues that the IMF, with the
ability to provide liquidity in many currencies, can potentially act as an international LLR.
Several factors, including the IMF’s lack of any direct role in financial regulation and the
conditionality of its loans, make its facilities an implausible substitute for national reserve
holdings. Indeed the recent global reserve buildup has in part reflected reluctance to depend
on the Fund, reluctance that in November 2003 led to discontinuation of the Fund’s never-used
Contingent Credit Lines, introduced in 1999.




                                              10
2.3        Summary
Reserve adequacy should be judged relative to M2. In a simple model we illus-
trate why. Our empirical analysis then shows that a demand for reserves based
on the size of M2 does seem to fit the data, and has greater explanatory power
than the traditional factors in the long run—and even in the recent buildup,
where underprediction has been the norm until now.
     One paper close in spirit to ours is Lane and Burke (2001). They estimate
purely cross-sectional regressions on a 1981–95 sample. They do not find finan-
cial openness to be significant in their work, though their use of time averages
limits them to using as an independent variable the fraction of time a coun-
try is open. In the cross section, financial depth (measure by M2) is found to
increase reserves significantly. Lane and Burke ascribe this finding to the possi-
bility that some liabilities in the domestic financial system are denominated in
foreign currency, directly generating a potential need for more reserves.15 Our
view is broader, and holds that regardless of the currency denomination of these
domestic liabilities, they can add to the pressure on the reserves of a central
bank that is concerned to limit currency depreciation. The Lane-Burke paper
does not consider the recent surge in reserves, as its analysis ends in 1995, but
it is a precursor of our paper in its examination of both financial openness and
depth. Very much in line with our analysis, Rodrik (2006) argues that since
emerging market countries began to embark on financial liberalization starting
in the early 1990s, their reserve accumulation has been driven empirically by
the size of the domestic financial sector rather than by real magnitudes such as
trade flows.16
     Our findings have important policy implications. For example, Rodrik (2006)
argues that, rather than accumulating costly reserves, countries should take di-
rect measures that would reduce vulnerability to external drains (such as a
Chilean-style encaje, or tax on short-term capital inflows). The task of substan-
tially reducing the domestic banking system’s vulnerability is a more demanding
and time-consuming one, however. In the meantime, many countries might be
ill advised indeed to forgo the insurance provided by their foreign exchange
reserves.
  15 Obstfeld (2004) presents a model along these lines.
  16 See figure 3 in Rodrik (2006), which shows ratios of M2 to reserves. Dominguez (2007)
suggests that countries with less developed financial markets will tend to hold higher levels of
reserves. In her empirical specification, financial development is proxied by the sum of port-
folio debt plus equity external liabilities, measured as a share of GDP. Dominguez finds that
variable to have a significant negative effect on reserve holdings. Our M2 measure of financial
development, in contrast, focuses attention directly on the domestic banking system. Con-
sistent with our interpretation, Dominguez finds that a higher level of private debt liabilities
raises a country’s reserve demand. Future research should seek to isolate more precisely how
different aspects of a country’s financial structure affect its demand for international reserves.




                                               11
3    Some theoretical motivation
Empirically and in theory, a major motivation for holding international reserves
is to support the overall banking system while avoiding extreme currency depre-
ciation. Given this motivation, and a country’s vulnerability to portfolio shifts
by domestic residents, its demand for international reserves may go far beyond
what would be needed simply to insure against a “sudden stop” in foreign capital
inflows.
    This section presents a simple heterogeneous-forecast model to illustrate
the positive linkage between the size of the banking sector and a country’s
demand for international reserves. We do not purport to explicitly model every
aspect of reserves demand and test it in a structural sense. Rather this section
demonstrates how the banking sector can generate demand for foreign reserves
if the central bank prefers some degree of exchange rate stability (as many
countries do). An appendix explains implications of our crisis scenario for the
central bank’s balance sheet. The theory provides the basic motivation for the
empirical work that follows.
    There are two periods in the model, periods 0 and 1. The exchange rate e
on date 1 is given by the simple formula

                                    e(θ) = αθ,

where θ is an indicator of the future “state” of the home economy. The exchange
rate is quoted as the foreign-currency price of domestic currency, so a fall in e is
a depreciation of home currency and relatively low values of θ index relatively
unfavorable states. Economic actors in the home country have divergent views
of the fundamental that will materialize in period 1. For a given θ—which may
or may not be an unbiased forecast of the true future fundamental—domestic
agent i holds the expectation that the fundamental will be θ + εi on date 0,
where the noise εi is uniformly distributed over the interval [−ε, ε] and θ −ε > 0.
Domestic agents are indexed by i ∈ [0, 1].
    We assume that, in period 0, there is already a “sudden stop” situation,
in that foreigners are unwilling to purchase domestic currency in the foreign
exchange market at any price. For simplicity, we assume that the foreigners
no longer hold domestic currency at all. As a result, the exchange rate will be
determined in a market involving domestic residents and the home central bank
only. We also assume that the domestic authorities can prevent domestic interest
rates from fully offsetting expected exchange-rate changes, or that interest-rate
increases themselves are so damaging to financial-sector stability that domestic
residents discount them. As a simplified way of capturing this situation, we
simply ignore the interest that could potentially be earned on currency positions.
Thus, what people fundamentally care about is the future exchange rate, e(θ),
compared to today’s exchange rate e. If θ is very low (the crisis is expected
to continue and even intensify), the currency is expected to be very weak. But
among domestic residents, there will be divergent opinions about how far the
currency will fall.


                                        12
    Domestic residents hold money as domestic bank deposits. Each agent has
one deposit whose size is proportional to the broad money supply M . Deposits
are perfectly liquid, in that their owners may withdraw them without notice
and sell the for foreign exchange. Bank assets are illiquid however—otherwise,
as loans were called in, the debtors would cause M to shrink by repaying the
banks. This means that the banks can repay depositors only if they receive
liquidity assistance from the domestic central bank. (The model would have the
same qualitative implications if some fraction of the assets banks held against
their liabilities M were liquid.)
    Given the preceding assumptions, agent i wishes to trade home money for
foreign exchange provided E {e(θ) | θ + εi } = α (θ + εi ) ≤ e. In words, domestic
depositors wish to buy foreign exchange if they expect the home currency to
fall below its current level. For a given e, the law of large numbers implies that,
the measure of traders such that
                                            α (θ + εi ) ≤ e
                                 e
or, equivalently, that εi ≤      α   − θ is
                                     e
                                     α −θ
                                 Z
                            1                      1    e  
                                            dx =       ε+ −θ .
                            2ε   −ε                2ε    α
Thus, at an exchange rate of e on date 0, the demand for foreign exchange (in
terms of home currency) is
                                  M      e    
                                      ε+ −θ .
                                  2ε      α
As the home currency depreciates in period 0, the demand for foreign currency
falls.
    The central bank sells R in reserves (measured in foreign currency). Then the
equilibrium in the foreign exchange market is given by the equality of domestic
demand and supply:
                              M        e     R
                                    ε+ −θ = .
                               2ε       α         e
The equilibrium exchange rate therefore satisfies the quadratic equation
                                                        2αεR
                              e2 − α (θ − ε) e −             = 0,
                                                         M
with (positive) solution
                                               r
                                                              2   8αεR
                             α (θ − ε) +           α2 (θ − ε) +
                                                                   M
                        e=                                 .
                                          2
This solution shows the role of both reserves and the banking system’s liabilities
in driving the exchange rate. As R rises the currency strengthens (e rises), and
as M rises it weakens.17
  17 If R = 0, currency would have to fall in period 0 until everybody expected an appreciation

between dates 0 and 1, making the domestic demand for foreign exchange zero. The currency
would overshoot to the level α (θ − ε) < αθ.


                                                   13
    We can summarize the model’s main implications easily. Suppose there is a
bad realization of θ (or simply adverse beliefs about θ) and therefore pressure on
the currency as people withdraw bank deposits to speculate in foreign exchange.
The central bank can moderate today’s depreciation using its reserves. Given
the central bank’s exercise of its LLR role, however, the incipient pressure on
the exchange rate will be greater if the size of the banking system, measured by
M, is bigger.
    Because the scope of the run out of domestic-currency deposits is propor-
tional to the domestic banking system’s liabilities under the preceding specifi-
cation, it is most appropriate to take the size of the broad money supply M2
as an indicator of the potential need for reserves. As we have noted, this is the
theoretical approach taken by several previous authors, and as we shall see, it
receives strong empirical support from our estimates of the demand for foreign
exchange reserves.


4     Empirical findings
We have argued on theoretical grounds—and based on historical policymaking
best practice going back more than two centuries—that financial-sector protec-
tion has always been an important motivation for reserve accumulation when a
country is trying to manage its exchange rate. Our goal now is to show empiri-
cally that the same holds true today. To foreshadow our main results: we find
that financial stability variables are strongly correlated with reserve holdings
and that the inclusion of financial stability variables greatly improves our abil-
ity to explain the great worldwide reserve build-up of recent years. We conclude
that these financial stability factors should be at center stage in any empirical
analysis of reserve behavior.
    To make a case for a different empirical approach, we begin by comparing
our proposed new financial-stability-based model of reserve accumulation with a
benchmark model of a more traditional kind. In what follows we have two main
goals: first, to do better than this traditional model; and second, to do so much
better that we can claim to have a credible alternative model of international
reserve demand by central banks. We do not argue that elements of the tra-
ditional model, or of other models such as the “buffer stock” or “mercantilist”
models, are not also important as explanatory factors (Flood and Marion 2002;
Aizenman and Lee 2007). If our empirical results prove to be robust, however,
it will be important to include financial-stability considerations more explicitly
into future research on the demand for international reserves.

4.1    Benchmark comparison: Financial stability versus the
       traditional model
To begin, we estimate and compare a traditional model and our new financial
stability model. To provide a benchmark traditional model we adopt a specifi-



                                       14
cation proposed in a recent IMF (2003) study.18 It was the IMF’s poor results
using this traditional model that led Jeanne (2007) to conclude that there is
no satisfactory linear regression framework that can explain current patterns of
reserve accumulation.
    In all of our empirical work, the dependent variable will be the (natural) log-
arithm of the reserves to GDP ratio. (All data are from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators unless otherwise noted.) The explanatory variables in
the “traditional model” are:

    • the log of population;
    • the log of the ratio of imports to GDP;
    • exchange rate volatility (the standard deviation of the monthly percentage
      change in the exchange rate against the relevant base country over the
      current year, based on authors’ calculations using IFS data);
    • the log of real GDP per capita (converted at PPP exchange rates, in
      current international dollars).

   Alternatively, we consider our “financial stability model,” which is based on
the insights discussed above. The financial stability model includes as regressors:

    • the log of the ratio of M2 to GDP;
    • a measure of financial openness (based on the Edwards 2007 index, scaled
      from 0 to 1);

    • a pegged exchange rate dummy (based on the de facto Shambaugh 2004
      coding, with annual ±2% bands);19
    • a soft-peg exchange rate dummy (similar, but based on ±5% bands);20
  18 See IMF (2003), Chapter 3, Table 2.3 for details. Due to the data constraints it puts on

our sample, our specification does not currently include export volatility, which is included
in the IMF regression. In the IMF regression, however, the coefficient on export volatility
was almost exactly zero and statistically insignificant, so we do not think that excluding this
variable does any great damage to the spirit of that framework. The same section of the
IMF study also experiments with some other variables in purely bivariate regressions. The
specification we highlight, however, is based on the final multivariate regression specification
that the IMF reports.
  19 A country is classified as pegged if its official exchange rate stays within a ±2% band with

respect to its base country—the country to which it would ostensibly peg—over the course of
a year; or if its exchange rate has no change in 11 out of 12 months and shows at most one
discrete devaluation. Furthermore, to avoid “accidental” classifications, a country must stay
pegged for two years to be considered pegged. See Shambaugh (2004) for extensive discussion.
  20 The soft peg classification has been created for this project by the authors. A country is

considered a soft peg if its exchange rate stays within a ±5% band with respect to its base
country, or if its exchange rate changes by less than 2% in every month. There are 1,050
non pegs in the sample, 844 pegs, and 777 soft pegs (with pegs and soft pegs being mutually
exclusive). All but 25 of the soft pegs stay within the ±5% bands. As with the preceding peg
classification, a country classified as a soft peg must satisfy one of the criteria set out above



                                               15
    • an advanced country dummy;21
    • the log of the ratio of foreign trade (imports plus exports) to GDP.
    The inclusion of M2 is directly motivated by the model. In addition, we note
that if financial flows cannot move across borders, the likelihood of a bank run
becoming a balance of payments crisis is much reduced, and thus we include the
Edwards measure of financial openness. Further, as noted above, a central bank
that is not concerned by exchange rate movements may simply expand domestic
credit in a banking crisis and allow the exchange rate to move if necessary. Thus
we include peg and soft peg exchange rate dummies.22 In addition, a number of
features (stable banking systems and the ability to borrow in one’s own currency,
for example) may mean that advanced economies need fewer reserves, and this is
the motivation for the inclusion of an advanced country dummy, which we would
expect to have a negative sign. Finally, we have included the log of trade as a
control because of its robustness as an explanatory variable in other empirical
studies.
    We use an up-to-date and complete data set, and we use a consistent (com-
mon) sample for a fair comparison of the two specifications. Table 1 reports
the results of this comparison using a simple pooled OLS specification, in which
no fixed effects are allowed for the moment. As is often done in the litera-
ture, we scale reserves to GDP to make the reserves series stationary (it cannot
increase or decrease indefinitely). Though not a unit root, the series is still
positively autocorrelated. We thus cluster the standard errors by country to
allow for heteroskedasticity across countries and, more importantly, to allow for
an unstructured serial correlation in the error term within countries.23 Also,
at this point it is worth noting that our results hold in a pure cross-section (a
between-groups panel estimation), so the serial correlation is in no way driving
the results or generating a spurious regression. (See section 4.2 for more de-
tails). The sample consists in each case of 2,671 country-year observations. The
unbalanced panel covers 26 years from 1980 to 2004 and includes 134 countries.
The countries in our sample are listed in an appendix.24
for two years in a row to be considered a soft peg. The soft pegs are generally crawling pegs,
loose basket pegs, or tightly managed floats. Of the 777 observations, 237 are declared as
basket pegs, 111 pertain to loose EMS members or rates in countries that shadowed the EMS,
107 are Latin American crawling pegs, 82 are East Asian soft de facto pegs, and 114 are East
European soft pegs in the last decade. In fact, these five groups make up 83 percent of the
soft peg observations. We note that the Japan-U.S. dollar and Germany-U.S. dollar rates are
never classified as soft pegs, which suggests that countries that allow a fair bit of flexibility
are unlikely to be accidentally classified as soft pegs or pegs under our algorithm.
  21 Countries with IMF IFS codes less than 199 are classified as advanced, with the exception

of Malta and Turkey.
  22 Baek and Choi (2008) examine the link between reserves and various exchange-rate regime

classifications, based on the Reinhart-Rogoff data. They conclude that countries with inter-
mediate regimes demand more reserves than countries with polar regimes, although there is
no scaling of the reserves in their paper (which makes comparisons difficult and raises some
potential econometric problems).
  23 See Bertrand et al. (2004) for a discussion of how clustering can properly control for serial

correlation issues.
  24 We have excluded dollarized countries and multilateral currency unions (such as the CFA,




                                               16
    In column 1 we report results for the traditional model. Countries that
import more and are richer tend to hold more reserves. In columns 2 through
4, we add to the first specification the main financial variables—relating to the
fixity of the exchange rate, the openness of the financial account, and domestic
financial depth. All estimates of these variables’ coefficients are positive and
significant, as expected. Imports remains positive and significant, but we see
that including the M2/GDP ratio reduces the coefficient of the GDP per capita
variable to insignificance. GDP per capita is positively correlated with financial
openness and financial depth, and may simply be acting as a proxy for them
when they are omitted.
    In column 5 we run a horserace between the two sets of variables, replacing
the import variable by a total trade (export plus imports) variable. We see that
all the financial variables remain significant with the exception of the (hard) peg
variable. (In particular, the soft peg variable is still positive and significant.)
The result suggests that a model based on financial motives (and including
trade) should be a better predictor of reserve holdings than one ignoring these
factors. In column 6 we present the financial-stability based model. Dropping
the insignificant traditional variables has no impact on the other variables, and
a formal test that nests the two models favors our financial model against the
traditional model.25
    To conclude, we examined a “financial only” specification that drops trade
(column 7). Trade is positively correlated with all the financial variables (espe-
cially pegging, because economies that are more open to trade are more likely
to manage their exchange rates more closely). We show a regression that omits
trade to demonstrate that the inclusion of trade only biases the results against
our hypothesis. As expected, exclusion of the trade variable leads to larger and
more significant estimated coefficients on all of the financial variables. In par-
ticular, we see that the coefficients on both peg variables increase substantially.
    The estimated effects of pegs deserve some discussion. A country that cares
more about exchange-rate stability would plausibly be more worried about its
ability to cover demands for foreign funds without allowing substantial currency
depreciation. While the (hard) peg variable in not statistically significant in the
full model, it is qualitatively large and we cannot reject the hypothesis that it is
the same as the coefficient on the soft peg variable. Thus, we do not claim that
the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union, the period during the breakup of the ruble in Former
Soviet Union countries, and the Eurozone) where the allocation of reserves or M2 across
countries may be ambiguous and where the need for any one country to maintain reserves
is different than for countries with their own currencies. Eurozone countries are included up
until 1998, after which individual member country M2 data disappear.
   25 We perform Davidson and Mackinnon (1981) tests to address this issue. We include fitted

values based on the financial stability model (as in column 6) in a regression of the traditional
model (as in column 1). The coefficient on these fitted values is highly statistically significant.
This suggests omitting the financial variables leaves out important information. The same
holds true when examining the fitted values of a regression like column 7 that includes only
our financial variables. Alternatively, when including the fitted values from a regression like
column 1 in a regression like column 6, the coefficient on the fitted values is not significantly
different from zero, even at the 10 percent level. This suggests that the traditional variables
add no information once the variables in our financial stability model are included.



                                                17
harder pegs need fewer reserves, though we do find that the soft peg variable
has a larger coefficient in nearly all specifications. In alternative specifications
(not shown), in which we merge peg and soft peg into a single indicator variable,
the resulting composite indicator is statistically and quantitatively significant
in nearly all cases where soft peg is significant.
    It is sensible that the soft peg variable is significant, with a positive rela-
tionship to reserve demand that is at least as strong as that of the peg variable.
Our previous work (Obstfeld, Shambaugh, and Taylor 2004, 2005) focused on
strict peg definitions when examining monetary policy autonomy in the form of
interest-rate independence, because the wider the allowed currency fluctuation
bands, the more monetary autonomy a country has. On the other hand, if a
country holds reserves to ward off large devaluations following financial shocks,
any country with a preference for non-floating rates is equally exposed, whether
its preferred band is large or small. Hence, both pegs and soft pegs may need
more reserves than countries that are indifferent to the exchange rate’s level.
    Our findings on financial depth and openness also appear to be quantitatively
important. Taking our full financial stability model (column 6) as an example,
when the financial openness index rises by one standard deviation (+0.243 in
this sample), the model predicts that the reserve-to-GDP ratio rises by 0.16 log
points. When the financial depth measure, ln(M2/GDP), rises by one standard
deviation (+0.674 in this sample), the model predicts that the reserve-to-GDP
ratio rises by 0.21 log points. These are potentially large effects: for a developing
country that went through a transition from one standard deviation below the
mean on these two dimensions to one standard deviation above the mean, the
model would predict that the reserve-to-GDP ratio would close to double, all
else equal (+0.74 log points). The trilemma also appears here: the impacts of
all variables on the reserve/GDP ratio are magnified in countries that peg, given
the log-based specification.
    The contrast between the positive coefficient on GDP per capita in the tra-
ditional model and the negative coefficient on the advanced dummy in the fi-
nancial stability model is worth noting. The advanced dummy in our model
is intended to proxy for creditworthiness or capability to issue debt abroad in
home currency. (Below we examine the latter factor directly using a smaller
data sample.) As expected, advanced-country status has a strong negative ef-
fect. The positive sign of GDP per capita in the traditional model may reflect
that variable’s possible role as a proxy for the two excluded financial variables.
Once these are controlled for, GDP per capita drops out of the regression.

4.2     Robustness: Subsamples and short-term debt
Table 1 shows that the new model has potentially good explanatory power in an
absolute sense, as judged by R-squared;26 the model also performs well relative
to the current benchmark, the IMF’s “traditional” model of reserve demand.
  26 Here and elsewhere we report the standard, unadjusted R-squared statistic. Because we

have a large number of observations relative to the number of regressors, the two are always
identical to 2 decimal places.


                                            18
And our initial results illustrate the potentially large changes in reserves that
could be induced by changes in financial openness and financial depth. On the
other hand, much of the interest lately has centered on the behavior of emerging
markets. Hence, in Table 2 we consider the emerging market sample only. In
addition, recent policy debate has put great emphasis on the importance of
short-term external debt. We have a more consistent series for this variable
(from the World Bank’s Global Development Finance dataset) when limiting
our sample to emerging market countries. Thus, we introduce this variable in
our analysis of the emerging-only sample.
    To break the sample up into advanced, emerging, and developing groups
we use a standard classification.27 Table 2 (columns 1 through 4) repeats the
regression exercise of Table 1 with the sample restricted to just the emerging
market countries. The sample size is cut by more than 75 percent, falling to
just 646 country-year observations, so we can no longer expect estimates to
be as precise as before. Nonetheless, the basic message from Table 1 is con-
firmed. The fit is better under the new model (and even better in this restricted
sample), with an R2 of 0.60 for the financial stability (column 3) model versus
the traditional model’s 0.53 (column 1). Again, the financial variables take ex-
pected sign and significance in column 2, that is, in the horserace between the
two sets of variables.28 The peg variables provide exceptions, however. Both
are roughly zero for the emerging sample. Most of the source of identification
for this variable in the full sample seems to come from differences between the
emerging and developed samples, and from within the developing sample, and
these effects are excluded from the emerging-only sample underlying Table 2.
On the other hand, column 5 shows that the peg variables are positively as-
sociated with reserves holdings, but the cross-correlation with other variables
dominates in this particular sample. Looking at our financial stability model
(column 3), financial openness is statistically significant and the coefficient in-
creases in estimated magnitude to 0.918. The M2/GDP coefficient falls slightly
and the trade coefficient is essentially unchanged. Again, when looking at a
financial-only model (column 4), the financial variables have larger estimated
coefficients.29
    Columns 6 through 8 of Table 2 add the log of short term external debt to
GDP as an additional variable to the traditional model, the horserace, and the
financial stability model. The ideas of Guidotti and Greenspan have now coa-
  27 IFS codes less than 199 are classified as advanced, with the exception of Malta and Turkey.
Emerging countries are those in the Morgan Stanley emerging market index plus some eastern
European countries.
  28 Again, we perform Davidson and Mackinnon (1981) tests to address this issue. A coeffi-

cient on the fitted values from a traditional regression is insignificant if these are included in
the financial stability model (this is true with or without short-term external debt included
in the traditional model), while fitted values from the financial stability model do take on a
statistically significant coefficient when included in a traditional regression.
  29 For the emerging sample, the positive coefficient on exchange rate volatility is not robust

and is driven by extreme outliers in this sample, so we disregard it. Specifically, omitting 3
out of 646 large observations on this variable (which lie more than 8 standard deviations from
the mean) causes this coefficient to lose statistical significance. Omitting 7 observations (a 1
percent trim) turns the coefficient negative and insignificant.


                                               19
lesced into a widely cited rule of thumb, which judges emerging-market reserve
adequacy relative to the potential demand for repayment connected with a coun-
try’s short-term external foreign-currency borrowing. Empirically, though,the
results are quite weak. The estimated coefficients in columns 6 through 8 are
negative and insignificant. Thus, it appears there is a weak tendency for emerg-
ing countries to hold fewer reserves when they have more short-term debt.30
We also considered the role of the debt service burden but found no effect. The
lack of evidence favoring the Guidotti-Greenspan rule is consistent with the ob-
servation of Summers (2006) that many countries now hold reserves far in excess
of short-term external foreign-currency debt.31

4.3     Robustness: Cross-section versus time-series identifi-
        cation
In this section we subject our benchmark financial stability model to various
perturbations, both to check robustness and to identify whether the basic find-
ings emanate from cross-sectional or time-series patterns in the data. If we
expect to explain an increase in reserves for emerging markets, we need to see
our results confirmed not just in the cross-section but within countries over time
as well. Results are reported in Table 3. Column 1 simply reproduces column
3 from Table 2 for comparison.
     In the second column of Table 2 we introduce country fixed effects (CFE).
This change sweeps out all cross-sectional means, so there is no “between” iden-
tification, only “within.” All coefficients are now estimated from time-series
variation within country units. The country fixed effects obviously improve the
fit (R2 rises to 0.82), and they weaken some but not all of the coefficient esti-
mates. The financial openness coefficient decreases in size, and is now significant
only at the 10 percent level. The peg and soft peg coefficients remain insignifi-
cant. The trade coefficient remains large and significant. Importantly, though,
the M2 coefficient increases both in magnitude and in statistical significance.
     In column 3 we omit country fixed effects but add year-only fixed effects
(YFE). The year effects are statistically significant, but compared with the
pooled OLS results in column 1,the coefficient estimates do not change by a
large or statistically significant amount, and the fit is only modestly improved.
     In column 4 we add both country and year fixed effects (CFE & YFE).
In this specification the estimated coefficient of the financial openness variable
is now insignificant. More of the estimated effect of financial openness in the
EM sample seems to come from cross-section than from time-series variation.
The M2 and trade variables, though, remain positive and significant, even after
  30 Lane  and Burke (2001) also find a negative correlation between external debt and reserves.
  31 Looking   at the full emerging and developing country data set, we find that only 290
of the 1,935 observations are close to following the GG rule (these are countries where the
short-term external debt-to-reserves ratio is between 75 percent and 125 percent). In contrast,
1,366 observations display more reserves than short-term foreign-currency debt. This is not
unexpected since, as Table 2 shows, the level of short-term debt is not a good predictor of the
level of reserves.



                                              20
controlling for both year and country effects.
   Finally, in Column 5, we remove all time-series identification and look at
between-country panel estimation (running regressions across panel averages for
each country), essentially reducing our observations to the number of emerging
countries (31). Our results are strikingly similar to the regressions without
country fixed effects. Countries which are on average more financially open tend
to hold more reserves; countries that have larger M2 to GDP ratios and larger
trade to GDP ratios also tend to hold more reserves. The peg variables also
do not have significant coefficients in the cross section of the emerging sample,
though they do in a between regression on the full or developing samples.

4.4     Original sin
The advanced dummy could reflect the possibility that poorer countries unable
to issue foreign debt denominated in their own currencies may need to hold
more reserves. We now explore the influence of “original sin” directly.
    Given the limited information available, however, analysis is restricted to
a subset of countries and years, which leaves a sample of only 770 country-
year observations, including 168 advanced, 331 emerging, and 271 developing
economies with data starting in 1993. Our two debt measures are SIN1 (the
fraction of internationally issued securities issued in foreign currency) and the log
of the ratio to GDP of all external liabilities in foreign currency. Both variables
are based on authors’ calculations using data from Eichengreen, Hausmann,
and Panizza (2005). Findings are reported in Table 4. These results show that
the “original sin” hypothesis actually fares better than the Greenspan-Guidotti
guideline. While the second foreign-currency debt measure that we use here does
not allow a test of the strict version of GG, it fails to show up in an economically
or statistically significant manner consistent with the policy prescription. The
SIN1 variable, however, is significantly positive in the full sample (column 1),
a result which carries the implication that countries issuing a higher fraction of
debt in foreign currency hold higher foreign reserves. Still, our financial-stability
model still performs well when augmented with the SIN1 variable and the core
variables remain positive and, for the most part, significant.32
    Once country fixed effects are added, the SIN1 variable loses significance
and carries a perverse sign (columns 2, 4, and 6). The reason is that the SIN1
variable has very little time variation. For nearly all emerging-market and de-
veloping countries, the original sin measure is very nearly constant and close
to 100 percent. This feature of the data also ensures that SIN1 is insignificant
in samples that exclude the advanced countries, even when there are no coun-
try fixed effects (column 5). On the other hand, columns 1 and 3 demonstrate
that in samples where SIN1 does vary, it seems to matter quite a bit. Further,
SIN1 isn’t simply a proxy for advanced country status (which may entail addi-
  32 Neither peg nor soft peg are now statistically significant. However, the sample is now

much smaller. Moreover, a considerable portion of the developing-country sample is excluded
by the use of SIN1 as a regressor, and, as we have seen, it is in developing countries that the
exchange rate regime variables seem to matter most for reserve demand.



                                              21
tional structural advantages such as better prudential oversight of the financial
markets): as we can see from columns 1 and 3, both advanced and SIN1 are
significant even when both appear as regressors. Thus, from the point of view
of economizing on reserves, it is good to be advanced, but it is even better to
be a country with less sin.33
    To conclude, our data exhibit a correlation between reserves and sin, but
our main concern here is only to show that our core results are completely unaf-
fected by this correlation. Nonetheless the causal relationship between reserves
and sin may warrant further scrutiny in future research. It may be that sin
causes reserves, in that a larger stock of foreign-currency debt, all else equal,
requires larger reserve cover in the event of a sudden stop. But it is equally pos-
sible that some reverse causation is at work, with larger reserves at the central
bank assuring the private sector that the peg is more likely to hold, and hence
encouraging greater issuance of foreign-currency debt.

4.5     Then versus now: Have we entered a new era?
We next consider the model’s stability over time. Specifically, we address the
suggestion that the recent wave of reserve accumulation reflects a pronounced
break from the central bank behavior of the recent past. To do this we examine
how the model performs in three broad eras.
    We divide our sample into three periods: the 1980s, the pre–Asian crisis
1990s (1990-97), and the post–Asian crisis years (1998-2004). The first three
columns of Table 5 shows our findings for the EM sample. Financial openness
and trade have fairly consistent estimated effects over time, but financial depth
appears not to have been a factor in the 1980s (column 1) and only recently has
become quite important (column 3). Over time,the trade/GDP ratio becomes
less important for the EM sample while financial depth becomes increasingly
important. The pattern is similar for the full sample (columns 4 through 6),
although M2/GDP is positive and significant in the early 1990s as well. Thus,
the EM countries seem to be coming more into line with the overall patterns
in the full sample. In fact, M2/GDP is positively correlated with reserves in
the EM sample in each period, but the multivariate correlation increases and
the pertinent standard error falls as time goes by. Importantly, if we were to
limit our emerging sample to financially open countries (results available but
not shown), the M2/GDP variable is positive and significant (coefficient of 0.33,
significant at the 5 percent level) even in the 1980s.
    These findings suggest that the growing importance of M2/GDP for emerg-
ing market countries occurred just as these countries were becoming progres-
sively more fully integrated into world financial markets. They also provide fur-
ther support for our argument that M2 is a key driver of recent reserve growth
  33 We have also experimented with measures of bank quality and bank regulation (due

to Ross Levine and his coauthors). These measures also lack time variation and in some
specifications are statistically significant with the expected sign, but they are not particulary
robust and do not affect the other core variables in our financial-stability model.




                                               22
and that it should not be overlooked when trying to predict reserve behavior
going forward.

4.6     Does money increase reserve demand or vice versa?
While our estimates could support the idea that increased financial depth in the
form of M2 generates higher reserve demand, the results might instead reflect a
different pattern of causation, with base money demand as the common factor,
wherein broad money supply M2 and international reserves respond to a rise in
the monetary base M0. Technically, a central bank can determine the compo-
sition and size of its balance sheet independently by sterilizing any transaction
in which reserve levels change. In practice, however, causality could run from
M0 to reserves and M2 jointly. For example, the central bank might pursue
a reserve management policy of keeping the reserves/M0 ratio fixed (constant
backing of money base, including the case of a currency board); in that environ-
ment, an increase in the demand for M0 (say due to increased monetization of
the economy) would then spill over into both an increase in R (an endogenous
central bank response) and an increase in M2 (for a given money multiplier).
    We investigate this possibility in Table 6, but the results suggest that base
money is not generating our results. Our first approach is to change the scaling
of reserves. Rather than look at reserves divided by GDP, we scale reserves by
M0 in alternative versions of the traditional and financial stability models. Col-
umn 1 shows that reserve/M0 ratios are higher when imports/GDP are higher
and lower when exchange rate volatility is higher. Column 2 demonstrates that
much as in our previous results, financial openness, pegging, and financial depth
(now similarly rescaled, and measured by M2/M0) are still positively correlated
with reserves, while the advanced country dummy again has a negative coeffi-
cient. As before, when rescaled by M0 rather than GDP, the financial stability
model still has a higher R2 than the traditional model.
    For a different approach, in column 4, we scale by GDP as before, but
we also include M0/GDP in the regression as an additional control variable.
When added, M0/GDP is uncorrelated with the reserves/GDP ratio, conditional
on the other independent variables in the financial stability model.34 More
importantly, the M2/GDP coefficient is still the same size (slightly larger) than
in our main estimates presented back in Table 1. The connection between broad
money M2 and reserves apparently is not due to any spurious causality running
through M0. Even controlling for base money (M0), growth in the financial
sector (M2) is correlated with reserve growth.
  34 The two variables are weakly positively unconditionally correlated, but one all the finan-

cial stability variables are included, the conditional relationship is effectively zero. Removing
M2/GDP as a regressor makes the coefficient on M0/GDP positive but not statistically sig-
nificantly different from zero.




                                               23
4.7    Summary of the financial stability model
The considerations suggested by previous thinkers such as Thornton and ex-
pressed in our theoretical model do appear to matter empirically for reserve
demand. As financial depth increases, the central bank will worry more about
an internal-external double drain, and will hold more reserves. This will espe-
cially be true if the country is financially open and perhaps if its currency is
pegged.
    In our regression results, financial depth (M2/GDP) does in fact show a pos-
itive and significant coefficient when included in a traditional empirical model,
in a horserace model, or in our preferred financial stability model. Financial
depth is important even in just the time series dimension (within estimates) for
emerging markets, and it has become more important lately as emerging market
countries have grown more open financially—suggesting that M2 is potentially
the key to understanding recent reserve growth.
    A financial openness indicator also has a positive and significant effect on
reserve demand, although once country and year effects are included, it is no
longer significant in the emerging market sample. Much of the identification
for this variable seems to stem from the fact that those EM countries that are
financially open now hold more reserves than those that have not opened—
patterns over time within countries are less clear than the between pattern.
Still, we do see other variables (such as M2/GDP) mattering more as countries
open their financial markets—as the model would suggest.
    Finally, while significant in the overall sample, fixed exchange rates do not
appear to play an important role in the emerging sample. Unconditionally,
exchange rate pegging seems positively and significantly correlated with reserve
holding, but that correlation may reflect omitted variables such as trade. In the
developing-country or full sample, pegged exchange rates do appear to matter,
but their strong positive correlation with both trade and financial depth in the
EM sample leaves pegged-regime variables insignificant in those regressions. It
is possible that one reason for the weakness of this variable is that even countries
that are floating at a given point in time expect to peg again soon (see Klein and
Shambaugh 2008). In that case, they will not necessarily hold fewer reserves
while they are not pegging.

4.8    In-sample and out-of-sample prediction: Are current
       reserves excessive?
We now turn from a focus on model selection and statistical significance to
evaluations based on model fit and quantitative significance. As we have noted
above, it is often alleged that current reserve holdings are excessive or “inex-
plicable” based on traditional or external-debt explanations. We now present
both in-sample and out-of-sample predictions to show that our financial stability
model can better explain recent behavior.




                                        24
4.8.1    In-sample prediction
The two panels of figure 1 show the growth in emerging market reserves over
the 25 year sample period. For this period we conduct an in-sample comparison
of the financial stability model and the traditional model.35 The heights of the
columns represent actual values of reserves year by year in emerging markets.
The columns’ subsections illustrate how changes in the model variables explain
the growth of reserves over time. The bottom subsection is the amount that
a model predicts for the year 1980 (constant over time). The other subsec-
tions of each column depict in turn the predicted changes since 1980 due to
each regressor. The second lowest, for example, shows the effects of changes
in GDP assuming all other variables had remained constant at their 1980 val-
ues. The total predicted effect, however, is not merely the sum of all those
columns: the column section labeled “interaction” captures the multiplicative
(nonlinear) effect of all variables changing simultaneously, given the log func-
tional form we have used. Finally, the dark shaded subsection represents the
amount that cannot be explained by the model: it is the top section when there
is an underprediction and below the horizontal zero axis if there is overpredic-
tion, so that the unexplained portion is negative. Figure 1a shows that when
one uses a financial stability model, growth in GDP alone (assuming a constant
reserve/GDP ratio) explains a considerable amount of reserve growth. Beyond
that, however, financial openness and the size of the financial sector explain
considerable additional reserve growth. The model has no trouble predicting
the growth in reserves from $180 billion in 1980 to $800 billion in 2001. Since
then, a gap has opened, but the model still predicts reserves at over $1.1 trillion
by 2004. In contrast, the traditional model in figure 1b predicts lower levels of
reserves in emerging markets broadly and in particular it leaves a considerable
volume of reserves unexplained by the mid 1990s. By 2004 the traditional model
predicts only about $880 billion in reserves and leaves $700 billion unexplained.
Figure 2, which presents the in-sample predictions for China alone, paints a
very similar picture.
    Projecting forward from 1980 may be a stretch for any model, so figures
3a through 3h repeat the exercise on a shorter timescale (1996-2004), and with
reserves now shown as a ratio to GDP. These figures provide some key country
examples utilizing the financial-only model, with the original sin variable SIN1
included as a regressor. To generate these figures, we estimated the financial-
only model only on data from 1996 to 2004.36 Next, as in Figure 2, we calculated
the predicted values for the starting year (now 1996) and take those as base-
line values. We then allow each independent variable, one by one, to be set
equal to its actual value while holding other variables at their 1996 values and
  35 The financial stability model that we use is the one in Table 1, column 7, which has trade

excluded as a regressor. We remove trade to separate clearly the financial stability model from
the traditional model: we would like to see how far financial stability factors alone can go.
Further, the estimates underlying figure 1 come from a restricted, balanced sample. Otherwise
changes in the country sample would in part drive our predicted reserve totals.
  36 Data constraints when using the SIN1 and foreign-currency debt variables necessitate

starting at the later date



                                              25
again compute the difference that makes for reserves. The figures also show
the amount of unexplained reserve holdings (the difference between actual and
predicted) as a ratio to GDP.
    For example, Figure 3a shows that in 1996, China was holding too few
reserves relative to our benchmark (unexplained reserves were negative). Over
time, the M2 portion of the columns continues to grow, in the end justifying an
increase in the reserve/GDP ratio of 7 percentage points. Financial opening in
2004 justifies another small increase in reserves. The United States, in contrast,
has not changed its reserve/GDP ratio by much, and the model suggests that
this is appropriate.
    Japan, on the other hand, has greatly increased its ratio of reserves to GDP
in recent years, and little explanation for this can be found in our financial
stability model (nor in any other model, as far as we can tell). Emerging Asia
is predicted to hold roughly 20 percent of GDP in reserves, but in recent years,
reserve growth has outpaced our model’s benchmark, though not substantially.
    For the remaining groups shown, the model does a fair job of explaining
the ratios. The model predicts both emerging and developing Latin American
countries’ reserve shares within a few percentage points of GDP. Recent surges
in emerging EU countries’ reserves are left somewhat unexplained, but this
residual amounts to about 7 percent of GDP. The model is able to explain why
emerging Latin American countries hold fewer reserves than emerging Asia.
For 2004, both groups hold reserves that are a few percent above predicted
levels, but emerging Asia’s predicted reserves are on average 20 percent of GDP
(even with China taken out) while emerging Latin America is predicted to hold
reserves equal to only 12 percent of GDP.

4.8.2    Out-of-sample prediction
In addition to asking what is driving changes in reserves over time, one may
want to ask how well the model predicts reserves out of sample. Jeanne (2007)
suggests that despite providing acceptable in-sample accounting, econometric
equations estimated over past subsamples are unable to predict the surge in
reserves in the most recent years.
    We have seen that the financial stability model likewise explains reserves
well on an in-sample basis, so we now turn to its out-of-sample performance.
We estimate the financial-only model on data from 1993 (the first year for
which there are “original sin” data) up to 2000, and then try to predict reserves
in subsequent years (2004 being the last year for which we have a full set of
independent variables).37
    Figure 4a shows actual reserves on the vertical axis and compares them
to the reserve levels that the financial stability model predicts for 2004. The
points cluster relatively close to the 45-degree line (where actual and predicted
  37 In contrast to figure 3 which generates a slightly larger country sample by sacrificing some

early years (1993–95), in this exercise, we use the years 1993–95 and include fewer countries.
This choice is driven by the need for a sufficient length of time series before the cutoff date of
2000.



                                               26
reserves coincide), and many controversial cases (such as that of China) are
rather close to it. (China is marked by an arrow.) In contrast, Figure 4b shows
the same scatter but instead using the traditional model to make the out-of-
sample reserve predictions to 2004. This scatter is much more dispersed relative
to the 45-degree line and, in particular, more countries are far distant from the
line. (China is now well away from the diagonal.)
    One way to compare the two figures is to note that the R2 of a regression of
actual reserves/GDP on the predicted ratio using the financial stability model
is 0.52, and the slope coefficient is 1.33. Thus, on average, our model underpre-
dicts some at the high end, but the amount is not glaring. In contrast, using
the traditional model, the R2 is only 0.41 and the slope coefficient is 1.81, sug-
gesting a more severe underprediction of the largest reserve holdings using the
traditional model.38
    Figure 5 illustrates the model’s performance over time for a selection of
countries and country groups. We again estimate using 1993–2000 data and
graph actual reserve/GDP ratios against the out-of-sample predictions of the
financial stability and traditional models.39 The financial stability model is
able to largely explain the rise of reserves in China, at least until the last year
of the sample, 2004.40 The financial stability model does quite a bit better
for the United States than does a traditional model. For the three emerging
market country groups, the financial stability model is always more accurate
than the traditional model, though in the most recent years, the gap between
predicted and actual reserves is growing in emerging Asia.41 Finally, though,
we see that neither model can explain the massive run up in Japan’s reserves.
One could suggest many reasons for that country’s high reserves: attempts to
prevent deflation by buying foreign assets, attempts to prevent appreciation,
or arbitrage between low home interest rates and higher United States rates.
Neither the financial stability nor the traditional model captures these effects,
however.
    In general, we find that the financial stability model can predict with rea-
sonable accuracy the official reserve holdings in our sample. There are notable
exceptions (Japan, Singapore, and to some degree China in the last year or
so), but using the financial stability model that we have proposed the reserve
accumulation puzzle appears far less dramatic than either traditional models or
models based on foreign debt and sudden stops would suggest.
  38 Removing   the large outlier Singapore improves the performance of the financial stability
model, raising the R2 up to 0.68 and lowering the slope coefficient to 1.23. For the traditional
model, the effect is mixed. Removing Singapore lowers the R2 to 0.32, but it also lowers the
slope coefficient from 1.81 to 1.38.
  39 The number of groups is smaller than in figure 3 because of the need for balanced panels.
  40 As in figure 3, an equation based on 1993–2000 data does a better job of predicting China’s

holdings in the early 2000s than one based on the full time sample because the 1980s data
give less weight to financial variables (as shown in Table 4).
  41 Malaysia and Thailand seem to be important drivers of this result.




                                              27
5    Conclusion
The recent and rapid accumulation of reserves by emerging markets with pegged
or quasi-pegged exchange rates is often considered inexplicable. The practice
of emerging central banks seems far ahead of any coherent theory—and hence
appears to be an economic puzzle, if not a policy problem. Puzzling it may be
in terms of the prevailing models of reserve accumulation from the 1960s and
1970s, and even the more recent Guidotti-Greenspan rule of the 1990s, which
emerged from the Asian Crisis of 1997.
     However, in terms of operational rules devised following Britain’s Panic of
1797, the current trends make more sense. In the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries the Bank of England found itself with the responsibilities of a Lender
of Last Resort, under a Gold Standard system, in an economy undergoing rapid
financial development. And in that era too, as noted by T. S. Ashton, practice
preceded theory (Kindleberger 2000, p. 162).
     A visionary thinker realized that with a fixed exchange rate and a growing
base of bank deposits to worry about, a central bank needed to grow its reserves
if it were to face down the threat of external and internal drains. Thus, reserve
adequacy had to be gauged against the size of the banking sector. It took
some time for Henry Thornton’s ideas to be fully appreciated in 19th century
England; they appear to have been much more readily grasped in 21st century
China.


Appendix:
Twin crises and the central bank balance sheet
At the center of the financial system is the central bank. Its balance sheet
identity has the form
                      H + Currency + CBC = D + ĒR,
where H denotes banking-system deposits (high-powered money), Currency
denotes currency (assumed held outside the central bank), CBC is central-
bank capital, D denotes domestic assets of the central bank, Ē is the domestic-
currency price of foreign exchange, and R denotes international reserves (mea-
sured in foreign currency). We assume for simplicity that the exchange rate is
fixed, although, as noted earlier, matters are not much different if the rate is
flexible and the authorities simply wish to limit depreciation.
    The private banking system’s liabilities M constitute the money supply (not
including currency), whereas its assets are high-powered central bank deposits H
and illiquid loans L. If P BC denotes private bank capital, the private banking
system’s balance sheet identity is
                             M + P BC = H + L.
   We wish to consider a scenario of simultaneous internal and external drain,
in which residents attempt to convert bank deposits M into foreign exchange.


                                       28
Our assumption is that currency holdings are not responsive to depreciation
expectations—perhaps they are determined by a relatively interest inelastic
cash-in-advance demand. The demand for bank deposits is, however, elastic
with respect to the nominal domestic bond rate i, with a Cagan-type demand
given by
                            lnM − lnP = µ − λi.
    Now suppose that there is a sudden rise in the market’s depreciation expec-
tations, such that the bond rate i doubles. If the interest elasticity of money
demand is 0.5, then the volume of deposits demanded will fall by 25 percent. If
the banking system cannot liquidate loans in the short run, it must pay off these
deposits using central-bank deposits—so H as well as central bank international
reserves fall by 0.25M .
    If central-bank foreign reserves cannot cover the capital outflow, and mea-
sures other than intervention are unavailable to support the exchange rate, there
will be a depreciation. Let us suppose for the moment that international reserves
are sufficient, however. It is still possible, given the importance of currency in
the overall monetary base, that banking-system liquidity cannot cover desired
withdrawals: H < 0.25M In this case the central bank will act as a lender of
last resort, effectively purchasing debt instruments worth 0.25M − H from the
banking system in exchange for newly issued high-powered money. At the end
of the day, the central bank’s balance sheet has become

      Currency + CBC       =    (D + .25M − H) + ĒR − H − (.25M − H)
                           =    (D + .25M − H) + (ĒR − .25M ).

    The second line emphasizes that domestic assets are higher by the amount
of the LLR support, whereas reserves are lower by 0.25M . The private banking
system is illiquid and its balance sheet is

                        .75M + P BC = L − (.25M − H).

    Now let us consider, realistically, that such an operation might stretch the
central bank’s international reserves. What options are available to the central
bank if it wishes to control the exchange rate? At this stage, much of the
central bank’s domestic assets may consist of banking system loans that it will
be unable to market except at a steep loss. At a time of uncertainty the line
between illiquidity and insolvency may be blurred, if it is visible at all. This is,
after all, why the LLR is needed in the first place. But with the banks’ loans
(now passed on to the central bank directly or as collateral) being difficult to
value, it may be uncertain ex ante whether the liquidity provision is a loan or
a subsidy. If the latter, a large prospective (or actual) bailout may endanger
central bank capital and, in fact, pose a possible drain on the public-sector
finances more generally.
    Matters are not much better if the authorities seek merely to limit, rather
than stop, depreciation. The considerations making a large reserve stock es-
sential are basically the same. The ability of domestic residents to switch into


                                        29
foreign-currency deposits offered by the domestic banking system also helps lit-
tle, because banks will be under interest-rate pressure and will wish to buy
central bank foreign reserves so as to avoid an increasing currency mismatch on
their own books.


References
Aizenman, Joshua, and Jaewoo Lee. 2007. “International Reserves: Precautionary
    versus Mercantilist Views, Theory and Evidence.” Open Economies Review 18(2):
    191–214.
Aizenman, Joshua, and Nancy Marion. 2003. “The High Demand for International
    Reserves in the Far East: What’s Going On?” Journal of the Japanese and Inter-
    national Economies 17 (September): 370–400.
Baek, Seung-Gwan, and Changkyu Choi. 2008. “Exchange Rate regimes and Interna-
    tional Reserves.” Korean Economic Review 24(1). Forthcoming.
Bagehot, Walter. 1873. Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. London:
    Kegan, Paul & Co.
Bahmani-Oskooee, M., and F. Brown. 2002. “Demand for International Reserves: A
    Review Article.” Applied Economics 34 (July): 1209–26.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2004. “How Much
    Should We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics 119 (February): 249–75.
Bird, Graham, and Ramkishen Rajan. 2003. “Too Much of a Good Thing? The
    Adequacy of International Reserves in the Aftermath of Crises.” World Economy
    86 (June): 873–91.
Blustein, Paul. 2005. And the Money Kept Rolling In (And Out): Wall Street, the
    IMF, and the Bankrupting of Argentina. New York: Public Affairs.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 1996. “Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Management: Tequila
    Lessons.” International Journal of Finance and Economics 1 (July): 207–23.
Calvo, Guillermo A. 2006. “Monetary Policy Challenges in Emerging Markets: Sudden
    Stop, Liability Dollarization, and Lender of Last Resort.” Working Paper 12788,
    National Bureau of Economic Research.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Enrique G. Mendoza. 1996. “Mexico’s Balance-of-Payments
    Crisis: A Chronicle of a Death Foretold.” Journal of International Economics 41
    (November): 235–64.
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 2000. “When Capital Flows Come to a
    Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy.” In Reforming the International Monetary
    and Financial System, edited by P. B. Kenen and A. K. Swoboda. Washington,
    D.C.: International Monetary Fund.
Chang, Roberto, and Andrés Velasco. 2001. “Financial Crises in Emerging Markets:
    A Canonical Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 489–517.
Davidson, Russell, and James G. MacKinnon. 1981. “Several Tests for Model Spec-
    ification in the Presence of Alternative Hypotheses.” Econometrica 49 (May):
    781–93.
della Paolera, Gerardo, and Alan M. Taylor. 2002. “Internal Versus External Con-
    vertibility and Emerging-Market Crises: Lessons from Argentine History.” Explo-
    rations in Economic History 39 (4): 357–89.




                                        30
della Paolera, Gerardo, and Alan M. Taylor. 2003. “Gaucho Banking Redux.”
    Economı́a 3: 1–42.
Dominguez, Kathryn M. E. 2007. “International Reserves and Underdeveloped Capital
    Markets.” Photocopy. University of Michigan (October).
Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Jacob A. Frenkel. 1984. “The Gold Standard and the Bank
    of England in the Crisis of 1847.” In A Retrospective on the Classical Gold Stan-
    dard, 1821–1931, edited by M. D. Bordo and A. J. Schwartz. Chicago: University
    of Chicago Press.
Durdu, Ceyhun Bora, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Marco Terrones. “Precautionary
    Demand for Foreign Assets in Sudden Stop Economies: An Assessment of the New
    Mercantilism.” Journal of Development Economics. Forthcoming.
Edwards, Sebastian. 1985. “On the interest-rate elasticity of the demand for inter-
    national reserves: Some evidence from developing countries.” Journal of Interna-
    tional Money and Finance 4 (June): 287–295.
Edwards, Sebastian. 2007. “Capital Controls, Sudden Stops, and Current Account
    Reversals.” In Capital Controls and Capital Flows in Emerging Economies: Poli-
    cies, Practices, and Consequences edited by S. Edwards. Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza. 2005. “The Pain of Origi-
    nal Sin.” In Other Peoples’ Money, edited by B. Eichengreen and R. Hausmann.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 13–47.
Feldstein, Martin S. 1999. “A Self-Help Guide for Emerging Markets.” Foreign Affairs
    78(2): 93–109.
Fischer, Stanley. 1999. “On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort.”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (Fall): 85–104.
Flood, Robert, and Nancy Marion. 2002. “Holding International Reserves in an Era
    of High Capital Mobility.” In Brookings Trade Forum 2001 edited by S. M. Collins
    and D. Rodrik. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, pp. 1–68.
Frenkel, Jacob A., and Boyan Jovanovic. 1981. “Optimal International Reserves: A
    Stochastic Framework.” Economic Journal 91 (June): 507–14.
Goldstein, Itay. 2005. “Strategic Complementarities and the Twin Crises.” Economic
    Journal 115 (April): 368–90.
Greenspan, Alan. 1999. “Currency Reserves and Debt.” Remarks before the World
    Bank Conference on Recent Trends in Reserves Management, Washington, D.C.
    (April 29). http://www.federalreserve.gov/boardDocs/speeches/1999/19990429.
    htm.
Guttentag, Jack, and Richard Herring. 1983. “The Lender-of-Last-Resort Function in
    an International Context.” Princeton Essays in International Finance 151 (May).
Heller, H. Robert. 1966. “Optimal International Reserves.” Economic Journal 76
    (June): 296–311.
IMF. 2003. World Economic Outlook 2003. Washington, D.C: International Monetary
    Fund.
Jeanne, Olivier. 2007. “International Reserves in Emerging Market Countries: Too
    Much of a Good Thing?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1–79.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Romain Rancière. 2006. “The Optimal Level of International Re-
    serves for Emerging Market Countries: Formulas and Applications.” IMF Working
    Paper WP/06/229 (October).
Johnson, Harry G. 1958. “Towards a General Theory of the Balance of Payments.”
    In International Trade and Economic Growth. London: George Allen and Unwin.



                                         31
Kaminsky, Graciela L., and Carmen M. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The
    Causes of Banking and Balance of Payments Problems.” American Economic
    Review 89 (June): 473–500.
Keynes, John Maynard. 1971. A Treatise on Money. Volume 2: The Applied Theory of
    Money. In The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, Volume VI. London:
    Macmillan (for the Royal Economic Society).
Kindleberger, Charles P. 2000. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
    Crises, 4th ed. New York: Wiley.
Klein, Michael W., and Jay C. Shambaugh. 2008. “The Dynamics of Exchange Rate
    Regimes: Fixes, Floats, and Flips.” Journal of International Economics 75(1):
    70–92.
Lane, Philip R., and Dominic Burke. 2001. “The Empirics of Foreign Reserves.” Open
    Economies Review 12 (October): 423–34.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo. 2006. “The Cost of Reserves.” Documento de Trabajo 10/2006,
    Centro de Investigación en Finanzas, Universidad Torcuato Di Tella (July).
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, Sergio L. Schmukler, and Neeltje Van Horen. 2004. “The Price
    of Inconvertible Deposits: The Stock Market Boom During the Argentine Crisis.”
    Economics Letters 83(1): 7–13.
Miller, Victoria. 1996. “Speculative Currency Attacks with Endogenously Induced
    Commercial Bank Crises.” Journal of International Money and Finance 15 (June):
    383–403.
Miller, Victoria. 2000. “Central Bank Reactions to Banking Crises in Fixed Exchange
    Rate Regimes.” Journal of Development Economics 63 (December): 451–72.
Obstfeld, Maurice. 2004. “Globalization. Macroeconomic Performance, and the Ex-
    change Rates of Emerging Economies.” Monetary and Economic Studies 22 (De-
    cember): 29–55.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2004. “Monetary Sover-
    eignty, Exchange Rates, and Capital Controls: The Trilemma in the Interwar
    Period.” IMF Staff Papers 51: 75–108.
Obstfeld, Maurice, Jay C. Shambaugh, and Alan M. Taylor. 2005. “The Trilemma in
    History: Tradeoffs among Exchange Rates, Monetary Policies, and Capital Mobil-
    ity.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87 (August): 423–38.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2004. “The Modern History of Ex-
    change Rate Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    119 (February): 1–48.
Rodrik, Dani, 2006. “The Social Cost of Foreign Exchange Reserves.” International
    Economic Journal 20 (September): 253–66.
Rothenberg, Alexander D., and Francis E. Warnock. 2006. “Sudden Flight and True
    Sudden Stops.” Working Paper 12726, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. 1998. “Creditor Panics: Causes and Remedies.” Photocopy. Harvard
    University (October). http://www.cid.harvard.edu/archive/hiid/papers/cato.pdf.
Shambaugh, Jay C. 2004. “The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (February): 301–52.
Shin, Hyun Song. 2005. “Liquidity and Twin Crises.” Economic Notes 34 (3): 257–77.
Summers, Lawrence H. 2006. “Reflections on Global Account Imbalances and Emerg-
    ing Markets Reserve Accumulation.” L. K. Jha Memorial Lecture, Reserve Bank of
    India (March). http://www.president.harvard.edu/speeches/ 2006/0324 rbi.html.
Thornton, Henry. 1939 [1802]. An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper
    Credit of Great Britain. Edited with an introduction by F. A. von Hayek. London:
    George Allen and Unwin.


                                        32
Velasco, Andrés. 1987. “Financial Crises and Balance of Payments Crises: A Simple
   Model of Southern Cone Experience.” Journal of Development Economics 27:
   263–83.
Viner, Jacob. 1937. Studies in the Theory of International Trade. New York: Harper
   & Brothers.
Wijnholds, J. Onno de Beaufort, and Arend Kapteyn. 2001. “Reserve Adequacy in
   Emerging Market Economies.” IMF Working Paper WP/01/43 (September).
Williamson, John. 1973. “Surveys in Applied Economics: International Liquidity.”
   Economic Journal 83 (September): 685–746.




                                       33
Table 1: Traditional and Financial Stability Models of Reserves Demand
                            1           2          3          4        5           6            7
                                       Add                                     Financial    Financial
                       Traditional financial      Add        Add                stability    stability
                         model     openness       peg        M2    Horserace   w/ trade     w/o trade
Ln(population)            0.021       0.018      0.023      0.004   -0.012
                          0.035       0.035      0.035      0.034    0.032
Ln(imports/GDP)           0.806       0.776      0.774      0.726
                        0.097**     0.096**    0.097**    0.096**
Exchange rate            -0.011      -0.008     -0.006     -0.008   -0.001
                          0.009        0.01       0.01       0.01    0.008
Ln(GDP/person)            0.158       0.104      0.148      0.077    0.063
                        0.042**      0.044*    0.040**      0.054    0.055
Financial openness                    0.451                          0.599      0.671         1.035
                                     0.202*                         0.171**    0.174**       0.212**
Peg                                              0.144                0.09      0.095         0.246
                                               0.080+                0.077      0.077        0.093**
Soft peg                                         0.188               0.161      0.167         0.289
                                               0.065**              0.059**    0.060**       0.078**
Ln(M2/GDP)                                                  0.234    0.284      0.311         0.444
                                                           0.092*   0.087**    0.072**       0.086**
Ln(trade/GDP)                                                        0.544      0.583
                                                                    0.084**    0.071**
Advanced                                                            -0.625     -0.554        -0.858
                                                                    0.145**    0.125**       0.161**
Constant                 -6.818      -6.491     -6.754     -6.436   -6.265     -6.253        -4.538
                        0.911**     0.905**    0.897**    0.891**   0.788**    0.360**       0.288**
Observations              2671        2671       2671       2671     2671       2671          2671
R-squared                  0.31        0.32       0.32       0.33     0.38       0.38         0.27

Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
No fixed effects.
Dependent variable: Ln(reserves/GDP).
Table 2: Emerging Markets Sample
                         1       2             3         4               5         6         7         8
                                           Financial Financial
                        Traditional         stability stability         Peg        Add       Add      Add
                          model Horserace w/ trade w/o trade            only       debt      debt     debt
Ln(population)            0.034     -0.043                                       -0.018    -0.095
                          0.068      0.056                                         0.08     0.066
Ln(imports/GDP)            0.79                                                    0.69
                         0.131**                                                 0.106**
Exchange rate volatility 0.092       0.328                                        0.101     0.314
                          0.143     0.164+                                        0.117    0.154+
Ln(GDP/person)            0.149     -0.017                                         0.16     0.075
                          0.088      0.086                                        0.114     0.105
Ln(S.T.Ext.Debt/GDP)                                                             -0.135    -0.129    -0.048
                                                                                  0.085     0.076     0.068
Financial openness                      0.93      0.918       1.632                         0.589     0.701
                                      0.238**    0.186**     0.337**                       0.219*    0.191**
Peg                                    0.036      0.023       0.022     0.584               0.098      0.07
                                       0.119      0.118       0.127    0.176**              0.117     0.104
Soft peg                               0.006     -0.012       0.065     0.441               0.035     0.009
                                       0.111      0.115       0.124    0.184*               0.085      0.09
Ln(M2/GDP)                             0.299      0.238       0.569                         0.337     0.198
                                      0.123*     0.118+      0.117**                       0.114**   0.113+
Ln(trade/GDP)                          0.491       0.57                                     0.428      0.59
                                      0.108**    0.075**                                   0.088**   0.090**
Constant                   -6.731     -4.935     -5.904      -5.242     -2.46     -5.89     -4.82    -5.816
                           1.958**    1.644**    0.424**     0.491**   0.137**   2.236*    1.894*    0.559**
Observations                 646        646        646         646       646       504       504       504
R-squared                   0.53        0.61        0.6       0.49       0.1       0.45      0.54      0.51

Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
No fixed effects.
Dependent variable: Ln(reserves/GDP).
Table 3: Source of Identification for Emerging Markets Sample
                             1              2            3                   4          5
                         No FE           CFE            YFE              CFE+YFE    Between
Financial openness        0.918          0.393         0.789               0.121      1.600
                         0.186**        0.213+       0.249**               0.206     0.757*
Peg                       0.023          0.054         0.029               0.071     -0.240
                          0.118          0.081         0.125               0.063      0.338
Soft peg                 -0.012          0.046        -0.034               0.023     -0.137
                          0.115          0.086         0.111               0.079      0.370
Ln(M2/GDP)                0.238          0.492         0.215               0.348      0.351
                         0.118+         0.130**      0.114+               0.121**    0.180+
Ln(trade/GDP)              0.57            0.8         0.574               0.604      0.392
                         0.075**        0.120**      0.080**              0.177**    0.213+
Observations               646            646           646                 646        646
R-squared                   0.6           0.82          0.62                0.85       0.57

Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
 + significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
No FE = no fixed effects; CFE = country fixed effects; YFE = year fixed effects.
In column 5, the regresssion is a between groups panel regression
there are 31 country groups.
Within R-squared is .30, between is .73, and overall is .57
Dependent variable: Ln(reserves/GDP).
Table 4: Original Sin
                               1             2              3             4            5          6
                              Full          Full           Full          Full      Emerging   Emerging
                            sample        sample         sample        sample       Markets    Markets
                            No FE          CFE            YFE         CFE+YFE       No FE     CFE+YFE
Financial openness           0.413        -0.046          0.409        -0.037        0.871     -0.168
                            0.229+         0.217         0.228+          0.19       0.321*      0.219
Peg                          0.082         0.225          0.073         0.165       -0.079      0.063
                             0.091        0.078**         0.092        0.069*        0.119      0.087
Soft peg                     0.078         0.063          0.068         0.057        0.021      0.006
                             0.062          0.05          0.062         0.048        0.084      0.065
Ln(M2/GDP)                   0.548         0.535           0.54         0.301        0.343      0.627
                            0.086**       0.198**        0.088**        0.184       0.104**    0.249*
Ln(trade/GDP)                0.376         0.818          0.376          0.57        0.517       0.41
                            0.098**       0.175**        0.102**       0.169**      0.082**    0.211+
Advanced                    -0.712                       -0.643
                            0.148**                      0.166**
SIN1                         1.354        -0.621          1.438        -0.281       -0.901     -0.603
                            0.402**        1.123         0.411**        1.032        2.211      1.263
Ln(ForCurDebt/GDP)           0.035        -0.007          0.015        -0.076        0.003     -0.094
                              0.03         0.031          0.035        0.031*        0.044     0.044*
Constant                    -7.228        -7.174         -7.342        -5.855       -5.089     -5.439
                            0.627**       1.452**        0.639**       1.491**      2.275*     1.904**
Observations                  770           770            770           770          331        331
R-squared                     0.58          0.89           0.58          0.9          0.63       0.9

Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
No FE = no fixed effects; CFE = country fixed effects; YFE = year fixed effects.
Dependent variable: Ln(reserves/GDP).
Table 5: Financial Stability Model Across Eras
                          1            2                 3            4             5          6
                     Emerging      Emerging          Emerging        Full         Full        Full
                      markets       markets           markets      sample      sample       sample
                       1980s     preAsia 90s         postAsia       1980s    preAsia 90s   postAsia
Financial openness      0.923        0.829             0.648        0.782         0.43       0.024
                       0.490+       0.419+            0.253*       0.299*      0.232+        0.214
Peg                     0.177        0.081            -0.089        0.027         0.18       0.213
                        0.195        0.201             0.116        0.133        0.109      0.108+
Soft peg               -0.087       -0.002             0.101         0.13        0.153       0.243
                        0.229        0.112             0.089        0.106      0.078+       0.074**
Ln(M2/GDP)                0          0.154              0.45         0.22         0.34       0.386
                        0.193        0.172            0.101**       0.142      0.083**      0.072**
Ln(trade/GDP)           0.625        0.614             0.479        0.638         0.57       0.379
                      0.172**       0.147**           0.069**      0.105**     0.083**      0.097**
Advanced                                                           -0.218       -0.662      -0.831
                                                                    0.163      0.154**      0.182**
Constant                -5.327         -5.807          -6.07       -6.298       -6.197      -5.114
                        0.605**        0.516**        0.456**      0.610**     0.368**      0.458**
Observations              217            212            217          976          930         864
R-squared                0.54           0.51            0.71         0.33          0.4        0.35

Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
No fixed effects.
Dependent variable: Ln(reserves/GDP).
Table 6: The Monetary Base and M2
                               1                     2               3              4
                                                Financial       Financial      Financial
                               Traditional       stability       stability      stability
                                 model            model           model          model
Dependent variable          Ln(reserves/M0) Ln(reserves/M0) Ln(reserves/M0)Ln(reserves/GDP)
Ln(population)                   -0.065
                                  0.087
Ln(imports/GDP)                   0.339
                                 0.156*
Exchange rate volatility         -0.052
                                  0.322
Ln(gdp/cap)                       0.354
                                 0.154*
Ln(M2/M0)                                          0.726            0.81
                                                 0.114**         0.113**
Financial openness                                 1.407           1.777          0.894
                                                 0.235**         0.289**        0.196**
Peg                                               -0.222          -0.144          0.046
                                                   0.141           0.133           0.14
Soft peg                                          -0.066           0.014         -0.004
                                                   0.114           0.114          0.122
Ln(trade/GDP)                                      0.278                          0.571
                                                 0.072**                        0.077**
Ln(M2/GDP)                                                                        0.261
                                                                                 0.113*
Ln(M0/GDP)                                                                        -0.06
                                                                                  0.123
Constant                         -3.269           -2.928          -2.155         -5.831
                                  2.569          0.372**         0.287**        0.467**
Observations                       646              646             646            646
R-squared                          0.35             0.57            0.54           0.6

Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.
+ significant at 10%; * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.
No fixed effects.
Figure 1: In-Sample: What Explains Post-1980 Increases in Emerging Market Reserves?

                       (a) Emerging Market Sample: Financial Stability Model




                           (b) Emerging Market Sample: Traditional Model




Note: these two figures show the increase in reserves over 25 years for emerging market countries in
billions of current US dollars. The sub-sections of the bars represent the explanators of the growth. The
bottom bar is the amount predicted in 1980 (constant over time). Other sub-sections allow for changes in 1
variable at a time. The second lowest is simply the change in GDP assuming all other variables remain
constant, etc. The top section represents the amount that cannot be explained by the model.
      Figure 2: In-Sample: What Explains Post-1980 Increases in China’s Reserves?

                                  (a) China: Financial Stability Model




                                      (b) China: Traditional Model




Note: these two figures show the increase in reserves over 25 years for China in billions of current US
dollars. The sub-sections of the bars represent the explanators of the growth. The bottom bar is the amount
predicted in 1980 (constant over time). Other sub-sections allow for changes in 1 variable at a time. The
second lowest is simply the change in GDP assuming all other variables remain constant, etc. The top
section represents the amount that cannot be explained by the model.
Figure 3: In-Sample: What Explains Recent Increases in Reserves/GDP? Examples
                                                                    Figure 3: Continued




Note: these figures show the increase in reserve/GDP ratios over 9 years. The sub-sections of the bars represent the explanators of the growth. The bottom bar is
the amount predicted in 1996 (constant over time). Other sub-sections allow for changes in 1 variable at a time. The second lowest is simply the change in GDP
assuming all other variables remain constant, etc. The top section represents the amount that cannot be explained by the model.
            Figure 4: Out-of-Sample Predictions: 2004 projected from 1993–2000

                                      (a) Financial stability model




                                          (b) Traditional model




Note: Figure (a) shows actual (y-axis) vs. predicted (x-axis) reserve/GDP ratios in 2004. Predicted values
come from the financial stability model (with sin and foreign debt) estimated for 1993-2000. A regression of
                                                                           2
actual reserves on predicted yields a coefficient of 1.33 (s.e. 0.16) and R of 0.52. The arrow points to China.
         Figure (b) shows actual (y-axis) vs. predicted (x-axis) reserves/GDP in 2004. Predicted values
come from the traditional model estimated for 1993-2000. Samples in the two figures are the same. A
                                                                                           2
regression of actual reserves on predicted yields a coefficient of 1.81 (s.e. 0.28) and R of 0.41. The arrow
again points to China.
                         Figure 5: Out-of-Sample Predictions over Time




Note: These figures show the actual reserve/GDP ratios; those predicted by a financial stability model
(including Sin and foreign currency debt) along the lines of Table 4, column 1 without trade included; and
those predicted by a traditional one as shown in Table 1, column 1. Both models are estimated for 1993-
2000. For the figures showing a combination of countries within a group, the same countries are used for all
three lines and the panels are balanced (no countries enter or exit).
Data Appendix: List of Countries and Years in the Full Sample
     ifscode   country_name           type   minyear   maxyear         ifscode   country_name          type   minyear   maxyear
 1      111    United States          ADV     1980      2004      72      564    Pakistan              EM      1980      2004
 2      122    Austria                ADV     1980      1997      73      566    Philippines           EM      1980      2004
 3      124    Belgium                ADV     1980      1997      74      576    Singapore             EM      1980      2004
 4      128    Denmark                ADV     1980      2004      75      578    Thailand              EM      1980      2004
 5      132    France                 ADV     1980      1997      76      582    Vietnam               DEV     1996      2004
 6      134    Germany                ADV     1980      1998      77      611    Djibouti              DEV     1990      2004
 7      136    Italy                  ADV     1980      1998      78      612    Algeria               DEV     1980      2004
 8      138    Netherlands            ADV     1980      1997      79      614    Angola                DEV     1996      2004
 9      142    Norway                 ADV     1980      2003      80      616    Botswana              DEV     1980      2004
10      144    Sweden                 ADV     1980      2004      81      618    Burundi               DEV     1980      2004
11      146    Switzerland            ADV     1980      2004      82      624    Cape Verde            DEV     1986      2003
12      156    Canada                 ADV     1980      2004      83      632    Comoros               DEV     1983      2004
13      158    Japan                  ADV     1980      2004      84      636    Congo, Dem. Rep.      DEV     1980      1995
14      172    Finland                ADV     1980      1998      85      644    Ethiopia              DEV     1981      2004
15      174    Greece                 ADV     1980      2000      86      648    Gambia, The           DEV     1980      2004
16      176    Iceland                ADV     1980      2004      87      652    Ghana                 DEV     1980      2004
17      178    Ireland                ADV     1982      1998      88      654    Guinea-Bissau         DEV     1987      2004
18      181    Malta                  DEV     1980      2004      89      656    Guinea                DEV     1991      2004
19      182    Portugal               ADV     1980      1998      90      664    Kenya                 DEV     1980      2004
20      186    Turkey                 EM      1980      2004      91      666    Lesotho               DEV     1980      2004
21      193    Australia              ADV     1980      2004      92      672    Libya                 DEV     1980      2002
22      196    New Zealand            ADV     1980      2004      93      674    Madagascar            DEV     1980      2004
23      199    South Africa           EM      1980      2004      94      676    Malawi                DEV     1980      2004
24      213    Argentina              EM      1980      2004      95      682    Mauritania            DEV     1980      2003
25      218    Bolivia                DEV     1980      2004      96      684    Mauritius             DEV     1980      2004
26      223    Brazil                 EM      1980      2004      97      686    Morocco               DEV     1980      2004
27      228    Chile                  EM      1980      2004      98      694    Nigeria               DEV     1980      2004
28      233    Colombia               EM      1980      2004      99      714    Rwanda                DEV     1980      2004
29      238    Costa Rica             DEV     1980      2004     100      716    Sao Tome & Principe   DEV     1996      2004
30      243    Dominican Republic     DEV     1980      2004     101      718    Seychelles            DEV     1980      2004
31      258    Guatemala              DEV     1980      2004     102      724    Sierra Leone          DEV     1980      2004
32      263    Haiti                  DEV     1980      2003     103      728    Namibia               DEV     1992      2004
33      268    Honduras               DEV     1980      2004     104      734    Swaziland             DEV     1980      2004
34      273    Mexico                 EM      1980      2004     105      738    Tanzania              DEV     1990      2004
35      278    Nicaragua              DEV     1980      2004     106      744    Tunisia               DEV     1980      2004
36      288    Paraguay               DEV     1980      2004     107      746    Uganda                DEV     1980      2004
37      293    Peru                   EM      1980      2004     108      754    Zambia                DEV     1980      2004
38      298    Uruguay                DEV     1980      2004     109      813    Solomon Islands       DEV     1980      2004
39      299    Venezuela, RB          EM      1980      2004     110      819    Fiji                  DEV     1980      2001
40      313    Bahamas, The           DEV     1980      1987     111      846    Vanuatu               DEV     1981      1999
41      316    Barbados               DEV     1980      2004     112      853    Papua New Guinea      DEV     1980      2002
42      336    Guyana                 DEV     1980      2004     113      862    Samoa                 DEV     1994      2004
43      339    Belize                 DEV     1980      2004     114      866    Tonga                 DEV     1980      2004
44      343    Jamaica                DEV     1980      2004     115      911    Armenia               DEV     1996      2004
45      366    Suriname               DEV     1980      2004     116      912    Azerbaijan            DEV     1996      2004
46      369    Trinidad and Tobago    DEV     1980      2004     117      913    Belarus               DEV     1996      2004
47      419    Bahrain                DEV     1980      2004     118      914    Albania               DEV     1995      2004
48      423    Cyprus                 DEV     1980      1999     119      915    Georgia               DEV     1996      2004
49      429    Iran, Islamic Rep.     DEV     1980      1982     120      916    Kazakhstan            DEV     1996      2004
50      436    Israel                 EM      1980      2004     121      917    Kyrgyz Republic       DEV     1996      2004
51      439    Jordan                 DEV     1980      2004     122      918    Bulgaria              DEV     1992      2004
52      443    Kuwait                 DEV     1980      2004     123      921    Moldova               DEV     1996      2004
53      446    Lebanon                DEV     1989      2004     124      922    Russian Federation    EM      1996      2004
54      449    Oman                   DEV     1980      2004     125      923    Tajikistan            DEV     1999      2004
55      453    Qatar                  DEV     1994      2004     126      924    China                 EM      1980      2004
56      456    Saudi Arabia           EM      1980      2004     127      926    Ukraine               DEV     1996      2004
57      463    Syrian Arab Republic   DEV     1980      1988     128      935    Czech Republic        EM      1994      2004
58      466    United Arab Emirates   DEV     1980      2004     129      936    Slovak Republic       EM      1994      2004
59      469    Egypt, Arab Rep.       EM      1980      2004     130      939    Estonia               EM      1996      2004
60      474    Yemen, Rep.            DEV     1991      2004     131      941    Latvia                EM      1996      2004
61      513    Bangladesh             DEV     1980      2004     132      944    Hungary               EM      1983      2004
62      514    Bhutan                 DEV     1984      2004     133      946    Lithuania             EM      1996      2004
63      524    Sri Lanka              DEV     1980      2004     134      948    Mongolia              DEV     1992      2004
64      532    Hong Kong, China       EM      1992      2004     135      960    Croatia               DEV     1994      2004
65      534    India                  EM      1980      2004     136      961    Slovenia              EM      1992      2004
66      536    Indonesia              EM      1980      2004     137      962    Macedonia, FYR        DEV     1994      2004
67      542    Korea, Rep.            EM      1980      2004     138      963    Bosnia&Herzegovina    DEV     1998      2004
68      544    Lao PDR                DEV     1988      2004     139      964    Poland                EM      1990      2004
69      548    Malaysia               EM      1980      2004     140      968    Romania               DEV     1990      2004
70      556    Maldives               DEV     1995      2004
71      558    Nepal                  DEV     1980      2004
