                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     DOES INNOVATION STIMULATE EMPLOYMENT? A FIRM-LEVEL ANALYSIS
      USING COMPARABLE MICRO-DATA FROM FOUR EUROPEAN COUNTRIES

                                           Rupert Harrison
                                          Jordi Jaumandreu
                                          Jacques Mairesse
                                            Bettina Peters

                                        Working Paper 14216
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14216


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




The authors thank the respective statistical offices for access to the data. We are grateful for comments
by Manuel Arellano, Steve Bond, Bronwyn Hall, Daniele Paserman, Alessandro Sembenelli, Luc Soete,
Manuel Trajtenberg, John Van Reenen, Marian Vidal-Fernandez, two referees, and the participants
at the seminars where preliminary versions of the paper have been discussed. This research has benefited
from joint work with the rest of the IEEF team: Laura Abramovsky, Rachel Griffith, Elena Huergo,
Norbert Janz, Elizabeth Kremp, Alberto Lopez, Pierre Mohnen, Tobias Schmidt and Helen Simpson.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Rupert Harrison, Jordi Jaumandreu, Jacques Mairesse, and Bettina Peters. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Does Innovation Stimulate Employment? A Firm-Level Analysis Using Comparable Micro-Data
from Four European Countries
Rupert Harrison, Jordi Jaumandreu, Jacques Mairesse, and Bettina Peters
NBER Working Paper No. 14216
August 2008
JEL No. D2,J23,L1,O31,O33

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper studies the impact of process and product innovations introduced by firms on employment
growth in these firms. A simple model that relates employment growth to process innovations and
to the growth of sales separately due to innovative and unchanged products is developed and estimated
using comparable firm-level data from France, Germany, Spain and the UK. Results show that displacement
effects induced by productivity growth in the production of old products are large, while those associated
with process innovations, which are likely to be compensated by price decreases, appear to be small.
The effects related to product innovations are, however, strong enough to overcompensate these displacement
effects.


Rupert Harrison                                      Jacques Mairesse
The Institute for Fiscal Studies                     INSEE, CREST
7 Ridgmount Street, London WC1E 7AE.                 15, Boulevard Gabriel PERI
United Kingdom                                       92245 MALAKOFF CEDEX
harrison.rupert@googlemail.com                       FRANCE
                                                     and NBER
Jordi Jaumandreu                                     mairesse@ensae.fr
Department of Economics
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid                     Bettina Peters
C./ Madrid, 126                                      ZEW
28903 Getafe (Madrid)                                Postfach 103443 D-68043 Mannheim
SPAIN                                                Germany
jordij@eco.uc3m.es                                   b.peters@zew.de
1. Introduction


  Innovation is widely considered to be a primary source of economic growth, and policies to
encourage firm-level innovation are high on the agenda in most countries. The consequences of
innovation for employment are of particular interest, but the relationship between innovation
and employment is not particularly well known. On the one hand, the long-run economic
impact of innovation on employment is clearly not negative; many decades, and even centuries,
of innovation in advanced economies have been accompanied by employment growth instead
of the ever-decreasing levels of jobs that many predicted. On the other hand, although
the evidence suggests that innovative firms are more likely to survive and grow than firms
that do not innovate, our knowledge of the impact of innovation on employment at the firm
level remains rather fuzzy. Innovations often destroy jobs, but also estimulate demand for a
firm’s products and it is unclear to what extent and through what mechanisms the overall
employment is aﬀected.
  The analysis of the firm-level relationship between innovation and employment is thus an
important topic of research. It is expected to shed light on the relationships between firm-level
evidence and aggregate outcomes, and this is directly relevant for the design of micro-policies
to favour employment growth. The eﬀects of innovation on employment at the firm level are
likely to influence the incentives of managers and workers within the firm to resist or encourage
innovation, and these incentives will aﬀect the rhythm and even the types of innovations
that are introduced and their subsequent eﬀects on prices, output and employment. A better
assessment of such eﬀects is thus important for understanding how product and labour market
regulations can aﬀect firm-level and economy-wide rates of innovation, and for a well informed
implementation of innovation policy.
  This paper investigates the eﬀects of innovation on employment at the firm-level, and
makes three main contributions to the literature. Firstly, we develop and apply a simple
but formal model of innovation and employment that is able to disentangle some of the
structural eﬀects at work. In particular, we observe the mix of each firm’s output growth
between existing and newly introduced products, enabling us to quantify the employment
eﬀects of product innovation. Our results enlarge some of the findings of the literature,
encompassing and explaining previous evidence. Secondly, the paper uses comparable firm-
level data sets for four large European countries: France, Germany, Spain and the UK. Firms


                                               2
in these countries operate in somewhat diﬀerent economic and institutional environments, and
our results identify several robust common eﬀects as well as a few meaningful cross-country
diﬀerences in the firm-level relationship between innovation and employment. Finally, we
present evidence separately for manufacturing and the service sectors. Almost all previous
studies have focused exclusively on manufacturing, yet much of the employment creation in
the four countries in recent years has been in services.
  We take our model to the data by estimating, for each country, a regression relating firms’
employment growth to the introduction of process innovations and the two components of
sales growth accounted for by “unchanged” and “newly introduced or substantially improved”
products, respectively.1 We have taken particular care to control for potential sources of
correlation between the included variables and the residual by considering diﬀerent choices of
instrumental variables. The results show that product innovations are an important source of
firm-level employment growth, while process innovations, which are likely to be associated to
price reductions, tend to displace employment moderately. These eﬀects are measured at the
firm level, but we discuss how they should be aggregated up to the industry level by taking
into account rivalry between competitors and the eﬀects of entry and exit.
  The data used in this paper come from the Third Community Innovation Survey (CIS3).
These data are gathered on the basis of unified definitions following the "Oslo Manual" (see
OECD and Eurostat, 2007), and they are available for a number of European Union countries
in a similar format. Basic CIS3 variables (set out in the core questionnaire) include, for each
firm in the sample, employment and sales in the years 1998 and 2000, and information
about whether the firm has introduced process and product innovations during the period.
Particularly useful for our purpose is the variable measuring the share of the firm sales in
2000 stemming from new or significantly improved products introduced since 1998. This
variable, which can be viewed as a sales-weighted estimate of the firm product innovations,
allows us to decompose total sales in sales of “new” and “old” products. In addition, the
survey provides information on firms’ R&D and other innovation expenditures, as well as
sources and objectives of innovation, and cooperation and patenting activities. The firm-
level data used for France, Germany, Spain and the UK have been accessed at the national
level under confidentiality rules, but the analysis and implementation of the model have been
   1
       Due to data limitations, the paper considers the growth in total employment without distinguishing
between diﬀerent types of workers (e.g., skilled and unskilled).



                                                       3
discussed and coordinated among the researchers from the four countries. The results of such
a cooperative endeavour are stimulating, pointing to consistent regularities across countries
and to some diﬀerences that are worth investigating further.2
  The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 discusses the potential firm-level
employment eﬀects of innovation, including a look at the relationships between firm-level and
aggregate outcomes, and relates briefly our contribution to the literature. Section 3 develops
the model and discusses what eﬀects can be identified using the available data. Section 4
comments on the data and the evidence provided by simple descriptive statistics on employ-
ment and innovation outcomes in the four countries. Section 5 presents the main econometric
estimates and checks their validity. Section 6 presents a decomposition of firms’ employment
growth and comments on the diﬀerences between the four countries and the manufacturing
service sectors. Section 7 concludes. In Appendix A, we present some additional regressions
and robustness checks, and in Appendix B, we give details on the construction of the four
country samples and on the definition of all the variables used in the empirical analysis.


2. Employment eﬀects of innovation at the firm level


2.1 Process and product innovations


  The potential eﬀects of innovation on firm-level employment are summarised in Table 1.3
It is advisable to distinguish between the eﬀects of process innovations, which are directed
at improving the production process and hence have a direct impact on productivity and
unit costs, and the eﬀects of product innovations, which are mainly undertaken to reinforce
demand for a firm’s products. In practice, of course, process innovations often accompany
product innovations and vice versa. As indicated in Table 1, both types of innovations can be
interpreted as the (partly random) result of a firm’s investment in R&D and other innovative
activities.
  Pure process innovations are likely to reduce the quantities of (most) factors required
to obtain a unit of output, including the required labour input. Thus process innovations
tend to displace labour for a given output, although the size of such displacement eﬀect will
   2
       For a companion study also using the CIS3 firm-level data for France, Germany, Spain and the UK, see
Griﬃth, Huergo, Mairesse and Peters (2006).
   3
     In this section, we draw on theoretical discussions in several papers, including Nickell and Kong (1989),
Van Reenen (1997), Garcia, Jaumandreu and Rodriguez (2002) and the more theoretical works quoted therein.


                                                      4
depend on the extent to which the process improvement is labour or capital-augmenting.
The eﬀects of specific identifiable process innovations are additional to those of incremental
improvements in eﬃciency, attributable to factors such learning and spillovers, which also
reduce input requirements over time.4
  Productivity increases from process innovations imply a reduction in unit costs. Depending
on the competitive conditions facing the firm, this cost reduction is likely to result in a lower
price, which will stimulate demand, and hence output and employment. The size of such
compensation eﬀect is largely determined by the elasticity of demand for the firm’s products,
but is also likely to depend on the behaviour of the agents inside the firm and the nature
of market competition. For example, unions may attempt to transform any gains from
innovation into higher wages, while managers may take advantage of their firm market power
to increase profits.5 Both behaviours can dampen or override the compensation eﬀect.
  Product innovations may also have productivity eﬀects, even if they are not associated with
simultaneous process innovations. The new or improved product may imply a change in the
production method and input mix, which could either reduce or increase labour requirements.
The extent and direction of these eﬀects must be determined empirically. However, they are
likely to be smaller than the positive compensation eﬀects resulting from the increases in
demand for a firm’s products. The importance of such increases in demand will depend on
the nature of competition and the delay with which rivals react to the introduction of new
products. In addition, sales of new products may cannibalise some proportion of the firm’s
existing sales, reducing the size of the compensation eﬀects. Therefore, one should, when
possible, distinguish a gross eﬀect and a net eﬀect, the latter taking into account the induced
reduction in existing sales.
  The service sector has become the largest part of most developed economies, and contrary
to traditional wisdom, many areas of the service sector have demonstrated high levels of
   4
       Production functions frequently account for such ongoing improvements in productivity by including time
trends or time dummies when specified and estimated in levels (or, equivalently, constants or time dummies
when specified and estimated in first diﬀerences). Indicators of specific innovative investments or outcomes,
such as knowledge capital stocks or innovation counts, typically account for only a small part of unexplained
productivity growth, even when statistically significant. For an illustration of this point, see, for example, the
panel data investigations in Hall and Mairesse (1995) and Huergo and Jaumandreu (2004), or the survey by
Mairesse and Sassenou (1991).
  5
    See Nickell (1999) for a discussion.




                                                        5
innovation and productivity growth.6 However, innovation in services is often concerned
with changes in organisation, delivery and variety, which are possibly linked to the adoption
of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT).7 As a result, it is more diﬃcult than
in manufacturing to clearly identify new products and to distinguish product innovations
from process innovations. Moreover, statistical concepts and measurement in services are
currently in a period of change and refinement. As a result of these considerations, while
we think it is important to include the service sector in the analysis, one has to bear in
mind that the same variables may be more roughly measured than in manufacturing or have
interpretations that may be diﬀerent.


2.2 Innovation and employment at the aggregate level


  The focus of this paper is on the assessment of the relationship between innovation and
employment at the firm level, which raises the crucial question of how the eﬀects estimated
at this level of analysis relate to changes at the aggregate level of an industry or a country.
There are two main reasons why the aggregate eﬀects of innovation on employment cannot
be trivially inferred from average firm-level eﬀects (for example, by adjusting them on the
basis of the representativeness of the firms in the study sample relative to the population of
firms in the industry or the country).
  First, the firm-level compensation eﬀects that we observe do not distinguish between the
pure market expansion component and the business-stealing component.8 At the same time,
however, we should recognise that the average firm-level employment outcomes that we ob-
serve already embody the eﬀects of business-stealing demand by firms’ rivals, even if we do
not know their identity or observe them in our sample. This means that, on average, provided
that the diﬀerent types of firms are well represented in our sample, the business-stealing ef-
fects will tend to cancel out. However, this does not necessarily happen at more disaggregated
levels: we cannot identify, for instance, the degree to which innovation by innovative firms
results in business-stealing from non-innovators rather than market expansion.
  Secondly, and in a related way, we do not observe entering or exiting firms in our sample of
   6
     See, for example, Evangelista (2000) for the EU, and Triplett and Bosworth (2004) for the US.
   7
     Examples include Internet Banking and the introduction of scanners and computers in Retailing.
   8
     Garcia, Jaumandreu and Rodriguez (2002), however, provide a decomposition of these eﬀects by estimating
the impact of rivals’ actions on the firm’s demand. According to their results, market expansion eﬀects
dominate the business stealing eﬀects.


                                                     6
continuing firms. Firm entry, which may be the result of innovation, is an important source of
employment growth, while exit may be induced by successful innovation and business-stealing
by rival firms.
  A full industry-level analysis would therefore have to explicitly incorporate entry, exit
and competition between rival firms. Evidence on the rivalrous eﬀects of innovation could
be obtained by modelling firm demand, while data on entering and exiting firms would be
needed to assess the role of entry and exit. Our analysis does not relate directly to aggregate
employment eﬀects, but it does provide essential information on the micro-mechanisms that
explain aggregate employment growth. However, to draw implications for the aggregate
figures, the previous caveats should be taken into consideration.


2.3 Previous literature on innovation and employment


  A number of previous analyses have provided evidence on the relationship between inno-
vation and employment at the firm level. The survey by Chennels and Van Reenen (2002),
although focused on a related but diﬀerent question, and the one by Spiezia and Vivarelli
(2002), provide useful overviews.9 Existing studies diﬀer widely in terms of modelling strate-
gies and methods, in particular in the way they address the issues of heterogeneity and endo-
geneity. Most of them range from the assessment of simple correlations to the estimation of
reduced form relations, and only a few have tried a more structural approach. In addition,
they exploit diﬀerent data sets, using sundry measures of innovation, some input-oriented, as
R&D intensity, and others output-oriented, such as innovation and patents counts.
  On the whole, product innovation emerges as clearly associated with employment growth,
although the balance between displacement and compensation eﬀects appears diverse accross
studies (see, for example, Entorf and Pohlmeier, 1991; König, Licht and Buscher, 1995; Van
Reenen, 1997; Greenan and Guellec, 2000; Smolny, 1998 and 2002; Garcia, Jaumandreu and
Rodriguez, 2002). R&D investment also tends to be positively related to employment growth
(see, for example, Blechinger, Kleinknecht, Licht and Pfeiﬀer, 1998, and Regev, 1998), al-
though not always (see Brouwer, Kleinknecht and Reijnen, 1993, and Klette and Forre, 1998).
By contrast, the eﬀects of process innovation and of the introduction of new technologies are
found to range from negative to positive according to the specification (see, for example,
   9
       The survey by Chennels and Van Reenen focuses mainly on the impact of technological change on the
skill and pay structure of labour.


                                                    7
Ross and Zimmerman, 1993, for a negative process innovation eﬀect; Doms, Dunne and
Roberts, 1995, or Blanchflower and Burguess, 1999, for positive technology impacts; see also
the various eﬀects of process innovations in many of the above papers).
  The focus of our paper is the derivation of a simple theoretical model of employment
and innovation and the estimation of a few structural eﬀects with the comparable cross-
country data at hand. Our model encompasses most of the relationships estimated in previous
analyses and our findings throw light on the reasons why these results could vary across
specifications. We compare evidence for the manufacturing and service sectors, whereas
almost all of the existing literature has focused exclusively on manufacturing.
  Following the first draft of this paper, a few authors have applied some versions of our model
to diﬀerent country data sets: Peters (2004, 2008) to Germany; Hall, Lotti and Mairesse
(2007) to Italy; and Benavente and Lauterbach (2007) to Chile. They provide results which
are much in line with ours.


3. Theoretical framework and estimation strategy


3.1 A two-goods production function


  A firm can produce two types of products: old or only marginally modified products (“old
products”) and new or significantly improved products (“new products”), which we denote
with i = 1 and i = 2 , respectively. We observe firms in two diﬀerent years, which we denote
t = 1 and t = 2, possibly introducing some new products in between. Outputs of old and
new products in year t are denoted by Y1t and Y2t , respectively. In year t = 1, all products
are old products by definition, so Y21 is always equal to zero. If the firm does not introduce
any new products between the two years, then Y22 is also equal to zero.10
  We assume that the production technology for old and new products presents constant
returns to scale in capital, labour and intermediate inputs and can be written as two separable
identical production functions with diﬀerent Hicks-neutral technology parameters θ. That is,
omitting the firm subindex for the sake of simplicity, we have:

               Yit = θit F (Kit , Lit , Mit ) eη+ωit       i = 1, t = 1, 2 and i = 2, t = 2
  10
       In practice, in our data, years t = 1 and t = 2 are 1998 and 2000, and firms may have already started
introducing new products in 1998. This does not aﬀect the rationale of our model, but must be kept in mind
in the precise interpretation of our estimates.


                                                       8
where K, L and M stand for capital, labor and intermediate consumption, and η is an un-
observed firm-idiosyncratic “fixed” eﬀect and ω stands for product and time-specific produc-
tivity shocks with E(ω it ) = 0.11
  We assume that the firm invests in R&D to generate product and process innovations. New
products can be produced with higher or lower eﬃciency than old products, and the firm can
influence the eﬃciency of production of both old and new products by investing in process
innovation. The primary interest of our analysis is in estimating the change in eﬃciency of
producing old products (θ12 /θ 11 ) as well as the relative eﬃciency (θ22 /θ 11 ) of producing old
and new products.
  The firm productivity levels are influenced by the unobservable firm-specific eﬀects η and
idiosyncratic shocks ω. The η 0 s represent all the unobservable factors which make a firm
more (or less) productive than the average firm using the same technology, i.e., with the
same θ. These include any innovation-related characteristics which are likely to raise (lower)
productivity permanently (e.g., a superior ability for innovation management, a higher ab-
sorptive capacity, a more eﬃcient organization). We call them individual productivity eﬀects.
The ω 0 s are intended to pick up all the unobservable shifts in the production function for
reasons other than the development of technology (e.g., unobserved investments, bursts in
capacity utilization, labour and temporary organizational problems). We call them (non-
technological) productivity shocks. We do not impose any distributional restriction on these
productivity shocks ω, which in particular may be autocorrelated.                   12



3.2 An employment equation


  We assume that employment and other decisions about inputs are made according to cost
minimization given the individual productivity eﬀects η and productivity shocks ω (produc-
  11
       Our specification allows for the presence of economies of scope. Joint production implies a pair of eﬃciency
                                                                 0   0
terms (θ12 , θ22 ) which can be strictly higher than the pair (θ12 , θ22 ) corresponding to the production of each
good separately.
  12
     However, we have to consider that the shocks which aﬀect the production of the new products when they
are introduced are the shocks already aﬀecting the old products; that is, shocks ω 22 and ω11 are the same.
This is basically a definitional assumption, which means that the observed reallocations of inputs at the start
of a new production do not respond to unobserved shocks but correspond to technology requirements. This
assumption avoids the inclusion of an additional error term involving the ratio of the outputs of new and old
products in the derivation of our growth employment equation (1) below.



                                                          9
tivity shocks are observed by the firm before deciding the input quantities). Given technology,
the relevant cost functions have the form:


                                                                        Yit
                                   C(wit , Yit , θit ) = c(wit )                + Fi
                                                                   θ it eη+ω it
where the marginal costs c(w)/θeη+ω are a function of the vector of input prices w, and F
stands for some arbitrary fixed costs. According to Shephard’s lemma, labour demands for
the old and new products can be written as:
                                                         Y1t
                                  L1t = cwL (w1t )                    for t = 1, 2
                                                     θ1t eη+ω1t
and


                                 Y22
                  L22 = cwL (w22 )         if Y22 > 0 and L22 = 0 otherwise
                             θ22 eη+ω22
where cwL (.) represents the derivative of c(.) with respect to the wage. Notice that these
expressions show that employment is correlated with the individual productivity eﬀects η and
productivity shocks ω. To proceed, we also make the simplifying assumptions that cwL (w11 ) =
cwL (w12 ) = cwL (w22 ). This holds approximately, for example, in the likely case where the
relative prices of inputs remain roughly constant in the two years and equal for old and new
products.13
  We can decompose the growth of employment between the two years t = 1 and t = 2,
into the growth of employment due to production of the old products and the growth of
employment due to production of the new products, in the following way:
                      ∆L   L12 + L22 − L11   L12 − L11 L22       L12 L22
                         =                 =          +     ' ln    +
                       L         L11            L11     L11      L11 L11
where by convention the rate of growth of new products is defined as L22 /L11 , and where
we also use a logarithmic rate of growth of the old product to derive the more simple linear
equation (1) below in terms of the relevant variables. Based on this decomposition and
the labour demand equations with our simplyfying assumptions, we can write the following
employment growth equation where the individual fixed eﬀects η are diﬀerentiated out:
                  ∆L ∼                                            θ11 Y22
                     = −(ln θ12 − ln θ11 ) + (ln Y12 − ln Y11 ) +         − (ω 12 − ω11 )                 (1)
                   L                                              θ22 Y11
  13
       Notice that c(.) is homogeneous of degree one in input prices and hence the derivative cwL (.) is homo-
geneous of degree zero. The constancy of relative input prices for old products in the two periods and the
equality of input prices for old and new products in the second period thus imply that cwL (.) is unchanged
even if prices change.


                                                        10
  Equation (1) is a simple expression which accounts for the observed employment growth
in terms of four components: i) the change in eﬃciency in the production process for the
old products; ii) the rate of change of the demand for these products over time; iii) the
expansion in production attributable to the demand for new products, and iv) the impact of
productivity shocks.
  The increase in eﬃciency of the production of old products (ln θ 12 − ln θ11 ) is expected
to be larger for firms which introduce process innovations in producing them, even if firm
eﬃciency is also expected to grow over time for other important reasons such as learning and
spillover eﬀects. The impact of product innovation on employment growth depends on the
ratio (θ11 /θ22 ) of the relative eﬃciency of producing old and new products. If new products
are produced more eﬃciently than old products, this ratio is less than unity and employment
does not grow one-for-one with the growth in output accounted for by new products.


3.3 Econometric model and eﬀects of theoretical interest


  Equation (1) can be rewritten as the following econometric regression:

                                       l = α0 + α1 d + y1 + βy2 + u                                     (2)

where l stands for the rate of employment growth over the period (i.e., between the year
t = 1 and t = 2), y1 and y2 are the corresponding rates of output growth of old and new
products (i.e., ln Y12 −ln Y11 and Y22 /Y11 , respectively), and u = −(ω 12 −ω 11 )+ξ is an overall
random disturbance where ξ represents miscellaneous (uncorrelated) errors. The parameter
α0 represents (minus) the average eﬃciency growth in production of the old product, and a
binary variable d, equal to one if the firm has implemented a specific process innovation not
associated with a product innovation, picks up the eﬀects of such “process innovation only”
through parameter α1 .14 The parameter β captures the relative eﬃciency of the production
  14
       We can extend equation (2) to allow process innovation to aﬀect changes in the eﬃciency of production
of old and new products as follows:

                                   l = (α0 + α1 d1 ) + y1 + (β 0 + β 1 d2 )y2 + u

where d1 and d2 are binary variables equal to one if the firm implemented process innovations respectively
related to the production of old and new products. In practice, however, when a firm declares both process
and product innovations, we cannot separate process innovations that relate to their old products and their
new ones. We nonetheless have experimented with various alternatives: see the additional regressions shown


                                                        11
of old and new products. Notice that the variable y1 has a coeﬃcient equal to one and can
thus be substracted from l on the left-hand side of the equation for estimation.15
  Equation (2) identifies two eﬀects of major interest. Being able to measure the growth
of output due to the introduction of new products, it allows us to estimate the gross eﬀect
of product innovation on employment, while the observation of process innovations related
to the production of old products allows us to estimate the gross productivity or “displace-
ment” eﬀect of process innovation. However, equation (2) also has obvious limitations. In
fact, this variable embodies three diﬀerent employment eﬀects which cannot be separated
without additional (demand) data: i) the possible “autonomous” increase in firm demand
for the old products (for example, due to cyclical or industry eﬀects); ii) the “compensation”
eﬀect induced by any old product price decrease following a process innovation; and iii) the
cannibalization of old product demand resulting from the introduction of new products either
by the firm or by its competitors.
  In what follows, we shall now discuss in detail the problems involved in the identification
and estimation of parameters of equation (2).


3.3.1 Identification issues


  Identification and consistent estimation of the three parameters of interest (α0 , α1 and β)
of equation (2) depend on the lack of correlation between the variables representing process
and product innovations (d and y2 ) and the error term u or, at least, on the availability of
instruments correlated with these variables and uncorrelated with u.
  Innovations are the result of the success of “technological investments”, mainly R&D, which
have to be decided by firms in advance and depend on their individual productivity eﬀects
η. Therefore, innovations are likely to be correlated with these eﬀects. They are, however,
diﬀerentiated out in equation (2) and do not enter into u. The unobserved productivity shocks
ω remain in u, and their correlations with d and y2 depend on the assumptions which can
in the Appendix A.

  15
       Equation (2) can also be rewritten and reinterpreted in terms of a productivity growth equation by simply
rearranging it as follows:
                                     y1 + y2 − l = −α0 − α1 d + (1 − β)y2 − u

showing that labour productivity will depend positively on process innovation (recall α1 is likely to be negative)
and on product innovation if β is less than one.


                                                        12
reasonably be made about both their characteristics and the timing of the firm’s technological
investments.
  If the firm is supposed to make its technological investment decisions in advance and the
shocks are considered unpredictable, innovations will not be correlated with ω and u and
an OLS estimator would suﬃce to estimate equation (2) consistently.16 On the contrary, if
firms are assumed to make these investments within the period aﬀected by the shocks ω, the
resulting innovations will be correlated with these shocks, even if they were unpredictable
before. In this case, however, lagged values of the included variables could be considered
uncorrelated with ω and u and used as valid instruments. Finally, if ω is assumed to be
autocorrelated, the timing of the investment decisions becomes irrelevant because the current
value of u depends on its past values and innovations will likely be correlated with past values
of u as well as with its current value. In this case, both d and y2 and their past values are
endogenous and identification should rely on the use of (external) instrumental variables
which can be claimed to be exogenous with respect to ω.
  However, let us make a series of general considerations about the identifiability of the model.
Firstly, there are good reasons in fact to think that productivity shocks are not predictable
or very badly predictable by firms at the moment of deciding and starting their technological
investments; hence, consistent estimation of model (2) by OLS is not too unlikely. For
example, it seems rather unrealistic to assume that firms can forecast their future labour or
organizational problems or demand shocks when deciding R&D investments, which to a large
extent are made well in advance of the innovations they eventually generate.
  On the other hand, if technological investments were positively related with the productiv-
ity shocks ω (e.g., if they are stimulated by an anticipated burst in firm capacity utilization
and the resulting increase in labour productivity), and hence negatively with the overall error
u, we will expect a downward bias in the coeﬃcients of d and y2 . In other words, we would
estimate employment displacement eﬀects of process innovation that are too large and an im-
pact of the introduction of new products that is too low. As we will see, our estimates seem
basically free of such biases after controlling for the remaining problems (see next section)
and using our instrumental variables.
  Finally, while our data base allows us to make only a very limited use of lagged values
  16
       This is the basic timing assumption of models in the espirit of Olley and Pakes (1996), like Levinsohn and
Petrin (2003) or Doraszelski and Jaumandreu (2007).



                                                        13
of innovation or related variables, it fortunately includes some variables which indicate the
reasons for the introduction of innovations and can be convincingly contemplated as a priori
unrelated to the productivity shocks ω (see subsections 3.4 and 5.1).


3.3.2 Measurement problems


  To estimate equation (2), however, we have to face another diﬃcult issue. In this equation,
we must substitute the growth in nominal sales, which is what we observe, for the growth in
real production. The problem that prices are unavailable at the firm level to deflate changes in
nominal sales is in fact common in nearly all firm productivity data analyses. This problem
is particularly relevant here, since we are attempting to estimate the relative eﬃciency of
producing old and new products, which may be sold at diﬀerent prices.17 Denoting g1 =
( P12 YP1211−P 11 Y11
             Y11      ) as the nominal growth rate of sales due to old products, we can approximately
write g1 = y1 + π1 , where π1 = ( P12P−P
                                      11
                                         11
                                            ) is the rate of increase of the prices of old products.
Similarly, but taking into account that Y21 = 0, we can define g2 = ( PP22 Y22
                                                                        11 Y11
                                                                               ) as the nominal
growth in sales that is due to new products and write g2 = y2 (1 + π2 ) = y2 + π2 y2 , where
π2 = ( P22P−P
           11
              11
                 ) is the proportional diﬀerence of the prices of new products with respect to the
prices of the old products. Substituting g1 and g2 for y1 and y2 in equation (2), and moving
g1 to the left-hand side of the equation, we obtain:

                                       l − g1 = α0 + α1 d + βg2 + v                                          (3)

where the new unobserved disturbance is now v = −π1 −βπ 2 y2 +u. In case of a non-zero mean
of π 1 , the model will include −E(π1 ) in the intercept and −(π1 − E(π1 )) in the disturbance.
  To estimate the parameters of (3) consistently, we have thus to take into account two
additional problems.18 Firstly, g2 (i.e., y2 +π2 y2 ) is going to be correlated with the composite
error term v (i.e.,−π1 −βπ 2 y2 +u). We hope that this only happens because π2 y2 is obviously
  17
       We can assume that the old and the new products are ”diﬀerentiated” enough so that they have their
own interrelated downward sloping demand curves. That is, in the first period Y11 = D11 (p11 , z1 ) , and in
the second period the demand system is Y12 = D12 (p12 , p22 , z2 ) and Y22 = D22 (p12 , p22, z2 ), where z1 and
z2 stand for firm-specific, or even product-specific, exogenous demand shifters. The equilibrium prices will
in general depend on the degree of diﬀerentiation of the new and old products as embodied in the demand
functions. However, we do not need to explicitly model these demand functions because our exercise is based
on conditional labour demands. We simply assume that the firm produces the equilibrium quantities (Y11 )
and (Y12 and Y22 ) demanded in the first and second periods, respectively.
  18
     We should also note that the growth rates g1 and g2 are not observed directly, but that they are constructed


                                                       14
correlated with βπ 2 y2 , and that the term y2 is uncorrelated with both π1 and βπ 2 y2 .19 If
this condition is met, the problem amounts to finding an instrumental variable for g2 that
is correlated with the real ratio y2 and uncorrelated with π2 y2 . We discuss such a possible
instrument in subsections 3.4 and 5.1 below. Notice that the likely bias in β in the absence
of instrumentation is an “attenuation” bias.
  Secondly, the composite error term v includes π1 as long as we cannot control for the
change in the prices of the old products. This creates a problem for isolating one of the
structural eﬀects of interest. We know that any increase in eﬃciency decreases marginal
cost by the same proportion. Therefore, if firms are pricing their products competitively or
by setting a markup on marginal cost, price variations are likely to be proportional to the
eﬃciency increase (with an opposite sign). If we suppose, for example, that the price change
π 1 depends on the marginal cost change c according to the rule π1 = π0 + γc, where π0 is
a constant and γ is the pass through parameter (with 0 < γ < 1), and that marginal cost
changes themselves are related to process innovation eﬃciency gains according to c = α1 d,
we can write that π 1 = π0 + γα1 d. Thus, in equation (3), we will only be able to estimate
an attenuated eﬀect (1 − γ)α1 . In other words, in the absence of firm price information, we
can only identify an eﬀect of process innovation on employment net of (direct) compensating
price variations. As such compensating movements can be important (with γ close to 1), we
could even find that process innovation has no eﬀect on employment.
  To deal as best as we can with this latest problem in our econometric analysis, we take the
corresponding industry price indices π as a rough proxy for π1 , available at a more or less
on the basis of observations of the share s of new products in total sales in the second period and the growth
rate of total sales g between the two periods as g2 = s(1 + g) and g1 = g − s(1 + g) (see Appendix B). One
may then wonder about the eﬀect of having a variable that is likely to be measured with error on both sides
of the estimating equation. Supposing that s = s∗ + ε, where s∗ is the true share and ε is white noise (as in
the standard case of random measurement errors in variables), and substituting s for s∗ shows that g2 will be
correlated with an error component (1 − β)ε(1 + g) in equation (3). The potential error in variables bias is
hence likely to be small and to fade away with the instrumentation of g2 .
  19
     Technically, y2 will be uncorrelated with π 2 y2 , if y2 and y22 are uncorrelated with π 2 , or more generally
if π 2 is mean independent of y2 (i.e., E(π 2 |y2 ) = 0). This entails that the change of the prices of the
new products with respect to the prices of the old products P22 /P11 is not a function of the ratio of the
new products to the old products Y22 /Y11 . With many unrelated factors influencing the new prices (quality
improvement or degradation, substitutability among goods, demand shifters, market power, etc.) this is a
reasonable assumption.




                                                        15
detailed industry classification and assigned to firms according to their main activities (see
Appendix B for some precisions). Therefore, in practice we use l − (g1 − π) as the dependent
variable, which will leave the term −(π1 − π) in the error term. We may hope that, to the
extent the firm prices do not deviate much from industry prices, this adjustment at least
partly corrects the attenuation bias in the estimated α1 .


3.4 Estimation strategy


  In summary, to consistently estimate the parameters of interest in our model, we have to
address the endogeneity problem created by the possible correlation of y2 with productivity
shocks and by its necessary replacement by g2 for lack of firm-level price information, and we
have to consider that d could also be correlated with productivity shocks. Our strategy thus
relies on the choice of instrumental variables that can be considered to be uncorrelated with
both the price diﬀerences and the productivity shocks. After some trials, we settled on what
we thought a priori the most appropriate instrument we could consider, but we also used it
in conjonction with two other appropriate instruments (see the detailed discussion of these
issues in subsections 5.1 and 5.2).


4. Innovation and employment across four countries


  In this section, we present descriptive statistics and discuss the results of the initial explo-
ration of the data. The sizes of the national samples diﬀer, but all samples are representative
by industry-size strata. Overall representativeness, however, can diverge across countries,
and therefore comparisons must be considered with due care. Details on the samples and
variable definitions can be found in Appendix B. Tables 2a and 2b present descriptive statis-
tics respectively for the manufacturing and service sector in the four countries.20 For each
variable, the sample is split into three sub-groups according to whether the firm reports that,
over the whole study period 1998-2000, it has not introduced any innovation, has introduced
only process innovations, or has introduced product innovations. We do not distinguish firms
that have introduced both product and process innovations from those that only introduce
product innovations, since we cannot know not from the data whether these two types of
  20
       See Appendix Table B1 for a description of the industry composition of the manufacturing and service
sectors samples.




                                                     16
innovations are related or not.
  Table 2a shows that innovators represent between about 40% (for the UK) and 60% (for
Germany) of manufacturing firms in the four countries, and that about more than three
fourths of them have introduced product innovations (half of them together with process
innovations). Employment growth of innovators is consistently higher than that of non-
innovators across the four countries, with the employment growth for product innovators
being slightly higher than for process innovators only. Productivity gains also tend to be
higher in the innovating firms (with the exception of Spain, where there is almost no diﬀerence
in average productivity growth between innovators and non-innovators). Notice that the
increase in employment in innovative firms is higher despite their larger labour productivity
gains. This shows that, on average, the eﬀects stemming from the growth of output dominate
the displacement eﬀects of innovation. Although all output eﬀects do not necessarily come
from innovation, this suggests that the compensation eﬀects of innovation are likely to be
important.
  The average increase in sales over the period 1998-2000 is high in all countries, reflecting
both an expansionary phase of the industrial cycle and the fact that we are considering
samples of continuing firms. Average sales growth is highest for Spain, even when deflated
with the corresponding rate of price increase, which is also highest. At the time, the Spanish
economy was experiencing a particularly rapid overall growth. Sales growth is consistently
higher for innovators than for non-innovators, with no systematic diﬀerence between firms
that only introduce process innovations and those that introduce product innovations. For
product innovators, sales of new or significantly improved products introduced during the
period 1998-2000 are a very important component of total sales growth: these sales in 2000
(i.e., Y22 ) amount to more than one third of sales of old products in 1998 (i.e., Y11 ) for
the German, Spanish and British firms, and to nearly 20% for the French firms. Sales of
new products appear to cannibalise sales of old products to a diﬀerent extent in the four
countries.21
  Table 2b for the service sector shows that the proportion of innovators is lower in the four
countries than in manufacturing, but relatively high in Germany and particularly low in the
  21
       Note, however, that the fact that average growth in sales of unchanged products is negative for product
innovators does not necessarily imply cannibalisation of old products by new products. For example, it is
possible that firms whose traditional markets are declining are more likely to introduce product innovations.




                                                       17
United Kingdom and Spain. However, in the four countries, the proportion of innovators
that only introduce process innovations is slightly higher than in manufacturing. It is also
the case that in all four countries employment growth is somewhat higher for innovators, and
higher for product innovators than for only process innovators. This suggests that increase
in demand associated with new services plays as important a role in employment creation in
the service sector as in manufacturing. The productivity growth of innovators is, however,
sometimes higher (France, Spain) and sometimes equal or lower (Germany, UK) than the
productivity growth of non-innovators.
  The growth of nominal sales during the three years 1998-2000 is even higher than in manu-
facturing, but the average price increases are also higher. As with employment growth, sales
growth is higher for product innovators, but in this case less for firms that only introduce
process innovations. For product innovators, sales of new products are as large a part of total
sales growth as in manufacturing, although it seems that cannibalisation of old products by
new products may be slightly less.
  To summarize, data across the four countries show that employment grows more in inno-
vative firms, and more intensely in firms with product innovations than in firms with process
innovations. For the firms with product innovations, the demand for the old products always
decreases, but the increase in sales of new products surpasses this decrease (i.e., new products
contribute to an increase in demand). All this suggests that compensation eﬀects of all kinds
are prevalent, and that there is no hope to assess the relative roles played by process and
product innovations without estimating a model as the one we consider here.


5. Econometric results


5.1 Basic specification


  Table 3 presents the results of estimating the basic specification of our model, which is equa-
tion (3), by OLS and by IV, using the increased range indicator as our preferred instrument
for the sales growth due to new products variable. The dependent variable is employment
growth minus the growth of sales due to the unchanged products. As discussed above, we
control for changes in the prices of old products by deducting an industry price growth in-
dex from the nominal sales growth of unchanged products (i.e., the dependent variable is
l − (g1 − π)). The value of the constant is therefore an estimate (with a negative sign) of the


                                               18
average real productivity growth in the production of old products for the two-year period
1998-2000. In all regressions we include a full set of industry dummies, but their coeﬃcients
are constrained to add up to zero in order to preserve the interpretation of the constant.22
The key explanatory variables are the process innovation only dummy d and sales growth
due to new products g2 variables. Let us first discuss in detail the results for manufacturing
and then more briefly the corresponding results for services. In the next subsection, we use
other possible instruments in addition to our preferred one, we test for their joint validity,
and for the endogeneity of the process innovation only variable. Other robustness checks are
discussed in Appendix A.23
  Panel A of Table 3 gives the OLS estimates for manufacturing in the four countries. The
constant α0 of the regression shows sensible average productivity growth for each country,
which implies constantly decreasing employment for a given old products ouput. Recall that
a negative coeﬃcient α1 in the process innovation only indicator represents an additional
increase in productivity (and thus a displacement of labour) in the production of old prod-
ucts. The coeﬃcient is negative and significant for Germany and the UK. The coeﬃcient
is negative but insignificant for France, and positive but insignificant for Spain. These last
two estimates could be due to a larger pass through of productivity improvements in prices
imperfectly picked up by our industry price indices.24 Also recall that the estimated coeﬃ-
cient β of sales growth due to new products is an estimate of the relative eﬃciency of the
production process for new products compared with that for old products. The fact that the
coeﬃcient is significantly less than one for all countries would suggest that new products are
produced more eﬃciently than old products. However, as discussed above, any endogene-
ity (due to unobserved price changes or correlation with the non-technological productivity
shocks) is likely to produce a downward bias in this coeﬃcient, overstating the productivity
gains associated with the production of new products.
  Panel B thus reports on our IV estimates, taking the sales growth due to new products
  22
       Firm size dummies, when included, turned out in general to be not significant, and did not practically
aﬀect our results.
  23
     In particular, we report “naive” exploratory OLS results in Appendix Table A2. These results do not, as
in equation (3), impose the theoretical constraint that the coeﬃcient of (g1 − π) equals one. We also report
IV estimates of equation (3) for two variants of the specification of process innovation in Appendix Table A3
and comment other regressions.
  24
     This seems particularly likely for Spain, where prices have been increasing faster than in the other countries
during the period.


                                                        19
variable as endogenous and using a single instrument (i.e., the equation is exactly identified).
Any valid instrument must be related to growth in sales of new products but not to any
change in the price of new products compared to old products and to productivity shocks.
Among the possible variables we could use, the one we preferred was the increased range
of goods and services indicator, which assesses the impact of innovation on the increase in
the range of goods and services produced by firms, as reported by them in the common CIS
questionnaire for the four countries. The variable is coded as zero if innovation is not relevant
for the range of goods and services produced, one if the impact of innovation on the range is
low, two if it is medium and three if it is high.25 Two other related questions ask the firm
about the impact of innovation for an increased market share and that for improved quality
in goods and services , so that the increased range of goods and services variable must be
interpreted as a measure of the extent to which the firm’s innovation is associated with an
increase in demand for reasons other than changes in product prices and quality. As a result,
we expect this instrument to be uncorrelated with changes in the price of new products
compared to old products. It also seems unlikely that it is correlated with productivity
shocks. We also verify that in practice it will not be a weak instrument since it appears to be
clearly positively and significantly correlated with the endogenous variable in the first-stage
reduced form regressions for the four countries.26
  The IV estimates of the constant and the process innovation only dummy change noticeably
from the OLS ones, showing faster average productivity growth (and corresponding decrease
in employment) in the production of old products and suggesting smaller improvements in
productivity (and employment) due to process innovation in Germany and the UK. But
the most notable result is that the IV estimates of the coeﬃcient β of sales growth due to
new products are higher than the OLS estimates, which is consistent, as expected, with the
correction of the downward biases related to endogeneity and price mismeasurement. All the
IV estimated β are extremely close to one, now showing no evidence that new products are
produced with higher eﬃciency than old products, that is, no evidence of productivity gains
and employment displacement eﬀects associated with product innovation.
  25
       We have experimented with a more flexible form of this variable, but this step variable appears to fit the
data remarkably well, with very little evidence of any non-linear eﬀect in the reduced form equation.
  26
     In France, Germany, Spain and the UK, the R-squared statistics obtained in these first-stage regressions
are respectively equal to 0.39, 0.20, 0.35 and 0.28, and the corresponding coeﬃcients on the increased range
equal to 5.3, 10.5, 11.2 and 14.5, with t-statistics of 30.8, 15.8, 26.9 and 16.0.



                                                        20
  Turning now to services, we have to consider their results with particular caution (as was
suggested in subsection 2.1). In addition, we have to take into account the following two
diﬀerences with respect to what we were able to do for manufacturing. First, in spite of the
great heterogeneity of service activities, we were able to use only an overall price deflator in
France and Spain, and in Germany and the UK price deflators are available at a very high level
of aggregation. Secondly, the proportion of innovating firms in services is much lower than
in manufacturing, particularly so in Spain and the UK, which can largely aﬀect the precision
of the estimates. Despite these caveats, the results we obtain, shown in Panels C and D of
Table 3, look interesting. Average productivity growth in production of the old product, as
revealed by the constant term, is higher than in manufacturing for France, lower in Germany
and Spain, and about the same in the UK. Not too surprisingly, process innovation only is
not significant in any country. And, as in manufacturing, the coeﬃcients on sales growth due
to new products are less than one in the OLS case (particularly in Germany), but augment
to become insignificantly diﬀerent from one in all four countries when estimated by IV, using
the increased range variable as an instrument. We cannot thus reject the hypothesis that
new products are, on average, produced with the same productivity as old products, although
there is some slight indication that new products could be produced with lower productivity
in France (with an estimated coeﬃcient β of 1.15 statistically diﬀerent from 1 at the 10%
level of confidence).


5.2 Testing endogeneity


  The consistency of our IV estimates of equation (3) in Table 3 is supported by the a priori
likelihood of the exogeneity assumptions about our preferred instrument, as well as our use
of a growth rate specification which diﬀerences out the fixed eﬀects. It is also important that
all coeﬃcient changes obtained by instrumenting the equation go in the direction expected
when correcting for the endogeneity biases, and lead to estimates of reasonable magnitude.
Here we provide some additional statistical evidence for the consistency and robutness of our
results.
  We looked for other potential instruments in addition to the increased range variable. We
thought that a similar variable based on the answer of the firms to the CIS question on the
importance of clients or customers as a source of information for innovation (clients as a



                                              21
source of information), and the indicator of continuous R&D investment during in 1998 to
2000 (continuous R&D engagement) were a priori valid and should be well correlated with
both the sales growth due to new products variable g2 and the process innovation only variable
d.27 Using these three variables as instruments provides two overidentifying restrictions if
we maintain the assumption that d is exogenous, and one restriction if we consider that this
variable is also endogenous. We use them to test for the overidentifying restrictions by means
of a χ2 test (Sargan test). This provides us with an indicator of the validity of the employed
instruments. Then, we use them to test for the exogeneity assumption maintained until now
on d by means of a diﬀerence in the χ2 tests (“diﬀerence-in-Sargan” test).28
  Panel A in Tables 4a and 4b for manufacturing and services, respectively, present the IV
estimates of equation (3) using the three instruments for g2 and performing the two Sargan
tests of overidentifying restrictions. The overall Sargan test does not reject the joint validity
of the three instruments with high degree of confidence for all four countries in manufacturing
and services. The diﬀerence-in-Sargan test does not reject the exogeneity of d, again with
high degree of confidence. The statistical evidence thus provided confirms our previous IV
estimates in Panels B and D of Table 3 (assuming exogeneity of d and instrumenting g2 by
the increased range variable only).
  However, such confirmatory evidence is only as good as the discriminatory capacity of the
Sargan tests. To have a feeling of whether such discriminatory power could be weak, we have
also estimated equation (3) using a much more doubtful set of instruments, and computed the
corresponding overall Sargan tests. To the increased range instrument, we add the importance
of innovation for the improvement of the quality of the product and the increase of the firms’
market share (improved quality and increased market share), and innovation eﬀort (ratio of
R&D and other innovation expenditures to sales). A product quality improvement is likely
to be associated with a price increase, an increase in firm market share can follow from a
  27
       The overall R-square of the first-stage regressions of the sales growth due to new products on the set of the
three instruments are respectively equal to 0.41, 0.46, 0.39 and 0.37 in manufacturing for France, Germany,
Spain and the United Kingdom , and, similarly, to 0.36, 0.42, 0.38 and 0.45 in services.
  The F statistics of the regressions of the process innovation only variable on the set of the three instruments
are 36.6, 3.5, 61.4 and 23.6 in manufacturing, and 24.7, 5.9, 27.8 and 7.8 in services.
  28
     The overall Sargan test evaluates the appropriate scaled value of the objective function at the optimum.
The “diﬀerence-in-Sargan” test measures the change in the appropriately scaled value of the objective function
when the assumption of exogeneity of d is maintained and when it is dropped.




                                                         22
price reduction resulting itself from some process improvement, and a change in the firm
innovation eﬀort may be rapidly decided in reaction to important productivity shocks. The
results, shown in Panel B of Tables 4a and 4b, are clear. The overall Sargan tests clearly
reject the validity of this alternative set of instruments at a 1% and 5% level of significance
in Germany and Spain, respectively, for manufacturing and at 1% in France and the United
Kingdom for services and a 5% level of significance for German services. This again, but
this time a contrario, supports our choice of the increased range variable as an appropriate
instrument.
  Finally, it is of interest to present one last piece of evidence for the same conclusion, even
if for only one country. The instruments that we are able to use pertain to the year 2000 or
the period 1998-2000, and are therefore contemporaneous to g2 . A particularly appropriate
choice of instruments under some circumstances discussed above would be that of lags of
a variable like firms’ innovation or R&D eﬀort. Unfortunately, such information was not
available from the CIS3 data alone, and we have only been able to get it in the case of
German manufacturing. Column C of Table 4a shows the results we obtain in this case,
using lagged R&D eﬀort as another instrument in addition to the increased range variable.
The Sargan test does not reject, with a very high degree of confidence, that the two variables
can be taken as alternative valid instruments.


6. An employment growth decomposition


  An interesting way to summarise the evidence obtained with our estimates is to use them
to decompose the four country employment growth average, over the two year study period
1998-2000, into four diﬀerent components. Using our preferred specification, we can write
employment growth for each firm in the following way:
        P                                                                              b 2) + u
   l=    j (b
            α0    b 0j )indj + α
                 +α            b 1 d + [1 − 1(g2 > 0)](g1 − π1 ) + 1(g2 > 0)(g1 − π1 + βg     b



with the same notations as before and with indj denoting the industry dummies and α  b 0j their
                                                               P
estimated coeﬃcients. For a given firm, the first component ( j (b      b 0j )indj ) measures
                                                                   α0 + α
the change in its employment attributable to the (industry specific) productivity trend in
                                                  α1 d) estimates the change in employment
production of old products; the second component (b
associated with the gross productivity eﬀect of process innovation in the production of old

                                                 23
products; the third one ([1 − 1(g2 > 0)](g1 − π1 )) corresponds to the employment change
associated with output growth of old products for firms that do not introduce new products;
                                                 b 2 )) gives the net contribution of product
and finally, the fourth one (1(g2 > 0)(g1 − π1 + βg
innovation (i. e., contribution after allowing for any substitution of new products for old
products). The last term (b
                          u) is a zero-mean residual component.
  Table 5 reports the application of this decomposition to the eight samples of manufacturing
and services firms in the four countries, using the proportions and averages from Table 2a
and Table 2b for each sample, and the regression IV estimates from Panel B and Panel D in
Table 3. Notice that for each sample the average residual component is equal to zero, and
thus the productivity trend in the production of old products can be obtained by subtracting
the sum of the other components from the average employment growth.
  First considering manufacturing, Table 5 shows that incremental productivity improve-
ments in the production of existing products are an important source of reductions in em-
ployment requirements for a given level of output. The eﬀect is smallest in France (-1.9%
over two years) and largest in Germany (-7.5% over two years). However, growth in output of
existing products over this expansionary period more than compensates for the productivity
eﬀect in all countries except Germany.
  Individual process innovations account for only small employment changes in all countries,
generally resulting in a small displacement eﬀect. This can be partly because process in-
novation eﬀects are in practice somewhat underestimated, but also because the number of
firms that introduce only process innovations is small. Employment reductions resulting from
process innovations may indeed be important for individual firms, but they amount to only
a small fraction of overall employment changes.
  In contrast, product innovations play an important role in stimulating firm-level employ-
ment growth. The decomposition shows that the eﬀect of new product sales, even net of the
cannibalisation of old products, is sizeable in all countries. It implies an average firm-level
employment increase over the period ranging from 4.8% in the UK to 8.0% in Germany.29
  Overall, the importance of innovation for firm-level employment growth becomes clear when
the diﬀerent sources of employment change are compared. In Germany, where the combined
  29
       Peters (2008) estimates the employment eﬀects of innovation in Germany for the recession period 2000-
2002. Though the magnitude of the eﬀects she finds are smaller, the overall conclusions remain similar: in
particular the net contribution of product innovation accounts for large part of employment growth.




                                                      24
eﬀect of growth in existing output and trend productivity increases in the production of
existing products is slightly negative, product innovation is responsible for more than the
whole average firm-level employment growth during the period. Even in Spain and the
UK, where the growth of sales of old products is responsible for a large proportion of net
employment growth, product innovation is on average more important than the net eﬀect of
growth in sales of existing products.
  Looking next at the corresponding results for services, they appear somewhat diﬀerent. Av-
erage within-firm employment growth is almost double that in manufacturing during the pe-
riod, and more than double in the UK. On average, product innovation accounts for a smaller
proportion of total employment growth than in manufacturing, but still non-negligible. In
Spain and the UK, the main source of firm-level employment growth is growth in the pro-
duction of old products, with a small counterbalancing eﬀect of trend productivity increases
only in the UK. In France, the contribution of product innovation is roughly the same as
the net contribution of the growth of sales of existing products. Total employment growth
is lower in Germany, and growth in the production of new products accounts for a share of
employment growth that is larger in Germany than in the other countries.
  Keeping in mind the limitations of the analysis stressed in section 3.3, the decomposition
given in Table 5 can be read as a simple but eﬀective way to show what our estimates say
about the average eﬀect of firm innovation on employment. In short, we find that process
innovations only tend to have a negligible eﬀects on employment, because we measure weak
displacement eﬀects and because they aﬀect few firms (when not associated with product
innovations). On the contrary, productivity trends, which correspond to general sources of
technical progress other than firms’ own innovations, result in important displacement eﬀects
on employment in services and even larger ones in manufacturing. However, the eﬀects that
can be attributed to the growth of sales of new products appear strong enough to more than
compensate for these eﬀects. The implication is that employment would have shown small
positive rates of growth almost everywhere, even if the demand for old products had suddenly
stopped growing. Overall, the net contribution of product innovation to employment growth
for the two-year period 1998-2000 is in the 5% to 8% range, which is quite impressive.




                                             25
7. Concluding remarks


  Understanding the relationship between innovation and employment at the micro level is
essential for predicting how innovation might aﬀect employment, and hence for the eﬀective
design of innovation policy together with other policy interventions. In this paper, we have
derived a simple formal model of the firm-level relationship between innovation and employ-
ment growth, and we have estimated it by using a source of comparable and representative
data on innovation in manufacturing and services firms across four European countries. Our
results shed new light on the relative roles of displacement and compensation eﬀects of prod-
uct and process innovation on employment growth in manufacturing. They also provide an
insight into this relationship in services.
  Our results, however, are only a first step in the analysis in at least three important
respects. First, the lack of data to model the demand side of firms’ activity imposes some
obvious limitations when estimating the displacement and compensation eﬀects of innovation.
In particular, “business stealing” eﬀects cannot be separately identified from pure market ex-
pansion, and compensation eﬀects resulting from price pass-through cannot be fully assessed.
Secondly, we have considered only the total level of employment and not its composition in
terms of skills or types of worker. For example, our results suggest that workers on aver-
age have little to fear from product innovation, but we have not been able to address the
possibility that new products are more complementary to skilled than to unskilled workers.
Thirdly, our results do not relate directly to aggregate employment growth, since we do not
observe nor explain why firms enter and exit from our samples, nor do we consider why and
how firms innovate and grow. All these topics represent important lines of research at the
micro level and suggest high returns to increasing the richness of available data sources.
  In spite of their limitations, our findings are interesting. They reveal that, in manufac-
turing, although process innovation tends to displace employment, compensation eﬀects are
prevalent, and product innovation is associated with employment growth. The destruction
of jobs through process innovation, as well as being relatively infrequent, seems to be weak.
At the same time, we observe no evidence of displacement eﬀects associated with product
innovation, and compensation eﬀects resulting from the introduction of new products imply
employment growth even when the cannibalisation of old products is taken into account. In
the service sector, we find no evidence of displacement eﬀects from process innovation, and


                                              26
the growth in sales of new products, although relatively less important than in manufacturing,
accounts for a non-negligible proportion of employment growth. These results agree well with
the already existing and provide explanations for both the strong positive eﬀect of product
innovation on employment and the inconclusive or fragile eﬀects of process innovation that
have usually been found.
  Overall, the results are similar across countries, although there emerge some interesting
diﬀerences, which might also merit further investigation, probably by extending our analysis
to diﬀerent periods when possible. For example, we find no evidence for a displacement
eﬀect of process innovation in Spanish manufacturing, possibly due to greater pass-through
of productivity improvements in lower prices. Product innovation appears to play a larger
role in employment growth in Germany than in the other countries, and possibly a smaller
role in the UK, while higher levels of firm-level employment growth over this period in Spain
are largely explained by faster growth in output of existing products.




                                             27
Appendix A: Additional regressions


Naive OLS regressions


  OLS descriptive or “naive” regressions for the manufacturing and services samples in each
country are presented in Table A1. In each case, employment growth is regressed on deflated
total sales growth, dummies for “process innovation only” and product innovation, and a full
set of industry dummies.
  The coeﬃcient on real sales growth is fairly stable across samples and is a long way below
unity in all cases. On face value, this suggests that sales growth is associated with less than
one-for-one growth in employment. The coeﬃcient on the “process innovation only” dummy
is insignificant in all cases apart from Spanish manufacturing, where it is positive, suggesting
a negative correlation between process innovation and productivity growth. Overall, the
results are quite uninformative about the relative roles of displacement and compensation
eﬀects in the relationship between innovation and employment growth. They mainly show
what is gained by imposing more structure on the data using our theoretical model and
information about the mix of sales between old and new products.


Alternative process innovation specifications


  Since we do not know whether process innovations refer to the production of old or new
products, we considered two extreme alternative specifications of our model. In Panels A and
B of Table A2 for manufacturing, and similarly in Panels C and D for services, we respectively
present IV estimates for a specification assuming that all the process innovations of product
innovators correspond to the production of old products, and for a specification assuming
that they all correspond to the production of new products.
  The coeﬃcient on the process and product innovation indicator in Panel A for manu-
facturing is negative and insignificant for Germany and Spain, but positive and marginally
significant for France and the UK, apparently suggesting that the process innovations of
product innovators are associated with employment growth in production of the old product
(or slower productivity growth) after allowing for any price pass-through. However, in both
cases, comparing these estimates to our previous ones (in Panel B of Table 3 in the text), we
see that, while the coeﬃcient on the process innovation only indicator remains unchanged,


                                              28
the coeﬃcient on sales growth due to new products is slightly reduced from about 1.0 to
about 0.9, suggesting lower employment growth associated with production of the new prod-
uct. The results in Panel C for services are unchanged from previously, the coeﬃcient for the
product and process indicator being insignicant in all four countries, as well as that for the
process inovation only indicator.
  The other alternative hypothesis that the process innovations of product innovators are in
fact associated with production of new products is tested in Panels B and D by including a
variable interacting the process and product innovation indicator and the sales growth due
to new products variable, thereby allowing the average relative productivity in production of
the old and the new products to be diﬀerent for firms that also introduce process innovations.
In this case, as an additional instrument, we use the existing increased range instrument in-
teracted with the process and product innovation dummy. For manufacturing, the estimates
correspond closely with those in Panel A, with insignificant negative coeﬃcients on the inter-
acted variable for Germany and Spain, and positive and marginally significant coeﬃcients for
France and the UK, suggesting that new products are associated with smaller productivity
increases (or larger productivity decreases) for firms that also introduce process innovations.
For services, as in Panel C, the estimates in Panel D are unchanged from previously, the
coeﬃcients of the interacted variable being insignificant in the four countries.
  Overall, given the available data, we are not able to distinguish between the alternative
hypotheses embodied in Panels A and C and in Panels B and D, and the not-too-surprising
conclusion is that the truth is very likely in between, with process innovations being associated
with both old products and new products. For this reason, our preferred specification is that
of Table3 in the main text, where we can be sure that the process innovations of firms that
do not introduce new products relate to the old product.


Other regressions


  We have also carried out other regressions to take advantage of the availability of a given
variable, sometimes for a single country. These are variables that were not included in the
core CIS3 questionnaire, but were added by the relevant statistical agencies in individual
countries.
  First, in all countries, we included the ratio of physical investment to the value of the sales



                                               29
at the beginning of the period (in 1998) as an explanatory variable. Introducing this variable
may control for the role of investment in the subsequent growth of employment, and can
also be interpreted as an indirect check on the assumption of no changes in relative factor
prices. In the case of a change in factor prices, this variable would tend to be significant. We
found that the variable was significant for some regressions but the coeﬃcients on process
innovation only and sales growth due to new products were not significantly aﬀected.
  Secondly, we introduced a variable specific to the German data indicating whether firm
process innovations are associated with rationalisation (cost reduction). The results suggest
that these cost-reducing process innovations are particularly focused on reducing employment
requirements (see Peters, 2004, for more details).
  Thirdly, we checked whether the growth in employment over the observed period might be
measuring only a fraction of the total eﬀect of innovation, with the remaining eﬀect taking
place after the end of the period. To test for this possibility, we included a variable from
the Spanish data specifying what firms expect the change in their level of employment to be
over the coming two years. The coeﬃcient on expected employment growth was negative but
insignificant, suggesting that we are not missing important dynamic eﬀects in our preferred
specification.
  Finally, firms in the UK are asked separately about the proportion of their sales in 2000
that are accounted for by “significantly improved” and by “new products” stricto sensu,
whereas firms in other countries are only asked about the proportion accounted for by “new
or significantly improved” products. This allowed us to test whether our results would be
significantly diﬀerent if “new products” stricto sensu were distinguished from products that
are merely significantly improved. In fact, our results remained practically unchanged.




                                              30
Appendix B: Data


Country samples


  The Community Innovation Surveys (CIS) are carried out in European countries every
four years, in general by the national statistical oﬃces under the coordination of Eurostat.
The questionnaire is harmonised, following the recommendations of the Oslo Manual; it
includes some common “core” questions for all countries, as well as optional ones which
can diﬀer among countries. CIS3 is the survey performed in 2001, referring to the period
1998-2000. The institutions directly in charge were mainly INSEE and SESSI for France,
ZEW for Germany, INE for Spain and the DTI for the United Kingdom. Firm participation
in answering the questionnaire is compulsory in France and Spain, but only voluntary in
Germany and the UK. Samples are representative, although the sampling frame diﬀer across
countries. A detailed analysis of the main characteristics of CIS3 for the four countries, as
well as an assessment of its comparability, can be found in Abramovsky, Jaumandreu, Kremp
and Peters (2004).
  The samples used in the present study (corresponding to Tables 2a and 2b in the text)
have been defined and cleaned in order to improve their comparability in terms of indus-
try composition and firm size coverage; they have also been slightly cleaned from a priori
outliers, which could be particularly influential and strongly contaminate our econometric re-
sults. Firms which show significant reductions or increases in turnover as a result of mergers,
closures or scissions have been excluded, as well as all firms which show incomplete data or
changes in sales or employment higher than 300%. The German sample has been restricted
to firms with 10 or more employees to match the Spanish and UK samples. However, the
French sample refers only to firms with 20 or more employees in manufacturing, and it does
not include the transport industry in services. Table B1 gives the list of the eleven manu-
facturing industries and seven service industries covered in the study samples, as well as the
number of firms and the average firm size by country and industry.


Variable Definitions (in alphabetical order)


  Clients as source of information: Variable which takes the value 0 if the firm reports that
clients as a source of information for innovation have not been used, 1 if they have been of


                                              31
low importance, 2 if they have been of medium importance and 3 if they have been of high
importance.
  Continuous R&D engagement: Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the firms report
continuous engagement in intramural R&D activities during the period.
  Employment growth: Rate of change of the firm’s employment for the whole period.
  Expected employment growth:      Rate of change in employment implied for expected em-
ployment in the coming two years (between 2000 and 2002).
  Increased market share: Variable which takes the value 0 if the firm reports that the eﬀect
of innovation has been irrelevant for market share, 1 if it has had a low impact, 2 if it has
had a medium impact, and 3 if it has had a high impact.
  Increased range: Variable which takes the value 0 if the firm reports that the eﬀect of
innovation has been irrelevant for the broadening of the range of goods and services, 1 if it
has had a low impact, 2 if it has had a medium impact, and 3 if it has had a high impact.
  Industry dummies: System of industry dummies according to the list of industries given
in Table B1.
  Innovation eﬀort: Ratio of R&D and other innovation expenditures to current turnover.
  Improved quality: Variable which takes the value 0 if the firm reports that the eﬀect of
innovation has been irrelevant for the quality of goods and services, 1 if it has had a low
impact, 2 if it has had a medium impact, and 3 if it has had a high impact.
  Investment/sales98: Ratio of the value of investment during the period to the value of
turnover in 1998.
  Prices indices at detailed industry levels: For France, they are obtained for manufacturing
and services at a 2.5-digit level of classification on the basis of the National Accounts value-
added deflators. For Germany, in manufacturing they are constructed at a 3-digit level (and
in a few cases at a 2-digit level) on the basis of the producer price indices published by the
German statistical oﬃce; in the service sector they have been obtained only at the level of
the seven industries on the basis of the producer price indices or from diﬀerent components
on the consumer price indices (for details, see Peters, 2004). For Spain, for manufacturing
they correspond to the 88-industry series of the “Indices de precios industriales” from INE,
and for services to diﬀerent components of the consumer price indices. For the UK, they are
computed at a 4-digit level for manufacturing on the basis of the ONS output deflators, and
at a 1.5-digit level for services on the basis of OECD output deflators.


                                              32
  Process and product innovation: Dummy which takes the value 1 if the firm reports hav-
ing introduced new or significantly improved products and production processes during the
period.
  Process innovation: Dummy which takes the value 1 if the firm reports having introduced
new or significantly improved production processes during the period.
  Process innovation of rationalisation: Dummy which takes the value 1 if the firm reports
having introduced some process innovation with rationalisation (cost reduction) purposes
during the period.
  Process innovation only: Dummy which takes the value 1 if the firm reports having intro-
duced new or significantly improved production processes during the period but no new or
significantly improved products.
  R&D eﬀort: Ratio of total R&D expenditure to current turnover.
  Sales growth: Rate of change of the firm’s turnover for the whole period (formally equal
          P22 Y22 +P12 Y12 −P11 Y11
to g =             P11 Y11          ).
  Sales growth due to new products: Computed as the product of the fraction of turnover
due to new or significantly improved products and one plus the rate of change of the firm’s
turnover for the whole period (notice that, denoting s as the proportion of sales in 2000
                                              P22 Y22                            P22 Y22
accounted for by new products, we have   P22 Y22 +P12 Y12   = s and hence g2 =   P11 Y11   = s(1 + g)).
  Sales growth due to old products: Sales growth minus sales growth due to new products.




                                              33
References


Abramovsky, L., J. Jaumandreu, E. Kremp and B. Peters (2004), “National diﬀerences in
    innovation behaviour: Facts and explanations. Results using CIS3 data for France,
    Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom,” mimeo, http://www.eco.uc3m.es/IEEF.

Benavente, J.M. and R. Lauterbach (2008), “The eﬀect of innovation on employment, evi-
    dence from Chilean firms,” forthcoming in The European Journal of Development Re-
    search.

Blanchflower, D. and S. Burguess (1998), “New technology and jobs: Comparative evidence
    from a two-country study,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 5, 109-138.

Blechinger, D., A. Kleinknecht, G. Licht and F. Pfeiﬀer (1998), “The impact of innovation
    on employment in Europe. An analysis using CIS data,” ZEW Discussion Paper 98-02,
    ZEW.

Brouwer, E., A. Kleinknecht and J. Reijnen (1993), “Employment growth and innovation
    at the firm level. An empirical study,” Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 3, 153-159.

Chennells, L. and J. Van Reenen (2002), “Technical change and the structure of employment
    and wages: A survey on the microeconometric evidence,” in Greenan, N., Y. L’Horty
    and J. Mairesse (eds.), Productivity, Inequality and the Digital Economy, MIT Press,
    175-224.

Doms, M., T. Dunne and M. Roberts (1995), “The role of technology use in the survival and
    growth of manufacturing plants,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 13,
    523-542.

Doraszelski, U. and J. Jaumandreu (2007), “R&D and productivity: Estimating production
    functions when productivity is endogenous,” mimeo, Harvard University and Universi-
    dad Carlos III.

Entorf, H. and W. Pohlmeier (1990),“Employment, innovation and export activity: Evidence
    from firm-level data,” in Florens, J.P., M. Ivaldi, J.J. Laﬀont and F. Laisney (eds.),
    Microeconometrics: Surveys and applications, Oxford, 394-415.



                                           34
Evangelista, R. (2000), “Sectoral patterns of technological change in services,” Economics
    of Innovation and New Technology, 9, 183-221.

Garcia, A., J. Jaumandreu and C. Rodriguez (2002), “Innovation and jobs: Evidence from
    manufacturing firms,” UC3M, http://www.eco.uc3m.es/IEEF.

Greenan, N. and D. Guellec (2000), “Technological innovation and employment realloca-
    tion,” Labour, 14, 547-590.

Griﬃth, R., E. Huergo, J. Mairesse and B. Peters (2006), “Innovation and productivity
    across four European countries,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 22, 483-498.

Hall, B.H. and J. Mairesse (1995), “Exploring the relationship betwen R&D and productivity
    in French manufacturing firms,” Journal of Econometrics, 65, 263-293.

Hall, B.H., F. Lotti and J. Mairesse (2008), “Employment, innovation and productivity:
    Evidence from Italian microdata,” forthcoming in Industrial and Corporate Change.

Huergo, E. and J. Jaumandreu (2004), “Firms’ age, process innovation and productivity
    growth,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 22, 541-559.

Klette, T. and S.E. Forre (1998), “Innovation and job creation in a small open economy:
    Evidence from Norwegian manufacturing plants 1982-92,” Economics of Innovation and
    New Technology, 5, 247-272.

König, H., G. Licht and H. Buscher (1995), “Employment, investment and innovation at
    the firm level,” in OECD (ed.), The OECD jobs study. Investment, productivity and
    employment, Paris, 67-81.

Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin (2003), “Estimating production functions using inputs to control
    for unobservables,” Review of Economic Studies, 70, 317-341.

Mairesse J. and M. Sassenou (1991), “R&D and productivity: a survey of econometric
    studies at the firm level,” Science-Technology Industry Review, OECD, 8, 9-43.

Nickell, S. (1999), “Product markets and labour markets,” Labour Economics, 6, 1-20.

Nickell, S. and P. Kong (1989), “Technical progress and jobs,” Discussion Paper no. 366,
    Centre for Labour Economics, Oxford.

                                            35
OECD and Eurostat (1997), Oslo Manual, Proposed guidelines for collecting and interpreting
    technological innovation data, Paris.

Olley S. and A. Pakes (1996), “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
    equipment industry,” Econometrica, 64, 1263-1297.

Peters, B. (2004), “Employment eﬀects of diﬀerent innovation activities: Microeconometric
    evidence,” ZEW Discussion Paper 04-73, ZEW.

Peters, B. (2008), “Innovation and firm performance: An empirical investigation for German
    firms,” ZEW Economic Studies 38.

Regev, H. (1998), “Innovation, skilled labour, technology and performance in Israeli indus-
    trial firms,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 5, 301-323.

Ross, D.R. and K. Zimmerman (1993), “Evaluating reported determinants of labour de-
    mand,” Labour Economics, 1, 71-84.

Smolny, W. (1998), “Innovations, prices and employment. A theoretical model and an
    empirical application for West German manufacturing firms,” Journal of Industrial
    Economics, 3, 359-381.

Smolny, W. (2002), “Employment adjustment at the firm level. A theoretical model and
    empirical investigation for West German manufacturing firms,” Labour, 4, 65-88.

Spiezia, V. and M. Vivarelli (2002), "Innovation and employment: A critical survey," in
    Greenan, N., Y. L’Horty and J. Mairesse (eds), Productivity, Inequality and the Digital
    Economy, MIT Press, 101-131.

Triplett, J.E. and B.P. Bosworth (2004), Productivity in the US Services Sector. New Sources
    of Economic Growth, Brookings Institution Press.

Van Reenen, J. (1997), “Employment and technological innovation: evidence from UK
    manufacturing firms,” Journal of Labour Economics, 2, 255-284.




                                            36
                                                    Table 1. Employment eﬀects of innovation

                                       Displacement                    Compensation

                          Process      Productivity eﬀect (<0): less   Price eﬀect (>0): cost reduction, passed   ⇐=   Depends on firm
                          innovation   labour for a given output       on to price, expands demand                     agents’ behaviour
R&D and Innovation   =⇒                                                                                                        m
expenditures
                          Product      Productivity diﬀerences         Demand enlargement eﬀect (>0)              ⇐=   Depends on
                          innovation   of the new product (>0 or <0)                                                   competition
     Table 2a. Manufacturing firms: Process and product innovators,
               growth of employment and sales, 1998-20001,2

                                                       France     Germany      Spain       UK
No   of firms                                           4631        1319        4548      2533

Non-innovators (%)                                      47.7        41.5        55.4       60.5
Process only (%)                                         7.1        10.2        12.2       11.0
Product innovators (%)                                  45.2        48.4        32.4       28.5
  [Of which product & process innovators]              [24 .3 ]    [27 .4 ]    [20 .0 ]   [14 .1 ]

Employment growth (%)
 All firms                                              8 .3        5 .9        14 .2      6 .6
 Non-innovators                                         7.0         2.4         12.6       5.4
 Process only                                           7.5         6.0         16.2       8.0
 Product innovators                                     9.8         8.9         16.2       8.5

Sales growth3 (%)
  All firms                                             13 .0       15 .2       23 .2     12 .3
  Non-innovators                                        11.0        10.8        21.7      10.8
  Process only                                          13.4        21.7        23.6      16.3
  Product innovators                                    15.0        17.5        25.7      13.9
    of which:
    Old products                                        −2.3       −17.0       −13.7      −21.2
    New products                                        17.3       34.5        39.4        35.1

Productivity growth (%)
  All firms                                             4 .7        9 .3         9 .0      5 .7
 Non-innovators                                         4.0         8.4          9.1       5.3
 Process only                                           5.9         15.7         7.4       8.3
 Product innovators                                     7.5          8.7         9.5       5.4

Prices growth4 (%)
  All firms                                             2.5         1.3          3.9      -1.7
 Non-innovators                                         2.5         1.1          4.0      −1.0
 Process only                                           3.1         2.4          4.2      −0.4
 Product innovators                                     2.4         1.3          3.7      −3.3
1 Rates    of growth for the whole period 1998-2000.
2 Population    is firms with 10 or more employees. Entrant firms and firms aﬀected by
mergers and scissions not considered.
3 Sales   growth for each type of firm is the average of variable g and averages for old and
new products are the averages of variables g1 and g2 , respectively.
4 Prices   computed for a set of industries and assigned to firms according to their activity.
            Table 2b. Services firms: Process and product innovators,
                  growth of employment and sales, 1998-20001,2

                                                       France     Germany      Spain      UK
No   of firms                                           1653        849         1839      1794

Non-innovators (%)                                      60.2        51.4        69.1       70.2
Process only (%)                                         8.5         9.3         9.4        7.0
Product innovators (%)                                  31.3        39.3        21.5       19.8
  [Of which product & process innovators]              [17 .2 ]    [21 .7 ]    [11 .9 ]   [8 .1 ]

Employment growth (%)
 All firms                                              15 .5       10 .2       25 .9     16 .1
 Non-innovators                                         14.2         5.9        24.8      13.8
 Process only                                            9.9         6.1        24.5      18.6
 Product innovators                                     19.4        16.9        30.1      23.7

Sales growth3 (%)
  All firms                                             18 .4       18 .5       32 .3     22 .7
  Non-innovators                                        16.3        14.4        30.9      21.2
  Process only                                          16.1        11.2        30.9      24.1
  Product innovators                                    23.1        25.6        37.8      28.2
    of which:
    Old products                                        −3.2       −15.9        −8.9      −14.1
    New products                                        26.3       41.5         46.7      42.2

Productivity growth (%)
  All firms                                             2 .9        8 .3         6 .4     6 .7
 Non-innovators                                         2.1         8.5          6.1      7.4
 Process only                                           6.2         5.1          6.4      5.5
 Product innovators                                     3.7         8.7          7.7      4.5

Prices growth4 (%)
  All firms                                              1.8         4.2         7.3       2.3
 Non-innovators                                          1.8         5.0         7.3       2.3
 Process only                                            1.8         4.7         7.3       1.0
 Product innovators                                      1.8         3.0         7.3       3.0
1 Rates    of growth for the whole period 1998-2000.
2 Population    is firms with 10 or more employees. Entrant firms and firms aﬀected by
mergers and scissions not considered.
3 Sales   growth for each type of firm is the average of variable g and averages for old and
new products are the averages of variables g1 and g2 , respectively.
4 Prices   computed for a set of industries and assigned to firms according to their activity.
                                                    Table 3. The eﬀects of innovation on employment

Dependent variable: l − (g1 − π)

Sector                                       MANUFACTURING                                                                SERVICES

Regression                      A (OLS)                             B (IV2 )                            C (OLS)                             D (IV2 )

                      FR       GE       SP       UK       FR       GE       SP       UK       FR       GE       SP       UK       FR       GE       SP       UK

Constant              -1.64    -4.55    -3.62    -4.21    -3.52    -6.95    -6.11    -6.30    -1.62    -1.96    -2.94    -3.72    -5.25    -3.36    -4.04    -5.51
                     (0.59)   (1.17)   (0.71)   (0.81)   (0.78)   (1.36)   (0.90)   (0.85)   (2.02)   (2.64)   (2.03)   (1.54)   (2.48)   (3.05)   (2.25)   (1.61)

Process innova-       -2.88    -8.49    0.30     -5.49    -1.31    -6.19    2.46     -3.51    -4.49    -1.48    -1.05    1.80     -1.45    1.54     -0.38    3.21
tion only (d)        (1.53)   (2.92)   (1.68)   (1.84)   (1.57)   (2.92)   (1.78)   (1.86)   (3.30)   (2.83)   (3.26)   (3.56)   (3.47)   (3.07)   (3.37)   (3.54)

Sales growth d.t.     0.77     0.87     0.86     0.80     0.98     1.01     1.02     0.99     0.85     0.75     0.91     0.89     1.16     0.92     0.99     1.05
new products (g2 )   (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.03)   (0.06)   (0.06)   (0.07)   (0.04)   (0.05)   (0.07)   (0.06)   (0.05)   (0.06)   (0.13)   (0.08)   (0.08)   (0.06)



Standard error      28.01 27.14 35.97 30.07             28.21 27.31 36.25 30.45                44.57 33.44     43.31    37.95    45.11    33.66    43.37    38.02
No of firms         4631     1319     4548    2533       4631      1319     4548    2533        1653   849     1839     1794     1653      849     1839     1794
1
  Coeﬃcients and standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include industry dummies.
2
  Unique instrument used is increased range.
                            Table 4a. Testing the specification (Manufacturing)

Dependent variable: l − (g1 − π)

Regression                               A2                                            B3                            C4

                       FR          GE          SP        UK         FR         GE             SP         UK          GE

Constant              -3.44      -6.32         -5.99    -6.30      -3.51       -7.49         -5.27      -6.38        -7.03
                     (0.77)     (1.30)        (0.88)   (0.85)     (0.76)      (1.25)        (0.86)     (0.84)       (1.36)

Process innova-       -1.37      -6.80         2.35     -3.51      -1.32       -5.67         1.73       -3.43        -6.11
tion only (d)        (1.55)     (2.90)        (1.76)   (1.85)     (1.56)      (2.93)        (1.76)     (1.85)       (2.92)

Sales growth d.t.     0.97       0.97          1.01     0.99       0.98        1.04          0.97       1.00         1.02
new products (g2 )   (0.06)     (0.06)        (0.04)   (0.05)     (0.06)      (0.06)        (0.04)     (0.05)       (0.07)


Standard error        28.19      27.17        36.23     30.45      28.21      27.46          36.09      30.48       27.33
No of firms           4631       1319         4548      2533       4631       1319           4548       2533        1319

Sargan (m)5          2.08 (2)   2.74 (2)   0.54 (2)    1.93 (2)   4.52 (3)   18.47 (3)      8.66 (3)   0.63 (3)   0.03 (1)
Prob. value           (0.36)     (0.25)     (0.76)      (0.38)     (0.21)     (0.00)         (0.03)     (0.89)     (0.86)

Diﬀ. Sargan (m)5 1.80 (1) 1.20 (1) 0.27 (1) 0.48 (1)                    -           -           -        -            -
Prob. value             (0.18)    (0.27)     (0.60)     (0.49)
1
  Coeﬃcients and standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include industry dummies.
2
  Instruments used are increased range, clients as a source of information, and continuous R&D engagement.
3
  Instruments used are increased range, improved quality, increased market share and innovation eﬀort.
4
  Instruments used are increased range and lagged R&D eﬀort.
5
  Sargan denotes the test on overidentifying restrictions. Under the null hypothesis the test statistic is χ2 (m)
  distributed with the number m of overidentifying restrictions. Diﬀ. Sargan denotes the "diﬀerence-in-Sargan"
  statistic testing the exogeneity of process innovation. The statistic is distributed as a χ2 (1).
                              Table 4b. Testing the specification (Services)

Dependent variable: l − (g1 − π)

Regression                                A2                                              B3

                       FR          GE           SP        UK         FR          GE            SP       UK

Constant               -5.00      -3.68         -3.78    -5.41       -4.22      -3.96       -3.61       -5.42
                      (2.41)     (3.01)        (2.21)   (1.60)      (2.41)     (2.75)      (2.19)      (1.61)

Process innova-        -1.66      1.84          -0.54    3.14        -2.31      2.41        -0.64       3.15
tion only (d)         (3.46)     (3.00)        (3.34)   (3.53)      (3.46)     (2.93)      (3.34)      (3.55)

Sales growth d.t.      1.14       0.94          0.97     1.04        1.07       0.97        0.96        1.04
new products (g2 )    (0.12)     (0.08)        (0.07)   (0.06)      (0.11)     (0.07)      (0.07)      (0.06)


Standard error        45.04       33.77        43.35     38.00      44.85       34.00      43.34       38.16
No of firms           1653         849         1839      1794       1653         849       1839        1794

Sargan (m)4          0.41 (2)    1.09 (2)   0.28 (2)    3.75 (2)   13.97 (3)   7.71 (3)   5.48 (3)   12.48 (3)
Prob. value           (0.81)      (0.58)     (0.87)      (0.15)     (0.00)      (0.05)     (0.14)     (0.01)

Diﬀ. Sargan (m)4 0.01 (1) 0.01 (1) 0.03 (1) 0.59 (1)                     -           -          -          -
Prob. value             (0.92)    (0.92)     (0.86)     (0.44)
1
  Coeﬃcients and standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include industry dummies.
2
  Instruments used are increased range, clients as a source of information, and continuous R&D engagement.
3
  Instruments used are increased range, improved quality, increased market share and innovation eﬀort.
4
  Sargan denotes the test on overidentifying restrictions. Under the null hypothesis the test statistic is χ2 (m)
  distributed with the number m of overidentifying restrictions. Diﬀ. Sargan denotes the "diﬀerence-in-Sargan"
  statistic testing the exogeneity of process innovation. The statistic is distributed as a χ2 (1).
                                                  Table 5.
                             Contributions of innovation to employment growth1
                                  Manufacturing and Services, 1998-20002

                                                                               France     Germany        Spain     UK

Manufacturing (Average values)3

Firms’ employment growth                                                         8.3          5.9         14.2      6.7
  Productivity trend in production of old products4                              -1.9         -7.5        -5.7      -6.8
  Gross eﬀect of process innovation in production of old products                -0.1         -0.6         0.3      -0.4
  Output growth of old products contribution                                     4.8          6.0         12.2      9.0
  Net contribution of product innovation                                         5.5          8.0          7.4      4.8



Services (Average values)3

Firms’ employment growth                                                         15.5        10.2         25.9     16.1
  Productivity trend in production of old products4                              -2.3        -3.0          1.0     -5.0
  Gross eﬀect of process innovation in production of old products                -0.1         0.1         -0.0      0.2
  Output growth of old products contribution                                      9.9         5.4         18.5     15.5
  Net contribution of product innovation                                          8.0         7.6          6.5      5.4
1   Decomposition based on regressions B and D of Table 3.
2   Rates of growth for the whole period.
3   The sum of decomposition values may diﬀer slightly from employment growth because of rounding.
4   Productivity trend is the weighted sum of industry dummy values and hence diﬀers from the constant of the regression.
                             Table A1. Manufacturing and Services
    Exploratory OLS regressions: employment growth on sales growth and innovation dummies1

Dependent variable: l

Sector                                           A (Manufacturing)                                B (Services)
                                              FR    GE     SP      UK                     FR      GE       SP          UK
Explanatory variables

Constant                                     2.52     -2.21    6.59     -0.62            5.15     2.71        8.44     6.10
                                            (0.53)   (0.74)   (0.59)   (0.62)           (2.23)   (1.87)      (1.67)   (1.31)

Real sales growth: (g1 − π)                  0.43     0.43     0.35     0.48             0.45     0.49        0.48     0.46
                                            (0.02)   (0.04)   (0.02)   (0.03)           (0.04)   (0.04)      (0.03)   (0.03)

Process innovation only (d)                  -0.54    -0.49    2.98     -0.29            -3.78    -0.12       0.57     3.68
                                            (1.17)   (1.20)   (1.25)   (1.56)           (2.73)   (1.97)      (2.60)   (3.29)

Product innovation2                          1.11     3.99      2.0     2.29             3.30     3.94        2.82     5.57
                                            (0.72)   (1.21)   (0.88)   (1.28)           (2.74)   (1.85)      (2.31)   (2.05)

No of firms                                 4631     1319     4548     2533              1653      849       1839     1794
Standard error                              21.64    19.31    26.10    24.27             39.33    23.50      36.09    30.13
1   Coeﬃcients and standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include industry dummies.
2   Product innovators only and product and process innovators.
                                              Table A2. Alternative assumptions about process innovations

Dependent variable: l − (g1 − π)

Sector                                        MANUFACTURING                                                                SERVICES

Regression                         A (IV2 )                           B(IV3 )                            C (IV2 )                            D (IV3 )

                      FR       GE        SP       UK       FR       GE       SP       UK       FR       GE       SP       UK       FR       GE       SP       UK

Constant              -3.51    -6.96     -6.14    -6.33    -3.50    -6.97    -6.12    -6.24    -4.96    -3.39    -3.82    -5.45    -5.24    -3.23    -4.07    -5.61
                     (0.78)   (1.37)    (0.91)   (0.88)   (0.78)   (1.37)   (0.90)   (0.84)   (2.44)   (3.04)   (2.20)   (1.62)   (2.48)   (3.05)   (2.24)   (1.62)

Process innova-       -1.26    -6.20     2.47     -3.50    -1.32    -6.18    2.47     -3.54    -1.63    1.56     -0.46    3.10     -1.45    1.46     -0.32    3.25
tion only (d)        (1.56)   (2.92)    (1.79)   (1.85)   (1.57)   (2.92)   (1.78)   (1.85)   (3.47)   (3.06)   (3.36)   (3.53)   (3.47)   (3.07)   (3.37)   (3.53)

Process & product     2.59     -1.98     -1.49    4.94                                         -3.81    1.80     -6.52    -6.26
innovation           (1.43)   (2.80)    (2.64)   (2.56)                                       (5.55)   (4.26)   (6.72)   (4.96)

Sales growth d.t.     0.90     1.04      1.05     0.92     0.90     1.03     1.03     0.91     1.23     0.90     1.07     1.10     1.18     0.86     1.13     1.10
new products (g2 )   (0.09)   (0.07)    (0.07)   (0.07)   (0.09)   (0.08)   (0.06)   (0.07)   (0.18)   (0.11)   (0.14)   (0.09)   (0.17)   (0.11)   (0.12)   (0.10)

Sales growth d.t.                                          0.14     -0.04    -0.02    0.14                                         -0.04    0.09     -0.23    -0.10
new products                                              (0.08)   (0.07)   (0.06)   (0.08)                                       (0.20)   (0.10)   (0.12)   (0.11)
× process inno.

Standard error       28.07 27.46 36.35 30.13              28.20 27.27 36.26 30.19               45.36 33.53     43.51    38.19    45.11    33.76    43.25    38.07
  o
N of firms            4631    1319     4548    2533       4631     1319     4548     2533       1653    849     1839     1794     1653      849     1839     1794
1
  Coeﬃcients and standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity. All regressions include industry dummies.
2
  Unique instrument used is increased range.
3
  Instruments are increased range and increased range interacted with process innovation.
             Table B1. Number of firms and average firm size,
                         by country and sector.

                        Number of firms (%)                 Average firm size1

                       FR     GE     SP     UK        FR      GE     SP       UK

Manufacturing
 Vehicles               4.3   4.0     5.6   10.5     1164    340     367      222
 Chemicals              8.2   7.0     6.5    3.7     483     330     213      337
 Machinery              9.2   14.0    6.3    8.0      302    291     150      179
 Electrical             9.9   16.2    8.1   15.7      540    482     157      197
 Food                  19.3   8.6    11.0    7.2      282    149     150      303
 Textile               12.3   5.8    14.7    5.7     124     219      78      148
 Wood                   9.1   8.5    13.8   14.6     234     358      87      144
 Plastic/rubber         6.0   8.8     4.4    5.1     396     148     105      132
 Non-metallic          3.5    5.9     7.3    2.3     415     247     141      242
 Basic metal           13.3   17.2   13.4   14.1      258    153     110       68
 NEC                    4.9   4.0     8.9   13.2     217     253      66      132
 All firms             100    100    100    100      345     276     132      171

Services
 Wholesale             44.9   24.0   22.1   41.4       62     410    146      124
 Transport              0.0   24.0   18.5   25.9        -    1272    373      291
 Post/telecomm.         1.9   3.1     4.1    3.6      102    220     191      587
 Financial int.        15.2   11.4    7.0   13.3     1044    808     527      282
 Computers             12.8   9.4     9.8    4.4      81       95    151      238
 R&D                    3.9   8.8     3.9   1.9       168     91      68      338
 Technical serv.       21.4   19.2   34.6    9.6      129      56    301      136
 All firms             100    100    100    100      233     531     268      215
1   Average firm size is measured by the average number of employees in the year 2000.
