                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       RISK AND LACK OF DIVERSIFICATION UNDER EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP
                          AND SHARED CAPITALISM

                                          Joseph R. Blasi
                                         Douglas L. Kruse
                                        Harry M. Markowitz

                                        Working Paper 14229
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14229


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




The original version of this paper was prepared for the Russell Sage/NBER conference in New York
City, October 2006. This paper is part of the National Bureau of Economic Research's Shared Capitalism
Research Project, funded by the Russell Sage and Rockefeller Foundations from 2001-2007. Additional
funding for the General Social Survey questions was provided by the Beyster Institute of the University
of California at San Diego, the ESOP Association, the Employee Ownership Foundation, Hewitt Associates,
the National Center for Employee Ownership, the Profit Sharing Council of America, and American
Capital Strategies. The authors wish to thank Tom Smith with the General Social Survey at the National
Opinion Research Center of the University of Chicago and Peter Marsden of Harvard University with
the National Organizations Study for their assistance in arranging the shared capitalism segment of
both surveys. The authors wish to thank Daniel Kahneman of Princeton University for several generous
discussions and communications with us about our ideas. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Joseph R. Blasi, Douglas L. Kruse, and Harry M. Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk and Lack of Diversification under Employee Ownership and Shared Capitalism
Joseph R. Blasi, Douglas L. Kruse, and Harry M. Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 14229
August 2008
JEL No. D81,J33,J54,L23

                                              ABSTRACT

Some analysts view risk as the Achilles Heel of employee ownership and to some extent variable pay
plans such as profit sharing and gainsharing. Workers in such "shared capitalist" firms may invest
too much of their wealth in the firm, contrary to the principle of diversification. This paper addresses
whether the risk in shared capitalism makes it unwise for most workers or whether the risk can be
managed to limit much of the loss of utility from holding the extra risk. We create an index of financial
security based on worker pay and wealth, and find that workers who feel financially insecure exhibit
fewer of the positive outcomes associated with shared capitalism, and are less interested than other
workers in receiving more employee ownership or even more profit sharing in their workplaces. This
response is substantially lessened, however, when accounting for worker empowerment, good employee
relations, and high-performance work bundles that appear to buffer worker response toward risk and
increase interest in shared capitalism plans. We also discuss portfolio theory which suggests that any
risky investment -- including stock in one's company -- can be part of an efficient portfolio as long
as the overall portfolio is properly diversified. We show that given estimates of risk aversion parameters,
workers could prudently hold reasonable proportions of their assets in employee stock ownership of
their firm with only a modest loss in utility due to risk. A good strategy for firms is to personalize
individual portfolios on the basis of worker characteristics and preferences, developing investment
strategies that would diversify each worker's entire portfolio in ways consistent with individual risk
preferences.


Joseph R. Blasi                                      Harry M. Markowitz
Rutgers University                                   Rady School of Management
School of management and Labor Relations             Otterson Hall, Room 4S1
Levin Building                                       9500 Gilman Dr. #0553
New Brunswick, NJ 08544                              La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
and NBER                                             hmarkowitz@ucsd.edu
jrbru@hotmail.com

Douglas L. Kruse
School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University
94 Rockafeller Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854
and NBER
dkruse@rci.rutgers.edu
       “I am in favor of having as large a unit as market conditions will allow. . . To suppose
       that safety-first consists in having a small gamble in a large number of different
       [companies] where I have no information to reach a good judgment, as compared with a
       substantial stake in a company where one’s information is adequate, strikes me as a
       travesty of investment policy.”

               John Maynard Keynes Letter to F.C. Scott on February 6, 1942 (1983) Note:
               Keynes managed the investments of a large British insurance company and the
               endowment funds of Kings College Cambridge (quoted in Bernstein 1992:48).


       “The correlation among returns is not the same for all securities. We generally expect the
       returns on a security to be more correlated with those in the same industry than those of
       unrelated industries. Business connections among corporations, the fact that they service
       the same area, a common dependence on military expenditures, building activity, or the
       weather can increase the tendency of particular returns to move up and down together. To
       reduce risk it is necessary to avoid a portfolio whose securities are highly correlated with
       each other.”

               Harry M. Markowitz, Portfolio Selection (1991: 5)



       A substantial proportion of private sector workers participate in some form of shared

rewards and there is evidence that shared capitalism plays a positive role in economic

performance (Kruse, Blasi, and Park, 2008; Freeman Kruse, and Blasi, 2008; Blasi et al., 2008;

Harden, Kruse, and Blasi, 2008). With this level of incidence and these potential outcomes, it is

incumbent on scholars to figure out whether and under what conditions such practices make

sense or are really ill-advised. Since shared capitalism, especially in the form of employee stock

ownership and stock options, is an investment, we need to examine it from the critical

perspective of risk. This paper considers two questions: What is the impact of subjective risk on

workers’ attitudes, preferences, and behaviors under shared capitalism? Can employee

ownership and other forms of worker equity participation be consistent with proper

diversification?




                                               1
       Many economists have seriously worried about the phenomenon of employee stock

ownership because it possibly “put all one’s eggs in one basket.” Looking at subjective worker

behavior, Benartzi and Thaler’s incisive study (2001) found that workers put about 42% of their

assets in the company stock account and then split the remaining assets fairly evenly between

non-employee ownership equities and fixed income securities with the result that the workers in

the companies with employee ownership are over 70% invested in equities, in effect, further

adding to lack of diversification in their portfolios. Benartzi (2001) has shown that workers in

large corporate defined contribution retirement plans (such as 401k plans) increase the

proportion of their holdings in employee ownership of company stock after the company’s

equity performs well on the market, allocating four times more new investments to company

stock in the future when the company stock had done well in the past. He concludes that this

violates a cardinal law of economics, portfolio diversification. Meulbroek (2002) compares the

risk of holding one company’s stock to a diversified portfolio for all stocks listed in the Center

For Research on Securities Prices (CRSP) and concludes “on average 42% of the stock’s

market value will be sacrificed by failing to diversify.” (p. 29) She looked at expectations of

what could happen rather than the specific tracking of actual data on employee investments in

company stock and considered the extreme case of 100% employee investment in company

stock. Meulbroek sees no rational basis for company stock ownership by employees whatsoever

(2002: 14) and makes a strong recommendation against any employee ownership at all in the

economy.

Data and Methods

       We have done research on these questions using a unique dataset. The NBER Shared

Capitalism Project uses a data set of 41,206 employee surveys that were conducted over the



                                                2
2001-2007 period in 14 companies and several hundred work sites worldwide with one or more

shared capitalist programs. The companies were selected to vary in company size, industry, and

type of shared reward program. The average response rate was 52.8%. Within the NBER

dataset 81.5% of the workers had one or more forms of shared capitalist rewards. The appendix

describes the relevant variables used in our analysis. This dataset is particularly useful to

examine risk because it provides a comprehensive description of the possible ways a worker can

share in the profits or equity of the company plus detailed information on their income and

wealth, organization of work, specific measures of their attitudes toward shared capitalism, their

preferences for more or less shared capitalism, and their behavioral responses to shared

capitalism (loyalty, turnover, and willingness to work harder for the company). These measures

of worker attitudes, preferences, and behavioral responses are the main dependent variables of

the study. Moreover, variables on empowerment and employee relations and work structure

allow us to examine their role in the story. Analyses are conducted on only those workers with

shared rewards, totalling 35,429 employees.

       The economic insecurity score is the main independent variable of the study. The three

components of a worker’s economic insecurity score are the size of each worker’s fixed annual

pay, how many multiples each worker’s total wealth (minus debt) is relative to that worker’s

fixed annual pay, and the extent to which each worker perceives they are competitively paid in

the firm where they work. Briefly put, the score expresses how much cushion each worker’s

current capital offers them relative to their annual income, taking into account whether the

worker feels fairly compensated or not based on expectations from the local labor market. If a

worker perceives he or she is underpaid, then profit sharing or employee stock ownership may be

perceived as wage substitution. The higher the score the more the worker’s economic insecurity



                                                3
and the more the worker’s capital is at risk. The construction of the economic insecurity score is

explained in detail in the appendix.

       Here is a concrete example of economic insecurity and economic security. At one

extreme, that of the high economic insecurity score, is a worker with fixed annual pay of

$25,000, whose total wealth (minus debt) is less than $25,000, and who perceives that she or he

is being paid significantly below market for their job position relative to comparable workers.

We hold that the more insecure worker -- just as Adam Smith predicts from his observations of

the French sharecroppers in the Theoretical Perspectives section below -- will be resistant to

risking his or her own capital in the firm. At the other extreme, that of the low economic

insecurity score (i.e., high economic security), is a worker with fixed annual pay of $75,000,

whose total wealth is four multiples of annual pay at $300,000, and who perceives that he or she

is being paid significantly above the market rate. We hold that this worker will be more

comfortable with shared capitalism. Table 1 shows the economic insecurity scores for the

sample. There is a lot of variation in the sample. Because some components of the score were

not contained in all company surveys, the score is only available for 22,980 workers.

       Regarding methodology, the issue of unmeasured differences among the companies is

directly addressed because regressions using the dataset include company fixed effects so that

coefficients reflect within-company differences rather than cross company differences that might

be due to unmeasured differences among the companies. Since the study lacks instruments to

identify causality, there is no attempt to try to tease out possible causal links among the

outcomes. Rather, these are tests for reduced form relationships between the economic

insecurity score and changes in attitudes, preferences, and outcomes (behaviors), noting in the

text whether the results may change when holding constant other variables (Bartholomew 1996;



                                                4
Bartholomew, Galbraith, Moustkaki, & Steele 2002.) Since many of the dependent variables

have three or four values with a natural ordering (e.g., "not at all true, not very true, somewhat

true, and very true"), ordered probits are estimated that control for job and demographic

characteristics. One advantage of the extensive NBER Shared Capitalism dataset is that we can

control for many worker characteristics. The job characteristics controlled for are: occupation,

education, tenure, hourly/salaried, hours worked, supervisory/non-supervisory, management

level, and log of fixed pay (plus overtime). The demographic characteristics controlled for are:

sex, age, marital status, family size, children, race, and disability.



Theoretical Perspectives

        What we expect to find about the impact of risk on the attitudes, preferences and

behavioral outcomes of workers in firms under shared capitalism has been inspired by the work

of Adam Smith. A key theme of Smith’s economics is that capitalism would result in better

economic performance as a result of more effort, productivity, and wealth. Indeed, this is

consistent with the literature on shared capitalism. Smith wrote about the evolution from

feudalism to the new market system as part of a long line of economists who stressed that

capitalism also involved greater risk and speculation. The principal advantage of feudalism for

the worker was the protection it provided from such risk (see Book III, 2.2-2.21). Adam Smith

however definitely recognized that a worker could be interested in shared rewards—as it were,

full employee ownership and profit sharing -- but that it was not a common arrangement at that

time. He wrote:

        “It sometimes happens, indeed, that a single independent workman has stock sufficient
        both to purchase the materials of his work, and to maintain himself till it be completed.
        He is both master and workman, and enjoys the whole produce of his own labour, or the
        whole value which it adds to the materials upon which it is bestowed. It includes what are


                                                  5
       usually two distinct revenues, belonging to two distinct persons, the profits of stock, and
       the wages of labour.” (Book I. 8.9-10)

       Smith recognized the incentive value of such shared capitalist rewards and cited its role

in improved economic performance. In writing about the French Metayers or sharecroppers as

one example of a shared capitalist institution, he said:

       “The proprietor furnished them with the seed, cattle, and instruments of husbandry, the
       whole stock, in short, necessary for cultivating the farm. The produce was divided
       equally between the proprietor and the farmer, after setting aside what was judged
       necessary for keeping up the stock, which was restored to the proprietor when the farmer
       either quitted, or was turned out of the farm. Land occupied by such tenants is properly
       cultivated at the expense of the proprietor as much as that occupied by slaves. There is,
       however, one very essential difference between them. Such tenants, being freemen, are
       capable of acquiring property, and having a certain proportion of the produce of the land,
       they have a plain interest that the whole produce should be as great as possible, in order
       that their own proportion may be so. A slave, on the contrary, who can acquire nothing
       but his maintenance, consults his own ease by making the land produce as little as
       possible over and above that maintenance.”(Book III, chapter 2, 11-12) (as quoted in
       Laffont & Martimort 2002:10)

       However, Smith identified a critical problem with the idea in addressing risk under such

shared capitalist arrangements when he identified the moral hazard problem of sharecropping:

sharecroppers do not desire to risk their own capital. Thus he wrote:

       “It could never, however, be the interest even of this last species of cultivators to lay out,
       in the further improvement of the land, any part of the little stock which they might save
       from their own share of the produce, because the lord, who laid out nothing, was to get
       one-half of whatever it produced…. It might be the interest of a metayer to make the land
       produce as much as could be brought out of it by means of the stock furnished by the
       proprietor; but it could never be his interest to mix any part of his own with it. In France,
       where five parts out of six of the whole kingdom are said to be still occupied by this
       species of cultivators, the proprietors complain that their metayers take every opportunity
       of employing the master's cattle rather in carriage than in cultivation; because in the one
       case they get the whole profits to themselves, in the other they share them with their
       landlord.” (Book III, chapter 2, 13)(as quoted in Laffont & Martimort 2002:10)

       While he did not envision how such shared capitalist incentives would be structured in a

complex economy, Smith clearly saw the advantages of shared capitalism. This analysis

suggests that the incentive effect would be diminished if the worker’s own capital was subject to


                                                6
excessive risk. We expect that workers will be risk averse in mixing their own capital with that

of the firm.

       While Smith’s notion is based on salient historical observations, Daniel Kahneman and

Amos Tversky’s prospect theory (1981, 1986, 1991) inspired us to develop a unique way to

explore the issues at hand. Prospect theory holds that people decide about outcomes based on a

reference point (reflecting their status quo) rather than based upon some “objective” final

situation or status. In their view, this status quo “frames” their decision. They note that different

attitudes towards risk will emerge when a person perceives gains relative to their reference point

or losses relative to their reference point and that people will care more about potential losses

than potential gains. The economic insecurity score provides one measure of a worker’s status

quo and is directly influenced by Adam Smith’s observation that a worker will not want to risk

his or her own capital in a shared capitalist arrangement.



Hypotheses

       Reflecting Adam Smith’s perspective that workers will not risk their own capital, this

part of the paper explores subjective risk, namely, how workers in shared capitalist arrangements

respond to variations in their economic insecurity. People are risk averse. Our first hypothesis

is:

       Hypothesis One: As the economic insecurity score increases, attitudes toward shared

       capitalism, preferences for variable pay, and workplace outcomes (behaviors) under

       shared capitalism will worsen.

       Next we examine the impact of company culture. A worker’s economic insecurity and

response to shared capitalism are likely to be related to worker empowerment (influence over



                                                7
one’s job and the workplace) and perceived fairness. In the absence of empowerment, shared

capitalism may easily be seen as nothing more than increased income risk, whereas

empowerment creates a greater sense that one can affect workplace performance and rewards

under shared capitalism. Regarding fairness, a number of scholars have argued that economists

should add to their analyses the “preferences that people have for being treated fairly”

(Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler 1986a: S285-6; see also Akerlof 1979 and Arrow 1973). Good

employee-management relations, where employees feel they are treated fairly, may be an

important condition to create cooperation and higher performance under shared capitalism.

Workers may therefore respond better to shared capitalism when they have greater empowerment

and perceive better employee relations, diminishing the negative effects of economic insecurity.

This is consistent with the idea that under the right conditions, shared capitalism can strengthen

the “psychological contract” between employees and the firm (Rousseau and Shperling 2003).

The second hypothesis is:

       Hypothesis Two: Lack of empowerment and poor employee relations help explain the

       negative relationship between the economic insecurity score and attitudes toward shared

       capitalism, preferences for variable pay, and behavioral outcomes under shared rewards.

       Several researchers have linked a bundle of high performance work practices to either

improved operating performance of individual facilities or better productivity, lower turnover,

and better total shareholder return of firms (Appelbaum 2000; Becker and Huselid 2001;

Cappelli and Neumark 2002; Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi 1995). These bundles are

characterized by a coordinated integration of the various “high performance people

management” systems inside the firm and involve: selective recruitment, intensive training and

performance management, self-directed work teams, employee involvement, and performance



                                                8
sharing.1 These bundles may interact with shared capitalism in the same way as hypothesized

above for employee empowerment and employee relations: such practices can help create the

means for employees to positively affect performance, and strengthen the psychological contract

between employees and the firm. This is likely to make employees more receptive to shared

capitalism, and diminish the negative effects of economic insecurity. Put simply, we hypothesize

that a more engaging work system will buffer worker response to risk. The third hypothesis is:

       Hypothesis Three: The presence or absence of a high performance work system helps

       explain the negative effect of high economic insecurity on attitudes toward shared

       capitalism, preferences for variable pay, and outcomes under shared rewards.



Results

       Risk aversion is the general norm for workers. Using the employee surveys of the NBER

Shared Capitalism dataset we can briefly review findings on the general preference for risk

aversion or risk seeking among the workers in the sample based on demographic group and job

characteristics. This is based on responses to the question:

       Some people like to take risks and others dislike taking risks. Where would you place
       yourself on a scale of how much you like or dislike taking risks, where 0 is hating to take
       any kind of risk and 10 is loving to take risks?

               Hate to take risks                                    Love to take risks
                       0     1    2     3      4     5     6     7      8      9     10


The sample tends toward risk-seeking: the mean is 5.6, with only one-quarter (26%) giving an

answer of 4 or below, while 55% gave an answer above 5. Those with low earnings are

predictably more likely to say they are risk averse, with 53% giving scores of 5 or below,




                                               9
compared to 27% of the high earners. The results are similar when breaking the figures down by

wealth categories.

       Another measure of risk aversion comes from the survey question:

       You are offered a bet. You have a 10% chance of winning $1000. Would you take the
       bet if it cost you: (mark highest price you would pay)
                □ $150 □ $100 □ $50 □ $20 □ $10 □ $1
                □ Would not pay anything

One-third (33%) of the individuals indicated extreme risk aversion, saying they would pay

nothing or only $1 for the bet, while at the other extreme, 7% would pay $100 and 2% would pay

$150 (above the expected value of the bet, indicating extreme risk loving).   This is also related

to earnings: 41% of the low earners would pay no more than $1, compared to 19% of high

earners. It is noteworthy, however, that there is a good deal of dispersion even within the low-

earning and high-earning groups. With this perspective on the general risk aversion of workers,

let us now examine the results.

       Hypothesis One: As the economic insecurity score increases, attitudes toward shared

capitalism, preferences for variable pay, and workplace outcomes (behaviors) under shared

incentives will worsen.

       The sample is workers who say that they participate in any kind of shared capitalist

practice, including company stock ownership of any kind, stock options, profit or gain sharing,

or any combination of these. Table 2 shows the results and reports on a number of individual

variables that measure attitudes towards shared rewards, preferences for more shared rewards,

and workplace outcomes (behaviors) under shared reward situations. Some of the dependent

variables are also grouped into summative attitude, preference, and outcome variables where a

large sample size is amenable to such a grouping:




                                               10
       Summative attitudes variable – measures a) how important it is to work in a company
       with employee ownership and b) how much the worker feels like an owner

       Summative preferences variable- measures a) preference for variable pay (a 50/50
       chance to make 10% more or 5% less over fixed pay); and, b) the preference for next
       pay increase as all fixed wages, a mixture of fixed and performance-based, or all
       performance-based pay

       Summative outcomes (behaviors) variable – measures a) whether the worker is looking
       hard for a job with another company in the next year (reverse scored) ; b) the extent of
       their loyalty to their company ; c) whether they will work hard for the company; d)
       whether they plan to stay with their company for a long time; and, e) whether they see
       their current job as part of a long-term career


We will review these findings in some detail. The findings show that as the economic insecurity

score increases, workers with increased risk respond with more negative attitudes about company

ownership (Lines 1 to 16), weaker preferences for additional shared incentives in their company

(Lines 17 to 28), and worse workplace outcomes. (Lines 29 to 39). A higher economic

insecurity score is associated with very negative responses to shared capitalism just as Adam

Smith’s views would suggest.

       Looking more closely at the individual measures of attitudes, as the economic insecurity

score increases, workers report that it is less important to them to work for a company that

provides stock ownership or stock options to its employees (Line 2), that they feel less like

owners (Line 3) , that ownership is less important to them (Line 4), that stock options were less

important in attracting them to work for the company (Line 5), and that the Employee Stock

Purchase Plan was less important in attracting them to work for the company (Line 6). (Note

that the score does not predict that workers in ESOP companies said ESOPs were less likely to

have attracted them to work for the company on line 7. This is probably because ESOPs under

most circumstances do not require workers to buy the stock with their own capital.) As one

would expect, as the economic insecurity score increases workers are more likely to say that a



                                               11
less risky cash incentive (Line 8), cash bonus (Line 13), or fixed wage increase (Line 14) will

increase their motivation to improve the business success of the company. As the economic

insecurity score increases, workers are less likely to be motivated to improve the business

success of the company through more risky incentive practices such as open market purchases of

company stock (Line 9), stock options (Line 10), an Employee Stock Purchase Plan (Line 11), a

401k plan company stock match (Line 15), a company-wide profit sharing plan (Line 16), or

even a less risky ESOP (Line 12).

         Regarding individual measures of preferences for additional shared incentives, as the

economic insecurity score increases, workers are less willing to make a bet that risks losing 25%

of fixed pay for a 50/50 chance of making 50% more in variable pay (Line 19), wish their next

pay increase to comprise fixed wages rather than a mixture of fixed/performance-based pay or all

performance-based pay (Line 20), are unwilling to get company stock or stock options over cash

incentives as part of their compensation (Line 21), and are unwilling to accept variable pay over

fixed pay (Line 22). As the economic insecurity score increases, the percentage of fixed pay that

they are willing to sacrifice for the chance of getting a possible 10% rise in variable pay goes

down (Line 23). As the economic insecurity score increases, when asked to rank fixed pay, cash

profit sharing, company stock or stock options as the preferred compensation mechanism for

their next pay increase, workers rank less risky fixed pay higher and more risky company stock

lower.

         Regarding individual measures of workplace outcomes (behaviors), as the economic

insecurity score increases, workers say they are more likely to: be looking for a job elsewhere in

the next 6 months (Line 30) , feel less loyalty to the company (Line 31) , not see themselves

working at the company for a long time (Line 32) , and not see the company as part of a longtime



                                                12
career (Line 33). A higher economic insecurity score means more days absent in the last six

months (Line 35). On other outcome measures reflecting contributing to the company, they say

that they are less likely to: work harder for the company (Line 34) or have participated in teams

or meetings where they offer suggestions to superiors on improving the company (Line 38).

       Two related analyses available from the authors extend these findings. In one analysis

we demonstrate that the results hold true for the typical combinations of shared capitalist

practices that workers actually experience in the economy as identified by the University of

Chicago’s General Social Survey. So, for example, these results hold true for workers holding

only company stock, for workers holding a combination of company stock, profit sharing, and

broad-based stock options, and so forth. In another analysis we focus only on workers who own

stock in 401k plans by measuring the percent of annual pay invested in company stock. We find

that workers with high economic insecurity scores have more turnover, less loyalty, and less

willingness to work hard at all levels of pay invested in company stock, not just at low levels of

pay invested in company stock. The economic insecurity status appears to be the key to this

subjective response.2 These tables are available from the authors.

       Hypothesis Two: Lack of empowerment and poor employee relations help explain the

negative relationship between the economic insecurity score and attitudestoward shared

capitalism, preferences for variable pay, and behavioral outcomes under shared rewards.

       The measurement of empowerment is the Lack of Empowerment Score. It is an additive

index of each worker’s participation in employee involvement teams, satisfaction with his or her

work life influence overall, and satisfaction with influence in the job, department, and company

as a whole. The measurement of employee relations is the Poor Employee Relations Score. It is

an additive index of each worker’s A-F school grades of their company regarding its



                                                13
trustworthiness in keeping its promises, overall employment relations, fairness, and ability to

create a sense of common purpose in the company. (Both are reverse scored so that higher

scores represent lower empowerment and worse employee relations. See appendix, variables 21-

31).

       A first look at this issue is provided in Table 3 where worker reports of their expected

turnover are compared to their scores on economic insecurity, empowerment, and employee

relations. For ease of presentation, workers are divided into whether they are above or below the

median on these three variables, and expected turnover is presented for the eight permutations.

The highest likely turnover (23.7%) is among those reporting high economic insecurity, poor

empowerment, and poor employee relations, while the lowest (3.9%) is among those in the

opposite categories on all three variables. Overall, good employee relations appear most

important, since workers report good employee relations in the four categories with the lowest

likely turnover. In effect, at risk workers may respond less to this risk in better workplaces.

Other tables available from the authors demonstrate the same pattern for loyalty and willingness

to work hard.

       Turning to the regressions in Table 4, the findings also show that a good corporate culture

– the ability to have a say at work and be treated fairly in employment relations – plays a

critical role in the relationship between the economic insecurity score and the attitude and

behavioral outcomes. When lack of empowerment and poor employee relations are added as

predictors of the summative attitudes measure, the economic insecurity coefficient goes down by

almost 50% (columns 1-2), and when they are added as predictors of the summative outcomes

measure, the economic insecurity coefficient goes down by 70% (columns 7-8). Lack of

empowerment is also a significant predictor of the summative measure of preferences over



                                                14
variable pay, although the economic insecurity measure is not a significant predictor either

before or after adding lack of empowerment as a control.

       The two key implications of these findings are that: 1) a substantial portion of the

negative attitudes toward shared capitalism and the poor behavioral outcomes among the

economically insecure is not due to economic insecurity per se, but to corporate cultures that

provide little empowerment and poor employee relations; and 2) the negative effects of

economic insecurity can be counteracted by policies that increase employment and improve

employee relations. Regarding the latter point, the magnitudes indicate that a one standard

deviation improvement in either empowerment or employee relations would easily outweigh (by

a multiple of two to six) a one standard deviation increase in economic insecurity in predicting

the attitude and behavioural outcome index scores.3 These results paint a picture of worker risk

that suggests that a bad and unfair corporate culture is itself seen as a risk by workers.

       Hypothesis Three: The presence or absence of high performance work practices helps

explain the negative effect of high economic insecurity scores on attitudes toward shared

capitalism, preferences for variable pay, and behavioural outcomes under shared rewards.

       The score for a high performance work system (HPWS) is based on the following

summative index described in detail in the appendix, variables 32-38. It captures elements of

training intensity, company communication and information, employee buy-in to corporate

strategy, and structuring of the company’s culture and work organization to support the overall

company plan. A recent survey of the high performance work practices literature confirms the

relevance of the components used (Blasi and Kruse 2007).

       The method is to examine whether the negative coefficient on the economic insecurity

score is reduced by the addition of HPWS as a control. As noted earlier, we contend that a more



                                                 15
engaging work system will buffer worker response to risk. The results are in Table 4, columns 3,

6, and 9. The HPWS measure is a strong and significant predictor of all three summative

measures. Controlling for HPWS, the negative coefficient of the economic insecurity score for

the attitudes measure (column 3) is reduced by 50% relative to column 2, and the coefficient is

only one-fourth as large as it was before controlling for lack of empowerment, poor employee

relations, and HPWS (column 1). It appears that workers have more willingness to have a profit

or stock share in their company if they perceive that the company invests more in their

performance abilities through a high performance work system. Adding HPWS as a predictor of

the summative outcomes measure (column 9) reduces the economic insecurity coefficient by

only a small amount relative to column 8, but the fact that HPWS is closely related to lack of

empowerment and poor employee relations (reducing the coefficients on those variables when it

is added in column 9) indicates that HPWS is a key factor in reducing the economic insecurity

effect found in column 7. The results strongly suggest that high risk workers moderate their

responses to risk when the work system is more progressive.

       It has been demonstrated that as economic insecurity of workers rises, this is associated

with worse worker attitudes toward shared capitalism, preferences for variable pay, and

behavioural outcomes under shared capitalist arrangements. Not only do workers make some bad

portfolio decisions under shared capitalism as the research literature reviewed in the beginning of

this study has shown, but our results indicate that their level of economic insecurity also

influences how well they actually respond to shared capitalist arrangements such as employee

ownership in their workplace. Insecure workers may moderate their responses in better

workplaces. One implication is that employee ownership and shared capitalist plans need to be

designed carefully when they involve workers with high economic insecurity. Employers with



                                                16
shared capitalist arrangements that are structured to take into account worker responses to their

economic insecurity and employment culture should, as a result, have better worker attitudes,

better workplace outcomes, and a greater willingness of workers to prefer such arrangements.

This means, for example, that pushing low paid workers with little wealth who perceive that they

are paid non-competitive wages to buy company stock in 401(k) plans with their savings does

not make economic sense for the workers, the firms, the shareholders, or the economy as a

whole, because asking workers with little capital to risk their personal capital is associated with a

bad worker response to shared capitalism.



Is Shared Capitalism Consistent With Proper Diversification?

       Does the portfolio diversification problem go away now that we know that workers tend

to subjectively respond poorly to excessive economic insecurity under shared capitalist

arrangements? The answer is clearly no, it does not go away. Our results only show that

workers are subjectively sensitive to risk, and manage to respond to it in their own way. The

results do not mean that workers’ investment portfolios always properly diversify risk. Indeed,

the irony of our results is that, while workers evidently respond to their subjective risk, the

problem of objective risk in their portfolios remains. The fact that workers in the more

progressive workplaces respond less to risk, only increases the importance of solving the

objective risk problem.

       The concerns of economists and policy makers about an objective lack of diversification

in workers’ portfolios thus needs to be considered more carefully. In the NBER sample the

median percent of net wealth in company stock is 5% and the mean is 14%. While only 0.6% of

workers have 100% of their net wealth in company stock (i.e. Muelbroek’s scenario), 4.7% of



                                                 17
NBER sample workers do have more than 50% of their net wealth in company stock, and 15.6%

have more than twice the mean percent of net wealth in company stock, that is, have over 28% of

their net wealth invested in company stock. Thus, it is likely that at least these three groups -- in

total, 20.9% of the workers in the NBER employee survey sample -- may have excessive

amounts of company stock in their overall portfolios. We can consider these groups to be

approximately the workers for whom employee ownership plays a critical role in lack of

diversification.

       The remainder of this section explores the question of how much investment in company

stock is “too much.”

        The theory of rational behavior under uncertainty, as developed by Leonard J. Savage

(1954), asserts that the rational decision maker maximizes expected utility using probability

beliefs where objective probabilities are not known. Levy and Markowitz (1979) show that, for

a wide variety of risk-averse utility functions and historical return distributions, mean-variance

approximations provide almost maximum expected utility. (See also Markowitz 1959, Chapters

6 and 13; Dexter, Yu and Ziemba 1980; Ederington 1986; Hlawitschka 1994; Kroll, Levy and

Markowitz 1984; Markowitz, Reid and Tew 1994; Pulley 1981, 1983; and Simaan 1993.) Thus

the justification for the use of mean-variance, according to Markowitz (1959) and others, is not

that probability distributions are Gaussian or that utility is quadratic (as asserted as requirements

in Tobin 1958 and frequently incorrectly attributed to Markowitz), but as an approximation to

expected utility.

       The mean-variance approximation to expected utility typically takes the form

                        EU ≅ E − 12 kV                                                (1)




                                                 18
where E is the expected and V the variance of returns on the portfolio-as-a-whole, and k > 0 is

a risk-aversion parameter. For example, following Kelly (1956) and Latané (1957), most

financial analysts believe that action for the long run involves maximizing the expected value of

the log of 1.0 + return. Levy and Markowitz show that this is closely approximated by Equation

(1) with k = 1.0. In continuous time models, “Ito’s Lemma” asserts that this relationship is exact

quite generally.

         If X is the fraction of an employee’s financial assets held “explicitly” in company stock

and (1 − X ) the fraction in all other financial assets (including, e.g., an index fund which

“implicitly” owns the company stock) then

                           E = m1 X + m2 (1 − X )                                     (2a)

                           V = V1 X 2 + V2 (1 − X ) 2 + 2 X (1 − X )σ 12              (2b)

where m1 and m2 are the expected (or mean) returns on the two “investments,” V1 and V2 their

variances and σ 12 their covariance. The latter includes the covariance between the company

stock held explicitly and that held implicitly. Inserting (2) into (1) we have

                EU ≅ m1 X + m2 (1 − X )
                                                                                      (3)
                        − 12 k {V1 X 2 + V2 (1 − X ) 2 + 2σ 12 X (1 − X )}

The optimum value of X is found by setting the derivative of EU to zero, from which emerges

     ∧
that X , the optimum X , satisfies

                   ∧
                   X (V1 + V2 − 2σ 12 ) + V2 − σ 12 = (m1 − m2 ) / k                  (4)

                                                                    ∧
The analysis simplifies considerably if we assume that X = 0, and m1 = m2 absent any stock

incentive plan. The first equality is plausible; since “other investments” may include the

company’s stock, we may assume that it includes the ideal amount of this stock, in which case

                                                         19
        ∧
indeed X = 0. Later we discuss the assumption that m1 = m2 . Given these two assumptions,

Equation (4) implies that

                       σ 12 = V2                                                   (5)

From this follows that (3) may be written as

                       EU ≅ m + (Δm1 ) X − 12 k {V1 X 2 + V2 (1 − X 2 )}           (6)

with m = m1 = m2 and Δm1 = 0.

       We are interested here in the tradeoff between increased m1 (keeping m2 constant) and

increased X , moving the investor’s allocation from the optimum at X = 0. As m1 = m + Δm1

            ∧
increases X , the optimum X , increases as well. Specifically, differentiating (6) with respect to

X , and setting dEU / dX to zero, we find

                       ∧
                       X = Δm1 / k (V1 − V2 )                                      (7)

The term (V1 − V2 ) in the denominator of Equation (7) may seem strange. For example, if

                                         ∧
V1 = V2 the formula implies infinite X . But (5) implies

                      V2 = σ 2 2
                                                                                   (8a)
                            = ρ1σ 1σ 2

therefore

                       σ 2 = ρσ 1                                                  (8b)

Thus V2 < V1 unless the two “investments” are perfectly correlated.

       The assumption that m1 = m2 may be plausible if (1 − X ) represents investment in other

equities, but not if it includes substantial investment in money market funds or short term bonds.



                                                  20
Then we would expect m2 < m1 . A standard and very convenient assumption is that X and 1 − X

represent investments in risky “securities” and, additionally, the investor’s risk level is adjusted

by holding cash with interest rate r0 . In this case, the Tobin Separation Theorem is applicable. If

the investor can borrow as well as lend at the rate r0 , as Sharpe (1964) assumes, then the

investor will hold the risky portfolio which maximizes the Sharpe ratio

                         E − r0
                                                                                         (9)
                           σ

where σ is the standard deviation of portfolio return. If the investor can only lend not borrow at

the rate r0 , as Tobin (1958) assumes, and “cash” is part of the investor’s portfolio then, again, the

investor holds the risky portfolio that maximizes the Sharpe ratio and combines it with lending

(i.e., the holding of cash).

        In general in this case, the optimum risky portfolio satisfies

                        CY = bν                                                          (10)

where C is the covariance matrix among risky securities, Y is the portfolio of risky securities,

ν is a vector of excess returns (i.e., expected returns minus the risk-free rate), and b is a number

(as distinguished from a vector or matrix). In our case Equation (10) specializes to

                        ⎛ V1       ρ 2V1 ⎞ ⎛ X 1 ⎞ ⎛ν 1 ⎞
                        ⎜ 2              ⎟⎜ ⎟ = b⎜ ⎟                                     (11)
                        ⎝ ρ V1     ρ V1 ⎠ ⎝ X 2 ⎠  ⎝ν 2 ⎠
                                     2




where we write X 1 and X 2 for X and 1 − X respectively. Solving Equation (11) gives us

                         X 1 = b(ν 1 −ν 2 ) /(1 − ρ 2 )V1                                (12a)

                         X 2 = b(ν 2 − ρ 2ν 1 ) / ρ 2 (1 − ρ 2 )V1                       (12b)

If b = ρ 2V1 /ν 2 = V2 /ν 2 then X 1 + X 2 = 1. A smaller b implies that “cash” equal 1 − X 1 − X 2 is

held.

                                                        21
        A plausible example might have σ 2 = 0.2, σ 1 = 0.4. (The former is approximately the

standard deviation of the S&P 500 Index; the latter then would follow from a one-factor model

                        r1 = α + β r + u

with r1 representing the return on company stock; r that on an underlying factor with the same

variance as the S&P 500; β = 1 and the variance of the idiosyncratic term u equal three times

that to the variance of r .) Then (8b) implies ρ = 12 .

        Solving for X = X 1 in (12) with these parameters yields

                               ν 1 −ν 2
                        3X =                                                       (13)
                                  ν2

For example if (1 − X ) supplied four percentage points of excess return and X supplied five,

then

                         ∧
                        X = 0.067

        A higher X , in the neighborhood of ten or even fifteen percent, would not be imprudent.

Because the relationship between V and X is quadratic, small deviations from zero, the

optimum if m1 = m2 , do not increase V or reduce EU much, even if m1 = m2 . Specifically,

Equation (6) implies

                        V = V2 + (V1 − V2 ) X 2                                    (14)

and

                        dV
                           = 2(V1 − V2 ) X                                         (15)
                        dX

Thus at X = 0, dV / dX = 0. A small increase in X has virtually no effect on V .




                                                  22
       Table 5 shows the values of portfolio V and σ for various values of X for the

parameters of our example. Figure 1 plots the relationship between σ and X. These reinforce

the observation that X around ten percent has small effect of the volatility of the employee’s

portfolio. For example, a ten percent investment in company stock has a standard deviation of

20.3 percent, whereas a fifteen percent investment in company stock has a standard deviation of

return of 20.7 percent, up slightly from 20.0 percent for no company stock as compared to 40.0

percent for all company stock.

       The difference between the 6 23 percent, which is optimal in this example, and the ten or

fifteen percent which is not too imprudent, suggests a possible “free-rider” problem. From the

individual employee’s point of view, ideally he or she would like everyone else to have ten or

fifteen percent invested and have 6 23 invested himself or herself.

        V , σ and EU are continuous functions of the input parameters; thus small changes in the

assumptions of this example cause small changes in the table and the figure. Thus it seems likely

that any reasonable estimates will leave our general conclusion in tact: A small but meaningful

employee stock ownership level will not significantly deteriorate the diversification of employee

portfolios.



Conclusion

       These exploratory insights on the role of risk in properly structuring shared capitalist

arrangements have been developed by studying how workers themselves would confront and

resolve the issue of risk and examining the implications of portfolio theory. The main revision to

the previous empirical research on the economics of employee ownership is that a high level of

risk is not a requirement of making shared capitalism work best. The results show clearly that


                                                23
excessive worker risk based on a worker’s level of economic insecurity has the capability of

reversing every single positive individual and workplace outcome documented in decades of

research on shared capitalism and in findings in companion research using these data. Lack of

empowerment and poor employee relations play key roles in driving the negative impact of risk.

Ironically, workers in corporations with the most progressive work practices may not pay as

much attention to their risk as their objective economic situation requires.

       This finding may partly explain why empirical results on the impact of employee

ownership on firm performance are not always uniformly positive and sometimes show

dispersion, why some of the most progressive corporations ignore these issues, and why some

very large and very risky employee ownership experiments have failed miserably. The most

notable failure is the United Airlines employee buyout where risking the capital of individual

workers, wage substitution, lack of empowerment and poor employee relations all played a large

role consistent with our analysis. Indeed, the design of United Airlines employee ownership plan

appears to have violated every finding of this study. Moreover, many United workers may have

also had undiversified portfolios. Worker economic insecurity has been an unmeasured variable

in past research. Two clear implications are that: 1) the structure of employee ownership and

profit sharing plans needs to be “fit” to the risk profile of the workers; and (2) portfolio

diversification can be generally consistent with shared capitalism.

       Eliminating shared capitalism from capitalist societies is not the answer to the problem

of objective risk. Remember that Adam Smith emphasizes the incentive effect of capitalism and

its superiority to feudal systems and expected shared capitalism to be a positive motivator.

Portfolio theory suggests how a wide range of workers could have employee ownership and

diversification at the same time. Portfolio theory’s implications for this discussion is sometimes



                                                 24
reduced in the popular mind to the quick summary “buy a index of the entire market” but, as we

have seen, this is not precisely what portfolio theory says. Portfolio theory does not propose that

all risk be banned so that every global citizen should own a completely diversified basket of

securitized assets worldwide. In such a world there would be no home ownership, no individual

asset ownership, no sole proprietorships, no small businesspeople, no entrepreneurs, no high tech

start-ups, no owners who are “principals” in corporations, no room for workers to have shares in

their company, indeed, no shared capitalism. There would, in short, be no capitalism in the

individual incentive sense. It would be something akin to the heavily controlled paternalistic risk

reduction of feudalism.

         Research on employee ownership and shared capitalism often ignores or minimizes both

subjective and objective risk. This disregard has taken place for decades despite the fact that

excessive risk and lack of diversification has been the principal objection by some economists,

other social scientists, and policy-makers to the idea of broadened shared incentives and

employee ownership. The goal of this paper has been to confront these objections head-on and

attempt through empirical analysis to understand them better. As national wage systems evolve

in the 21st century and inflation-adjusted wage increases flatten, the additional income workers

can get from capital income (shares of profits and stock and capital appreciation in their firms),

may constitute an important potential future component of worker wealth. Risk is not the enemy

of shared capitalism, but the elements of this risk must be directly confronted, empirically

understood, and theoretically considered in a sound manner.


Notes:
1
  The authors are indebted to Mark Huselid for suggesting what themes and wording should be
considered as critical for our questions regarding the measurement of alignment with the



                                                25
company’s strategy. While we did some editing to make the questions accessible to the wide
variety of workers and firms in the study, they basically follow his ideas.
2
  In a discussion of these findings with Daniel Kahneman, he has raised the issue whether the
(different) ideas of an irrelevant gift (one that does not respond to an immediate need) or of a gift
that involves costs to the recipient, have anything to do with what we found. (Personal
communication, October 26, 2007)
3
  In predicting the summative attitudes measure (column 2), the effect of a one standard
deviation change in the empowerment score (employee relations score) on the ordered probit
index would be 2.14 (2.91) times larger than the effect of a one standard deviation change in the
insecurity score. In predicting the behavioral outcomes measure (column 8), the similar
multiples would respectively be 4.03 and 6.59.




                                                26
                  Appendix: Variable Definitions and Descriptive Statistics.

Dependent Variables

Risk Aversion and Risk Seeking

1. Attitude towards risk: “Some people like to take risks and others dislike taking risks. Where
would you place yourself on a scale of how much you like or dislike taking risks, where 0 is
hating to take any kind of risk and 10 is loving to take risks?” (0-10 scale, 0= Hate to take risks
10 =Love to take risks). Mean = 5.61, s.d. = 2.38, n= 34,794.

2. Highest price paid for a bet: “You are offered a bet. You have a 10% chance of winning
$1000. Would you take the bet if it cost you: (mark highest price you would pay: $0, $1, $10,
$20, $50, $100, $150) Mean = $23.37, s.d. = 32.40, n= 34,751.

Outcomes

3. Planning to stay with employer vs looking to turnover. : “How likely is it that you will decide
to look hard for a job with another organization within the next twelve months?” 0-3 scale, 0=
Already looking; 1= Very likely; 2= Somewhat likely; 2=Not at all likely. Mean = 2..45, s.d. =
.81, n= 35,080.

4. Extent of loyalty to current employer: “How much loyalty would you say you feel toward the
company you work for as a whole?” (Scale 0-3, 0= No loyalty at all; 1= Only a little; 2 = Some;
3=A lot). Mean = 2.37, s.d. = .78, n= 34,555.

5. Willingness to work harder to help company succeed: “To what extent do you agree or
disagree with this statement? “I am willing to work harder than I have to in order to help the
company I work for succeed.” (Scale: 0-4, 0= Strongly disagree; 1= Disagree; 2= Neither agree
nor disagree; 3= Agree; 4= Strongly agree) Mean=3.04, s.d. 0.89; n= 35,091.

6. Whether worker expects to stay with employer for the foreseeable future: “Which ONE of
the following statements best describes how you think of your current employer? 1= I see
myself working here for the foreseeable future (a long time). 0= I do not see myself working
here very long.” (Scale 0-1). Mean=0.83; s.d= 0.37; n= 34,794.

7. Whether worker sees current job as part of long-term career: “Thinking about your current job
(rather than your employer), do you look upon it as part of your long term career, or a position
that is not part of your long term career? 1= Part of my long term career; 0= A position that is
not part of my long term career.” (Scale 0-1). Mean=0.78, s.d. 0.42, n=34,991.

8.. Summative outcomes variable: Additive index of variables 3-7 above. (0-12 scale) Mean =
9.49, s.d. = 2.26, n= 33,467.
Attitudes

9. Importance of employee ownership: “How important is it to you to work in a company that
provides stock ownership to its employees? Please rate on a scale of 0 to 10.” (0-10 scale, 0=
Not important - 10 = Highly important.) Mean = 7.44 , s.d. = 2.68, n= 34,729.

10. Feeling like an owner of the company: “How much do you feel like an owner of this
company?” (1-10 scale, 1=Not important --- A moderate degree --- 10=Very much). Mean =
4.81, s.d. = 3.02, n= 34,910.

11.. Summative attitudes variable: Additive index of variables 9-10 above. (0-20 scale) Mean =
12.24, s.d. = 4.93, n= 34,525.

Preferences

12. Preference regarding a small variable pay risk: “We would like to ask about your attitude
toward variable pay in two imaginary jobs. Job A and Job B are identical except for the fact that
Job A pays a fixed amount and Job B pays an amount that varies. Based on the following
information, which one would you choose? Job A which guarantees an amount equal to your
current pay, or Job B, which each year has a 50/50 chance that you would make 10% MORE
than your current pay and a 50/50 chance that you would make 5% LESS than your current pay.”
(Scale: 0= Job A, 1= Job B). Mean = 0.40 s.d. = 0.49, n= 28,700.

13. Preference regarding variable or fixed pay for next pay increase: “For your next pay increase,
would you prefer that it come in the form of: 1.All fixed wages, with no profit sharing or
company stock. 2. Split between fixed wages and profit sharing or company stock. 3. All in the
form of profit sharing or company stock.” (Scale: 1-3, textual responses as shown.) Mean =
1.84, s.d. = .60, n= 22,623.

14. Summative preferences variable: Additive index of variables 12-13 above. (0-4 scale)
Mean = 2.22, s.d. = 0.81, n= 21,040.

15. Incentive threshold point: “Some people think that basing pay on company performance will
encourage employees to take an active role in promoting the company’s success. At your
company, how much of their pay would most employees have to get in performance-based pay to
motivate them to take more responsibility for the success of the company? _5%, _10%, _20%,
_30%, _40%, _50%, _60%, _70%, _80%, _90%, _100%, _Performance-based pay would not
make a difference.” (Scale: % 0-100%). Mean = 31.7, s.d. = 24.6, n= 25435.

16. Percent of worker’s wealth in equities overall: “About what percent of your total wealth is
      in stocks overall? ________%” (Scale: 1-100%). Mean: 29.2, s.d=26.6; n= 25,715.

Independent Variables

17. Economic insecurity score. Measure of the economic status quo of each worker denoting
     increasing economic insecurity. Summative measure of questions 18-20 below including:


                                               28
     -quartiles representing highest to lowest annual fixed pay plus overtime     Score: 0-3
     -quartiles representing highest to lowest total wealth divided by fixed pay Score: 0-3
     -five categories representing highest to lowest competitiveness of fixed pay Score: 0-4

     Mean=5.28, s.d.=2.12; n= 22,980. Minimum 0; Maximum 10.

18. Annual fixed pay plus overtime: “What was your annual base pay last year (excluding any
     overtime, bonuses and commissions) BEFORE taxes and deductions? If you receive
     overtime pay, how much did you earn in overtime last year?” Mean=60,035, s.d.=42,092,
     n= 28,365.

     For first component of the economic insecurity score, answers were recoded by quartile:
           0: >$80,000; 1: >$50,000 & <= $80,000; 2: > $33,000 & < =$50,000 3: <$33,000.

19. Total wealth (minus debts) with spouse/partner: “People have various assets that constitute
     their wealth. These include the value of their house minus the mortgage, plus their
     vehicles, stocks and mutual funds, cash, checking accounts, retirement accounts including
     401(k) and pension assets, and so forth. Taking account of all of these things would you
     say that the WEALTH of you and your spouse/partner is: Less than $5000; $5000 to
     $20,000; $20,000 to $40,000; $40,000 to $75,000; $75,000 to $100,000; $100,000 to
     $150,000; $150,000 to $250,000; $250,000 to $500,000; $500,000 to $1 Million; Over $1
     Million.” For analytical purposes, each worker was assigned the mid-point of each category
     as their assumed wealth. Mean=312020, s.d.=613,975, n= 28,920.

     For second component of the economic insecurity score, answers were divided by fixed
     pay plus overtime, and recoded into quartiles: 0: >6.37; 1: >3.09 & <=6.37; 2: >1.28 & <
     =3.09 3: <1.28

20. Competitiveness of annual fixed pay: “Do you believe your fixed annual wages last year
     were higher or lower than those of employees with similar experience and job descriptions
     in other companies in your region? Please circle a number from 1 to 5.” Mean= 2.67,
     s.d.=1.00, n= 31.091.

     For third component of the economic insecurity score, answers were subtracted from 5 for
           a range of 0 to 4.


Other Variables

21. Lack of Empowerment Score: Summative measure of 22-26 below (reverse scored from
     format used in survey):
     - Overall satisfaction with job-related influence                     Score 0-3
     -Worker influence at the job level                                    Score 0-3
     -Worker influence at the work group or department level               Score 0-3
     -Worker influence at the company level                                Score 0-3


                                              29
     -Worker involvement in a team, committee, or task force                       Score 0-1
     Mean=6.07, s.d.=2.66, n= 33,855; Minimum 0; Maximum 13.

22. Overall satisfaction with job-related influence. “Overall, how satisfied are you with the
     influence you have in company decisions that affect your job and work life?” (Scale 0-3,
     0= very satisfied, 1=somewhat satisfied, 2= not too satisfied, 3= not at all satisfied) Mean=
     1.36; s.d.=0.84, n= 34,981.

23. Worker influence at the job level. “How much involvement and direct influence do YOU
     have in: A. Deciding how to do your job and organize the work.” (Scale: 0-3, 0=A lot,
     1=Some, 2= Only a little, 3=None) Mean=0.69, s.d.=0.86, n = 35,109.

24. Worker influence at the work group or department level. “How much involvement and direct
     influence do YOU have in: B. Setting goals for your work group or department.” (Scale: 0-
     3, 0=A lot, 1=Some, 2= Only a little, 3=None). Mean=1.38, s.d.=1.03, n = 35,015..

25. Worker influence at the company level. “How much involvement and direct influence do
     YOU have in: C. Overall company decisions. ” (Scale: 0-3, 0=A lot, 1=Some, 2= Only a
     little, 3=None). Mean=2.28, s.d.=0.86, n = 34,978.

26. Worker involvement in a team, committee, or task force: “Some companies have organized
     workplace decision-making in ways to get more employee input and involvement. Are you
     personally involved in any team, committee or task force that addresses issues such as
     product quality, cost cutting, productivity, health and safety, or other workplace issues?
     (Scale: 0 = yes; 1= no). Mean: 0.37, s.d.=0.48, n= 34,722..

27. Poor Employee Relations Score: Summative measure of 28-31 below (reverse scored from
     format used in survey):
     -company grade for trustworthiness in keeping its promises             Score 0-4
     -company grade for overall employment relations                        Score 0-4
     -company grade for fairness                                            Score 0-6
     -company grade for creating a sense of common purpose in the company Score 0-4

     Mean=6.75, s.d. 4.14, n= 34,199; minimum 0; maximum 18.

28. Worker’s grade of company for trustworthiness: “If you were to rate how well this company
     takes care of workers on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give in
     these areas? (C is an average grade.) Trustworthiness in keeping its promises.” (Scale: A =
     0; B=1; C=2; D=3; F=4). Mean=1.62, s.d.=1.14, n= 34,850.

29. Worker’s grade of company for fairness: “Overall, this company is fair to its employees.”
      (Scale: Strongly agree = 0, Strongly disagree = 6). Mean=2.14, s.d.=1.67, n= 35,031.

30. Worker’s grade of company for overall employment relations: “If you were to rate how well
      this company takes care of workers on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would



                                               30
       you give in these areas? (C is an average grade.) Overall relations with employees.”
       (Scale: A = 0; B=1; C=2; D=3; F=4). Mean: 1.51, s.d. 1.05, n= 34,928.

31. Worker’s grade of company for creating a sense of common purpose: “If you were to rate
      how well this company takes care of workers on a scale similar to school grades, what
      grade would you give in these areas? (C is an average grade.) Creating a sense of
      common purpose in the company.” (Scale: A = 0; B=1; C=2; D=3; F=4). Mean: 1.50, s.d.
      1.04, n= 34,916.

32. High Performance Work System: Summative measure of 33-38 below:
      -whether workers have received formal training from their employer in the last 12 months
      -the number of hours of this training measured by four increasing categories of
              investment by the firm
      -whether workers say they understand their company’s overall plan for being successful
      -whether workers say that they agree with this plan
      -whether workers say that the company is providing them with the information, training,
              and resources necessary to help achieve the goals of this plan
      -whether workers feel that the company’s culture encourages you to share your ideas
              about how to achieve the goals of this plan
      Mean=13.35, s.d.=3.31, n=23,714.

33. Whether worker received formal training by employer. “In the last 12 months have you
      received any formal training from your current employer, such as in classes or seminars
      sponsored by the employer?” (Score: 0 =No; 1 = Yes). Mean=0.59, s.d. 0.49, n= 34,913.

34. Hours of formal training in last 12 months: “About how many hours of formal training have
       you received in the last 12 months?” (Scale: actual number of hours). Mean=18.88,
       s.d.=41.57, n= 34,154.

     Recoding for training hours variable into four ascending categories:
                                        Percent of Sample With This Score
     0: 0 hours                         41.0%
     1: > 0 & <= 11 hours               17.6%
     2: >11 & <=33 hours                18.5%
     3: >33 & < 1680 hours              22.8%

35. Whether worker says he/she understands company’s overall plan: “To what extent do you:
      Understand your company’s overall plan for being successful?” (Scale: 1-4, 1=not at all,
      2=very little, 3=to some extent, 4=to a great extent). Mean=3.18, s.d.=0.72, n= 25,046.

36. Whether worker says she/he agrees with company’s overall plan: “To what extent do you:
      personally agree with this plan?” (Scale: 1-4, 1=not at all, 2=very little, 3=to some
      extent, 4=to a great extent). Mean=3.02, s.d.=-.73, n= 24,515.

37. Whether worker says he/she has info, training, and resources to achieve the company’s
      overall plan. “To what extent do you: Feel that the company is providing you with the


                                              31
       information, training, and resources necessary to help achieve the goals of this plan?”
       (Scale: 1-4, 1=not at all, 2=very little, 3=to some extent, 4=to a great extent).
       Mean=2.84, s.d.=0.83, n= 24,906.

38. Whether worker feels company culture encourages sharing of ideas about achieving plan’s
      goals. “To what extent do you: Feel that your company’s culture encourages you to share
      your ideas about how to achieve the goals of this plan?” (Scale: 1-4, 1=not at all, 2=very
      little, 3=to some extent, 4=to a great extent). Mean=2.74, s.d.=0.91, n= 24,841.

39. Percent of wealth in company stock: “About what percent of your wealth is in your
       employer’s stock?” (Scale: 0-100%). Mean=16.9, s.d.=21.2, n= 26,818.




                                               32
Bibliography

Akerlof, George A. 1979. “The case against conservative macroeconomics: an inaugural
       lecture,” Economica 46, 219-237 (August)

Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, Peter Berg, and Arne L. Kalleberg. 2000. Manufacturing
      Advantage: Why High Performance Work Systems Pay Off. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
      University Press/ILR Press.

Arrow, Kenneth. 1973. “Social responsibility and economic efficiency,” Public Policy 21: 303-
       317 (Summer).

Bartholomew, David. 1996. The Statistical Approach to Social Measurement. New York:
       Academic Press.

Bartholomew, David, J. Galbraith, Irini Moustkaki, Fionay Steele. 2002. The Analysis and
       Interpretation of Multivariate Data for Social Scientists. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Becker, Brian E., and Mark A. Huselid, and Dave Ulrich. 2001. The HR Scorecard: Linking
       People, Strategy, and Performance. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press.

Benartzi, Shlomo. 2001. “Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of company stock to
       retirement accounts, “ Journal of Finance 56(5), 1747-1764.

Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard Thaler. 2001. “Naïve diversification strategies in defin ed
       contribution savings plans,” American Economic Review 91(1), 79-98.

Bernstein, Peter L. 1992. Capital Ideas: The Improbable Origins of Modern Wall Street. New
       York: The Free Press.

Blasi, Joseph and Douglas Kruse. 2006. “High Performance Work Practices at Century’s End,”
        Industrial Relations, October. Vol. 45, No. 4, pp. 547-578.

Blasi, Joseph, Richard Freeman, Chris Mackin, and Douglas Kruse. 2008. "Creating a Bigger
        Pie? The Effects of Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Stock Options on
        Workplace Performance." Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New
        York, NY, October 2006.

Cappelli, Peter, and David Neumark. 2001. “Do "High-Performance" Work Practices Improve
       Establishment-Level Outcomes?,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Volume 54,
       Number 4, July.

Dexter, A.S., J.N.W. Yu and W. T. Ziemba. 1980. “Portfolio Selection in a Lognormal Market
       When the Investor Has a Power Utility Function: Computational Results” In M.A.H.
       Dempster (ed.), Stochastic Programming, Academic Press, New York, pp.507-23
Ederington, L.H. 1986. “Mean-variance as an Approximation to Expected Utility
       Maximization,” working paper 86-5, School of Business Administration, Washington
       University, St Louis, Missouri.

Freeman, Richard, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Worker Responses to Shirking
      under Shared Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference,
      New York, NY, October 2006.

Harden, Erika, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Who Has a Better Idea: Innovation,
      Shared Capitalism, and Human Resource Policies.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage
      Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.

Hlawitschka, Walter. 1994. “The Empirical Nature of Taylor-Series Approximations to
       Expected Utility,” The American Economic Review Vol. 84, No. 3 pp.713-719

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanni Prennushi. 1995. The Impact of Human
       Resource Management Practices on Productivity. Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
       Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper Number 5333.

Kahneman, Daniel. 2003. “A psychological perspective on economics,” American Economic
     Review, 92(2), 161-168 (May).

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986a. “Fairness as a constraint on
     profit seeking: entitlements in the market,” American Economic Review 76(4), 728-741
     (September).

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1986b. “Fairness and the assumptions
     of economics,” Journal of Business 59(4), Part 2, S285-S300 (October)

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack L. Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. 1991. “Anomalies: The Endowment
     Effect, Loss Aversion, and Status Quo Bias,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume
     5, Issue 1, Winter 1991, 193-206

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prespect theory: an analysis of decisions under
     risk,” Econometrica 47(2), 313-27 (March).

Kahneman, Daniel and Amos Tversky. 2000. Choices, values, and frames. New York:
     Cambridge University Press.

Kallberg, Jarl G., and William T. Ziemba. 1981. “Remarks on Optimal Portfolio Selection,” in
       Methods of Operations Research, Gunter Bamberg and Otto Optiz (eds.). Cambridge,
       MA: Oelgeschlager, Gunn & Hain pp. 507-520.

Kelly, J. L., Jr. 1956. “A New Interpretation of Information Rate,” Bell System Technical
        Journal, pp. 917-926



                                             34
Keynes, John Maynard. 1983. “Letter to F.C. Scott, February 6, 1942,” The Collected Writings
      of John Maynard Keynes, Donald Moggridge, ed., Vol XII, New York: Cambridge
      University Press, pps. 81-83.

Kroll, Y., H. Levy and H.M. Markowitz. 1984. “Mean Variance Versus Direct Utility
        Maximization,” Journal of Finance, 39(1), March.


Kruse, Douglas, Joseph Blasi, and Rhokeun Park. 2008. “Shared Capitalism in the U.S.
       Economy: Prevalence, Characteristics, and Employee Views of Financial Participation in
       Enterprises.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY,
       October 2006.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and David Martimort. 2002. The Theory of Incentives: The Principal-
       Agent Model. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.

Latané, H. A. 1959. “Criteria for Choice among Risky Ventures,” Journal of Political
       Economy, April, LXVII No. 2, pp. 144-155

Levy, H. and H.M. Markowitz. 1979. “Approximating Expected Utility by a Function of Mean
       and Variance,” American Economic Review, 69(3), June pp. 308-317.

Markowitz, Harry. 1952a. “Portfolio Selection,” Journal of Finance, Vol 2 (1), 79-91.

Markowitz, Harry. 1952b. “The Utility of Wealth,” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 60
     (2), 151-158.

Markowitz, H.M. 1959. Portfolio Selection: Efficient Diversification of Investments. Wiley,
     Yale University Press, 1970, 2nd ed. Basil Blackwell, 1991

Markowitz, H.M., D.W. Reid and B. V. Tew. 1994. “The Value of a Blank Check,” The Journal
     of Portfolio Management, pp. 82-91 Summer.

Muelbroek, Lisa. 2002. Company stock in pension plans: how costly is it? Harvard Business
      School working paper 02-025.

Pulley, L.M. 1981. “A General Mean-variance Approximation to Expected Utility for Short
        Holding Periods,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 16, pp. 361-73

Pulley, L.M. 1983. “Mean-variance Approximations to Expected Logarithmic Utility,”
        Operations Research, 31 (4), pp. 685-96.

Rousseau, Denise M.; Shperling, Zipi. 2003. “Pieces of the Action: Ownership and the
      Changing Employment Relationship,” Academy of Management Review, 28(4), pp. 553-
      570.



                                             35
Savage, L.J. 1954. The Foundations of Statistics, John Wiley & Sons. Second revised ed.
      Dover, New York.

Sharpe, W.F. 1964. “Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Market Equilibrium Under. Conditions
       of Risk,” Journal of Finance, Vol.19, pp.425-442.

Simaan, Yusif. 1993. “What is the Opportunity Cost of Mean-Variance Investment Strategies?”
      Management Science 39, (5), pp. 578-587, May

Smith, Adam. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. New York: The Modern Library.

Tobin, J. 1958. “Liquidity Preference as Behavior Towards Risk,” The Review of Economic
       Statistics, No. 67, February, 65-86.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1981. “The framing of decisions and the psychology of
      choice,” Science, 211, 453-458.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1986. “Rational choice and the framing of decisions,”
      Journal of Business 59(4), Part 2, S251-78.

Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman. 1991. “Loss aversion in riskless choice: a reference
      dependent model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106(4), 1039-61 (November).




                                             36
Table 1. The Economic Insecurity Score

Score Percent       #

0     0.26%         59
1     2.62%         603
2     7.56%         1,737
3     12.15%        2,792
4     14.54%        3,341
5     16.22%        3,728
6     16.50%        3,792
7     14.13%        3,248
8     9.73%         2,237
9     4.40%         1,010
10    1.88%         433

Mean=5.28; Median=5; s.d.=2.12; n= 22,980
           Table 2. Economic Insecurity Score and Attitudes, Preferences, and Outcomes
                        For Workers With Any Shared Capitalist Practice

Note: Each line represents a separate regression, containing coefficient and T-statistic for Economic
Insecurity Score in predicting the dependent variable at the left. Controls are noted at bottom.

                                                            Line    Coeff.         T-stat. n      R-sq.
Attitudes
Summative attitudes measure (0-20, ordered probit)          1       -0.109***      -20.56 17,922 0.044
Important to work in a company that provides
  stock ownership or stock options to its employees
  (0-10, ordered probit)                                    2       -0.062***      -11,27 17,967 0.032

Feel like an owner (1-10, ordered probit)                   3       -0.125***      -22.90 17,954 0.060

Ownership important to me (1-10, ordered probit)            4       -0.050***      -6.83 10,426 0.032
How important stock options were in attracting you
  to work for the company (1-4, ordered probit)             5       -0.034***      -3.66 6,964 0.021

Importance of Employee Stock Purchase Plan in attracting
  you to work at the company(0-4, ordered probit)        6          -0.063***      -5.77 5,210 0.025
How important the ESOP was in attracting you to
  work for the company (1-4, ordered probit)             7          -0.024         -1.37 1,898 0.034
Extent to which a cash incentive would increase your
  motivation to improve the business success of the
  company (0-4, ordered probit)                          8          0.059***       6.65   7,727 0.008

Extent to which open market purchases of company
  stock would increase your motivation to improve the
  business success of the company
  (0-4, ordered probit)                                     9       -0.050***      -5.46 6,430 0.013
Extent to which stock options would increase your
  motivation to improve the business success of the
  company (0-4, ordered probit)                             10      -0.050***      -5.15 6,462 0.040

Extent to which buying company stock in an Employee
  Stock Purchase Plan would increase your motivation to
  improve the business success of the company
  (0-4, ordered probit)                                 11          -0.050***      -5.28 6,436 0.025

Extent to which an ESOP would increase your
  motivation to improve the business success of the
  company (0-4, ordered probit)                             12      -0.054***      -3.03 1,902 0.029

Ranking of the following relative to the other incentives
  in affecting one’s motivation to improve the


                                                    38
  business success of the company
  (0-3 lowest-highest rank, ordered probit)
    cash bonus                                            13    0.036**     2.44    3,067   0.055
    fixed wage increase                                   14   0.063***     4.23    3,112   0.033
    401k company stock match                              15   -0.060***    -4.12   2,908   0.031
    company-wide profit sharing plan                      16    -0.038***   -2.75   3,120   0.044

Preferences
Summative preferences measure a (0-4, ordered probit)     17   -0.012       -1.58 10,707 0.037

Preference of variable pay, a 50/50 chance to make
  10% more or 5% less over fixed pay (0-1, probit)        18   -0.010       -1.27 14,194 0.121

Preference of variable pay, a 50/50 chance to make
  50% more or 25% less over fixed pay (0-1, probit)       19   -0.076***    -4.75 3,385 0.122

Preference for next pay increase as all fixed wages, a
  mixture of fixed and performance-based, or all
  performance-based pay (1-3, ordered probit)             20   -0.021**     -2.77 11,549 0.016
Preference of company stock or stock options over
  cash incentive plan for some of your compensation
  (1-5, ordered probit)                                   21   -0.100***    -10.84 6,434 0.033

Preference of variable pay using company stock,
  profit sharing or stock options over only fixed pay
  (0-1, probit)                                           22   -0.105***    -8.17 7,997 0.167

% less regular pay worker is willing to accept to get
  a possible performance bonus of 10% on average of
  regular pay annually with the risk it could be higher
  or lower in any given year (0-100%, OLS)                23   -0.222***    -11.62 15,261 0.071

Ranking of the following as part of a pay raise.
(0-3 lowest-highest rank, ordered probit)
       stock options                                      24   -0.020       -1.32   1,178   0.013
       fixed wage increase                                25    0.067***    2.85    1,738   0.019
       company stock                                      26   -0.072***    -4.00   1,691   0.015
       company-wide profit sharing plan                   27    0.024       1.33    1,697   0.032

Would not opt to receive 50% of ESOP in cash right
 away or transfer it to another retirement fund versus
 keeping it entirely in company stock (0-1, probit)       28   -0.014       -0.58 1,297 0.042

Outcomes
Summative outcomes rating (0-20, ordered probit)          29   -0.109***    -19.93 17,469 0.033
Not likely to look hard for a job (0-3, ordered probit)   30   -0.115***    -18.33 17,940 0.036


                                                     39
Feel loyalty to the company (0-3, ordered probit)         31         -0.108***       -17.45   17,735 0.060
See myself working here a long time (0-1, probit)         32         -0.091***       -11.18   17,953 0.043
See current job as part of career (0-1, probit)           33         -0.048***       -6.39    17,979 0.078
Will work harder for company (0-4, ordered probit)        34         -0.063***       -11.05   17,968 0.040
Number of days absent (#, tobit)                          35          0.171**        2.36     17,676 0.018
It’s part of my job to find out how to improve my workgroup
  or team’s performance (0-4, ordered probit)             36          0.004          -0.11 592      0.078
Days in which I don’t put much effort into my
   job (0-4, ordered probit)                              37         -0.011          -1.17 6,840 0.017
Suggestion meeting frequency (0-4, ordered probit)        38         -0.054***       -3.48 2,224 0.033
Offering suggestions frequency (0-4, ordered probit)      39          0.011           1.42 12,643 0.072

See the appendix for variable definitions and descriptive statistics.
Regressions include only workers who said they participated in at least one shared capitalist practice
(owning company stock, participating in a profit sharing or gain sharing plan, or currently holding or
receiving company stock options in the past year). Control variables include age, sex, marital status,
children, family size, disability status, education, occupation, full-time status, payment on an hourly rate,
hours worked per week, tenure, supervisory status, and log of fixed annual pay.
* p< .10 ** p< .05 ***p<. 01




                                                     40
           Table 3. Bad vs. Good Corporate Culture In the Economic Insecurity Score’s
                                Impact on Workplace Outcomes.

Note: In this table high and low economic insecurity refers respectively to scores above the median, and
at or below the median. The empowerment and employee relations scores are similarly divided at the
median.

                                                                   % Very Likely To Look Hard
                                                                   For A Job In The Next 12
                                                                   Months Or Already Looking

High Economic Insecurity/Poor Empowerment/Poor Employee Relations                23.7%
Low Economic Insecurity/Poor Empowerment/Poor Employee Relations                 21.2%

High Economic Insecurity/Good Empowerment/Poor Employee Relations                13.2%
Low Economic Insecurity/Good Empowerment/Poor Employee Relations                 10.8%
High Economic Insecurity /Poor Empowerment/Good Employee Relations               9.8%
Low Economic Insecurity/Poor Empowerment/Good Employee Relations                 8.8%

High Economic Insecurity/Good Empowerment/Good Employee Relations                4.5%
Low Economic Insecurity/Good Empowerment/Good Employee Relations                 3.9%




                                                   41
         Table 4. Empowerment, Employee Relations, and High Performance Work Systems
                  as Predictors of Attitudes, Preferences, and Behavioral Outcomes.


                 Summative attitudes     Summative preferences     Summative outcomes
      Dep. var.: measure                 measure                   measure
                  (1)    (2)       (3)   (4)        (5)     (6)    (7)     (8)      (9)
Economic
insecurity        -0.109   -0.058 -0.029     -0.012 -0.002 -0.004 -0.109     -0.033 -0.032
                 (0.005) (0.006) (0.006)   (0.007) (0.008) (0.008) (0.005) (0.006) (0.007)

Lack of
empowerment                   -0.095    -0.072               -0.027 -0.023                 -0.132 -0.094
                             (0.004)   (0.005)              (0.005) (0.006)               (0.004) (0.005)

Poor employee
relations                     -0.082     -0.05               -0.003   0.005                -0.139 -0.131
                             (0.002)   (0.003)              (0.003) (0.004)               (0.003) (0.004)

HPWS                                     0.069                          0.018                         0.073
                                       (0.004)                        (0.005)                       (0.004)

N                  17922      17251 11268           10707 10252           9977 17469           16859 10965
R-squared           0.044      0.076     0.049       0.037     0.039      0.04      0.033      0.125   0.137
    Standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients in bold are significant at 95% level. Regressions
    include only workers who said they participated in at least one shared capitalist practice (owning
    company stock through open market purchases, an Employee Stock Purchase Plan, a 401k plan,
    the exercise of stock options, or an ESOP, participating in a profit sharing or gain sharing plan,
    currently holding or receiving company stock options in the past year).
    Control variables include age, sex, marital status, children, family size, disability status,
    education, occupation, full-time status, payment on an hourly rate, hours worked per week,
    tenure, supervisory status, and log of fixed annual pay.
Table 5. Values of V and Sigma for Various Values of X




                X      1-X       V     Sigma
              0.00     1.00   0.0400    0.200
              0.05     0.95   0.0403    0.201
              0.10     0.90   0.0412    0.203
              0.15     0.85   0.0427    0.207
              0.20     0.80   0.0448    0.212
              0.25     0.75   0.0475    0.218
              0.30     0.70   0.0508    0.225
              0.35     0.65   0.0547    0.234
              0.40     0.60   0.0592    0.243
              0.45     0.55   0.0643    0.254
              0.50     0.50   0.0700    0.265
              0.55     0.45   0.0763    0.276
              0.60     0.40   0.0832    0.288
              0.65     0.35   0.0907    0.301
              0.70     0.30   0.0988    0.314
              0.75     0.25   0.1075    0.328
              0.80     0.20   0.1168    0.342
              0.85     0.15   0.1267    0.356
              0.90     0.10   0.1372    0.370
              0.95     0.05   0.1483    0.385
              1.00     0.00   0.1600    0.400




                         43
                                                                     Figure 1:


                                                               Portfolio Standard Deviation
                                                      as a function of investment in company stock

                                   0.450


                                   0.400


                                   0.350
    Portfolio Standard Deviation




                                   0.300


                                   0.250


                                   0.200


                                   0.150


                                   0.100


                                   0.050


                                   0.000
                                        0.00   0.20         0.40                   0.60                   0.80   1.00   1.20
                                                                   Fraction X invested in company stock
•




                                                                          44
