                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          WORKER RESPONSES TO SHIRKING UNDER SHARED CAPITALISM

                                         Richard Freeman
                                          Douglas Kruse
                                           Joseph Blasi

                                       Working Paper 14227
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14227


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008

Presented at the Russell Sage/NBER conference in New York City, October 2006, and at the M.I.T.
Sloan School of Management, November 2007. The authors wish to thank Eric Maskin and Canice
Prendergast for comments on the paper at the Russell Sage/NBER conference. The discussion and
footnotes in response to possible objections represent our responses to his very helpful points. An
earlier version was presented at the 2004 Association for Comparative Economic Studies conference,
San Diego, CA, with valuable comments from Avner Ben-Ner. This paper is part of the National Bureau
of Economic Research?s Shared Capitalism Research Project, funded by the Russell Sage and Rockefeller
Foundations. Additional funding for the General Social Survey questions was provided by the Beyster
Institute for Entrepreneurial Employee Ownership, the ESOP Association, the Employee Ownership
Foundation, Hewitt Associates, the National Center for Employee Ownership, and the Profit Sharing
Council of America. The authors wish to thank Tom Smith with the General Social Survey at the National
Opinion Research Center of the University of Chicago and Peter Marsden of Harvard University with
the National Organizations Study for their assistance in arranging the shared capitalism segment of
both surveys. Refen Koh, Michelle Pinheiro, Rhokeun Park, and Patricia Berhau provided excellent
assistance in survey scanning, entry, and verification. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Richard Freeman, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
WORKER RESPONSES TO SHIRKING UNDER SHARED CAPITALISM
Richard Freeman, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi
NBER Working Paper No. 14227
August 2008
JEL No. J33,J54,L23

                                            ABSTRACT

Group incentive systems have to overcome the free rider or 1/N problem, which gives workers an
incentive to shirk, if they are to succeed. This paper uses new questions on responses to shirking from
the General Social Survey and a special NBER survey of workers at over 300 worksites in 14 companies
that have some form of group incentive pay to examine how well workers can monitor their peers
and what they do when the peers are not working up to speed. The paper finds that: 1) most workers
say that they can detect fellow employees who shirk; 2) many report that they would speak to the shirker
or report the behavior or a supervisor, and many report that they did so in the past; 3) the proportion
that takes action against shirkers is greatest among workers paid under group incentive systems, in
smaller companies, and in companies with good employee-management relations; 4) group incentives
interact with high-performance human resource policies such as employee involvement teams, training,
task variety, low levels of supervision, and good fixed wages to induce more workers to act against
shirking; 5) workers in workplaces where there is more anti-shirking behavior report that co-workers
work harder, encourage other workers more, and report that their workplace facility is more effective
in ways that should raise productivity and profits.


Richard Freeman                                    Joseph Blasi
NBER                                               Rutgers University
1050 Massachusetts Avenue                          School of Management and Labor Relations
Cambridge, MA 02138                                Levin Building
freeman@nber.org                                   New Brunswick, NJ 08544
                                                   and NBER
Douglas Kruse                                      jrbru@hotmail.com
School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University
94 Rockafeller Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854
and NBER
dkruse@rci.rutgers.edu
       What do workers do when they see someone slacking off in ways that reduce the

productivity of their work group and enterprise?

       The rational response depends on the circumstances. In a tournament race for promotion,

having a competitor slack off is good news. You don’t have to go all out to win the promotion.

In a piece-rate pay system where the firm lowers the rate per piece when workers produce more

than expected, you will also welcome the shirker. The more other workers shirk, the less likely it

is that management will lower the rate per piece and make it harder to earn your weekly pay.

       But when part of workers’ pay comes in the form of some group incentive such as profit-

sharing or share ownership or stock options, a worker who does not do his or her job takes

“money out of the pocket” of other workers. The group would be better off if someone acted

against the shirker. But standard analysis suggests that it will rarely be rational for anyone to

intervene. The costs of intervening with the shirker fall on the intervener but that person gets

only part of the benefit (in an N worker group the worker who intervenes gains 1/Nth of the

benefit going to workers and none of the benefit that goes to capital). The implication is that

rational workers will not act against a shirker just as rational players should not cooperate in a

prisoner’s dilemma game. Group incentive systems are thus doomed to failure.

       The facts for labor practices as for prisoner’s dilemma and other games of cooperation

are different. Team production and group incentive plans, which succeed only if they overcome

free riding and shirking, are widespread in modern economies. Since workers often have better

information than management on what fellow workers are doing, worker responses to shirking

are critical to the success or failure of these schemes. Many workplaces develop cultures where

workers discourage others from shirking. Lab experiments find cooperative behavior in

                                                  1
collective goods games when game theory rationality predicts that the rational player defects.

Directly relevant to our analysis, Fehr and Gachter (2000) have found that individuals punish

defectors in laboratory experiments even when it is not in their individual self-interest to do so,

due to norms of reciprocity that are strong among many individuals. Peer monitoring has also

been found in group loans in Third World credit markets (Stiglitz 1990). Punishing free riders at

a workplace may also benefit the intervener in the long run if other members of the group

appreciate that person’s action against free riders. They may reap long term rewards in the form

of higher esteem and greater influence within a group. Self-interest aside, the evidence from

anthropologists that voluntarily “policing” cooperation occurs in many societies suggests that it

may be hardwired from evolution. Some economists have suggested how ostracism can be

effective in promoting cooperation (Hirshleifer and Rasmussen 2003).

       This study examines worker reactions to shirking by analyzing questions that we

developed and put on the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys (GSS) and on surveys of 14

companies that have some forms of group incentive plans that we conducted through the NBER.

We asked workers about the ease of observing co-workers' performance, and the likelihood of

responding to poor work performance. Our analysis of these questions, together with questions

about incentive systems, firm human resource policies, and other aspects of the workplace, show:

       1. Most workers believe that they can readily detect shirking by fellow employees.

       2. Workers are most likely to take action against shirkers in workplaces where

employees are paid by some form of “shared capitalism” – by which we mean profit sharing,

gain sharing, stock options, or other forms of ownership – and they participate in decisions or

work in team settings.

                                                  2
       3. Responses to these forms of group incentive pay are largest when they trust

management and have good employee management relations, and when the firm adopts high-

performance human resource policies, low levels of supervision, and pays fixed wages at or

above market levels along with the incentive pay.

       4. Consistent with the theory of free riding, anti-shirking behavior is greater in smaller

firms and is particularly strong in small firms with shared capitalist pay.

       5. Workers in workplaces where there is more anti-shirking behavior report that co-

workers work harder, encourage other workers more, and report that their workplace facility is

more effective in several dimensions related to productivity and profits.

       The bottom line is that “shared capitalist“ arrangements – defined broadly as those in

which firms share rewards and decision-making with workers -- and positive labor relations

encourage workers to act against shirking behavior and thus strengthen the potential for group

incentive systems and team production to overcome the free rider problem and succeed.

Group incentives and monitoring colleagues

       When will a worker act against a shirking fellow employee?

       The natural economics answer is that a worker will so act when it pays off for that

person, which almost invariably requires group incentive pay. Building on Drago and Garvey

(1998), it is easy to show that workers are more likely to intervene the higher the amount of the

group incentive, the higher the probability that intervening increases the performance of the co-

worker, the lower the cost of intervening (which may depend on individual incentives), and the

smaller the number of co-workers. In addition, workers may gain respect from fellow workers

and supervisors, which can translate into greater chances of promotion in the future. Workers

                                                  3
may discourage "shirkers" through peer pressure and non pecuniary sanctions such as social

ostracism, personal guilt, or shame (Kandel and Lazear 1991). Since the 1/N problem is smaller

at small workplaces, cooperative agreements should be easier to establish and maintain in small

companies than in large ones.

         Workers can also engage in punishing behavior to enforce group norms of high effort,

and change the behavior of free riders. Punishment may be effective in counteracting the free

rider effect per the experimental results of Carpenter (2004). He explains his results by noting

that an increase in the size of a group has two opposing effects: it “forces monitors to spread

their resources thinner which might lead to more free riding,” but “there are also more people

monitoring each free rider so it is not obvious whether the total amount of punishment each free

rider receives will increase or decrease” (2004: 4). Prendergast suggests that monitoring with a

sufficiently low cost can negate the free rider problem but notes that “empirical evidence on peer

pressure reveals behavioral responses different from those posited in the theory”.1

         Finally in the workplace setting, management may seek to develop a corporate culture

that emphasizes company spirit, promotes group cooperation, encourages social enforcement

mechanisms, and so forth in order to encourage cooperative actions (Weitzman and Kruse, 1990;

Blasi, Conte, and Kruse, 1996; Blasi, Kruse, and Bernstein, 2003: 226-228). Fudenberg and

Maskin (1986) show how the free rider problem can be overcome in an ongoing relationship by a

cooperative agreement among participants. Using artificial agent modeling with small groups,

Axelrod (1997) has shown how mutual cooperation can develop among agents through


1 Prendergast cites Weiss’ study of workers in a pharmaceutical company (1987) and Hansen’s examination (1997)
of the incentives of telephone operators for a large financial corporation. Both found that group incentives improved
the performance of workers who were less productive under individual schemes but decreased the performance of
                                                         4
reciprocity. Klos and Nooteboom (2001) explore the creation of interaction networks that have

trust as a major component.

        Whatever model one uses to explain punishment of free riders, workers should be more

likely to act against shirker when they: a) have some financial interest in the performance of the

firm; b) regularly participate in workplace decisions, which should reduce the cost of speaking

out; and c) have trust in management and good labor-management relations, since in those

situations, they can reasonably expect the firm to reward them for helping to reduce shirking. If

you don’t trust management, you can hardly be expected to report shirking to management. If

you regard labor-management relations as poor, you may view shirking as a justifiable response

to management’s poor treatment of workers.

Data

        Our study asked about worker responses to shirker behavior on two datasets. The first

dataset comes from the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys (GSS), on which we placed

several questions on shared capitalism programs. The GSS is a national area probability sample

of non institutionalized adults conducted by NORC. The 2002 GSS has a sample of 1,145

employees, and the 2006 GSS has a sample of 1,081 employees, in for-profit companies. The

second dataset is based on surveys of employees in 14 companies with over 300 worksites that

had one or more shared capitalist incentive program in 2001-2006 that we conducted as part of

the NBER Shared Capitalism research program.2 The response rates from employees averaged



more productive workers
2 We drew up a sample of firms varying in size, industry, and type of program, and contacted them in various ways
to participate. As is usual in this sort of research, we were able to convince only some firms o participate. Once
firms agreed to the survey, we surveyed either all employees or a random sample of employees. The survey
included core questions common across all companies, and some questions of special interest or relevance to that
                                                        5
53% across the 14 companies. A total of 41,206 respondents provided usable surveys. Question

wordings and descriptive statistics for both surveys are in Appendix A.

        Neither survey is ideal. The GSS is nationally representative, but has limited numbers of

persons with different forms of compensation arrangements, which makes it hard to reach

statistically valid conclusions in some areas. Because it is a small national sample, workers are

likely to all be employed by different firms so that we view comparisons among workers as

comparisons across firms. The NBER has a large number of respondents but they are taken from

a sample of firms that is non random. Because the NBER survey covers a small number of

firms, much of the variation comes from variation among workers within firms, and we generally

include firm fixed effects in analyses to focus on this variation. By combining analyses of the

small national sample that lives on cross-company variation and the larger non-random sample

of workers from participating companies that lives on within- company variation, we hopefully

surmount these weaknesses and can reach conclusions that have general validity.

        The innovation of our study is the new questions about workers’ ability to detect the

performance of other workers at their workplace and their actions if they observed shirking. We

asked about the ability of workers to observe their peers’ effort because that is a necessary

precondition for acting against shirking:

        In your job how easy is it for you to see whether your co-workers are working well or
        poorly? On a scale of 0 to 10 please describe with 0 meaning not at all easy to see and 10
        meaning very easy to see




company. Six company surveys were conducted over the web, seven company surveys were done on paper, and one
survey was done using both the web and paper surveys. Two firms that agreed to participate were bought out by
other firms, who did not want to cooperate with the study.
                                                     6
       Figure 1A displays the frequency distribution of answers from the GSS. The distribution

is concentrated at the upper end, with 49% of workers giving the highest possible answer about

the ease of detecting how co-workers are doing, and another 28% giving answers in the 7-9

categories. Responses are also bunched at the 0 category as well, with 8% of workers giving this

answer but otherwise there is a paucity of responses at the low end. Thus, the vast majority of

workers think they have a good idea of how hard their fellow employees are working. Looking

at which employees report being able to observe co-workers shows a priori sensible variation

among employees. Workers who answered with a 7 or more to the question reported

disproportionately that they work in a team as opposed to by themselves, and that they rely on

coworkers and supervisors for help, compared to workers who answered 3 or less on seeing how

coworkers perform (data not shown but available). In addition, 13% who answered 7 or higher

reported that they are managers compared to 7% of those answered 3 or less.

       Figure 1B displays the frequency distribution of answers from the NBER survey. The

largest single group of respondents gave the maximum answer to their ability to observe their

fellow employees, but the distribution is less concentrated than the distribution in the GSS, with

proportionately half as many workers giving the 10 response. Still, 62% of respondents gave a

response of 7 or more to the observability question.

       Given that most workers say that they can observe the effort of co-workers, what do they

do if they catch someone shirking? Our question was:

       If you were to see a fellow employee not working as hard or well as he or she should,
       how likely would you be to:

       A. Talk directly to the employee;
       B. Speak to your supervisor or manager;

                                                 7
       C. Do nothing
       D. (contained on only some company surveys) Talk about it in a work group or team3;

       The responses use a four-point scale: not at all likely, not very likely, somewhat likely,

and very likely. As a simple way to display the responses to these questions, we formed a

summated rating anti-shirking index reflecting the likelihood of intervention against shirkers

using a 1 to 4 scale, where 1 measures the lowest intervention and 4 the greatest intervention, by

simply adding the values of responses across questions (Bartholemew et al, 2002). The anti-

shirking index ranges from 3 to 12 for the observations based on the A to C responses and from 4

to 16 for the smaller sample for which we asked part D as well. In this ordering a 12 means that

the worker reported that it was very likely they would talk to the shirking employee and very

likely that they would talk to the supervisor and not at all likely that they would do nothing. A 3

means that they said it was very unlikely they would talk to the shirking employee, very unlikely

they would talk to the supervisor, and very likely they would do nothing.

       Figure 2A summarizes the responses from the GSS. It shows that the summary statistic

differentiates people in a relatively continuous way. If we organize the data into five bins,

grouping the 3 and 4 responses, and the 5 and 6 responses, and so on, the distribution looks

roughly uniform. The anti-shirking index has a mean of 7.81 and a standard deviation of 2.94.

Figure 2B gives the anti-shirking index for the NBER survey data. With the larger sample, the

distribution has proportionately more persons in the middle of the distribution, which gives it a

rough normal look. But again, there is wide variation. Some people are likely to take action

against a shirker and some are likely to do little. Our goal is to find out what differentiates

workers in this form of behavior.


                                                  8
         Table 1 shows for both data sets the proportion of workers who said it was likely or not

likely that they would take one of the actions in response to shirking behavior by a fellow

employee. One finding is that more workers in the GSS sample than in the NBER companies

say they would be “very likely” to take action against shirkers, which would seem to go against

the idea that shared capitalism encourages anti-shirking activities; this difference, however, is

primarily due to the larger establishment sizes in the NBER sample, and the difference is

reversed when controlling for this and other factors distinguishing the samples.4 In addition, the

table shows that the greater concentration of responses at the upper end of the distribution in the

GSS than in the NBER data set is due to the great proportion in the former who say they would

talk to the shirking employee: 32.4% in the GSS versus 16.7% in the NBER dataset. In the GSS

proportionately more workers say that it is very likely that they would talk to an employee than

would talk to a supervisor or manager, whereas in the NBER data set about the same proportion

say it is very likely they would talk to the shirker as to a manager.5

         To move from hypothetical responses to actual behavior, in some company surveys we

added a question, "Have you ever seen one of your fellow employees not working as hard or well

as he or she should over an extended time period?" Over half, 59%, of the respondents said yes.6


3 This option was not included in the 2002 GSS and the early NBER surveys.
4 GSS employees are also younger on average, and more likely to say they can see how well their co-workers are
working. When these two variables and establishment size are used in the GSS sample to predict anti-shirking, the
predicted mean for the NBER sample is less than the actual mean, indicating that the NBER employees are generally
more likely than would be expected to take action against shirkers.
5 Since some respondents said that they did not have a supervisor or manager the sample size of answers to that
question is smaller than the sample size for the other questions. One possible objection to the anti-shirking index is
that it combines disparate behaviors that may substitute for each other—for example, a worker may choose between
talking to the shirker or supervisor but not want to do both. We find, however, that the responses are highly
correlated (the alpha for the index is .80 in the GSS data and .69 in the NBER data). We also present results for
each response separately in Table 4a and find results consistent with those using the anti-shirking index.
6 The mean of the anti-shirking index for the 41% of workers who said they have not seen a co-worker shirking is
not significantly different from the mean for the 59%, suggesting that there is no systematic difference in
                                                          9
We then asked what they did in response. As seen in Table 2, 34% of the employees talked to

the shirker, 46% talked to a supervisor or manager, 20% talked about it in a work group or team,

5% did something else, and 29% did nothing (row 1). Most important, these answers correlate

highly with the respondents' reported likelihood of taking this action, as shown in rows 2 to 5:

for example, 82% of those who said they were very likely to talk to the shirker actually did so,

while only 6% of those who said it was not likely they would talk to the shirker actually did so.

         From the tabulations in Figures 1a, 1b, 2a, and 2b, and Tables 1 and 2, we conclude that:

most workers can tell when a fellow employee is shirking or not; there is wide variation in what

they will do when faced with a situation in which someone shirks; and that this variation reflects

variation in actual past behavior.



Shared Capitalist Arrangements: Group Incentives and Labor Policies

         We have a wide set of measures of the group incentives and labor policies that we expect

to affect worker responses to shirking behavior. As far as we know, ours is the most

comprehensive survey of group incentive policies in the United States. The overall prevalence of

shared capitalist compensation is presented in Appendix Tables A-1 and A-2. The most

important result is that 45% of the for-profit private sector employees in the GSS sample report

participating in some kind of shared capitalism program (36% in profit sharing, 25% in gain-

sharing, 19% in employee ownership, and 11% in stock options). This gives us good variation

for examining the relation of these programs to worker outcomes. Regarding other work policies,

the 2002 and 2006 GSS asked whether employees normally work as part of a team and how


willingness to take action against shirkers between these two groups.
                                                         10
often they participate with others in determining how things are done at their job. Over half

(58%) of private sector workers report working in a team setting, and 44% report that they often

participate with others in helping set the way things are done on a job.

       The prevalence of group incentives is necessarily higher in the NBER sample, since these

firms were selected on the basis of having one or more shared capitalism programs. About two-

thirds report profit sharing (71%) and owning company stock (64%), while about one-fifth report

gainsharing (21%) and holding stock options (22%). The figure for working as part of a team

(59%) is similar to that for the GSS, and about one-third (35%) report being part of an employee

involvement team.

       As a first step in assessing the relation of shared capitalism to employee outcomes, we

constructed a thermometer-style index of shared capitalism, which assigns points based on

coverage by shared capitalism programs and the size of the financial stakes. This index is

described in Appendix B. We also present results breaking out the different forms of shared

capitalism types and intensities.

Shared Capitalist Incentives and Shirking

       To examine the determinants of anti-shirking behavior, we first regressed the anti-

shirking index on organizational/company policy variables and job and demographic factors. As

seen in Table 3, the shared capitalism index is linked to greater anti-shirking activity in both the

GSS and NBER datasets. Among the covariates, the ease of observing co-workers has a strong

positive effect on the anti-shirking index, consistent with the idea that workers will be more

likely to take action the greater the observability of shirking behavior. The participation

variables have a substantial positive impact on the anti-shirking index in both datasets, as does

                                                 11
job security in the NBER dataset. Job task variety also has a strong positive effect (consistent

with Drago and Garvey, 1998), indicating that knowledge of how to help is greater, and the costs

of helping are lower, when the worker has a broader base of skills and overlap of tasks with the

shirking co-worker. Those who are supervised more closely are less likely to engage in anti-

shirking behavior in the NBER dataset, perhaps reflecting a belief among closely-supervised

workers that dealing with shirking is the supervisor's responsibility (to be addressed in Table 8).

Finally, the data shows that the size of the workplace has a strong impact on anti-shirking

behavior, with workers more likely to intervene more to stop shirking in a smaller workplace,

where the shirking of one co-worker is more likely to affect them more than it would in a larger

workplace.

       The specific behaviors making up the anti-shirking index are analyzed separately in

Tables 4a and 4b. The shared capitalism index is a positive predictor of each type of anti-

shirking behavior in both the GSS and NBER data, except for the likelihood of talking in a work

group in the GSS data. It seems that many workers with shared capitalism do not wish to talk

about the shirker to the group in the shirker’s presence as they might find this embarrassing

(consistent with concerns by workers that the shirker might resent them or other employees

would react poorly, as presented in Table 8.)

Types of shared capitalism

       Which shared capitalism policies are responsible for the results given in our indices?

Table 6 uses different types and intensities of shared capitalism to predict taking action against

shirking. In the GSS data, the most important factors behind anti-shirking activity is the

presence of profit sharing and gain-sharing (col. 1). In the NBER data, it is the intensity rather

                                                 12
than the presence of profit sharing and gain sharing that seems to matter. The NBER results in

column 2 show a very strong effect of the profit/gain sharing bonus size (not eligibility), along

with strong positive effects of stock option holding and owning any company stock.

       When the richer NBER data are used for a more detailed breakdown of shared capitalism

in column 3 (along with more extensive controls, mirroring the specification in Table 3), anti-

shirking activity is strongly related to both profit sharing bonus size and gain sharing bonus size.

There is one seemingly odd result, however. The negative coefficient on eligibility combined

with the positive coefficient on bonus size indicate that when the profit share is small, those

eligible for profit sharing are less likely than non-eligible employees to take action. As will be

seen in Table 8, shared capitalism appears to increase the fear that co-workers will resent any

anti-shirking action, so that low levels of profit sharing may have a negative effect on anti-

shirking activity but this reluctance is apparently overcome as the bonus grows larger. For gain

sharing, by contrast, simple eligibility increases anti-shirking behavior.

       Consistent with the results of Drago and Garvey (1998), the effect of greater individual

bonuses is negative and significant on anti-shirking behavior (column 3). Apparently, individual

bonuses focus workers on their own work and may lead them to see co-workers as competitors

(or at least not cooperators). By contrast, workers who received a stock option grant last year

where more likely to take action against shirkers, although the size of the grant, and of one's

holdings, do not seem to make a difference (col. 3). Owning company stock is no longer a

significant predictor in column 3, although in supplementary regressions (not reported here) we

positive associations with some forms of ownership -- ESPP participation, holding stock after

exercising options, holding stock purchased on the open market, and ESOP membership (this

                                                 13
latter result only when company fixed effects are not used7).               That ownership appears to operate

through simply owning stock and not the size of one's stake is consistent with findings from

several other studies, which they attribute to higher organizational commitment (reviewed in

Kruse and Blasi, 1997). Eight out of ten of the workers reporting employee ownership in the

2002 GSS report they also have some form of profit/gain sharing or stock options, which

indicates that some managers recognize the value of combining short-term rewards and long-

term equity (Blasi, Kruse, and Freeman 2006: 7)

Before/After on Profit Sharing

         The cross section data presented so far are consistent with the theory that shared

capitalism affect the response of workers to shirking co-workers but cannot rule out the

possibility that there are missing variables or other processes that affect results. As we were

conducting our survey, one firm told us that they intended to introduce a new profit-sharing plan

that offered the chance to conduct a before/after analysis as well as a cross-section analysis of

worker responses to group incentives. Accordingly, we administered our survey twice at this

firm, six months apart, with the first survey coming before the firm introduced a new profit-

sharing plan, and the second survey coming after the firm had introduced the new plan.8

         As shown in Table 6, the introduction of the profit-sharing plan led to a jump in the

percent of employees saying they are eligible for profit sharing from 59% at the first survey to


7 Company fixed effects are probably inappropriate to use in analyzing the effects of ESOP membership, since
ERISA rules provide strict guidelines to ensure broad coverage. The small number of non-ESOP members are
likely to be very different from the ESOP members within a firm, and the effects of ESOP membership may be
better judged by comparing ESOP members to otherwise-similar workers in other firms.
8 The analyses presented so far use only the responses to the second survey at this company, to avoid having more
than one survey from some employees. The surveys did not have individual identifiers so respondents could not be
tracked across the two surveys. The higher response rate in the second survey is due in part to the provision of a $5
bill accompanying this survey, but the surveys appear equally representative since the means on all variables (apart
                                                         14
88% at the second survey. Apart from this, only two variables in the entire survey showed

significant changes between the surveys: the percent who say they were very likely to talk to a

shirking co-worker (increase from 42% to 55%), and the percent who say that they would do

something about a shirker because poor performance would hurt the bonus or stock value (from

39% to 56%). The fact that these are the only three variables that changed between the surveys

indicates that there were not compositional changes or other policy changes that affected the

results. These results lend support to the prior findings, pointing toward a positive effect of

profit sharing in attempts to combat co-worker shirking.

Complementarities

         Analysis of the decision equation for workers to intervene against shirking suggests that

some of the factors that influence behavior should enter equations in an interactive rather than

linear way.. The worker decides to intervene against a shirker when the expected benefits of

intervening exceed the costs: p (G) – Cost, where p is the probability that the intervention will

succeed, G is the gain to the worker and C is the cost. The financial incentive would affect G;

participation should affect p and the cost. Labor-management relations L-M might affect both G

and p. More complicated analyses, in which the worker is assumed to take account of the

possible behavior of other employees, lead to even more complexity, which we will ignore.

Instead, we have looked for potential interactions among key variables in determining anti-

shirking behavior.

         Using the nationally representative GSS data, Table 7a examines how shared capitalism

interacts with company size, and Table 7b examines how it interacts with other company


from those highlighted in Table 8) were not significantly different between the two surveys.
                                                         15
policies. Shared capitalism is most strongly associated with taking action against shirkers in the

smallest workplaces, as shown in column 1 of Table 7a. The supports the idea that the 1/N

problem will be lower in smaller workplaces (note that the base estimates continue to show more

anti-shirking activity among workers in small companies without profit/gain sharing, indicating

that shirking may be perceived as more of an economic threat in small enterprises generally).

The shared capitalist index effect is also significant in the next two larger size classes, and

positive although not significant in the two largest classes. An equally or even more important

factor, however, appears to be the quality of the relationship with management. As shown in

column 2, shared capitalism is associated with anti-shirking activity most strongly when

combined with a high level of trust in management. While this could simply reflect column 1's

finding of a more positive effect in small companies, the results in column 2 are maintained

when the smallest companies are deleted (not shown here). Similar results are obtained when

shared capitalism is interacted with view of employee-management relations.9 These results

indicate that employees are likely to take action to increase productivity only when they are

confident that any gains will in fact be shared with workers. This suggests that large companies

can use improved employee-management relations to counteract the 1/N problem.10


9 The correlation between trust in management and view of employee management relations is .60, indicating they
appear to represent a common attitude.
10 We examined other ways in which shared capitalism arrangements may interact with workplace policies. The
positive shared capitalism effect on the likelihood of taking action against shirkers is lower among those who plan to
look for a new job in the next year (presumably because they will not be around to receive the profit share), and in
companies with high injury rates (which could worsen management employee relations and decrease expected
tenure). While some models predict that financial participation will have a positive interaction with participation in
decision-making in affecting worker motivation and performance (e.g., Ben-Ner and Jones, 1995), we do not find
significant interactions using the GSS participation measures (which are subjective and may mediate the effects of
shared capitalism). Further, we did not find that employee stock ownership or holding stock options alone were
related to anti-shirking behavior. This is consistent with the research literature and our findings in this and related
papers in the NBER project that employee ownership and stock options generally interact with company culture in
impacting performance, although there is evidence that employee ownership directly improves commitment. Also,
                                                          16
         This result does not, however, carry over to within-company comparisons in the NBER

data. The most positive effect of shared capitalism on anti-shirking activity still occurs among

employees with the most trust in management, but the shared capitalism index has a positive

effect even when the NBER employees disagree that management is trustworthy. We do not

have a ready explanation for the difference between the two datasets. Because almost all

employees in the GSS sample work in different companies, we do not know if the positive

interaction between shared capitalism and employee-management relations in that data set

reflects the effect of companies with good employee-management relations in general, or of

individuals who perceive good relations within a company (even if their co-workers do not). We

did some exploration of company and individual differences in the NBER data and found that

anti-shirking behavior is generally strong in companies with higher average grades of employee-

management relations and trust in management, no matter the individual employee's grades of

these items. This suggests the importance of company culture in fostering an environment

encouraging peer pressure.

         The role of complementary company policies is explored with the NBER data in Table

7b. Column 1 essentially replicates the specification from Table 3, adding a control for the

worker's perception that his or her fixed pay is at or above market level. The strong positive

effect of the wage variable is consistent with efficiency wage theories which posit that worker

behavior can be improved when they are better paid. The shared capitalism index remains a

positive predictor as this control is introduced. The effect appears to be contingent, however, on


as noted, it is possible that some managers combine profit sharing and equity participation in order to get synergy
between them.

                                                         17
other workplace policies. The shared capitalist index has a strong positive interaction with a

high performance policy index (col. 2), supporting the idea of complementarities among these

policies in affecting worker behavior.11 The shared capitalist index also has a strong negative

interaction with closeness of supervision, and a positive interaction with having fixed pay at or

above market level. The negative supervision interaction may reflect a negative reaction to the

mixed message received by workers: we want you to work harder due to company-based pay,

but we're nonetheless going to watch you very closely. In this case the shared capitalism might

be perceived by workers as primarily risk-sharing. The positive interaction with having fixed

pay at or above the market level may reflect a more positive response by workers when the

company seems to be truly sharing, and not asking the worker to sacrifice pay levels in exchange

for shared capitalist incentives. Forms of employee ownership that are combined with below-

market pay might not be optimal for anti-shirking behavior because the incentive is diluted

through what workers perceive as wage substitution.

        These interaction results for supervision and high-performance policies are illustrated in

Figure 3. This figure shows how there is a positive relation between shared capitalism and the

anti-shirking index only when there are high-performance policies and average or low levels of

supervision. Otherwise the relationship is negative.

        Thus, incentive intensity is strongly related to anti-shirking activity, but appears to work

best as part of a high-performance work system where workers are paid well and not supervised

too closely. These results are consistent with the findings of Ichniowski et al. that workplace



11 These results showing the value of embedding such participation in a system of high performance work policies
are consistent with the analysis of Appelbaum, Bailey, Berg, and Kalleberg (2000) and Huselid (1995).
                                                       18
productivity is improved by combining several high-performance HR policies, and show that

worker response to shirkers is likely an important mechanism in the higher productivity.

Reasons For/Against Acting Against Shirkers

         The dynamics underlying taking action against shirkers are explored more fully in Table

8, which records employee responses to questions about why they might or might not do

something about a shirking co-worker. These questions were asked on only some of our

company surveys. Over half of workers said they would be likely to do something because the

employee's performance could affect their own jobs (56%), reflecting interdependent work where

cooperation can be especially productive. Almost half of workers said they would do something

because they would want to keep work standards high (47%), which can be seen as reflecting a

cooperative solution to reinforce high work norms. Almost as many workers expressed a

financial incentive, saying the poor performance would lead to lower bonus or stock value

(43%), while 45% said they simply like helping others and 31% said the employee might help

them in the future.

         The responses are related to level of participation in shared capitalism. For example, the

percent saying that poor performance would lead to lower bonus or stock value is almost twice as

high among those with a high value on the shared capitalism index (58%, in col. 4) relative to

those with a low value on the index (32% in col. 2). Similarly, the former group is more likely to

say they would do it to keep work standard high (59% compared to 42%). Column 5 shows that

the shared capitalism index is a strong predictor of five of the reasons for taking action. 12


12 One possible objection to our focus on shared capitalism is that there are many reasons workers take action
against shirkers, as shown in this table. Of course, workers report and probably have a variety of reasons -- which
may also include simply noticing incompetence , as noted by Erik Maskin in discussing our paper -- and we do not
                                                         19
         The predominant reason for not taking action against shirkers is that it's seen as the

supervisor's job (45%) followed closely by the fear that the shirking employee would resent it

(41%). About one-fourth (23%) feared that other employees would react poorly, while less than

one-tenth (8%) directly expressed free ridership by saying that some other employee would

probably take action. The shared capitalism index is a strong predictor of the fear that the

shirking employee would resent the action, perhaps because the intervener would be seen as

acting out of a financial concern rather than out of concern for the worker. As noted earlier, this

may help explain why very low levels of profit sharing appear to be associated with reduced

likelihood of taking action against shirkers—an effect that is more than counterbalanced by other

reasons as the bonus size grows. The shared capitalist index also, not surprisingly, predicts a

lower likelihood that the employee will say there's no financial benefit or "nothing in it for me

personally" (col. 5). Therefore these data are consistent with the idea that shared capitalism can

affect worker behavior.

Outcomes of Anti-shirking Activity

         What happened as a result of the action? The data in Table 9 point up one of the dangers

of taking action, as one-third (35%) of the workers said that the employee who was not working

well resented it. The most likely outcome, however, was that other employees appreciated the

action (45%), while almost as many said the supervisor appreciated it (40%), and just over one-

third said that the employee's performance improved (36%).




pretend that workers have the simple motive of “anti-shirking” in their minds, or that shared capitalism is the only
motivator. These results show that shared capitalism is not related to two of the key reasons for taking action (“I
like helping others” and “Employee may help me in the future”), but is clearly related to several reasons that reflect
a concern with site performance efficiency.
                                                          20
         Does it help economic performance? Only a minority of workers report that the

employee's performance improved, but this may still be enough to make a difference in

workplace performance. Also, apart from actual anti-shirking actions, people may work harder

simply knowing that their co-workers are likely to do something if they see signs of shirking.

We do not have hard performance data, but we do have several survey measures of co-worker

and facility performance that show a strong relationship with our anti-shirking measures. Table

10 shows that those who report a higher likelihood of talking to a shirker, and a lower likelihood

of doing nothing, rate their co-workers' effort higher on a 0-10 scale. The anti-shirking index is

very strongly related not just to this measure, but also to a perception that workers tend to

encourage each other, and to ratings of the facility on five specific measures of performance.

Since several of these measures involve workers reporting on the behavior of others, it lessens

the probability that that the interveners are putting a good spin on their behavior by reporting

higher performance, as one reviewer has cautioned. To check the possibility that this simply

reflects individual characteristics (e.g., greater optimism about company performance among

those who say they would take action against shirkers), we also calculated these relationships at

the site level and found that worksites with higher average scores on the anti-shirking index also

had significantly higher average evaluations of workplace performance. This is illustrated in

Figure 4 for one of our performance measures (evaluations of co-workers performance).13

Therefore this does not simply reflect an individual reporting phenomenon: shared views of



13 We also find that site-level averages of the anti-shirking index are strongly related to site-level averages of a
worker-reported performance index (containing the five items from the bottom of Table 10) and employee loyalty to
the organization, although there is no strong relationship to site-level averages of willingness to work hard and
turnover intention. For one large multinational, the dataset has a number of hard operational measures of efficiency,
but only at an aggregate division level, which makes analysis problematic.
                                                         21
higher performance in a workplace are related to shared commitments to take action against

shirkers. It appears that the propensity for anti-shirking activity does make a difference in

performance.

         One possible objection to these findings is that some production processes are difficult to

supervise by managers so that work is arranged to rely on peer intervention. Shared capitalism

may be used not to encourage anti-shirking behavior, but directly to deter shirking, so that peer

intervention and shared capitalism are both consequences of technologies rather than causally

related to each other. Our pre/post results in Table 6 go against this explanation. We also tested

this by examining the relationship in different industries, and by controlling for detailed

manufacturing technologies (in our diversified multinational firm with diverse technologies such

as plastics and aerospace). The shared capitalism effect does not disappear, but in fact gets

slightly stronger with more detailed controls for production technologies, making us more

confident that anti-shirking intentions and behavior are a result of shared capitalism and

company culture.14

                                                   Conclusion

         This study has examined employee responses to new questions on the 2002 and 2006

General Social Surveys and a large database of NBER employee surveys on whether workers can



14 One limitation of our study is the lack of a measure of shirking per se. However, we did ask each employee in
two companies covering to respond on a 1-5 scale whether “There are days when I don’t put much effort into my
job.” Analysis of this variable indicates that workers reporting high effort are the ones who are more likely to
intervene against shirkers. Moreover, there is no direct relationship between the shared capitalism index and
increased individual effort. This reflects the finding that the principal impact of shared capitalism appears to work
in combination with various aspects of company culture such as trust, high performance work systems, and fixed
wages at or above market. This suggests that shared capitalism alone nor unique production systems dependent on
technologies are not creating anti-shirking work systems, but rather that shared capitalism enhances anti-shirking
together with company culture, and shared capitalism and positive company culture also impact the potential
shirker’s level of effort. These additional analyses are available from the authors.
                                                         22
easily observe whether co-workers are shirking and how workers respond to shirking. The

answers to the new questions provide valuable insight into the likely magnitude of mutual

monitoring and peer pressure against shirking behavior. They show that most workers believe

that they are able to observe the effort/activity of fellow workers, which is the first prerequisite

for mutual monitoring and peer pressure against shirking to work. In addition, about half of the

work force says that they would be very likely to respond to poor job performance by co-

workers, with more saying that they would talk to the shirker rather than reporting the behavior

to management. While there are some demographic correlates to responding against shirking,

workplace factors are more strongly related to employee efforts to reduce shirking. This

conflicts with the claim that broad-based incentives will be weak for everyone because of free

riding.15

         Employees respond more against shirking in workplaces with shared capitalism

institutions, and the findings suggest important complementarities between shared capitalism and

high-performance policies, supervision intensity, and being paid at least the market wage.




15 The standard theory does not predict no anti-shirking intervention but only that it is likely to be suboptimal. As
our discussant Eric Maskin noted, there is “no way of telling what optimal intervention would be.” Our study does
suggest, however, how the corporation can be structured to increase anti-shirking behavior and performance.
                                                          23
            APPENDIX A: Variable definitions and descriptive statistics

MONITORING AND RESPONDING TO SHIRKING

    Ease of seeing how well co-workers are working (GSS and NBER): "In your job how
    easy is it for you to see whether your co-workers are working well or poorly?" (0-10
    scale, 0=not at all easy to see and 10=very easy to see), GSS mean=7.74, s.d.=3.16,
    n=2192, NBER mean=6.81, s.d.=2.73, n=40971.

    Potential employee actions against shirkers (GSS and NBER): "If you were to see a
    fellow employee not working as hard or well as he or she should, how likely would you
    be to:
           a) Talk directly to the employee
           b) Speak to your supervisor or manager
           c) Talk about it in a work group or team
           d) Do nothing"
           See distribution of answers in Table 1.

    Anti-shirking index: Answers to above questions were coded on a 1-4 scale (1=not at
    all likely, 4=very likely), and scales were added for "talk directly to the employee,"
    "speak to your supervisor or manager," and "do nothing"(reverse-scored)(3-12 scale).
    GSS alpha=.795, mean=7.81, s.d.=2.94, n=2115, NBER alpha=.69, mean=7.57,
    s.d.=2.49, n=35869.

    Past employee actions against shirkers (NBER):
    "Have you ever seen one of your fellow employees not working as hard or well as he or
    she should over an extended time period?" (0=no, 1=yes), Mean=.586, n=32010.
    If responded "yes", then "What action, if any, did you take?
            a) Talk directly to the employee,
            b) Speak to your supervisor or manager,
            c) Talk about it in a work group or team,
            d) Do nothing"
            See distribution of answers in Table 2.
    "What was the outcome of your actions?
            Employee not working well resented it
            Other employees appreciated it
            Supervisor appreciated it
            Employee not working well improved
            Other"
            See distribution of answers in Table 9.

    Why people do or do not act against shirkers (NBER):


                                           24
    "Why might you be likely to do something when a fellow employee is not working as
    hard or well as he or she should? (Mark all that apply)
            I like helping others
            Employee might help me in the future
            Poor performance will cost me and other employees in bonus or stock value
            Other employees appreciate it when someone steps forward
            Want to keep work standards high
            Employees poor performance could affect my own job
            Other (What?)
    Why might you be likely to do nothing when a fellow employee is not working as hard or
    well as he or she should? (Mark all that apply)
            Employee not working well would resent it
            Other employees would react poorly
            It's the supervisor's job, not mine
            Some other employee will probably take action
            Some other employee could take care of it
            There's no financial benefit for me
            Nothing in it for me personally
            Other (What?)"
    See distribution of answers in Table 8.


COMPENSATION

    Shared capitalism index (GSS): 8-point index with one point each for profit sharing
    eligibility, gain sharing eligibility, owning any company stock, holding any stock options,
    receiving a profit sharing bonus in the past year, receiving a gain sharing bonus in the
    past year, having an above-median profit- and gain sharing bonus as a percent of pay, and
    having an above-median company stock holding as a percent of pay. Mean=1.48,
    s.d.=2.14, n=1919

    Shared capitalism index (NBER): 10-point index with all items in GS index, plus one
    point each for receiving a stock option grant in the past year, and having above-median
    stock option holdings as a percent of pay. Mean=3.60, s.d.=2.65, n=40522

    Profit sharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
    performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-
    sharing? What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on?
    Company profits or performance" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.372, n=2184, NBER
    mean=.713, n=41018

    Profit sharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to profit sharing, answer to
    "What was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most

                                            25
recent year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. GSS mean=.024,
s.d.=.066, n=1944, NBER mean=.068, s.d.=.124, n=40485

Gainsharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-
sharing? What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on?
Workgroup or department performance" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.257, n=2184, NBER
mean=.207, n=41023

Gainsharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to gainsharing, answer to "What
was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent
year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. GSS mean=.017,
s.d.=.061, n=2013, NBER mean=.033, s.d.=.106, n=40767

Individual bonus (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-
sharing? What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on?
Individual performance" (0=no, 1=yes). GSS mean=.290, n=2184, NBER mean=.290,
n=41019

Individual bonus as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to individual bonus, answer to "What
was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent
year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. Mean=.050, s.d.=.125,
n=40547

Hold employer stock (GSS): "Do you own any shares of stock in the company where
you now work, either directly or through some type of retirement or stock plan?" (0=no,
1=yes), mean=.212, n=2202

Employer stock as % of pay (GSS): If "yes" to "hold employer stock," answer to
"Please give a general estimate of how much cash you would get if all this stock were
sold today?" divided by annual earnings, otherwise 0, mean=.111, s.d.=.977, n=2186

Hold employer stock (NBER): Any employer stock held through ESOP, Employee
Stock Purchase Plan, 401(k), exercised stock options, or open market purchases (0=no,
1=yes), mean=.640, n=41206

Employer stock as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold employer stock," the sum of
answers to questions about value of stock held in different plans, divided by
basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. NBER mean=.398, s.d.=.808, n=40367




                                       26
    Hold stock options (GSS and NBER): "Do you currently hold any stock options in your
    company (vested or unvested)?" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.123, n=2188, NBER
    mean=.219, n=41166.

    Stock options as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold stock options," the sum of
    answers to questions about value of vested and unvested stock, divided by
    basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. NBER mean=.395, s.d.=1.490, n=40922

EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION IN DECISIONS

    Make decisions with others (GSS): "In your job, how often do you take part with others
    in making decisions that affect you?" (1-4 scale, 1=never, 4=often), mean=3.08, s.d.=.93,
    n=2211

    Help set way things done on job (GSS): "How often do you participate with others in
    helping set the way things are done on your job?" (1-4 scale, 1=never, 4=often),
    mean=3.14, s.d.=.92, n=2210

    High participation in decisions (GSS): This measure has a score of 1 if the sum of
    scales of the above two items is 7 or 8, and 0 otherwise. Mean=.466, n=2226.

    Lot of participation in job decisions (NBER): "How much involvement and direct
    influence do YOU have in: Deciding HOW to do your job and organize the work" (coded
    1 if "a lot", 0 otherwise) mean=0.51, n=40750

    Lot of participation in department goals (NBER): "How much involvement and direct
    influence do YOU have in: Setting GOALS for your work group or department" (coded
    1 if "a lot", 0 otherwise) mean=0.21, n=40594

    Lot of participation in company decisions (NBER): "How much involvement and
    direct influence do YOU have in: Overall company decisions" (coded 1 if "a lot", 0
    otherwise) mean=0.04, n=40520

    EI team (NBER): " Some companies have organized workplace decision-making in
    ways to get more employee input and involvement. Are you personally involved in any
    team, committee or task force that addresses issues such as product quality, cost cutting,
    productivity, health and safety, or other workplace issues?" (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.35,
    n=40122




                                            27
OTHER VARIABLES

    Co-worker effort (NBER): "At your workplace, how hard would you say that people
    work?" (0-10 scale, 0=not at all hard, 10-very hard), mean=7.07, s.d.=2.10, n=40738.

    Fixed pay at or above mkt. (NBER): "Do you believe your fixed annual wages are
    higher or lower than those of employees with similar experience and job descriptions in
    other companies in your region?" (coded 0 if <3 on 1-5 scale, and 1 if 3 or greater)
    mean=.59, n=35860

    High performance policies (NBER): Additive index of EI team, training, and job
    security measures. Mean=1.77, s.d.=.86, n=37125

    How closely supervised (NBER): "Are you closely supervised, or do you work fairly
    independently of close supervision?" (0-10 scale, 0=independent of close supervision,
    10= closely supervised), mean=3.35, s.d.=2.63, n=40845

    Job security (NBER): "Thinking about the next twelve months, how likely do you think
    it is that you will lose your job or be laid off?" (coded 0 if somewhat or very likely, and 1
    if not at all likely or not very likely), mean=.843, n=38510

    Task variety (GSS): "I get to do a number of different things on my job." (1-4 scale,
    1=strongly disagree, 4=strongly agree), mean=3.24, s.d.=.71, n=2210.

    Training (NBER): "In the last 12 months have you received any formal training from
    your current employer, such as in classes or seminars sponsored by the employer?"
    (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.564, n=40460

    Mgt. is trustworthy (GSS): "I trust the management at the place where I work." (1-4
    scale, 1=strongly disagree, 4=strongly agree), mean=2.97, s.d.=0.85, n=2201

    Work as part of team (GSS and NBER): "In your job, do you normally work as part of
    a team or group, or do you work mostly on your own?" (coded 1 if part of team, 0
    otherwise), GSS mean=.58, n=2206, n=, NBER mean=.59, n=32301.




                                             28
                   APPENDIX B: The shared capitalist thermometer index

       As a first step in assessing the relation of shared capitalism to employee outcomes, we

constructed a thermometer-style index of shared capitalism. This index assigns one point each

when the worker was covered by any of the shared capitalist forms of compensation about which

the survey asked, with additional points for recent bonuses or grants, and for large bonuses or

stock holdings. For questions with a continuous numeric answer, we gave the item a value of 1

if the respondent had a value greater than the median value. Because there is no natural ordering

of shared capitalist systems in the sense that a firm first introduces profit-sharing, then adds

employee ownership, and then gain-sharing, the index is not a Guttman scale. It is a simple

summated rating (Bartholomew et al, 2002; Bartholomew, 1996), using dichotomous scoring.

       In the GSS, there are eight variables in the index: profit sharing eligibility, gain sharing

eligibility, owning any company stock, holding stock options, receiving a profit sharing bonus in

the past year, receiving a gain sharing bonus in the past year, having an above-median profit- and

gain sharing bonus as a percent of pay, and having an above-median company stock holding as a

percent of pay. In the NBER data there are ten variables in the index: all of the above items plus

one point each for receiving a stock option grant in the past year, and having above-median stock

option holdings (including unvested options if they could be exercised today) as a percent of pay.

       Indices of this style have both advantages and disadvantages. On the plus side, they

provide a quick and ready measure of the extent of shared capitalist arrangements that makes it

easy to compare results across surveys and to summarize the broad thrust of findings. Since our

firm surveys covered only firms with some shared capitalist arrangements, the index allows us to

differentiate workers with differing degrees of incentive to their firm’s programs. On the

                                                 29
negative side, the index treats different programs the same even though they potentially have

different effects on particular outcomes. It postulates a single scale with equal weights rather

than using factor analysis or other statistical modelling to obtain weights for given factors. To

deal with these problems, we estimated the relationship of the outcomes to the different types of

shared capitalism, introduced as dummy or continuous variables in regressions.16 Appendix B

gives the results of those calculations. By comparing the results in the appendix tables with

those in the text, we can assess the loss of information due to the amalgamation of the measures

into a single index.

         Figure B1 shows the distribution of our shared capitalism index in the GSS. This survey

estimates that 40% of US workers have some form of shared capitalist program. This estimate is

close to that obtained by Dube and Freeman in the WRPS. The mean score of the index is 1.48 –

a figure greatly affected by the substantial number of workers without shared capitalism systems.

Conditional on having a program, most workers report scores in the range of 2 to 5, with 6%

reporting scores of 6 or greater. Figure B2 gives the distribution of the index in the NBER

survey data. It also shows a non-normal distribution, with the most common scores as 2 to 4 but

a sizeable number of workers scoring 7 or above. There is sufficient variation in the index to

differentiate the extent of the shared capitalist “treatment” on workers.




16 There are statistical techniques to deal with the formation of latent variable indices from questions of the sort that
we are amalgamating into a single summated rating. See Bartholomew et al. (2002) and Spector (1992).

                                                           30
References


Appelbaum, Eileen, Thomas Bailey, Peter Berg, and Arne Kalleberg. 2000. Manufacturing
      Advantage: Why High-Performance Work Systems Pay Off. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
      University Press.

Axelrod, Robert M. 1984. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.

Bailey, Richard M. 1970. “Economies of Scale in Medical Practice,” in Empirical Studies in
        Health Economics. H. Klarman. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Bartholomew, David. 1996. The Statistical Approach to Social Measurement. San Diego:
       Academic Press.

Bartholomew, David, J. Galbraith, Irini Moustkaki, Fionay Steele. 2002. The Analysis and
       Interpretation of Multivariate Data for Social Scientists. Chapman and Hall/CRC.

Bebchuk, Lucian, and Jesse Fried. 2004. Pay Without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of
      Executive Compensation. Boston, MA: Harvard University Press.

Becker, B.E., M. Huselid, and D. Ulrich. The HR Scorecard: Linking People, Strategy, and
       Performance. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

Ben-Ner, Avner, and Derek C. Jones. 1995. “Employee Participation, Ownership, and
      Productivity: A Theoretical Framework,” Industrial Relations. Vol. 34 (4). p 532-54.

Blair, Margaret, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2000. “Is Employee Ownership an Unstable
        Form? Or a Stabilizing Force? in Thomas Kochan and Margaret Blair, eds., The New
        Relationship: Human Capital in the American Corporation. Washington, D.C.: The
        Brookings Institution.

Blasi, Joseph R. and Douglas Kruse. 1991. The New Owners. New York: HarperCollins.
        2004.

-----. 2006. “High Performance Work Practices at Century’s End: Incidence, Diffusion, Industry
        Group Differences and the Economic Environment," Industrial Relations, Volume 45,
        Number 4 (October), pp. 547-578.

Blasi, Joseph R., Michael Conte, and Douglas Kruse. 1996. “Employee Stock Ownership and
        Corporate Performance Among Public Companies,” Industrial & Labor Relations
        Review, Volume 50, Issue 1, pp. 60-79.


                                              31
Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. 2001. "Opportunity Counts: Teams and
      the Effectiveness of Production Incentives," National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper 8306.

Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Aaron Bernstein. 2003. In the Company of Owners. New
        York: Basic Books.

Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Richard Freeman. 2006. “Shared Capitalism at Work:
        Impacts and Policy Options,” in America at Work, edited by Edward Lawler and James
        O’Toole. New York: Palgrave/Macmillan, 275-296.

Carpenter, Jeffrey. 2004. “Punishing Free Riders: How Group Size Affects Mutual Monitoring
      and the Provision of Public Goods,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 1337, Institute for the
      Study of Labor.

Collins, Denis. 1998. Gainsharing and Power: Lessons from Six Scanlon Plans. Ithaca and
       London: Cornell University Press, ILR Press.

Craig B. and J. Pencavel. 1992. “The Behavior of Worker Cooperatives: The Plywood
       Companies of The Pacific Northwest,” American Economic Review, 82, 1083-1105.

-----. 1993. “The Objectives of Worker Cooperatives,” Journal of Comparative Economics,
        Vol. 17(2), June, pp. 288-308.

-----. 1995. “Participation and Productivity: A Comparison of Worker Cooperatives and
        Conventional Firms in The Plywood Industry,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
        212-160.

Fehr, Ernst, and Simon Gachter. 2000. “Cooperation and Punishment in Public Goods
       Experiments,” American Economic Review 90, pp. 980-994.

Freeman, Richard, and Arin Dube. 2000. “Shared Compensation Systems and Decision Making
      in the U.S. Job Market,” Draft, Harvard University Department of Economics.

Freeman, R and Joel Rogers. 1999. What Workers Want. New York: Russell Sage and Cornell
      University Press.

Fudenberg, Drew, and Eric Maskin. 1986. "The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games with
      Discounting or with Incomplete Information." Econometrica, Vol. 54, No. 3 (May), pp.
      533-54.




                                             32
Gaynor, Martin and M. Pauly 1990. “Compensation and Productive Efficiency in
      Partnerships: Evidence from Medical Group Practice,” Journal of Political Economy, 98,
      pps. 544-574.

Hirshleifer, David, and Eric Rasmussen. 1989. “Cooperation in a Repeated Prisoners’
       Dilemma With Ostracism,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 12 (August):
       87-106.

Huselid, M. 1995. The impact of human resource management practices on the turnover,
       productivity, and corporate financial performance. Academy of Management Journal,
       38: 635-672.

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanni Prennushi. 1997. The Effects of Human
       resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,”
       American Economic Review, 87 (3), 291-313.

Jensen, Michael C. ,and William H. Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
       Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.
       3, No. 4.

Jones, Derek, and Takeo Kato. 1995. “The Productivity Effects of Employee-Stock Ownership
       Plans and Bonuses,” American Economic Review, 83 (3), 391-415.

Kandel, Eugene, and Edward P. Lazear. 1992. "Peer Pressure and Partnerships," Journal of
      Political Economy, Vol. 100, No. 4 (August), pp. 801-17.

Knez, Marc, and Duncan Simester. 1997. “Firm-wide Incentives and Mutual Monitoring at
      Continental Airlines,” mimeo, University of Chicago.

-----. 2001. “Firm-Wide Incentives and Mutual Monitoring at Continental Airlines,” Journal of
        Labor Economics, Vol. 19, No. 4. (Oct., 2001), pp. 743-772.

Kruse, D. 1993. Profit Sharing: Does It Make A Difference? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
       Institute for Employment Research.

-----. 1998. “Profit Sharing and the Demand for Low-Skill Workers,” in Richard Freeman and
        Peter Gottschalk, eds., Generating Jobs: Increasing the Demand for Low-Skill Workers.
        New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1998, pp. 105-153.

-----, and Joseph Blasi. 1997. "Employee Ownership, Employee Attitudes, and Firm
         Performance: A Review of the Evidence," in The Human Resources Management
         Handbook, Part 1. Edited by David Lewin, Daniel J.B. Mitchell, and Mahmood A. Zaidi.
         Greenwich, CT.: JAI Press.

                                              33
Leibowitz, Arlene and Robert Tollison. 1980. “Free Riding, Shirking, and Team Production in
      Legal Partnerships,” Economic Inquiry, 18, pps. 380-394.

Morgenson, Gretchen. 2002. “When Options Rise to Top, Guess Who Pays,” The New York
      Times, Money & Business Section.

Newhouse, Joseph. 1973. “The Economics of Group Practice,” Journal of Human Resources, 8,
     pps. 37-56.

New York Stock Exchange. 2004. “Section 303a Corporate Governance Rules (of the NYSE
     Listed Company Manual,” (Final Standards Approved by the SEC), November 3.
     Available at: http://www.nyse.com/pdfs/section303A_final_rules.pdf

Prendergast, Canice. "The Provision of Incentives in Firms," Journal of Economic Literature,
       Vol. 37, No. 1. (Mar., 1999), pp. 7-63.

Prietula, M.J., K.M. Carley, and L. Gasser. 1998. Simulating Organizations: Computational
        Models of Institutions and Groups. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Smith, Adam. 2003. The Wealth of Nations. New York: Bantam Books.

-----. 1776. An Inquiry Into The Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. London: W.
        Strahan; and T. Cadell.

Spector, Paul E. 1992. Summated Rating Scale Construction: An Introduction, Sage, London,
       Quantitative Applications in Social Sciences, 82

Rapoport, Anatol, and A. M. Chammah. 1965. Prisoners' Dilemma. Ann Arbor: University of
      Michigan Press.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1990. “Peer Monitoring and Credit Markets,” World Bank Economic Review,
        4(3): 351-366.

Tesfatsion, Leigh. 2002 Agent-Based Computational Economics. Ames, Iowa: ISU
       Economics Working Paper Number 1.

Weitzman, Martin, and Douglas Kruse. 1990. "Profit Sharing and Productivity." In A. S. Blinder,
      ed., Paying for Productivity: A Look at the Evidence. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
      Institution, pp. 95-141.




                                              34
               Figure 1a: GSS Distribution of Workers by How Well They Can See Whether Co-
                                     workers are Working Well or Poorly


60.0%




50.0%                                                                                         48.9%




40.0%




30.0%




20.0%

                                                                              13.5%


10.0%     8.4%                                                                         8.2%
                                                     6.3%             6.0%

                             1.8%    2.0%    1.9%             2.1%
                    1.0%
0.0%
           0          1       2       3       4          5     6       7        8       9      10



   NOT EASY                                                                           VERY EASY
    TO SEE                                                                              TO SEE
               Figure 1b: NBER Distribution of Workers by How Well They Can See Whether Co-
                                     workers are Working Well or Poorly


25.0%



                                                                                              20.8%

20.0%
                                                                              18.2%




15.0%
                                                     13.0%            13.0%



                                                                                      10.0%
10.0%


                                                              6.7%

                                     5.1%
5.0%                                         4.2%
                             3.6%
          2.9%
                    2.5%



0.0%
           0          1       2       3        4         5     6        7       8       9      10




        NOT EASY                                                                      VERY EASY
         TO SEE                                                                         TO SEE



                                                    35
                           Figure 2a: GSS Distribution of Anti-shirking Index

14.0%
        13.1%                                                      13.2%
                                                                                               13.0%


12.0%                                                     11.7%


                                                                                10.4%

10.0%                                                                                   9.5%
                                     9.2%



8.0%                                            7.6%

                            6.6%

6.0%            5.6%




4.0%




2.0%




0.0%
         3       4           5         6         7         8         9           10      11     12




                     Figure 2b: NBER Frequency Distribution of Anti-shirking Index

16.0%
                                                                   14.9%
                                     14.4%
14.0%
                                                          13.3%


                                               11.8%                            11.6%
12.0%



10.0%
                                                                                        8.9%
        8.4%
8.0%                        7.6%



6.0%
                4.9%
                                                                                               4.4%
4.0%



2.0%



0.0%
         3       4           5         6         7         8         9           10      11     12




                                                     36
                              Figure 3: The Contingent Effects of Shared Capitalism on Anti-Shirking Activity




                                                                 Not closely supervised,
                      6
                                                                 covered by hi-perf. policies

                                                                                                  Avg. supervision,
                                                                                                  covered by hi-perf.
Anti-shirking Index




                                                                            Very closely supervised,
                      5                                                     covered by hi-perf. policies



                                                                                                 Not closely supervised,
                                                                                                 no hi-perf. policies


                                                                                                Avg. supervision,
                      4                                                                         no hi-perf. policies

                                                                   Very closely supervised,
                                                                   no hi-perf. policies




                      3
                          0                                                                                                10
                                                        Shared capitalism index




                                                                   37
                                                      Figure 4: Anti-shirking and Worker Effort at Site Level
Average perception of co-worker effort at work site
 5       6         7        8         9        10




                                                      4           6                  8                  10   12
                                                                  Average anti-shirking index at work site




                                                                                 38
                                                   Figure B1: Distribution of Shared Capitalism Index in GSS

                       70.0%



                                59.5%
                       60.0%




                       50.0%
Percent of employees




                       40.0%




                       30.0%




                       20.0%




                       10.0%                                 8.8%
                                                                            6.8%           6.9%        7.0%
                                             4.8%
                                                                                                                          2.6%          2.6%
                                                                                                                                                    1.1%
                       0.0%
                                    0          1              2               3             4              5               6             7           8
                                                                        Score on 8-point shared capitalism index



                                        Figure B2: Distribution of Shared Capitalism Index in NBER Companies

                       18.0%
                               16.6%                              16.5%

                       16.0%

                                                     14.3%                    14.2%
                       14.0%


                       12.0%
Percent of employees




                                                                                           10.0%
                       10.0%


                       8.0%

                                                                                                                                 6.0%
                       6.0%             5.4%                                                                       5.5%

                                                                                                     4.3%
                       4.0%                                                                                                                  3.5%    3.7%



                       2.0%


                       0.0%
                                0        1             2            3             4         5          6            7             8            9      10
                                                                        Score on 10-point shared capitalism index




                                                                                      39
Table 1: Potential Employee Actions Against Shirkers

                                               Talk to          Talk to        Talk about      Do
                                              employee        supervisor        it in work   Nothing
                                                              or manager     group or team
                                                (1)               (2)                (3)       (4)
Response to fellow worker not working
as hard or well as he or she should:
     GSS
                          Not at all likely           26.0%          28.0%           36.1%       38.8%
                          Not very likely             17.2%          22.4%           20.3%       20.5%
                        Somewhat likely               24.4%          25.1%           24.0%       17.6%
                              Very likely             32.4%          24.4%           19.7%       23.0%
                                          n            2183           2137            1058        2173
     NBER
                          Not at all likely           28.1%          21.5%           28.6%       36.7%
                          Not very likely             25.4%          26.8%           26.5%       24.1%
                        Somewhat likely               29.9%          34.8%           31.3%       22.4%
                              Very likely             16.7%          17.0%           13.5%       16.8%
                                          n           38228          37767           29336       36979




                                                  40
                 Table 2: Past Employee Actions Against Shirkers

         NBER Survey
                                                     Talk to       Talk to       Talk about        Do
                                                    employee     supervisor       it in work     Nothing
                                                                 or manager    group or team
                                                         (1)         (2)               (3)          (4)
 Actions actually taken when saw fellow
     worker not working as hard or well as
     he or she should^
                                                         33.5%        46.0%             20.3%       29.3%

         If said likelihood of this action
         was:
                                Not at all likely         6.1%        12.4%              3.9%       14.8%
                                 Not very likely         13.9%        26.6%              9.1%       17.0%
                              Somewhat likely            54.6%        65.3%             34.0%       41.9%
                                     Very likely         81.7%        84.9%             52.8%       72.4%

                                             n        18744           18744              18744        18744
Workers were asked "Have you ever seen one of your fellow employees not working as hard or well
as he or she should over an extended time period?" The above answers are based on the 58.6% who
responded "yes". They were then asked "What action, if any, did you take?" In addition to the actions
listed above, 5.2% said they would do "something else".




                                                    41
           Table 3: Effects of Shared Capitalism on Anti-shirking Index


                              GSS data                    GSS data                 NBER data

Shared capitalism index           0.115    (.035)   ***   0.072   (0.034)    **    0.027    (0.009)   ***

Ease of seeing how well
 co-worker is working             0.086    (.024)   ***   0.061   (0.024)    **    0.130    (0.005)   ***
Work as part of team              1.060    (.059)   ***   0.766   (0.157)    ***
High participation in
decisions                                                 1.207   (0.153)    ***
Task variety                                              0.308   (0.103)    ***

Any individual bonuses                                                             0.199    (0.036)   ***
Employee involvement
team                                                                               0.571    (0.028)   ***
Formal training                                                                    0.235    (0.028)   ***
Job security                                                                       0.445    (0.037)   ***
How closely supervised                                                             -0.013   (0.006)    **

Size 1-9 ees.                     1.255    (.278)   ***   1.015   (0.271)    ***
    10-49 ees.                    1.211    (.259)   ***   1.073   (0.250)    ***
    59-99 ees.                    0.933    (.280)   ***   0.858   (0.269)     **
    100-999 ees.                  0.427    (.244)     *   0.412   (0.235)
    1000+ ees. (excl.)


n                                 1634                    1633                     32099
R-sq.                             0.131                   0.176                    0.192

The GSS regressions include controls for occupation (7 dummies), age, years of tenure, female, black,
Hispanic, education (4 dummies), full-time status, ln(yearly earnings), and dummy for survey year 2006.
The NBER regressions include controls for occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3 dummies), hourly pay
status, supervisory status, years of tenure, hours worked per week, union status, country (27 dummies),
age, gender, marital status (2 dummies), family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids,
race (4 dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay), and company fixed effects.




                                                    42
                      Table 4a: Specific Responses to Shirking, GSS

Based on ordered probits
                              Likelihood                      Likelihood              Likelihood
                              of talking                      of talking to           of talking in
                              to shirker                      sup./manager            work group
                                       (1)                        (2)                     (3)
 Shared capitalism index            0.038    (0.015)    ***    0.038 (0.014)    ***   -0.011 (0.022)

 Ease of seeing how well            0.033    (0.010)    ***   0.022   (0.010)   **    0.029    (0.016)   *
  co-worker is working
 Work as part of team               0.426    (0.063)    ***   0.298   (0.062)   ***   0.138    (0.099)

 Size 1-9 ees.                      0.469    (0.112)    ***   0.448   (0.111)   ***   -0.393   (0.165)   **
 10-49 ees.                         0.432    (0.104)    ***   0.417   (0.104)   ***   -0.166   (0.150)
 59-99 ees.                         0.293    (0.111)    ***   0.390   (0.110)   ***   -0.304   (0.163)
 100-999 ees.                       0.086    (0.101)          0.208   (0.100)   **     0.007   (0.143)
 1000+ ees. (excl.)

 n                                   1676                     1641                    800
 (Pseudo) R-sq.                      0.058                    0.034                 0.019
 Cut point 1                         0.886 (0.379)           -0.020    0.370       -1.365     0.562
 Cut point 2                         1.407 (0.380)            0.598    0.371       -0.818     0.561
 Cut point 3                         2.077 (0.382)            1.325    0.371       -0.094     0.560
The regressions include controls for occupation (7 dummies), age, years of tenure, female, black,
Hispanic, education (4 dummies), full-time status, ln(yearly earnings), and dummy for survey year 2006.




                                                       43
                   Table 4b: Specific Responses to Shirking, NBER

Based on ordered probits
                              Likelihood                     Likelihood               Likelihood
                              of talking                     of talking to            of talking in
                              to shirker                     sup./manager             work group
                                       (1)                       (2)                      (3)
 Shared capitalism index            0.010    (0.004)   **     0.007 (0.004)     *     0.009 (0.005)     *

 Any individual bonuses             0.061    (0.017)   ***   0.084    (0.017)   ***   0.050   (0.020)   **
 Ease of seeing how well            0.045    (0.002)   ***   0.057    (0.002)   ***   0.037   (0.003)   ***
  co-worker is working
 Employee involvement
 team                               0.224    (0.013)   ***   0.192    (0.013)   ***   0.195   (0.015)   ***
 Formal training                    0.146    (0.013)   ***   0.055    (0.013)   ***   0.065   (0.014)   ***
 Job security                       0.132    (0.018)   ***   0.206    (0.018)   ***   0.084   (0.019)   ***
 How closely supervised             0.002    (0.003)         -0.002   (0.003)         0.007   (0.003)   **

 n                                 33807                     33544                 25570
 (Pseudo) R-sq.                     0.071                     0.049                 0.022
                                                                                        -
 Cut point 1                           0.152 (0.254)         0.198 (0.252)         0.020 (0.664)
 Cut point 2                           0.907 (0.254)         1.012 (0.252)         0.700 (0.664)
 Cut point 3                           1.920 (0.255)         2.104 (0.252)         1.715 (0.664)
The regressions include controls for occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3 dummies), hourly pay status,
supervisory status, years of tenure, hours worked per week, union status, country (27 dummies), age,
gender, marital status (2 dummies), family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids, race
(4 dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay), and company fixed effects.




                                                   44
             Table 5: Effects of Particular Forms of Shared Capitalist
                      Compensation on Anti-shirking Index

                                               GSS                    NBER                    NBER
                                                (1)                     (2)                     (3)
PROFIT & GAIN SHARING
Profit sharing or gain sharing
eligibility                                   0.344     (0.183)   *   0.010   (0.040)
Profit sharing-gain sharing bonus as
% of base pay                                 0.742     (0.887)       1.424   (0.143)   ***
Profit sharing eligibility                                                                    -0.181   (0.045)   ***
Profit sharing bonus as % of base pay                                                          0.596   (0.202)   ***
Gain sharing eligibility                                                                       0.099   (0.056)   *
Gain sharing bonus as % of base pay                                                            0.675   (0.223)   ***
Individual bonus eligibility                                                                   0.250   (0.053)   ***
Individual bonus as % of base pay                                                             -0.480   (0.230)   **

STOCK OPTIONS
Stock option holding                          0.237     (0.293)       0.440   (0.075)   ***   -0.043   (0.110)
Stock option value as % of base pay                                                            0.001   (0.011)
Stock option grant last year                                                                   0.212   (0.108)   **
Stock option grant as % of avg. grant                                                          0.014   (0.023)

EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP
Co. stock ownership                           0.020     (0.298)       0.182   (0.038)   ***    0.051   (0.042)
Co. stock as % of base pay                    0.141     (0.101)       0.027   (0.018)         -0.023   (0.019)

R-squared                                       .132                   .113                     .195
N                                              1645                   34379                   30933
Based on OLS regressions
The GSS regression includes controls for occupation (7 dummies), age, years of tenure, female, black,
Hispanic, education (4 dummies), full-time status, ln(yearly earnings), co. size (4 dummies), ease of
observing co-workers, and dummy for survey year 2006.
The NBER regression in column 2 contains the GSS controls from column 1 except co. size, plus
company and country fixed effects.
The NBER regression in column 3 includes the controls from column 2 plus hourly pay status, supervisory
status, hours worked per week, union status, marital status (2 dummies), family size, number of kids, race
(4 dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay), closeness of supervision, employee involvement team,
training in past year, high job security, and company fixed effects.




                                                   45
          Table 6: Longitudinal Evidence: Two waves of same company

                                                        2004            2005
                                                    (profit         (profit
                                                    sharing         sharing       Change
                                                    announced)      in place)
                                                          (1)            (2)
Profit sharing                                              58.6%         87.9%    29.2%   ***

VERY/SOMEWHAT LIKELY TO TAKE ACTION
AGAINST SHIRKER
   Talk to shirking employee                              42.1%         54.5%      12.4%   ***
   Talk to supervisor or manager                          64.3%         68.1%       3.9%
   Talk about it in workgroup                             47.3%         48.8%       1.5%
   Do nothing                                             34.1%         33.7%      -0.4%

WHY YOU ARE LIKELY TO TAKE ACTION
I like helping others                                     47.4%          49.6%      2.3%
Employee might help me in the future                      30.6%          33.5%      2.9%
Poor performance will cost me and other employees
in bonus or stock value                                   38.8%          56.1%     17.3%   ***
Other employees appreciate it when someone steps
forward                                                   34.3%          34.4%      0.1%
Want to keep work standards high                          59.3%          59.6%      0.3%
Employee's poor performance could affect my own
job                                                       57.1%          56.3%     -0.8%
Other (What?)                                             14.2%          10.0%     -4.2%
 N                                                          273            428




                                             46
              Table 7a: Company Size and Employee-Management Relations as
                            Moderators of Shared Capitalism

Dep. variable=anti-shirking index
                                         GSS data                                          NBER data

                                            (1)                      (2)                       (3)
Shared cap. index * co. size of:
   1-9 ees.                              0.281    (0.085)   ***
   10-49 ees.                            0.117    (0.068)   *
   59-99 ees.                            0.195    (0.085)   **
   100-999 ees.                          0.029    (0.057)
   2000+ ees.                            0.045    (0.076)
Shared cap. index * mgt. is
trustworthy
  Strongly disagree (D or F in col. 3)                            0.043    (0.165)           0.048   (0.014)   ***
  Disagree (C in col. 3)                                          0.117    (0.072)          -0.001   (0.013)
  Agree (B in col. 3)                                             0.083    (0.048)   *       0.014   (0.010)
  Strongly agree (A in col. 3)                                    0.179    (0.064)   ***     0.054   (0.013)   ***

Mgt. is trustworthy:
  Strongly disagree (excl.)
  Disagree                               0.057    (0.181)         -0.053   (0.414)           0.499   (0.064)   ***
  Agree                                 -0.249 (0.210)            0.122    (0.374)           0.710 (0.065) ***
  Strongly agree                        -0.199 (0.313)            0.208    (0.398)           0.838 (0.081) ***
Size 1-9 ees.                            0.855 (0.345) **         1.179    (0.283) ***
    10-49 ees.                           1.005 (0.336) ***        1.143    (0.259) ***
    59-99 ees.                           0.585 (0.366)            0.885    (0.281) ***
    100-999 ees.                         0.403 (0.317)            0.407    (0.244) *
    1000+ ees. (excl.)
n                                         1631                     1627                      31770
(Pseudo) R-sq.                           0.137                    0.132                      0.205
      * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
      The GSS regression includes controls for occupation (7 dummies), age, years of tenure, female, black,
      Hispanic, education (4 dummies), full-time status, ln(yearly earnings), ease of observing co-workers, work
      as part of team, and dummy for survey year 2006.
      The NBER regressions include controls for occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3 dummies), hourly pay
      status, supervisory status, years of tenure, hours worked per week, union status, country (27 dummies),
      age, gender, marital status (2 dummies), family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids,
      race (4 dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay), employee involvement team, training in past year, job
      security, ease of observing co-workers, closeness of supervision, individual bonuses, and company fixed
      effects.




                                                            47
 Table 7b: Company Policies as Moderators of Shared Capitalism

Dep. variable=anti-shirking index


                                          (1)                       (2)
Shared capitalism index                    0.028   (0.010)   ***   -0.018   (0.018)

Employee involvement team                  0.544   (0.030)   ***
Formal training                            0.232   (0.029)   ***
Job security                               0.431   (0.040)   ***
High perf. policy index                                             0.259   (0.030)   ***
* shared capitalism index                                           0.035   (0.006)   ***

How closely supervised                    -0.014   (0.006)   **     0.030   (0.010)   ***
* shared capitalism index                                          -0.013   (0.002)   ***

Fixed pay at or above market               0.181   (0.028)   ***    0.043   (0.050)
* shared capitalism index                                           0.034   (0.010)   ***

n                                           28424                     28424
(Pseudo) R-sq.                               0.193                     0.194
  * p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
  Based on NBER data. The regressions include controls for occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3
  dummies), hourly pay status, supervisory status, years of tenure, hours worked per week, union
  status, country (27 dummies), age, gender, marital status (2 dummies), family size, college
  graduate, graduate degree, number of kids, race (4 dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay),
  ease of observing co-workers, individual bonuses, and company fixed effects.




                                            48
            Table 8: Why People Do/Do not Act against Shirkers
                                                                Position in shared
                                                                capitalism^                        Coeff. on
                                                      All       Lower       Middle      Upper      SC index^^
                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)
WHY YOU MIGHT DO SOMETHING
I like helping others                                   44.9%       47.2%      43.2%      42.8%    0.001
Employee might help me in the future                    31.0%       32.0%      30.5%      29.7%    0.003
Poor performance will cost me and other
employees in bonus or stock value                       42.9%       32.0%      48.5%      58.2%    0.038***
Other employees appreciate it when someone
steps forward                                           23.9%       19.9%      24.9%      32.0%    0.008***
Want to keep work standards high                        46.6%       41.6%      46.6%      58.9%    0.015***
Employee's poor performance could affect
my own job                                              55.9%       53.2%      56.9%      61.3%    0.010***
Other (What?)                                            6.8%        5.7%       7.0%       8.9%    0.003***
n                                                       32386       13991      12514       5463

WHY YOU MIGHT DO NOTHING
Employee not working well would resent it               41.3%       37.9%      43.2%      44.7%    0.015***
Other employees would react poorly                      23.4%       24.3%      23.3%      21.8%    0.000
It's the supervisor's job, not mine                     44.7%       45.0%      46.8%      39.7%    0.001
Some other employee will probably take
action                                                   8.4%       10.5%       7.2%       6.1%    0.000
There's no financial benefit for me                      7.7%       10.2%       6.6%       4.9%    -0.003***
Nothing in it for me personally                         11.0%       13.3%      10.1%       8.0%    -0.003**
Other (What?)                                           12.4%        8.8%      13.3%      19.0%    0.007***

N                                                       30363       12236      12284        5444

    Based on NBER data
    ^ Shared capitalism index of 5 or greater="upper", 3 to 4="middle", and 0 to 2="lower"
    ^^ Based on linear probability models predicting whether employee checked this reason, controlling for
    ease of observing co-worker, closeness of supervision, occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3 dummies),
    hourly pay status, supervisory status, tenure in years, hours worked per week, union status, age, gender,
    marital status (2 dummies), family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids, race (4
    dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay), and company fixed effects.




                                                       49
                     Table 9: Responses to Anti-Shirking Actions



                                                                                  Don't
                                                         Yes          No          know             n
   What was the outcome of your
   actions?
     Employee not working well
     resented it                                        34.7%         19.1%         46.2%          14125
     Other employees appreciated it                     45.0%         11.4%         43.6%          13676
     Supervisor appreciated it                          40.1%         15.5%         44.4%          13845
     Employee not working well
     improved                                           35.7%         38.9%         25.4%          14254
     Other                                              28.3%          9.9%         61.8%           2923

Based on NBER data.
Workers were asked "Have you ever seen one of your fellow employees not working as hard or well
as he or she should over an extended time period?" If yes, they were then asked "What action, if any,
did you take?" Those who reported taking some action (see Table 2) were then asked the above
question about the outcome.




                                                  50
  Table 10: Relation of Anti-shirking Behavior to Co-worker Performance


A. Average ratings of co-worker effort (0-10 scale)
                                           Anti-shirking action

                                               Talk to             Talk to                   Do
                                               shirker            sup./man.                nothing

                        Not at all likely        6.7                 6.8                     7.2
                         Not very likely         7.0                 7.1                     7.1
                       Somewhat likely           7.3                 7.2                     7.0
                            Very likely          7.5                 7.1                     6.6



B. Anti-shirking index as predictor of workplace performance
                                                                   Summated
                                                                   rating
  Dep. var.                                                        coeff. (s.e.)        T or Z        n
  Rating of co-worker effort (0-10 scale, OLS)                     0.109   (0.004)         25.24     35637
  Workers encourage each other (-1, 0, 1, ordered probit)          0.135   (0.005)         27.14     12659
  Grade of facility performance (0-4 scale, OLS):
  A. Getting the job done that has to get done efficiently         0.050      (0.002)     21.12      22810
  B. Practicing accountability                                     0.066      (0.003)     23.32      22705
  C. Delivering customers' products on time.                       0.021      (0.003)      7.68      22700
  D. Delivering highest quality customer products.                 0.044      (0.003)     17.69      22704
  E. Being the market leader in its products.                      0.032      (0.003)     13.18      22569

   Based on NBER data




                                                    51
      Table A-1 – Current Prevalence of Shared Capitalism Plans

                                                                           Source:      GSS         GSS     NOS
                                                                             Year:      2002        2006    2002
                                                                      Type of data:   Employee    Employee Firm
                                                                                       survey      survey  survey
                                                                                         (1)         (2)     (3)
PROFIT SHARING
  Percent of employees covered
       Eligible for bonuses based on company performance                                   34%         38%   46%
       Received bonus last year based on company performance                               24%         30%
  Percent of firms with plans
       Any employees eligible for bonuses based on                                                           62%
          company performance
GAINSHARING
  Percent of employees covered
       Eligible for bonuses based on department or team performance                        23%         27%   23%
       Received bonus last year based on department or team performance                    17%         21%
  Percent of firms with plans
       Any employees eligible for bonuses based on department or team performance                            35%
EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP
  Percent of employees covered
       Own company stock                                                                   21%         18%   16%
  Percent of firms
       Any employees own company stock                                                                       33%
STOCK OPTIONS                                                                              13%
  Percent of employees covered
       Hold stock options                                                                               9%
       Granted stock options last year                                                                  5%
  Percent of firms
       Any employees granted stock options last year                                                         14%
COMBINATIONS
  Any of above                                                                             43%         47%
  Just one form:
       Rec'd profit- or gainsharing bonus last year                                       14.6%      21.2%
       Hold company stock                                                                  5.0%       3.8%
       Hold stock options                                                                  0.7%       0.7%
  Two forms:
       Hold co. stock and rec'd profit- or gainsharing bonus last year                     3.7%       5.3%
       Hold co. stock and stock options                                                    6.1%       3.2%
       Hold stock options and rec'd profit- or gainsharing bonus last year                 0.4%       0.6%
  All three forms                                                                          6.1%       4.6%
Sample size                                                                                1257       1173    312




                                                         52
          TABLE A-2: Shared capitalism types and intensities in GSS and NBER datasets

                                                           General     NBER       Sample sizes
                                                            Social    company
                                                           Survey      dataset    GSS      NBER
                                                          2002-2006
Bonus eligibility
    Profit sharing                                            35.9%      71.3%      2386    41018
    Gainsharing                                               24.9%      20.7%      2386    41023
    Size of most recent bonus, if eligible for any
          Mean dollar value                                  $6,265     $11,329      693    26113
          Median dollar value                                $1,500      $2,000      693    26113
          Mean % of pay                                       8.9%       12.1%       645    22019
          Median % of pay                                     4.6%        5.7%       645    22019

Employee ownership
   Own employer stock in any form                             19.4%      64.0%      2406    41206
   Own employer stock through:
        Employee Stock Ownership Plan                                     8.1%              41109
        Employee Stock Purchase Plan                                     17.6%              40990
        401(k) plan                                                      33.5%              40885
        Exercising options and keeping stock                              5.0%              41032
        Open market purchase                                              7.3%              41145
   Value of employer stock, if own stock
        Dollar value: Mean                                  $63,130     $60,078      318    25447
                    Median                                  $10,000     $14,375      318    25447
        % of pay: Mean                                       81.7%       65.0%       302    22715
                    Median                                   23.0%       30.6%       302    22715
        % of wealth: Mean                                                19.6%              23141
                    Median                                               10.0%              23141

Stock options
    Currently hold stock options                              11.3%      21.9%      2392    41166
    Ever granted stock options                                           22.3%              41166
    Granted stock options last year                                      20.4%              41158
    Value of stock options, if hold options:
          Mean dollar value of unvested options                        $112,882              8390
          Mean dollar value of vested options                          $143,117              8497
          Total dollar value: Mean                                     $249,901              8656
                            Median                                      $75,000              8656
          % of pay:          Mean                                       183.7%               8403
                            Median                                      100.0%               8403
          % of wealth:       Mean                                        60.3%               8104
                            Median                                       28.6%               8104

Any of above programs                                         44.9%      85.7%      2430    41206




                                                     53
