                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 SHARED CAPITALISM IN THE U.S. ECONOMY? PREVALENCE, CHARACTERISTICS,
    AND EMPLOYEE VIEWS OF FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION IN ENTERPRISES

                                          Douglas L. Kruse
                                           Joseph R. Blasi
                                            Rhokeun Park

                                        Working Paper 14225
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14225


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




Presented at the Russell Sage/NBER conference in New York City, October 2006. We thank Casey
Ichniowski for valuable comments. This paper is part of the National Bureau of Economic Research's
Shared Capitalism Research Project, funded by the Russell Sage and Rockefeller Foundations. Additional
funding for the General Social Survey questions was provided by the Beyster Institute of the University
of California at San Diego, the ESOP Association, the Employee Ownership Foundation, Hewitt Associates,
the National Center for Employee Ownership, the Profit Sharing Council of America, and American
Capital. The authors wish to thank Tom Smith with the General Social Survey at the National Opinion
Research Center of the University of Chicago and Peter Marsden of Harvard University with the National
Organizations Study for their assistance in arranging the shared capitalism segment of both surveys.
Refen Koh, Michelle Pinheiro, and Patricia Berhau provided excellent assistance in survey scanning,
entry, and verification. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Douglas L. Kruse, Joseph R. Blasi, and Rhokeun Park. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Shared Capitalism in the U.S. Economy: Prevalence, Characteristics, and Employee Views
of Financial Participation in Enterprises
Douglas L. Kruse, Joseph R. Blasi, and Rhokeun Park
NBER Working Paper No. 14225
August 2008
JEL No. J33,J54,L23

                                             ABSTRACT

Between one-third and one-half of employees participate directly in company performance through
profit sharing, gainsharing, employee ownership, or stock options. This flies in the face of concerns
about the free rider problem and worker risk aversion in group incentives, and raises many questions
about the effects on firms and workers. This paper lays out the major reasons we may see such "shared
capitalism" plans, and reviews recent nationally representative surveys on the prevalence of these plans.
We also introduce the NBER shared capitalism data, based on questions added to the 2002 and 2006
General Social Surveys (GSS) and more than 40,000 employee surveys from 14 companies with different
combinations of shared capitalism plans. We find that while shared capitalism exists broadly throughout
the economy, it is more likely in larger establishments. The free rider effect may be countered by
the use of other policies to create productive teamwork and a cooperative culture: shared capitalism
is positively linked to workplace decision-making, training, job security, teamwork, the ability to easily
observe co-worker performance, and low levels of supervision. Also, more risk-averse employees
avoid participating in several types of shared capitalism, but two-thirds of even the most risk-averse
employees in these companies say they want shared capitalism as part of their pay package. The effects
of these plans for both workers and firms are more fully explored in accompanying papers.


Douglas L. Kruse                                    Rhokeun Park
School of Management and Labor Relations            Kwangwoon University
Rutgers University                                  26 Kwangwoon-gil, Nowon-gu
94 Rockafeller Road                                 Seoul, Korea 139-701
Piscataway, NJ 08854                                rhokeun@kw.ac.kr
and NBER
dkruse@rci.rutgers.edu

Joseph R. Blasi
Rutgers University
School of Management and Labor Relations
Levin Building
New Brunswick, NJ 08544
and NBER
jrbru@hotmail.com
       In the past several decades the U.S. and other advanced countries have seen growth in

direct employee participation in the financial performance of capitalist enterprises. This

participation can take many forms, including profit sharing, gain sharing, bonuses, employee

stock ownership, and broad-based stock options. All of these approaches have one thing in

common: offering the worker a share in profits or stock appreciation when the company makes a

profit. Our broad label for this participation is "shared capitalism."

       This growth is driven in part by increased competitive pressures, environmental

volatility, and rapid technological change, which have led firms to implement new forms of

workplace organization and human resource practices. These changes include increased

teamwork, employee participation in decisions, and other practices that can work in conjunction

with financial participation to increase worker productivity, skills, commitment, and job security.

Shared capitalist institutions with new forms of high performance work organization, not

traditional labor-management relations, may be the emerging form of employee relations under

capitalism.

       This raises a number of important questions for firms, workers, and economic policy-

makers:

       •       To what extent are these new modes of financial participation and decision-making

                  related?

       •       Are they likely to increase or decrease economic inequality?

       •       Do they generally supplement or substitute for standard forms of compensation?

       •       How can they best improve productivity in ways that will benefit both firms and

                  ordinary workers?

       •       Do employees welcome shared capitalism or are they uneasy about the increased
                                                  3
                    financial risk and responsibility that this places on them?

        •        Are the new forms of participation likely to continue to grow?

        This paper introduces the NBER project that was established to address these questions.

Following a discussion of why shared capitalism exists at all, we summarize data on the current

forms and extent of shared capitalism in the U.S. economy. We then introduce the General

Social Survey and NBER employee survey datasets that will be used to answer the above

questions in accompanying papers1, and provide an overall portrait of the data and an initial

exploration of how shared capitalism is related to job and company characteristics, work

organization, risk aversion, and worker preferences.



                                        Why Share with Workers?

        Standard economic analysis outlines two key problems with shared capitalism plans that

argue against their use. Principal-agent analysis says that owners/managers can improve

employees' performance by giving employees pay contingent on performance, but group

incentives suffer from the free rider or "1/N" problem due to the increasingly weak link between

individual performance and rewards as the size of the group expands. Economic analysis

therefore predicts that firms will favor tying financial rewards to local economic performance

and outcomes rather than to company-wide outcomes. This is because profit-sharing or gain-

sharing based on workplace outcomes can motivate workers in a small group, who can influence

the costs and revenues of that group. Hence, the argument suggests that firms that introduce

financial sharing should eschew company-wide sharing, since there is virtually nothing the local


1 The accompanying papers using the GSS and NBER survey data are Blasi, Kruse, and Markowitz (2008), Blasi et
al. (2008), Buchele et al. (2008), Budd (2008), Carberry (2008), Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi (2008), Harden, Kruse,
and Blasi (2008), and Kruse, Freeman, and Blasi (2008). These issues are addressed using additional U.S. and UK
                                                        4
group can do to affect the share price of the firm.

           A second key problem with shared capitalism plans is income variability for risk-averse

workers. Firms are predicted to select the least costly form of rewarding workers. In traditional

analyses where firms are risk-neutral and workers are risk-averse, this means paying employees

wages or salaries, rather than with variable pay dependent on company performance. Firms that

offer more risky modes of wage payment should have to compensate workers for risk.

           Given these (and other2) problems, why are there any shared capitalism plans? The

major reasons for adopting shared capitalism can be categorized as productivity- or flexibility-

related.

Productivity reasons for shared capitalism plans

           Firms may find that group incentives are better than individual incentives for

encouraging productive teamwork and information sharing, especially where centralized

supervision is costly. The free rider problem may be overcome by creation of an implicit

cooperative agreement among employees to work hard, enforced by monitoring co-worker

performance and applying peer pressure where needed (Weitzman and Kruse, 1990). What it

takes to create and maintain such an agreement is unclear and may vary from workplace to

workplace—it is likely that company human resource policies, employee relations, and general

corporate culture play a large role. A growing body of literature finds that combinations of

workplace policies may induce behaviours that improve performance (see, e.g., Ichniowski et al.



datasets in Bryson and Freeman (2008) and Dube and Freeman (2008).
2 While these are the two most common theoretical objections to shared capitalism plans, there are others as well.
These include the possibility that diluting the economic surplus received by the owner will decrease performance by
weakening the owner's incentive to monitor workers closely (Alchian and Demsetz, 1972), and the objection that
profit sharing will decrease the firm's incentives to make capital investments (Summers, 1986). See Putterman and
Skillman (1988) and Weitzman (1986) for responses to these, and Bonin and Putterman (1987) and Dow (2003) for
additional theoretical arguments for and against shared capitalism plans.
                                                         5
1996). It has been demonstrated that globalization in specific industries and firms is linked to

the adoption of high performance work practices in firms in specific industries (Blasi and Kruse,

2006).

         A productivity motivation for adopting and maintaining shared capitalism plans is

directly expressed by many firms (U.S. GAO, 1986: 20; Kruse, 1993: 33), and is supported by

several findings in studies of adoption.3 Studies generally find, however, that profit-sharing and

employee ownership plans are more common in large firms, which runs counter to the idea that

the free rider problem will favor greater productivity in small firms.4

         Shared capitalism does appear to create productive cooperation at least in some

companies. Existing evidence from over 60 studies indicates a positive association on average

between shared capitalism programs and company performance, but with substantial dispersion

in results (Kruse and Blasi, 1997; Kruse, 2002). The average estimated increase in productivity

associated with employee ownership and profit sharing is about 4.5%, and is maintained when

using pre/post comparisons and attempts to control for selection bias. Boning, Ichniowski, and

Shaw (2001) find positive effects of group incentives, particularly when combined with problem-

solving teams. Other studies of gainsharing also find positive results, particularly when there is

high employee involvement in design and operation, shorter pay out periods, controllable targets,

and perceptions of procedural and distributive justice (Bullock and Tubbs, 1990; Collins, 1998).

Many of the effects of shared capitalism plans on performance are likely to work through


3 Oyer and Schaefer (2005) find that adoption of broad-based stock option plans can be explained by retention and
sorting, but not incentive effects. Kruse (1996) finds that R&D levels are higher among old profit-sharing firms, and
job enrichment plans were more likely to be adopted just before new profit-sharing plans, suggesting
complementarities aimed at improving productivity. Beatty (1994) finds that risk variables suggest a productivity
motivation for adoption of ESOPs. Ichniowski and Shaw (1995) find that group incentives are more likely to be
adopted when they are part of a package of complementary policies to improve productivity, and also find evidence
of large switching costs that discourage firms with established technologies and workplace relationships from

                                                         6
employee attitudes and behaviours.5 Most studies find that organizational commitment and

identification are higher under employee ownership, while giving mixed results between

favorable and neutral on motivation and behavioral measures (Kruse and Blasi, 1997). The

results are consistent with opinion polls which find that most members of the public think that

workers in employee ownership firms work harder and better (reviewed in Kruse and Blasi,

1999).

Flexibility reasons for shared capitalism plans

         Firms may also adopt shared capitalism plans for flexibility-related reasons. These plans

can provide something of value to workers without a fixed obligation (such as a wage or salary

increase) that the company may have difficulty meeting depending on future performance and

the competitive environment. A flexibility motivation is supported by the finding that increased

volatility in profits helps predict adoption of profit sharing and employee ownership plans

(Kruse, 1996), although another study found that low-risk firms are more likely to provide

company stock matches in 401(k) plans (Brown et al., 2004).

         Some of the firm's financial risk is being shared with workers, which as noted above may

disadvantage risk-averse workers unless they are compensated for the risk. Consistent with the

idea that workers are risk averse, most prefer straight wage salary to company-wide or individual

incentives; however, a majority express positive views toward employee ownership and profit

sharing, and would like at least part of their next raise to be in company stock (summarized in

Kruse and Blasi, 1999). The extant evidence indicates that workers generally do not sacrifice

pay and benefits for shared capitalism plans: wages and compensation tend to be higher on


adopting new practices.
4 See Gregg and Machin (1988), Poole (1989), Fitzroy and Kraft (1995), and Kruse (1996).
5 Bartel et al. (2003) find that employee attitudes affect a variety of workplace outcomes.
                                                        7
average for workers in employee ownership and profit sharing plans (Blasi et al., 1996; Kardas

et al., 1998; Kruse, 1993: 113-114; Kruse, 1998; Scharf and Mackin, 2000). In exchange for the

financial risk, workers may benefit through lower risk of displacement: prior studies find that

employee ownership firms tend to have more stable employment and higher survival rates than

other firms (Craig and Pencavel, 1992, 1993; Blair et al., 2000; Park et al., 2004). The

prediction by Weitzman (1984) that profit sharing should stabilize firm employment has also

received support in many, though not all, studies.6

Other reasons for shared capitalism plans

         There are several reasons that firms may adopt shared capitalism plans apart from those

that are productivity- or flexibility-related. First, firms may adopt such plans due to tax and

regulatory incentives—for example, ESOPs enjoyed substantial tax incentives in the 1980's, and

retiring owners can still avoid capital gains taxes if they sell their stock to an ESOP. Second,

some employee ownership plans were adopted in the 1980's in response to hostile takeover

threats (Blasi and Kruse, 1991). Both takeover threats and tax incentives were clearly a factor in

some 1980's ESOP adoptions (Blasi and Kruse, 1991; Beatty, 1994). Third, firms may adopt

employee ownership or profit sharing out of a desire to discourage unionization by increasing

employee identification with the company. Profit sharing plans are less common among

unionized workers, which at least partly reflects firms dropping such plans after a union drive

(Freeman and Kleiner, 1990; Mitchell et al., 1990; Kruse, 1996). Findings are mixed on the




6 Studies of Weitzman's prediction that profit sharing should stabilize firm employment have produced mixed
findings: a majority support the proposition that firms view profit sharing differently from fixed wages in making
employment decisions, while half of the studies find greater employment stability associated with profit sharing and
the other half find either no greater stability or greater stability only in some samples (summarized in Kruse, 1998:
109-113).
                                                          8
relation between unionization and employee ownership.7

        Finally, shared capitalism plans may be adopted and promoted for moral or social

reasons. Albert Gallatin, a signer of the Declaration of Independence and Secretary of the

Treasury under Thomas Jefferson, set up a profit sharing plan at the Pennsylvania Glass Works

in 1795, stating that the "democratic principle upon which this Nation was founded should not be

restricted to the political processes but should be applied to the industrial operation" (quoted in

U.S. Senate 1939: 72). Workers who started the first unions in colonial American coastal cities

set up some worker cooperatives as alternatives to the craft firms where some master craftsmen

were attempting to introduce more division of labor in order to de-skill traditional craft workers

and reduce their pay. A century later, some labor organizations set up worker cooperatives as

part of a political challenge to how capitalism was developing, while others saw employee

ownership and profit sharing as a means to build support for capitalism in opposition to the

competing communist and socialist systems—arguing that it would help cure "unrest" and

"irrational agitation" in capitalism, and that the "great uplift and inspiration that sharing of

profits cultivates in the employee" would lead to "harmony and contentment" (Askwith, 1926:

20). John D. Rockefeller and other corporate leaders in 1919 encouraged employee ownership,

employee involvement in corporate decision-making, and profit sharing as part of a grand plan

for "welfare capitalism" that spread in the 1920's. Profit sharing was promoted in the 1930's in

Congressional hearings in the 1930's by Republican Senator Arthur Vandenberg, and ESOPs

were promoted by investment banker Louis Kelso in conjunction with Democratic Senator


7 Gregg and Machin (1988) and Poole (1989) find employee ownership is more common in unionized companies in
the UK, while Kruse (1996) finds that ESOP adoption was equally likely in union and non-union establishments in
the 1970's and 1980's.


                                                      9
Russell Long of Louisiana in the 1970's, as ways to broaden participation in the economic

system.8

        In sum, the two key objections to group incentives—the free rider problem and worker

risk aversion—have not been sufficient to quash shared capitalism plans. They continue to be

adopted and maintained, providing a fertile ground for examining outcomes for both firms and

workers. As will be seen, such programs now involve over a third of adult workers in the

economy, albeit at different levels of intensity and with different combinations of work practices.

The next section reviews current data on the prevalence of shared capitalism plans, followed by

a more intensive look at the kind of company policies associated with shared capitalism that can

shed light on how they are used by companies.



                              Prevalence of Shared Capitalism Programs

        There are a variety of forms that shared capitalism programs can take, which we break

into four broad categories: profit sharing, gainsharing, employee ownership, and stock options.

The NBER Shared Capitalism program sponsored several questions on shared capitalism in the

2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys and the 2003 National Organizations Survey, providing

the most recent representative data available. The results from these surveys are summarized in

Table 1, while Appendix Table A-1 summarizes other nationally representative surveys and

administrative data over the past 15 years. All of the surveys have high response rates. Four of

the surveys were conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau (the two National Employer Surveys, the

National Compensation Survey and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth), two surveys

were conducted by the National Opinion Research Center of the University of Chicago (General


8 For a more extensive history of shared capitalism see Blasi, Kruse, and Bernstein (2003).
                                                        10
Social Survey and National Organizations Survey), and two were conducted by professional

survey organizations (the Worker Representation and Participation Survey by Princeton Survey

Research Associates, and the Employee Benefits Research Institute survey by Gallup). All

surveys are based on the full private sector, except the National Employer Surveys which are

limited to private for-profit firms.9

        There is no hard and fast definition of profit sharing. Many firms have formal plans that

are called profit sharing, but there is variation in a) how profits are defined, b) whether profits

must meet a threshold level, c) whether some or all of the profit share is discretionary, and d)

whether the profit share is paid in cash or is deferred (put into a defined contribution pension

plan). In addition, firms may have bonus plans that are not called profit sharing, but which

effectively share profits since the bonus is affected by how well the company is doing. As

shown in Table 1, just over one-third of employees say that they are covered by profit sharing in

2002 (34%) and 2006 (38%), which is in line with earlier employee surveys in Table A-1.

Employers reported a higher percentage of employees eligible for bonuses based on company

performance (46%), though another survey using a more restricted definition showed lower

figures (30% of workers are in a deferred profit-sharing plan while 5% are in a cash profit

sharing plan, in Table A-1).

        Gainsharing plans typically tie employee compensation to a group-based operational

measure -- such as physical output, productivity, quality, safety, customer satisfaction, or costs --

rather than to a company-wide financial measure such as profitability or returns. These plans

often involve employees in some formal way to develop ideas and skills for improving


9 The full private sector figures include non-profit organizations. While these organizations cannot have employee
ownership and stock options, they can have organization- and group-based bonuses that are equivalent to profit
sharing and gainsharing, so their inclusion provides the best estimates of the extent to which shared capitalism has
                                                        11
performance. The three most popular types are Scanlon, Rucker, and ImproShare plans,

although there is a growing number of custom-designed plans. As shown in Table 1, employee

and company surveys agree that about one-fourth (23-27%) of employees are eligible for

bonuses based on group or workplace performance.10

        Employee ownership of company stock can occur in a variety of ways. Combining all

the ways, the GSS surveys in Table 1 show that roughly one-fifth of employees report owning

some company stock (21% in 2002 and 18% in 2006, which is in line with earlier surveys in

Table A-1). The most popular type of plan is the ESOP (Employee Stock Ownership Plan). The

ESOP is distinguished by the fact that workers do not have to use their own money to buy the

stock (unless stock was traded for wage and work rule changes which happens only in a very

small minority of ESOPs). Federal legislation allows companies to borrow money from a bank to

fund the worker stock and pay for it in installments from company revenues. About 5% of

employees are part of ESOPs (Table A-1). Employees may also own company stock through

other types of defined contribution plans. Many employees have bought stock through their

company 401(k) plan, a retirement plan where they make pre-tax contributions from their

paycheck. Sometimes corporations will match employee contributions to 401(k) plans with

company stock, so this type of employee ownership is closer to the ESOP because workers do

not buy it. About 20% of workers are eligible for a defined contribution plan that holds

employer stock (Table A-1). These non-ESOP pension plans also include various ERISA-

covered stock bonus plans and deferred profit sharing trusts (often combined with 401k plans)


permeated the entire private sector. Other papers in the NBER project restrict attention to for-profit firms.
10 About two-fifths (43%) of Fortune 1000 surveyed companies have gain-sharing plans somewhere in the
company, although most include less than 20% of employees (Lawler et al., 1995: 19). Broader surveys of
compensation and human resource managers have found that only about one-eighth (13%) have formal gainsharing
plans (Collins, 1998).

                                                      12
which actually hold some of their assets in company stock.

         Employees can also own company stock outside of pension plans. Employee Stock

Purchase Plans (ESPPs) allow workers to buy stock with deductions from their paycheck with a

discount from the market price, and some corporations provide employees direct grants of stock

as part of a stock bonus plan. Employees may also hold onto stock after exercising stock

options, or own stock through open market purchases. These plans combine with the pension

plans to make about one-fifth of private sector employees into employee-owners.

         Stock options represent a kind of hybrid between profit sharing and employee ownership.

A stock option is the right to buy the stock at a set price for 10 years into the future. The worker

does not have to purchase the stock. Receiving one hundred stock options to purchase Biotech

Inc. stock at $10 per share gives the worker the right to exercise these options anytime over 10

years if the stock price goes above $10 per share. During the ten years, the worker can for

example buy a stock trading at $15 a share for $10 per share, then sell the stock, and pocket the

$5 profit after taxes. While stock option excesses have been abused among higher executives,

for other managers and workers, a stock option has less risk than using one’s savings to buy the

stock and really involves the right to the upside gain without the risk of losing one’s capital. The

GSS surveys show a decline in stock option holding from 13% in 2002 to 9% in 2006, which we

believe is due to the Security and Exchange Commission’s implementation of stock option

expensing that led some companies to cut back on broad-based plans.11 Only 14% of companies

reported making stock option grants in 2002 and 5% of employees in the 2006 GSS reported



11 This drop in stock option holding likely accounts for the drop in the percent of workers in the computer services
industry who own company stock (from 58.3% to 31.9%). Because employee ownership often comes about as a
result of being granted stock options, this drop is likely an unintended consequence of the employee stock option
expensing.

                                                         13
actually receiving a stock option grant in the prior year (Table 1), while other surveys showed

that 8% of employees are eligible to receive stock options (Table A-1).

       The prevalence of any type of shared capitalism is high: the GSS surveys showed that

43% of employees reported participating in one or more of the above plans in 2002, rising to

47% in 2006 (Table 1). The rise in profit-sharing and gainsharing eligibility more than offset the

declines in employee ownership and stock option holding between these two years. Earlier

surveys show that between 41% and 75% of firms have shared capitalism plans (Table A-1).

       What is the overlap among the different types of shared capitalism? This issue has never

been comprehensively explored until the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys. As shown in

Table 1, close to 15% of employees in the 2002 survey received a profit- or gainsharing bonus in

the prior year but do not own company stock or hold stock options, rising to 21% in 2006. There

were 4-5% who just own company stock and less than 1% who just hold stock options. About

10% had two of the three forms of shared capitalism in both years, while 5-6% had all three.

The important point here is that employee ownership and stock option holding are uncommon on

their own, and typically paired with another type of shared capitalism. Over three-fourths of the

employee-owners also have profit/gainsharing bonuses and/or stock options, while almost all of

the 13% who hold stock options also have profit/gainsharing bonuses and/or employee

ownership. This high overlap suggests that firms may believe that it is worthwhile to examine

employee ownership and stock options in combination with each other and profit/gainsharing.

       Employee ownership and profit sharing have also received substantial attention in other

advanced countries and transition economies. With coverage similar to that in the U.S.,

between 20% and 30% of workers in France, Great Britain, Italy, and Japan are covered by some



                                               14
form of profit sharing, while smaller numbers covered by employee stock ownership (Del Boca

et al., 1999; Jones and Kato, 1995). Across the European Union, between 5% and 43% of firms

within each country have profit-sharing plans, between 1% and 22% have employee share

ownership, and between 5% and 38% have team-based bonuses (European Foundation for the

Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, 1997; Pendleton et al., 2003). Some employee

ownership is also found in some socialist countries transiting to private ownership, including

China (Tseo, 1996), Russia (Blasi et al., 1997), and the countries in central and eastern Europe

(Uvalic and Vaughan-Whitehead, 1997; Smith et al., 1997). Broad-based stock options have

appeared in stock market companies and high tech firms in Asia and are newly emergent in

China and India.

       Employee participation in decision making is often seen as complementary to financial

participation, most basically because financial participation provides the incentive to improve

performance while participation in decision making can provide a means to improve

performance. Before looking at their overlap in the next section, Table 2 summarizes the most

recent survey data on the overall prevalence of employee participation in decisions. There is a

lot of variation in the types and measures of employee participation. About two-fifths of

employees report having a lot of influence in decisions or say they often participate with others

in job decisions in both 2002 and 2006, while one-third of employees report being in an

employee involvement team (30%) or self-directed work team (33%). Firms report a lower

number of employees in these plans (17% each), while about two-fifths of firms report having

these plans at all. Data from earlier surveys in Table A-2 show great dispersion using different

measures, from a low of 13-16% of employees in self-managed teams to a high of 52-55% of

employees in work-related meetings for nonmanagers.
                                                15
                         Looking Inside the Shared Capitalism Firms

       The current NBER project was established to take a closer look at shared capitalism

plans, providing a more complete portrait along with an analysis of their causes and effects. The

first component of this project was to place several questions on the 2002 and 2006 General

Social Surveys, in order to collect data from a representative sample of employed Americans.

The basic results were presented in Tables 1 and 2. The second component of the project was to

do a more intensive look by conducting employee surveys in a number of firms that use shared

capitalism programs. Project members recruited 14 companies with a variety of shared capitalist

programs, and surveys were conducted over the 2001-2006 period.



The NBER database

       Basic information on the shared capitalism firms is contained in Table 3 (described only

in broad terms to preserve company confidentiality). All of the firms have some sort of broad-

based employee ownership plan, but the plan types vary: eight have standard ESOPs, one has a

401(k) ESOP, four have Employee Stock Purchase Plans (ESPPs), and three have 401(k)'s with

company stock. Eleven of the firms have broad-based profit-sharing plans, while five have

broad-based stock option plans. We also have variation by company size (six with fewer than

1000 employees and three with more than 10,000 employees), and industry (eight in

manufacturing, four in service/financial, and two in high-tech/Internet).

       While there is useful variance in types of companies and plans, we acknowledge that our

sample is non-representative, first because many firms refused our requests to run the survey,

and second because two of the firms were bought out by others who refused to proceed with the

planned survey. Each company in the sample agreed to have our research group administer a
                                                16
survey to all or a random sample of employees. The survey included core questions common

across all companies, and some questions of special interest or relevance to that company. Six

company surveys were conducted entirely by web, seven company surveys were done on paper,

and one survey was done using both the web and paper. The company response rates ranged

from 11% to 80%, with an average of 53% across the 14 companies. A total of 41,206

respondents provided usable surveys.

       Question wordings for the GSS and NBER measures are provided in the appendix.



Size of financial stakes in shared capitalism

       The extent and characteristics of shared capitalism programs in the GSS and NBER

datasets are presented in Table 4. This table combines the 2002 and 2006 GSS prevalence

figures from Table 1 (showing about one-third of workers covered by profit sharing, one-fourth

covered by gainsharing, one-fifth holding company stock, and one-ninth holding stock options),

and adds detail on the financial stakes involved. The monetary value appears to be significant

for covered employees. The median profit sharing and gain sharing bonus in the GSS is $1,500

or 4.6% of annual pay, and employer stock totals $10,000 or 23% of annual pay for the median

employee-owner.

       The column labelled "NBER company dataset" naturally gives higher figures for the

shared capitalist modes of compensation since we selected these firms on the basis of having

these programs. Seventy-one percent of the workers in the firms report being paid by profit

sharing, 21% report gain sharing, 64% report owning employer stock, and 22% report holding

stock options. Overall, 86% of surveyed workers report having at least one of these programs.

The size of the median profit-sharing and gain sharing stake are only somewhat higher among
                                                17
the NBER companies than in the GSS (5.7% compared to 4.1%), as is employee ownership as a

percent of pay (30.6% compared to 21.2%). The median stock option holding is $75,000

(counting the estimated profit on both vested and unvested stock options if they were exercised

on the day of the survey), representing 100% of annual pay and 29% of total wealth. These

stakes should be large enough to detect effects on worker and firm outcomes, if such effects

exist.



Participation by type of job and company

         Where are shared capitalism plans most likely? Theory broadly suggests that they are

most likely to be adopted in jobs and companies where performance is most sensitive to

employee effort, or where the need for flexibility is greatest. Table 5 provides participation rates

by basic job and company characteristics, using both the representative GSS dataset and our

larger NBER dataset with more extensive measures.

         The idea that shared capitalism is most likely in performance-sensitive jobs is supported

by the finding that profit/gainsharing is most common among sales and management employees

(48% and 56%, in col. 1), but the incidence remains substantial among all but service employees

(19%). Managers are also the most likely to own company stock (27%, col. 2), but are not

particularly more likely to hold stock options (14%, col. 3). The NBER data show high levels of

participation in profit/gainsharing and employee ownership for all occupational groups, and low

levels of stock options only among production workers and service employees (since the NBER

stock option companies had few production or service employees, although this is not true for all

stock option firms in the U.S.).



                                                 18
       Those who have been at their jobs for less than one year are the least likely to participate

in shared capitalism, partly reflecting probationary periods (e.g., employees only become eligible

for an ESOP after 6 months or one year). The exception is that new employees are more likely

than older employees to hold stock options in the NBER dataset, probably reflecting the use of

stock options to lure workers into the jobs.

       Not surprisingly, shared capitalism is more common among full-time employees in both

the GSS and NBER data—such employees are more likely to be core employees whose

commitment and effort are important to workplace performance. Also not surprisingly, union

members are less likely than non-union employees to be part of profit/gainsharing plans (38%

vs. 14%, in col. 1). Unions tend to resist profit sharing due to concerns that management can

manipulate profit figures, and that such pay can create inequality among workers (Zalusky,

1990). It is striking, however, that union members in the GSS are actually slightly more likely

than non-union employees to report owning company stock and holding stock options. While

there have been some noteworthy examples of unions leading employee buyouts (which make up

a very small percentage of firms with employee ownership), this employee ownership result

more likely reflects the greater likelihood of retirement plans among union employees, many of

which invest in company stock.

       The free rider problem predicts that these plans will be most advantageous in small

workplaces. Contrary to this prediction, larger establishments are more likely to have each of

the types of shared capitalism (cols. 1-3). All three types of shared capitalism are most common

in establishments with 1000 or more employees. These large establishment sizes strongly

suggest that if these companies want to use shared capitalism to enhance performance, they need

to take steps to counter the free rider problem.
                                                   19
       Finally, shared capitalism is well-represented in every broad industry. Profit/gainsharing

is most common in manufacturing, finance, and computer services (>50% in each), while

employee ownership and stock options are most common in transportation/ communications/

utilities, finance, and computer services. The figures are consistently highest in computer

services, reflecting the strong use of these incentives in new economy companies that rely

heavily on human skill and ingenuity (Blasi, Kruse, and Bernstein, 2003). This is not consistent

with the notion that shared rewards (especially employee ownership) will only work with

professional groups such as lawyers or more specialized service firms (Hansmann, 1996).



Work organization and shared capitalism

       How are these jobs structured, and what policies accompany shared capitalism plans?

Table 6 uses the GSS and NBER data to explore how shared capitalism relates to several aspects

of work organization and policies, shedding some light on the role these plans may play in

companies. The figures in Table 6 are simple cross-tabulations—these relationships are

analyzed using probit regressions in Table 7.

       Consistent with the idea that shared capitalism can encourage cooperative teamwork,

profit/gainsharing employees are more likely to work in teams, to be able to observe co-worker

performance, and to have low levels of supervision (cols. 2, 6). The patterns are mixed,

however, for employee-owners and stock option holders. The stock option holders are more

likely to work in teams and to have low levels of supervision, but are no more likely (and may be

less likely) to easily observe co-worker performance (cols. 4, 8). This may have to do with their

concentration in high tech and computer industry firms. Employee-owners are not more likely to

work in teams or to find it easy to observe co-workers, although they are more likely to have low
                                                20
levels of supervision (cols. 3, 7). This suggests that profit/gainsharing may be the primary

method for encouraging cooperative teamwork in day-to-day work, while employee ownership

and stock options may affect other outcomes (e.g., identification, loyalty, turnover). This is a

good example of how we can learn from the analysis of prevalence. It could possibly be the

basis of an argument for combining short-term forms of shared capitalism like profit/gainsharing

with longer horizon forms such as employee ownership and stock options. Whether these forms

do have the effects suggested by the prevalence figures is the job of accompanying papers to sort

out.

         Participation in decisions may, as discussed earlier, be an important complement to

shared capitalism programs in affecting workplace performance. Such participation can give

employees the means to improve performance, while shared capitalism provides the incentives.

The data in Table 6 generally support the idea of complementarity, with shared capitalism

employees having higher levels on both the objective measure of participation (being in an

employee involvement team) and the subjective measures (having say/influence in one's job, or

participating with others in decisions affecting one's job). Profit/gainsharing is consistently

linked to higher participation in both datasets, while employee ownership and stock option

holding show mixed results in the GSS but strong associations with participation in the NBER

data.

        Training may be another important complementary policy, helping to develop worker

skills and commitment that can be reinforced by shared capitalism. The GSS tabulations in

Table 6 show that those with profit/gainsharing are more likely to report that they have the

training opportunities they need. The shared capitalism employees in the NBER firms are more

likely to have had employer-sponsored training in the past year, while profit/gainsharing
                                                 21
employees and employee-owners—but not stock option holders—are slightly more likely to

frequently participate in job rotation.

       Finally, job security may be an important complementary policy—it is hard to maintain

worker commitment and cooperative teamwork if employees are afraid they will be laid off. Just

over 90% of the GSS shared capitalism employees report they are unlikely to be laid off, which

is higher than the 88% figure for the entire sample, with significantly greater job security for

profit/gainsharers and employee-owners. All three groups of shared capitalism employees report

significantly greater job security in the NBER data. In addition, each of these three groups

reports a higher expected likelihood of working at the company for a long time, and of seeing

their current jobs as part of a long-term career.

       Table 7 analyzes these relationships using probit regressions to predict the likelihood of

participating in each of the types of shared capitalism. The NBER regressions control for

company fixed effects, thereby doing within-company comparisons of who participates. Most of

the simple relationships described above are maintained when controlling for other variables. In

particular, each of the plans is associated with greater participation in decisions and with

employer-sponsored training in the past year. The ease of observing co-workers is a significant

predictor of profit/gainsharing in both the GSS and NBER data, suggesting an important role for

peer pressure. Closeness of supervision is a strong negative predictor in the NBER sample, and

high job security is a strong positive predictor, indicating that freedom from supervision and job

security may be complementary policies. Finally, the GSS regressions confirm that each of the

types of shared capitalism are more likely in larger establishments (though the highest

prevalence of profit/gainsharing is among establishments with 100-999 employees rather than

the 1000+ group).
                                                    22
Risk aversion and shared capitalism

       Risk aversion is clearly an important consideration in shared capitalism. We measured

risk aversion with several questions on the NBER company surveys, including a self-rating on a

0-10 scale, how much one would pay for a bet, whether one would take a job with stable pay

versus one with risky but higher pay, and whether one regularly buys and sells stock on the stock

market. These are strongly related and appear to measure a common risk propensity. Here we

focus on the employee's self-rating, where 0 is "hate to take any kind of risk" and 10 is "love to

take risks" (see question wording in appendix). The average score is 5.6, but there is wide

dispersion: 20% of employees give scores of 3 or less, while, and 41% give themselves scores of

7 or more. Of course these employees are not representative of the overall workforce, since they

have chosen to work in companies with shared capitalism and 85% are covered by some type of

shared capitalism plan. We can nonetheless learn something about the role of risk aversion by

examining its relation to plan participation and worker views of variable pay.

       Risk aversion is related to plan participation, as shown in Table 8, but not always in

expected ways. A surprising finding is that those who are eligible for profit sharing rate

themselves as more risk averse (less risk loving) than those who are not eligible, both before and

after controlling for demographic, pay, and wealth variables (cols. 3, 5). One explanation of this

is that profit sharing may be less risky than sinking your savings in your company stock under

certain circumstances, such as where you feel you are paid at the market rate for wages and there

is no wage substitution. Eligibility for gainsharing and individual bonuses, in contrast, is

associated with greater risk loving. Like profit sharers, stock option holders appear slightly

more risk averse after controlling for demographic, pay, and wealth variables.
                                                 23
       Employee owners appear to like risk more on average, but this varies by type of

employee ownership. Those owning stock through 401(k) plans or open market purchases are

clearly more risk loving than others (Table 8, col. 6), undoubtedly reflecting the self-selection of

risk lovers buying stock or allocating 401(k) accounts toward company stock. ESOP members,

however, are more risk averse than non-ESOP members in a simple comparison, and risk loving

is not a significant predictor of ESOP membership, or of owning stock through an ESPP or

exercised stock options, after controlling for demographic, pay, and wealth variables.

       Does risk aversion affect employees' views of variable pay? Most of the NBER workers

would prefer to be paid in part with profit sharing, company stock, or stock options, as shown in

Table 9. Remarkably, even two-thirds (66%) of the most risk-averse employees would prefer

this, while 86% of the least risk-averse prefer this. Very similar results are obtained by a

question asking about the employee's next pay increase, where again two-thirds of the most risk-

averse would prefer at least some of the increase in shared capitalism pay.

       About three-fourths of employees would prefer a new bonus program to be based at least

in part on their individual performance, where the line of sight is clearly greatest. Almost three-

fifths (58%), however, prefer that it also be based on company profits or performance, while

only about one-third (37%) prefer that it be based in part on workgroup performance. It may be

that the greater line of sight for workgroup bonuses is trumped by their greater perceived risk, as

workgroup performance is probably seen as more variable than overall company performance

(which averages across all workgroups in the company). Those with low risk aversion are more

likely to choose individual- or workgroup-based bonuses, while risk aversion is not related to the

desire for company-based bonuses.

       Most employees would not vote to sell the company to an outside investor for a 50%
                                                 24
premium, but would do so for a 100% premium. This likelihood is lowest among those with

high risk aversion, reflecting greater concern about job loss if the company were sold. While the

concern about job loss is the most common reason for refusing to sell the company, about one-

third of employees say they would refuse to sell because they like owning company stock (33%),

and a similar number say they would refuse because they like the sense of community from

employee ownership (37%). A lot more research is needed on this broader issue of employee

ownership and workers’ corporate governance rights since governance has always been seen by

corporate finance experts as being partly about managing risk. (It is standard in investment

banking to provide more governance rights when risk is higher.)

       Finally, most workers say that they would be willing to accept some degree of lower

regular pay in exchange for the opportunity to participate in a company-based bonus system

averaging 10% of their pay. This willingness varies substantially, however: two-fifths (41%)

would not accept lower pay, while one-sixth (15%) would accept less than 5% lower pay, one-

fourth (27%) would accept 5% lower pay, and one-sixth (17%) would accept more than 5%

lower pay. This is predictably related to risk aversion: a majority of the most risk averse would

not accept any lower regular pay (55%), compared to only a third of the least risk averse (33%).

       The NBER employees of course may not be representative of the overall workforce—in

particular, they may have joined these companies because they are less risk averse and more

favourably inclined toward shared capitalism than most workers. The data are broadly

consistent, however, with existing representative surveys. Over half (57%) of workers in a 1986

BNA/Bruskin poll said they would trade their next pay increase for a share in company, while

44% said this in a 1989 EBRI/Gallup poll (summarized in Kruse and Blasi, 1999). Workers in

general report that, if they had company stock, they would be less likely than the NBER workers
                                               25
to vote to sell the company even for a substantial premium.12 This indicates either a more rosy

view of the advantages of employee ownership among the workforce in general, or more concern

about an outside investor laying off workers. The public surveys do show positive views of

employee ownership: strong majorities think employee-owners will work harder, have higher

commitment, and be more concerned with the long-term success of the company. Participation

in decisions, however, appears to be very important: most employees would prefer participation

in decisions to having a share of ownership, and say that if they owned stock, they would not let

management vote their shares on major corporate issues (summarized in Kruse and Blasi, 1999).

        Overall, as expected, risk aversion is a key factor for shared capitalism: it appears most

likely to steer workers away from positions providing gainsharing or individual bonuses, and to

discourage workers from allocating 401(k) assets toward company stock or purchasing company

stock on the open market. Greater risk aversion is associated with less positive views of shared

capitalism pay, but even among the most risk-averse employees, two-thirds says they prefer

some shared capitalism as part of their pay package.



                                               Conclusion

        Contrary to concerns about the free rider problem and worker risk aversion, a substantial

number of workers participate in shared capitalism plans and are open to more shared capitalism

in their firms. Nationally-representative surveys of private-sector employees and firms show

that:

        •       One-fourth to one-third of employees are eligible for profit sharing


12 The 41% who would sell for a 50% premium is somewhat higher than the 23% figure for all employees from a
1989 EBRI/Gallup poll, and the 64% who would vote to sell for a 100% premium is much higher than the 36%
figure for all employees from a 1994 EBRI/Gallup poll (summarized in Kruse and Blasi, 1999).
                                                     26
         •      About one-fourth of employees are eligible for gainsharing

         •      About one-fifth of employees own stock in their companies

         •      Between one-twelfth and one-eighth of employees are eligible for stock options or

                   hold stock options

         •      Overall, between one-third and one-half of employees participate in some form of

                   shared capitalism

         Why do firms use these plans, and why do workers accept them? This paper broadly

reviews the major reasons for adopting these plans and some of the research results. The two

major categories of reasons for adopting these plans are productivity-related and flexibility-

related reasons. Prior studies find that these plans tend to be associated with better company

performance on average, but there is wide dispersion in outcomes. The goal of accompanying

papers using these data is to explain this dispersion and understand why, where, and how shared

capitalism does or does not work. Limited evidence also shows that these plans tend to be

associated with greater job stability, firm survival, and employee compensation—the latter

finding helping to explain why employees express positive attitudes toward shared capitalism

plans.

         The dispersion of results indicates that there is still much to learn about how these plans

can play a positive role in workplaces. Research has not nailed down the complementary role

that other human resource policies play in affecting worker attitudes and firm performance. To

help address the variety of questions surrounding shared capitalism, this paper has introduced the

NBER database of over 40,000 employee surveys in 14 firms with different combinations of

profit sharing, gainsharing, employee ownership, and stock options.


                                                  27
       Both the NBER dataset and the nationally-representative GSS dataset indicate that while

shared capitalism exists broadly throughout the economy, it is not distributed randomly across

firms and employees. One important finding is that shared capitalism plans are more likely in

larger establishments, where free riding is likely to be the highest. To counter free riding, firms

may combine shared capitalism with other policies to create a cooperative culture. An initial

exploration of work organization and policies supports this idea: shared capitalism employees

are more likely to participate in workplace decision-making and training programs, and to have

high job security and low levels of supervision. Within-company comparisons show that they

are also more likely to work in teams, and profit/gainsharing employees can more easily observe

co-worker performance, creating the conditions for cooperative teamwork. An examination of

risk aversion in the NBER dataset shows that, as expected, risk aversion is linked to lower

participation in several types of plans and less positive views of shared capitalism, but even

among the most risk averse employees, two-thirds prefer to have some form of shared capitalism

in their pay package.

       So risk aversion does not appear to be an insurmountable barrier and there appear to be

conditions for productive cooperation—does this in fact occur? What other effects does shared

capitalism have on both firms and employees? These relationships are probed and tested in the

accompanying papers, using the GSS and NBER data to explore a wide variety of outcomes for

both workers and firms.

       Over the last few decades many economists have said about various shared capitalism

practices: “If it makes so much sense then why do we not observe more firms and employees

doing it?” The response put forward by these prevalence figures is: “It appears to have spread

throughout the economy, so what does that mean?” This paper has examined some of the
                                                 28
linkages between shared capitalism practices and other employment practices. These linkages

raise another series of questions: Are managers in companies making the right choices about

how to achieve optimal performance from shared capitalist practices, or are there patterns and

combinations that work better and worse? In other words, is what we observe optimal because

that is the shared capitalist arrangement that has emerged in the laboratory of real life? Or,

should managers consider making substantive changes to how they organize shared capitalism

because it can be done well or poorly? One needs to beware of looking at these incidence

patterns with a “deterministic” frame of mind. It should not be immediately concluded that just

because there are certain types of shared capitalist practices (such as company stock in 401k

plans as a lone form of shared capitalism) or combinations of these practices with human

resource policies (such as a low incidence of self-directed work teams with employee ownership)

that somehow managers have told us these are the best workable combinations. Firms and

managers may have it wrong in some cases and right in others. These data will be used to

explore the answers to these questions.

       This NBER research program continues a long tradition of examination of shared

capitalism by economists. The phenomenon was seen as being so important that John Bates

Clark, a founder of the American Economic Association, wrote a book in the 1880's calling for

the combination of profit-sharing and employee ownership in companies to improve business

performance by motivating worker involvement (Clark, 1886). With his encouragement, the first

volume of the journal of the American Economics Association included an article surveying

shared capitalism in companies in the Northeast (Bemis, 1886) and in the Midwestern city of

Minneapolis (Shaw, 1886). Given that almost half of U.S. employees currently report

participating in some form of shared capitalism, it is time to take a closer look.
                                                 29
APPENDIX: GSS and NBER question wordings

COMPENSATION

     Profit sharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
     performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-
     sharing? What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on?
     Company profits or performance" (0=no, 1=yes)

     Profit sharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to profit sharing, answer to
     "What was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most
     recent year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0.

     Gainsharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
     performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-
     sharing? What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on?
     Workgroup or department performance" (0=no, 1=yes)

     Gainsharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to gainsharing, answer to "What
     was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent
     year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0.

     Individual bonus (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
     performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-
     sharing? What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on?
     Individual performance" (0=no, 1=yes)

     Individual bonus as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to individual bonus, answer
     to "What was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the
     most recent year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0.

     Own employer stock (GSS): "Do you own any shares of stock in the company where
     you now work, either directly or through some type of retirement or stock plan?" (0=no,
     1=yes)

     Employer stock as % of pay (GSS): If "yes" to "hold employer stock," answer to
     "Please give a general estimate of how much cash you would get if all this stock were
     sold today?" divided by annual earnings, otherwise 0

     Own employer stock (NBER): Any employer stock held through ESOP, Employee
     Stock Purchase Plan, 401(k), exercised stock options, or open market purchases (0=no,
     1=yes)

     Employer stock as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold employer stock," the sum of
     answers to questions about value of stock held in different plans, divided by
                                            30
   basepay+overtime, otherwise 0

   Hold stock options (GSS and NBER): "Do you currently hold any stock options in your
   company (vested or unvested)?" (0=no, 1=yes)

   Stock options as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold stock options," the sum of
   answers to questions about value of vested and unvested stock, divided by
   basepay+overtime, otherwise 0

WORK ORGANIZATION

   Work as part of team (GSS and NBER): "In your job, do you normally work as part of
   a team or group, or do you work mostly on your own?"

   Ease of observing co-worker performance (GSS and NBER): "In your job how easy is
   it for you to see whether your co-workers are working well or poorly? Please rate on a
   scale of 0 to 10, where 0 equals not at all easy, and 10 equals very easy."

   Closeness of supervision (NBER): "Are you closely supervised, or do you work fairly
   independently of close supervision?" (0-10 scale, 0=closely supervised, 10=independent
   of close supervision)

   In EI team (NBER): " Some companies have organized workplace decision-making in
   ways to get more employee input and involvement. Are you personally involved in any
   team, committee or task force that addresses issues such as product quality, cost cutting,
   productivity, health and safety, or other workplace issues?" (0=no, 1=yes)

   Lot of influence in job decisions (NBER): "How much involvement and direct
   influence do YOU have in: Deciding HOW to do your job and organize the work" (coded
   1 if worker responded 4="a lot" on 1-4 scale, and 0 otherwise)

   Lot of influence in setting dept. goals (NBER): "How much involvement and direct
   influence do YOU have in: Setting GOALS for your work group or department" (coded
   1 if worker responded 4="a lot" on 1-4 scale, and 0 otherwise)

   Lot of influence in company decisions (NBER): "How much involvement and direct
   influence do YOU have in: Overall company decisions" (coded 1 is worker responded
   4="a lot" on 1-4 scale, and 0 otherwise)

   Lot of say on job (GSS): "I have a lot of say about what happens on my job" (coded 1 if
   worker responded "strongly agree" on 1-4 scale, and 0 otherwise)

   Often make decisions with others (GSS): "In your job, how often do you take part
   with others in making decisions that affect you?" (coded 1 if worker responded "often"
   on 1-4 scale, and 0 otherwise)
                                           31
    Often help set way things done on job (GSS): "How often do you participate with
    others in helping set the way things are done on your job?" (coded 1 if worker responded
    "often" on 1-4 scale, and 0 otherwise)

    Participation index (GSS): Average of above three items (alpha=.737)

    Have training opportunities I need (GSS): "I have the training opportunities I need to
    perform my job safely and competently" (coded 1 if worker responded "very true" on 1-4
    scale, and 0 otherwise)

    Formal training (NBER): "In the last 12 months have you received any formal training
    from your current employer, such as in classes or seminars sponsored by the employer?"
    (0=no, 1=yes)

    Frequently participate in job rotation (NBER): "How frequently do you participate in
    a job rotation or cross-training program where you work or are trained on a job with
    different duties than your regular job?" (coded 1 if worker responded "frequently", and 0
    otherwise)

    High job security (GSS and NBER): "Thinking about the next twelve months, how
    likely do you think it is that you will lose your job or be laid off?" (coded 1 if "not at all
    likely" or "not very likely", and 0 otherwise)

    See myself working here a long time (NBER): "Which ONE of the following
    statements best describes how you think of your current employer? 1=I see myself
    working here for the foreseeable future (a long time), 0=I do not see myself working here
    very long."

    Current job is part of long-time career (NBER): "Thinking about your current job
    (rather than your employer), do you look upon it as part of your long term career, or a
    position that is not part of your long term career?" (1=yes, 0=no)

RISK AVERSION AND PREFERENCES OVER PAY

    Risk loving (NBER): "Some people like to take risks and others dislike taking risks.
    Where would you place yourself on a scale of how much you like or dislike taking risks,
    where 0 is hating to take any kind of risk and 10 is loving to take risks?"

    Risk aversion (NBER): High risk aversion=0 to 3 on risk loving scale, medium risk
    aversion=4 to 6 on risk loving scale, and low risk aversion=7 to 10 on risk loving scale.

    Type of pay preferred (NBER): "If it was your choice and yours alone, would you
    prefer that you be paid: 0=All fixed wage or salary, with no profit-sharing, company

                                              32
stock, or stock options; 1=Paid in part with a variable amount dependent on company
performance, through profit-sharing, company stock, or stock options"

Preference for new bonus plan (NBER): If your employer announced a new
compensation plan that would give up to 10% of pay in the form of bonuses, would you
like this pay to be based on (mark all that apply): Your individual performance, Your
workgroup performance, Company profits or performance"

Would vote to sell company (NBER): "If you owned stock in a company where you
worked and an outside investor offered to buy the company for 50% more than the
market value of the stock, would you vote to sell the company?"

Lower pay accepted for company-based bonus (NBER): "Imagine that you work for a
company that offers you the opportunity to participate in a bonus program. Over time, the
bonus will pay you on average 10% of your regular pay, but it could be higher or lower
in any given year depending on the company's performance that year. How much less
regular pay would you be willing to accept in order to get the possible performance
bonus?"

Preference for next pay increase (NBER): "For your next pay increase, would you
prefer that it come in the form of: 1=All fixed wages, with no profit sharing, company
stock, or stock options, 2=Split between fixed wages and profit sharing, company stock,
or stock options, 3=All in the form of profit sharing, company stock, or stock options"




                                       33
                                         References

Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. 1972. "Production, Information Costs, and Economic
       Organization," American Economic Review, 62, pp. 777-795.

Askwith, M.E. 1926. Profit-Sharing: An Aid to Trade Revival. London: Duncan Scott.

Bartel, Ann, Richard Freeman, Casey Ichniowski, and Morris Kleiner. 2003. "Can a Work
        Organization Have an Attitude Problem? The Impact of Workplaces on Employee
        Attitudes and Economic Outcomes," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper 9987.

Beatty, Anne. 1994. "An Empirical Analysis if the Corporate Control, Tax and Incentive
       Motivations for Adopting Leveraged Employee Stock ownership Plans," Managerial and
       Decision Economics, 15(4), pp. 299-315.

Bemis, Edward W. 1886. “Cooperation in the Northeast,” Publications of the American Economic
       Association 1(5) (November), pp. 7-136.

Blair, Margaret, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2000. “Is Employee Ownership an Unstable
        Form? Or a Stabilizing Force? in Thomas Kochan and Margaret Blair, eds., The New
        Relationship: Human Capital in the American Corporation. Washington, D.C.: The
        Brookings Institution.

Blasi, Joseph, Michael Conte and Douglas Kruse. 1996. "Employee Ownership and Corporate
        Performance Among Public Corporations," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol.
        50, No. 1, October, pp. 60-79.

Blasi, Joseph, Richard Freeman, Chris Mackin, and Douglas Kruse. 2008. "Creating a Bigger
        Pie? The Effects of Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Stock Options on
        Workplace Performance." Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New
        York, NY, October 2006.

Blasi, Joseph, Maya Kroumova and Douglas Kruse. 1997. Kremlin Capitalism: Privatizing The
        Russian Economy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Blasi, Joseph and Douglas Kruse. 1991. The New Owners: The Mass Emergence of Employee
        Ownership in Public Companies and What it Means to American Business. New York:
        HarperBusiness.

-----. 2006. “High Performance Work Practices at Century’s End,” Industrial Relations, Vol.
        45, No. 4 (October), pp. 547-578.

-----, and Aaron Bernstein. 2003. In the Company of Owners: The Truth About Stock Options
                                             34
       (And Why Every Employee Should Have Them). New York: Basic Books, 2003.

Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Harry M. Markowitz. 2008. “Risk and Lack of
        Diversification under Employee Ownership and Shared Capitalism. ” Presented at
        NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.

Bonin, John P., and Louis Putterman. 1987. Economics of Cooperation and the Labor-managed
       Economy. Chur, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers.

Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. 2001. "Opportunity Counts: Teams and
      the Effectiveness of Production Incentives," National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper 8306.

BLS. 2005. National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in Private Industry in the
      United States, 2003. Bulletin 2577, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, October.

-----. 2006. "National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in Private Industry in the
        United States, March 2006," Summary 06-05, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, August.

-----. 2007. National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in Private Industry in the
        United States, 2005. Bulletin 2589, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, May.

-----. 2008. “National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in Private Industry in the
        United States, March 2007,” Summary 07-05, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, August.

Brown, Jeffrey, Nellie Liang, and Scott Weisbenner. 2004. "401(k) Matching Contributions in
      Company Stock: Costs and Benefits for Firms and Workers," NBER Working Paper
      10419, August.

Buchele, Robert, Douglas Kruse, Loren Rodgers, and Adria Scharf. 2008. “Show Me the
      Money: The Wealth Impact of Shared Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage
      Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.

Budd, John. 2008. “Does Employee Ignorance Undermine Shared Capitalism” Presented at
       NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.

Bullock, R.J. and Mark E. Tubbs. 1990. "A Case Meta-Analysis of Gainsharing Plans as
       Organization Development Interventions," Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 26, 3,
       pp. 383-404.

Carberry, Edward. 2008. “An Analysis of Social Stratification in Companies with Shared
       Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY,
       October 2006.

Clark, John Bates. 1886. The Philosophy of Wealth. Boston: Ginn & Company.
                                             35
Collins, Denis. 1998. Gainsharing and Power: Lessons from Six Scanlon Plans. Ithaca and
       London: Cornell University Press, ILR Press.

Craig B. and J. Pencavel. 1992. "The Behavior of Worker Cooperatives: The Plywood
       Companies of The Pacific Northwest," American Economic Review, 82, 1083-1105.

-----. 1993. "The Objectives of Worker Cooperatives," Journal of Comparative Economics,
        Vol. 17(2), June, pp. 288-308.

Del Boca, Alessandra, Douglas Kruse, and Andrew Pendleton. 1999. "Decentralisation of
      Bargaining Systems and Financial Participation: A Comparative Analysis of Italy, UK
      and the US," Lavoro e Relazioni Industriali, Summer 1999.

Dow, Gregory. 2003. Governing the Firm: Workers' Control in Theory and Practice.
      Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

EBRI/Gallup. 1994. “Public Attitudes on Employee Stock Ownership and Benefit Promises,
      1994,” EBRI/Gallup Poll #G-54, Employee Benefit Research Institute, Washington, D.C.

European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions. 1997. New
      Forms of Work Organization: Can Europe Realize Its Potential? Luxembourg: Office for
      Official Publications of the European Communities, 1997.

Fitzroy, Felix, and Kornelius Kraft. 1995. "On the Choice of Incentive in Firms," Journal of
        Economic Behavior and Organization, 26, pp. 145-160.

Freeman, Richard, and Morris Kleiner. 1990. "The Impact of New Unionization on Wages and
      Working Conditions," Journal of Labor Economics, 8:1, S8-S25.

Freeman, Richard, and Joel Rogers. 1999. What Workers Want. New York: Russell Sage and
      Cornell University Press.

Freeman, Richard, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Worker Responses to Shirking
      under Shared Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference,
      New York, NY, October 2006.

Gregg, P.A. and Machin, S.J. 1988. "Unions and the Incidence of Performance Linked Pay Schemes
       in Britain," International Journal of Industrial Organization, 6, 91-107.

Harden, Erika, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Who Has a Better Idea: Innovation,
      Shared Capitalism, and Human Resource Policies.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage
      Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.

Hansmann, Henry. 1996. The Ownership of Enterprise. Cambridge: Harvard University Prress.

                                                36
Ichniowski, Casey, and Kathryn Shaw. 1995. "Old Dogs and New Tricks: Determinants of the
       Adoption of Productivity-Enhancing Work Practices," Brookings Papers on Economic
       Activity, Microeconomics 1995, pp. 1-55.

Ichniowski, Casey, Thomas Kochan, David Levine, Craig Olson, and George Strauss. 1996.
       "What Works at Work: Overview and Assessment," Industrial Relations, 35(3) 299-333.

Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1997. "The Effects of Human
       Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,"
       American Economic Review, 87 (3), pp. 291-313.

Jones, Derek C; Kato, Takao. 1995. "The Productivity Effects of Employee Stock-Ownership
       Plans and Bonuses: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data," American Economic Review,
       Vol. 85 (3), pp. 391-414.

Kardas, Peter; Adria L. Scharf; and Jim Keogh. 1998. “Wealth and Income Consequences of
       ESOPs and Employee Ownership: A Comparative Study from Washington State,"
       Journal of Employee Ownership Law and Finance. Vol. 10, No. 4, Fall.

Kato, Takao; Lee, Ju Ho; Lee, Kang-Sung; Ryu, Jang-Soo. 2005. "Employee Participation and
       Involvement in Korea: Evidence from a New Survey and Field Research," International
       Economic Journal, Vol. 19 (2), June, pp. 251-81.

Kruse, Douglas. 1993. Profit Sharing: Does It Make a Difference? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
       Institute for Employment Research.

-----. 1996. “Why Do Firms Adopt Profit-Sharing and Employee Ownership Plans?” British
         Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 34, No. 4 (December), pp. 515-38.

-----. 1998. “Profit Sharing and the Demand for Low-Skill Workers,” in Richard Freeman and
         Peter Gottschalk, eds., Generating Jobs: Increasing the Demand for Low-Skill Workers.
         New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 105-153.

-----. 2002. “Research Evidence on Prevalence and Effects of Employee Ownership,” Testimony
         before the Subcommittee on Employer-Employee Relations, Committee on Education
         and the Workforce, U.S. House of Representatives, February 13, 2002.

-----, and Joseph R. Blasi. 1997. “Employee Ownership, Employee Attitudes, and Firm
         Performance: A Review of the Evidence,” in David Lewin, Daniel J.B. Mitchell, and
         Mahmood A. Zaidi, eds., The Human Resource Management Handbook, Part I.
         Greenwich, Connecticut and London, England: JAI Press Inc.

-----. 1999. “Public Opinion Polls on Employee Ownership and Profit Sharing,” Journal of
         Employee Ownership Law and Finance, Vol. 11, No. 3, Summer 1999, pp. 3-25.
                                              37
Kruse, Douglas, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Do Workers Gain by Sharing?
       Employee Outcomes Under Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Broad-based Stock
       Options” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY,
       October 2006.

Lawler, Edward, Susan Mohrman, and G.E. Ledford. 1995. Creating High Performance
       Organizations: Practices and Results of Employee Involvement and Quality Management
       in Fortune 1000 Companies. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Oyer, Paul, and Scott Schaefer. 2005. "Why Do some Firms Give Stock Options to All
       Employees? An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories," Journal of Financial
       Economics, 76, pp. 99-133.

Park, Rhokeun., Douglas Kruse, and James Sesil. 2004. “Does Employee Ownership Enhance
       Firm Survival?” in Virginie Perotin and Andrew Robinson, eds., Advances in the
       Economic Analysis of Participatory and Labor-Managed Firms, Vol. 8. New York:
       Elsevier Science, JAI, pp. 3-33.
Pendleton, Andrew; Poutsma, Erik; Van Ommeren, Jos; Brewster, Chris. 2003. "The Incidence
       and Determinants of Employee Share Ownership and Profit Sharing in Europe," in Takao
       Kato and Jeffrey Pliskin, eds., Advances in the Economic Analysis of Participatory and
       Labor-Managed Firms, vol. 7. New York: Elsevier Science, JAI, pp. 141-72.

Poole, Michael. 1989. The Origins of Economic Democracy: Profit-Sharing and Employee-
       Shareholding Schemes. London: Routledge.

Poutsma, Erik. 1999. Financial Employee Participation in Europe. Nijmegen, Netherlands:
      Nijmegen University Business School, Report to the European Foundation for the
      Improvement of Living and Working Conditions.

Putterman, Louis, and Gil Skillman, Jr. 1988. "The Incentive Effects of Monitoring Under
       Alternative Compensation Schemes," International Journal of Industrial Organization, 6,
       pp. 109-119.

Scharf, Adria, and Christopher Mackin. 2000. "Census of Massachusetts Companies with
        Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs)." Boston: Commonwealth Corporation.

Shaw, Albert. 1886. “Cooperation in a Western City,” Publications of the American Economic
      Association 1(4), September, pp. 7-106.

Smith, Stephen, Beom-Cheol Cin, and Milan Vodopivec. 1997. "Privatization Incidence,
       Ownership Forms, and Firm Performance: Evidence from Slovenia," Journal of
       Comparative Economics, Vol. 25(2), October, pp. 158-179.

Summers, Lawrence. 1986. "On the Share Economy," Challenge, November/December, pp. 47-
                                          38
       50.

Tseo, George. 1996. "Chinese Economic Restructuring: Enterprise Development through
       Employee Ownership," Economic and Industrial Democracy, 17(2), May, pp. 243-279.

U.S. GAO. 1986. “Employee Stock Ownership Plans: Benefits and Costs of ESOP Tax
      Incentives for Broadening Stock Ownership.” GAO/PEMD-87-8. Washington, DC:
      General Accounting Office.

U.S. Senate, Subcommittee of the Committee on Finance. 1939. "Survey of Experiences in
       Profit Sharing and Possibilities of Incentive Taxation." Washington, D.C.: Government
       Printing Office.

Uvalic, M., and Daniel Vaughan-Whitehead, eds. 1997. Privatization Surprises in Transition
       Economies: Employee-ownership in Central and Eastern Europe. Cheltenham, UK and
       Lyme, NH: Elgar, distributed by American International Distribution Corp., Williston,
       VT.

Weitzman, Martin L. 1984. The Share Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

-----. 1986. "Macroeconomic Implications of Profit Sharing," NBER Macroeconomics Annual
        1986. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 291-335.

-----, and Douglas Kruse. 1990. “Profit Sharing and Productivity,” in Alan Blinder, ed., Paying
         For Productivity: A Look at the Evidence. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Zalusky, John. 1990. "Labor-Management Relations: Unions View Profit Sharing," in Myron J.
       Roomkin, ed., Profit Sharing and Gain Sharing. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 65-78.




                                              39
      Table 1 – Current Prevalence of Shared Capitalism Plans

                                                                            Source:      GSS         GSS     NOS
                                                                              Year:      2002        2006    2002
                                                                       Type of data:   Employee    Employee Firm
                                                                                        survey      survey  survey
                                                                                          (1)         (2)     (3)
PROFIT SHARING
  Percent of employees covered
       Eligible for bonuses based on company performance                                    34%         38%   46%
       Received bonus last year based on company performance                                24%         30%
  Percent of firms with plans
       Any employees eligible for bonuses based on                                                            62%
          company performance
GAINSHARING
  Percent of employees covered
       Eligible for bonuses based on department or team performance                         23%         27%   23%
       Received bonus last year based on department or team performance                     17%         21%
  Percent of firms with plans
       Any employees eligible for bonuses based on department or team performance                             35%
EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP
  Percent of employees covered
       Own company stock                                                                    21%         18%   16%
  Percent of firms
       Any employees own company stock                                                                        33%
STOCK OPTIONS                                                                               13%
  Percent of employees covered
       Hold stock options                                                                                9%
       Granted stock options last year                                                                   5%
  Percent of firms
       Any employees granted stock options last year                                                          14%
COMBINATIONS
  Any of above                                                                              43%         47%
  Just one form:
       Rec'd profit- or gainsharing bonus last year                                        14.6%      21.2%
       Hold company stock                                                                   5.0%       3.8%
       Hold stock options                                                                   0.7%       0.7%
  Two forms:
       Hold co. stock and rec'd profit- or gainsharing bonus last year                      3.7%       5.3%
       Hold co. stock and stock options                                                     6.1%       3.2%
       Hold stock options and rec'd profit- or gainsharing bonus last year                  0.4%       0.6%
  All three forms                                                                           6.1%       4.6%
Sample size                                                                                 1257       1173    312
                                                                  40
        Table 2: Current Prevalence of Employee Participation in Decisions

                                                    Source:    GSS      GSS           NOS
                                                      Year:    2002     2006          2002
                                               Type of data: Employee Employee        Firm
                                                              survey   survey        survey
                                                                (1)      (2)           (3)
Percentage of employees covered
       Employee involvement team
       Self-directed team                                                    30%        17%
       Quality circles or employee involvement committees                    33%        17%
       Often participate with others in making                    42%        38%
         decisions that affect job
       Often participate with others in helping                   45%        42%
         set how things are done on job

Percentage of firms with plans
       Self-managed teams for non-managers                                              39%
       Quality circles or employee involvement committees                               42%
       Worker safety committees                                                         49%

Sample size                                                       1257       1173        312

GSS=General Social Survey (from National Opinion Research Center, analyzed by authors)(all private sector)
NOS=National Organizations Survey (from National Opinion Research Center, analyzed by authors)(all private sector)




                                                                41
                 Table 3: NBER Survey Companies


                                Broad-based          Broad-based            Broad-based
                                   profit             employee                 stock
                                  sharing             ownership               options
Manufacturing
     <1000 employees
                   Company 1       Yes                 ESOP                    No
                   Company 2       Yes                 ESOP                    No
                   Company 3       Yes                 ESOP                    No
                   Company 4       Yes             ESOP and ESPP               Yes
     1,000-9,999 employees
                   Company 5       Yes                  ESOP                    No
                   Company 6       Yes               401(k) ESOP                No
                   Company 7       Yes                  ESOP                    No
     10,000+ employees
                   Company 8       Yes             401(k) w/co. stock           No
Service/financial
     <1000 employees
                   Company 9        No                  ESOP                    No
     1,000-9,999 employees
                   Company 10       No                 ESOP                    No
                   Company 11       No        ESPP and 401(k) w/co. stock      Yes
     10,000+ employees
                   Company 12      Yes        ESPP and 401(k) w/co. stock      Yes
Hi-tech/Internet
     <1000 employees
                   Company 13      Yes                   ESPP                  Yes
     10,000+ employees
                   Company 14      Yes                   ESPP                  Yes

Total companies with plans          11                    14                    5




                                                          42
          TABLE 4: Shared capitalism types and intensities in GSS and NBER datasets

                                                        General     NBER       Sample sizes
                                                         Social    company
                                                        Survey      dataset    GSS          NBER
                                                       2002-2006
Bonus eligibility
    Profit sharing                                         35.9%      71.3%      2386        41018
    Gainsharing                                            24.9%      20.7%      2386        41023
    Size of most recent bonus, if eligible for any
          Mean dollar value                               $6,265     $11,329          693    26113
          Median dollar value                             $1,500      $2,000          693    26113
          Mean % of pay                                    8.9%       12.1%           645    22019
          Median % of pay                                  4.6%        5.7%           645    22019

Employee ownership
   Own employer stock in any form                          19.4%      64.0%      2406        41206
   Own employer stock through:
        Employee Stock Ownership Plan                                  8.1%                  41109
        Employee Stock Purchase Plan                                  17.6%                  40990
        401(k) plan                                                   33.5%                  40885
        Exercising options and keeping stock                           5.0%                  41032
        Open market purchase                                           7.3%                  41145
   Value of employer stock, if own stock
        Dollar value: Mean                               $63,130     $60,078          318    25447
                    Median                               $10,000     $14,375          318    25447
        % of pay: Mean                                    81.7%       65.0%           302    22715
                    Median                                23.0%       30.6%           302    22715
        % of wealth: Mean                                             19.6%                  23141
                    Median                                            10.0%                  23141

Stock options
    Currently hold stock options                           11.3%      21.9%      2392        41166
    Ever granted stock options                                        22.3%                  41166
    Granted stock options last year                                   20.4%                  41158
    Value of stock options, if hold options:
          Mean dollar value of unvested options                     $112,882                  8390
          Mean dollar value of vested options                       $143,117                  8497
          Total dollar value: Mean                                  $249,901                  8656
                            Median                                   $75,000                  8656
          % of pay:          Mean                                    183.7%                   8403
                            Median                                   100.0%                   8403
          % of wealth:       Mean                                     60.3%                   8104
                            Median                                    28.6%                   8104

Any of above programs                                      44.9%       85.7%      2430       41206




                                                  43
    Table 5: Participation in Shared Capitalism by Job and Company Characteristics

                                  GSS, 2002-2006                                NBER
                              Percent of those at left who:     Percent of those at left who:       Sample sizes

                              Are eligible for Own    Hold Are eligible for       Own    Hold
                                 profit- or     co.   stock   profit- or           co.   stock
                               gainsharing     stock options gainsharing          stock options      GSS NBER
                                    (1)         (2)    (3)       (4)                (5)   (6)         (7)   (8)
Overall                               37.2% 19.4% 11.3%             76.4%          64.0% 21.9%       2,430 41,206
Occupation
   Production                        32.8%     17.2%     9.2%            72.1%     51.6%     1.8%      638 18,227
   Admin. support                    35.8%     23.5%    15.5%            68.5%     63.8%    18.1%      340 2,246
   Professional/technical            36.7%     21.9%    13.7%            82.9%     78.8%    44.1%      443 11,582
   Sales                             47.6%     21.5%    12.9%            64.8%     75.7%    49.6%      299 2,220
   Service                           19.2%      6.5%     4.1%            71.4%     50.8%     0.0%      322 1,105
   Management                        55.8%     26.5%    13.6%            90.6%     78.6%    42.3%      368 4,836

    Lower mgt.                                                           88.4%     83.7%    60.3%            4,214
    Middle mgt.                                                          88.9%     79.4%    48.3%            2,946
    Upper mgt.                                                           90.4%     74.4%    46.8%              856

Tenure
   1 year or less                    30.5%      7.5%     4.4%            62.3%     51.2%    33.1%      775 6,029
   >1, <=5 years                     39.7%     20.3%    11.6%            75.2%     61.1%    24.5%      828 10,602
   More than 5 years                 41.8%     30.3%    17.8%            80.8%     69.1%    18.2%      805 23,639

Hours of work
   Part-time (<35)                   20.7%      8.2%     4.9%            54.8%     45.9%    13.1%       447    588
   Full-time (35+)                   40.9%     22.0%    12.7%            76.7%     64.2%    21.6%     1,983 39,625

Union member
    No                               38.0%     19.0%    10.9%            80.9%     70.3%    25.2%     1,455 35,547
    Yes                              14.0%     24.2%    12.4%            46.7%     22.4%     0.7%       161 5,001

Establishment size
    1 to 9                           26.0%      8.9%     4.2%                                          505
    10 to 49                         35.6%     12.3%     7.1%                                          604
    50 to 99                         40.5%     20.3%    13.8%                                          329
    100 to 999                       44.1%     26.9%    16.0%                                          656
    1000+                            44.8%     36.8%    20.1%                                          300

Industry
    Ag./mining/constr.               22.3%     11.1%     5.2%                                          183
    Manufacturing                    52.0%     29.1%    18.3%                                          399
    Trans./comms./utilities          43.8%     37.9%    23.7%                                          214
    Wholesale/retail                 32.7%     14.0%     8.3%                                          553
    Finance/insurance                55.0%     35.5%    18.8%                                          198
    Computer services                65.2%     43.4%    40.3%                                           52
    Other services                   28.6%      9.9%     4.0%                                          771




                                                                44
        Table 6: Work Organization by Type of Shared Capitalism

                                                GSS (2002-2006)                                        NBER
                                                          Eligible for       Own         Hold                    Eligible for     Own        Hold
                                                   All     profit- or         co.        stock            All     profit- or       co.       stock
                                                employees gainsharing        stock      options        employees gainsharing      stock     options
                                                   (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)        (6)           (7)        (8)
Total                                             100.0%      100.0%        100.0%      100.0%           100.0%      100.0%      100.0%     100.0%

Work as part of team                                57.8%       60.8% **     60.4%        64.8% **         59.3%      60.8% **   57.9% **    64.7% **
Ease of observing co-worker performance
    Hard                                            15.5%       12.5% **     16.1%        11.9%            18.3%      17.8% **   19.2% **    26.3% **
    Medium                                          14.4%       14.1%        13.5%        16.2%            32.7%      33.3% **   33.8% **    37.7% **
    Easy                                            70.1%       73.3% **     70.4%        72.0%            49.0%      48.9%      47.1% **    36.0% **
Closeness of supervision
    Low supervision                                                                                        47.5%      50.5% **   53.9% **    66.6% **
    Medium supervision                                                                                     33.7%      33.1% **   32.0% **    24.8% **
    High supervision                                                                                       18.7%      16.4% **   14.1% **     8.7% **
Participation in decisions
    Employee involvement team                                                                              34.7%      37.9% **   37.7% **    37.7% **
    Lot of involvement in job decisions                                                                    50.5%      53.5% **   56.5% **    71.2% **
    Lot of involvement in setting dept. goals                                                              21.3%      22.6% **   23.8% **    33.2% **
    Lot of involvement in co. decisions
    A lot of say about what happens on job          24.6%       30.8% **     28.4% *      28.7%
    Often help set way things are done on job       39.7%       46.8% **     47.5% **     49.0% **
    Often make decisions with others                43.5%       50.1% **     49.4% **     52.1% **
Training/multi-skilling
    Have training opportunities I need
    Formal training in past year                    60.3%       62.7% *      61.6%        60.6%            56.4%      59.2% **   61.8% **    76.3% **
    Frequently participate in job rotation                                                                 11.2%      11.4% *    11.5% *      6.2% *

High job security                                 88.3%        92.7% **       91.7% *      91.3%           84.3%      86.9% **   87.8% **    92.0% **
See myself working here a long time                                                                        81.7%      83.6% **   84.8% **    88.3% **
Current job is part of long-time career                                                                    76.2%      78.0% **   79.1% **    83.5% **
Sample size                                         2430          908           470          275           41206      31351      26390        9019
* Difference between those who are and are not covered by this plan is significant at p<.10 ** p<.05

                                                                             45
    Table 7: Predicting Participation in Shared Capitalism

Figures are derivatives based on probit regressions, representing effect of one-unit change in independent variable on probability of dependent variable.
                                                   GSS                                                               NBER

                               Eligible for             Own                        Hold                      Eligible for             Own                       Hold
                               profit- or                co.                       stock                     profit- or                co.                      stock
                               gainsharing              stock                     options                    gainsharing              stock                    options
                                      (1)                   (2)                        (3)                          (4)                    (5)                      (6)
Occupation
   Production (excl.)
   Admin. support                 0.058   (0.041)        0.080    (0.036)   **     0.083     (0.031)   ***     -0.010   (0.010)        0.023     (0.011) **      0.044 (0.017) ***
   Prof./technical                0.041   (0.043)        0.075    (0.036)   **     0.059     (0.027)   **       0.019   (0.006) ***    0.064     (0.006) ***     0.141 (0.011) ***
   Sales                          0.214   (0.044) ***    0.096    (0.039)   ***    0.074     (0.032)   ***     -0.240   (0.014) ***    0.035     (0.012) ***     0.147 (0.022) ***
   Service                       -0.056   (0.045)       -0.031    (0.036)          0.012     (0.031)           -0.022   (0.013) *     -0.016     (0.015)
   Management                     0.224   (0.041) ***    0.099    (0.036)   ***    0.049     (0.026)   **
   Lower mgt.                                                                                                   0.033 (0.008) ***      0.039     (0.010) ***     0.146 (0.018) ***
   Middle mgt.                                                                                                  0.062 (0.008) ***      0.072     (0.010) ***     0.473 (0.020) ***
   Upper mgt.                                                                                                   0.085 (0.012) ***      0.045     (0.017) **      0.741 (0.018) ***

Tenure (years)                    0.000 (0.002)          0.006 (0.001) ***         0.002 (0.001) ***            0.004 (0.000) ***      0.009     (0.000) ***     0.005 (0.000) ***
Full-time                         0.144 (0.029) ***      0.089 (0.019) ***         0.036 (0.015) **             0.000 (0.000) ***      0.000     (0.000) ***     0.000 (0.000)
Union member                       ^                      ^                         ^                          -0.343 (0.010) ***     -0.390     (0.010) ***    -0.100 (0.007) ***

Work as part of team              0.006 (0.024)          0.003 (0.018)             0.020 (0.012)                 ^                      ^                         ^
Ease of observing co-worker       0.007 (0.004) **      -0.001 (0.003)             0.001 (0.002)                0.004 (0.001) ***      0.002     (0.001) *      -0.002 (0.001)
Closeness of supervision                                                                                       -0.004 (0.001) ***     -0.011     (0.001) ***    -0.009 (0.001) ***

Participation index               0.114 (0.018) ***      0.051 (0.013) ***         0.030 (0.009) ***
Employee involvement team                                                                                       0.054 (0.004) ***      0.041     (0.005) ***     0.012 (0.007) *

Formal training in past year                                                                                    0.039 (0.005) ***      0.039     (0.005) ***     0.027 (0.006) ***
Have needed training opps.        0.015 (0.024)         -0.004 (0.018)            -0.004 (0.013)
High job security                  ^                      ^                          ^                          0.083 (0.007) ***      0.061     (0.007) ***     0.053 (0.008) ***

(continued)



                                                                                              46
Table 7 (continued)
                                                         GSS                                                               NBER

                              Eligible for                Own                       Hold                    Eligible for    Own           Hold
                              profit- or                   co.                      stock                   profit- or       co.          stock
                              gainsharing                 stock                    options                  gainsharing     stock        options
                                     (1)                      (2)                       (3)                        (4)           (5)          (6)
Establishment size
    1 to 9 (excl.)
    10 to 49                     0.109   (0.036)   ***     0.034    (0.031)         0.031     (0.024)
    50 to 99                     0.164   (0.042)   ***     0.117    (0.039) ***     0.109     (0.034) ***
    100 to 999                   0.174   (0.036)   ***     0.171    (0.034) ***     0.117     (0.028) ***
    1000+                        0.155   (0.045)   ***     0.253    (0.045) ***     0.142     (0.039) ***

Industry
    Ag./mining/constr.          -0.235 (0.035) ***        -0.072 (0.027) **        -0.053 (0.015) ***
    Manufacturing (excl.)
    Trans./comms./utilities     -0.075   (0.041) *         0.081    (0.037)   **   0.038      (0.026)
    Wholesale/retail            -0.190   (0.034) ***      -0.058    (0.025)   **  -0.042      (0.016) **
    Finance/insurance           -0.029   (0.048)           0.070    (0.042)   *    0.007      (0.024)
    Computer services            0.090   (0.090)           0.101    (0.076)        0.135      (0.071) ***
    Other services              -0.208   (0.034) ***      -0.128    (0.022)   *** -0.098      (0.014) ***

Company fixed effects                                                                                         Yes           Yes           Yes

n                                2283                   2275                 2264               34316                   34790             30301
Pseudo-R-sq.                     0.12                  0.165                0.156               0.194                    0.211            0.815
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01
^ These variables were available only for a limited number of observations. When they are included, the significant relationships are:
    Union membership in GSS: negative and significant only in column 1
    High job security in GSS: positive and significant only in column 1
    Work as part of team in NBER: positive and significant in columns 4-6




                                                                                                  47
                       Table 8: Risk Aversion and Participation in Variable Pay


     Based on NBER data
                                              Risk-loving mean values (0-10 scale)                        Risk loving as
                                                                                                          predictor of
                                              Participate in plan at left                                 plan at left^
                                                                            Simple
                                              Yes          No               difference     (s.e.)         Coeff.    (s.e.)
                                                (1)             (2)              (3)         (4)            (5)        (6)
Profit sharing eligibility                        5.57            5.73             -0.16   (0.03)   ***    -0.009    (0.001)   ***
Gainsharing eligibility                           6.02            5.51              0.51   (0.03)   ***     0.004    (0.001)   ***
Individual bonus eligibility                      6.01            5.46              0.55   (0.03)   ***     0.003    (0.001)   ***
Hold stock options                                6.12            5.47              0.65   (0.03)   ***    -0.001    (0.001)   *
Own co. stock                                     5.71            5.45              0.26   (0.03)   ***     0.003    (0.001)   **

Own employer stock through:
     Employee Stock Ownership Plan                    5.32        5.65         -0.33 (0.04)         ***     0.000    (0.001)
     Employee Stock Purchase Plan                     6.16        5.51          0.65 (0.03)         ***     0.000    (0.000)
     401(k) plan                                      5.57         5.65        -0.08 (0.03)         ***     0.005    (0.001)   ***
     Exercising options and keeping stock             6.11        5.59          0.52 (0.06)         ***     0.000    (0.000)
     Open market purchase                             6.49         5.55         0.94 (0.05)         ***     0.003    (0.000)   ***
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01
^ Controlling for age, gender, marital status (2 dummies),
family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids,
race (4 dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay), ln(wealth), and 21 country dummies.




                                                            48
                                Table 9: Worker Views of Performance-based Pay
                                                                                              Risk aversion
                                                                           Overall   High     Medium        Low
Type of pay preferred
    All fixed wage or salary                                                 22%     34%         25%        14%     ***
    Paid in part with profit sharing, stock, or stock options                78%     66%         75%        86%     ***
                                                                       n    13199    2090        5069       5953
Preference for next pay increase
     All fixed pay                                                           27%     33%         28%        23%     ***
     Split between fixed wages and profit sharing, stock, or options         60%     55%         61%        62%     ***
     All profit sharing, stock, and options                                  13%     12%         11%        15%     ***
                                                                       n    25869    5318        9805      10330
Would prefer new bonus plan to be based on (can pick more than one)
     Your individual performance                                             77%     71%         77%        79%     ***
     Your workgroup performance                                              37%     31%         36%        40%     ***
     Company profits or performance                                          58%     57%         59%        59%
                                                                       n    13379    2144        5133       6002
Would vote to sell company if outside investor offered:
     50% premium                                                              41%     36%         39%        45%    ***
     100% premium                                                             64%     57%         61%        68%    ***
     Reasons for not selling for 50% premium:
         Like owning company stock                                           33%     35%         33%        32%
         Like sense of community from employee ownership                     37%     37%         36%        39%
         Concerned about investor laying off employees                       70%     75%         73%        65%     ***
         Offer might mean company is worth more                              39%     33%         38%        44%     ***
                                                                       n    12938    2059        4931       5854
Lower pay accepted for company-based bonus averaging 10%
     Mean percent lower regular pay accepted                                  3.31     2.28       3.15       3.91   ***
        (std. dev.)                                                         (3.56)   (3.21)     (3.51)     (3.63)
     0% lower pay accepted                                                   41%      55%        43%        33%     ***
     Between 0% and 5% lower pay accepted                                    15%      15%        15%        15%
     5% lower pay accepted                                                   27%      19%        26%        31%     ***
     More than 5% lower pay accepted                                          17%     11%        16%        21%     ***
                                                                       n    29426     5535      11141      12480
* Significant difference among risk groups at p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01

                                                                49
      Appendix Table A1 – Prior Evidence on Prevalence of Shared Capitalism Plans

                                                     Source: WRPS       NLSY      EBRI   NES           NES     Form 5500 NCS     NCS        NCS
                                                       Year: 1994/95     1993     1994   1994          1997       1998    2003   2005       2007
                                                Type of data: Employee Employee Employee Firm          Firm     Admin.    Firm   Firm       Firm
                                                               survey   survey   survey survey        survey      data   survey survey     survey
                                                                 (1)      (2)      (3)    (4)           (5)        (6)     (7)    (8)        (9)
PROFIT SHARING
    Percent of employees covered
        Receive any bonuses based on profit sharing                   30%
        Employer makes profit sharing available                                 35%
        Deferred profit-sharing plan                                                                                                 21% 30%
        Cash profit-sharing plan                                                                                                      5%        5%
GAINSHARING
    Percent of employees covered
        Receive any bonuses based on meeting workplace goals          27%
EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP
    Percent of employees covered
        Participate in an employee stock ownership or ESOP plan       24%
        Own company stock                                                                  21%
        ESOP participant                                                                                                        6%    5%  4%
        Participant in non-ESOP 401(k) w/employer stock^                                                                      11%
        Participant in other defined con. plan w/employer stock^                                                                1%
        Eligible for other defined con. plan w/employer stock^                                                                       20%
        Participant in savings/thrift plan w/employer stock^                                                                             16%
STOCK OPTIONS
    Percent of employees covered
        Eligible to receive stock options                                                                                             8%        8%
COMBINATIONS
    Percent of employees covered
        Any of above                                                  57%
    Percent of firms
        Profit sharing, bonus, or gainsharing plan                                                   75%
        Stock options or profit sharing                                                                         41%
Sample size                                                           2408                 1000     2867        2963         50769 3030  3227  8256
^ At least some employees in these plans own company stock, but the employee him/herself might not own stock (e.g., if s/he declined
        to allocate some contributions to employer stock in a 401(k))
WRPS=Worker Representation and Participation Survey (Freeman and Rogers 1999); NLSY=National Lomgitudinal Survey of Youth (Kruse 1998);
EBRI=Employee Benefits Research Institute (EBRI/Gallup 1994); NES=National Employer Survey (Kruse and Blasi 2000); Form 5500=Form 5500 pension
dataset (Kruse 2002); NCS=National Compensation Survey (BLS 2005, 2007, 2008)
                                                                      50
        Appendix Table A2: Prior Evidence on Prevalence of Employee Participation in Decisions

                                                     Source:   WRPS       NES       NES
                                                       Year: 1994/95      1994      1997
                                                Type of data: Employee    Firm      Firm
                                                               survey    survey    survey
                                                                 (1)       (2)       (3)
Percentage of employees covered
       Employee involvement team                                  31%
       Self-managed team                                                    13%        16%
       Work-related meetings for non-managers                               52%        55%
       Quality circles or employee involvement committees
       A lot of influence in decisions about how job is done      57%
       A lot of influence in setting group or dept. goals         32%

Percentage of firms with plans
       Self-managed teams for non-managers                                  32%        34%
       Work-related meetings for non-managers                               80%        74%

Sample size                                                       2408      2867       2963

WRPS=Worker Representation and Participation Survey (Freeman and Rogers 1999)(all private sector)
NES=National Employer Survey (Kruse and Blasi 2000)(private for-profit firms)




                                                        51
