                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DAILY MONETARY POLICY SHOCKS AND THE DELAYED RESPONSE OF
                           NEW HOME SALES

                                          James D. Hamilton

                                         Working Paper 14223
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14223


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2008




¸˛I am grateful to Marjorie Flavin, Seth Pruitt, and Eric Swanson for helpful comments on an earlier
  draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
  the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by James D. Hamilton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Daily Monetary Policy Shocks and the Delayed Response of New Home Sales
James D. Hamilton
NBER Working Paper No. 14223
August 2008
JEL No. E44,E52

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper offers an explication of the hump-shaped response of real economic activity to changes
in monetary policy, focusing on the particular channel operating through new home sales. I suggest
that the conventional notion of a monetary policy shock as a surprise change in the fed funds rate is
misspecified. The primary news for market participants is not what the Fed just did, but is instead
new information about what the Fed is going to do in the near future. Revisions in these anticipations
show up instantaneously in long-term mortgage rates. Although mortgage rates respond well before
the Fed actually changes its target rate, home sales do not respond until much later. The paper attributes
this delay to cross-sectional heterogeneity in search times. This framework offers a description of
the lags in the effects of monetary policy that is both more detailed, allowing us in principle to measure
the consequences at the daily frequency, and more believable than traditional measures.


James D. Hamilton
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
jhamilton@ucsd.edu
1         Introduction.

How do we measure the eﬀects of monetary policy on the economy? One popular approach

(e.g., Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1999) is based on a structural VAR. Let ym

denote a vector of variables observed for month m of which the average fed funds rate over

the month, rm , is one element. Suppose we formed a linear forecast of ym+s based on lagged

values of y (denoted Ωm−1 ) and some subset of the current values of y (denoted Λm ). How

would news about the value of rm , denoted um , cause us to revise our expectation of ym+s ?

The standard impulse-response function is simply a graph of the answer to this question1 :

                                     ∂ Ê(ym+s |um , Λm , Ωm−1 )
                                                                 .                                  (1)
                                                ∂um

        Much of the discussion in the literature concerns which elements of ym to include in the

contemporaneous information set Λm . However, this choice often proves of limited conse-

quence. Figure 1 displays impulse-response functions for a fairly standard VAR including

industrial production, the CPI, commodity prices, the fed funds rate, and M2.2                     One

sees the same broad hump-shaped response, with an increase in the fed funds rate being

followed after a substantial delay by a slowdown in industrial production, regardless of the

specification of Λm .

        Although the choice of Λm makes little diﬀerence for the answer to this forecasting

    1
     Here Ωm−1 = {ym−1 , ym−2 , ...} and um = rm − Ê(rm |Λm , Ωm−1 ). See for example Hamilton (1994,
eqs. [11.4.19] and [11.6.16]).
    2
    The commodity price index is the Reuters/CRB index from http://www.crbtrader.com/crbindex/. All
other series were obtained from the St. Louis FRED database. The first four series were converted to 100
times the year-over-year logarithmic change. The sample period is 1961:01 to 2008:03, and 12 lags were
used.


                                                   1
question, the specification of the lagged information set Ωm−1 is quite significant, as stressed

by Rudebusch (1998) and Brissimis and Magginas (2006). The top panel of Figure 2 plots

the errors um associated with a monthly VAR (in which the fed funds rate is ordered last)

between 2003:01 and 2006:06. The second panel plots the diﬀerence between rm and the

forecast implied by the 1-month fed funds futures contract on the last day of month m − 1.

Over this period, changes in the fed funds rate that would be characterized by the VAR as

monetary policy shocks were in fact almost perfectly anticipated by market participants.

   This is not to say that there were no surprises in monetary policy over this period.

However, any surprises were not about what the Fed just did, but instead reflected new

information about what the Fed was going to do in the future.         The bottom panel plots

revisions during each month in the anticipation of what the fed funds rate was going to be

2 months after the indicated month. For example, what the VAR classifies as a surprisingly

high fed funds rate in July 2004 actually showed up as news to markets in a much more

modest adjustment in the July fed funds contract price between April 30 and May 31. This

paper presents evidence that, for purposes of determining long-term mortgage rates or new

home sales, only unanticipated monetary policy changes matter, that is, it is the bottom

panels rather than the top panel in Figure 2 that will aﬀect the economy

   Before proposing my alternative to the forecasting question posed by (1), let me clarify

what it is that I believe we’re trying to estimate. The primary input the Fed needs from

empirical researchers is an answer to questions like the following:


         We’re trying to decide between a funds rate of 5 or 5.25.       How would the


                                               2
     predicted path for ym+s be diﬀerent under the two choices?


   This question is potentially related to the impulse-response function in (1), in that both

represent questions about a conditional forecast. However, interpreting an object like (1)

as telling us the answer to the policy question of interest faces two challenges. First, for

purposes of the policy question, it is clear that the information set we’d like to use is all

the information available to the Fed prior to the decision. That suggests that the bottom

panels of Figure 2 are more promising measures than the top, and indeed ideally we would

want to use forecasts from the day before rather than a month before the Fed’s decision.

   The second challenge is whether the conditions that caused surprise movements in rm in

our sample are comparable to those that would govern the outcome of the policy question

currently contemplated. For example, if historically the Fed raised rm in response to new

inflation fears that month, to what extent is what we see happen to ym+s a result of the

inflation itself, and to what extent does it result from the choice made by the Fed?

   A number of papers have sought to resolve these problems by looking at the change in

expectations of the fed funds rate on the day of a Fed policy change or announcement itself,

supposing that on such days, the answer to the forecasting question might isolate the eﬀect

of policy alone. Such studies include Kuttner (2001), Cochrane and Piazzesi (2002), Faust,

Swanson and Wright (2004), Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005a,b), and Andersson,

Dillén, and Sillin (2006), among others.   All of the above papers simply assume that the

conditional forecasting question has a diﬀerent answer on these days relative to others. To

my knowledge, mine is the first paper to test this assumption, and I find that over the period


                                              3
1988-2006, it appears not to be the case. That finding opens up a vastly bigger and richer

data set than previous researchers have used for purposes of calculating how revisions of

forecasts of the fed funds rate are associated with revisions of the forecasts of other macro

variables of interest.

   I also diﬀer from most previous studies in making primary use of daily innovations in

the one- and two-month-ahead futures contracts rather than the spot-month contract. As

suggested in the second and third panels of Figure 2, the most important news about the Fed

in recent years has been information about what it is going to do rather than information

about what it just did. Poole and Rasche (2000), Gürkaynak (2005), and Gürkaynak, Sack,

and Swanson (2007) looked at the comovements between near-month contracts (rather than

spot-month contracts) and asset prices on policy days.      But the current paper is again I

believe the first to try to link changes in these contracts directly to subsequent changes in a

measure of real economic activity.

   The way in which I do so is also methodologically novel. I propose a new method for

combining data observed at diﬀerent frequencies based on parametric restrictions inspired

by the observed cross-sectional heterogeneity in search times.

   The plan of the paper is as follows.       Section 2 reviews evidence on the time-series

properties of daily changes in near-term fed funds futures prices, and concludes that these

changes primarily result from daily changes in a rational anticipation of what the Fed is going

to do next. Section 3 documents that weekly mortgage rates follow a near-martingale, and

relates its innovations to daily changes in fed funds futures. I document that this relation



                                              4
appears to be invariant with respect to which day of the week one uses, whether one uses only

those changes associated with policy announcement days, days of particular macroeconomic

news releases, or the level of time aggregation up to a month. Section 4 investigates the

forecasting relation between interest rates and the level of new home sales, documenting

that there is a very long, sustained lag.   Some of the sales for a given month depend on

mortgage rate changes that occurred during the previous month, while sales of other homes

within that same month appear to be responding to mortgage rates up to six months earlier.

The paper attributes this lag in part to heterogeneity across households.     The mean lag

of the time-series relation turns out to match closely the mean lag of the cross-sectional

distribution across diﬀerent households in the time spent searching before buying a home.

   Taken together, the evidence supports the following interpretation of the way in which

monetary policy aﬀects the economy. Current mortgage rates reflect a rational anticipation

of everything the Fed may do in the future.       If the Fed wants to change mortgage rates,

it has to do something other than what the market expected. Any new information about

what the Fed is going to do shows up essentially instantly in mortgage rates, but due to

heterogeneity across households in information—processing and search times, shows up only

gradually over time in new home sales.      The biggest eﬀect on home sales is observed 15

weeks after the change in policy is first perceived by futures markets.




                                              5
2         Anticipations of the fed funds rate.
2.1        Fed funds futures data.

The fed funds rate for month m, denoted rm , is typically measured as the average value of

the eﬀective fed funds rate over all the days of that month. Since October 1988, it has been

possible on any business day to buy or sell through the Chicago Board of Trade a futures

contract whose payoﬀ depends on what the value of rm turns out to be.                  A contract on

day d for the current month specifies a futures price or interest rate, denoted F1 (d), such

that if the current month’s fed funds rate (denoted rm∗ (d) ) turns out to be less than F1 (d),

the seller of the contract will have to compensate the buyer an amount that depends on the

diﬀerence F1 (d) − rm∗ (d) .     If rm∗ (d) > F1 (d), the buyer will pay the seller.   One can also

buy a contract for the following month, whose implied interest rate is denoted F2 (d). For

example, one could purchase on d = May 22, 2006 a contract specifying F2 (d) = 503 basis

points (a 5.03% annual interest rate). The actual interest rate for June turned out to be

r1+m∗ (d) = 500.5 basis points, so the buyer of that one-month-ahead contract made a slight

profit. One could also purchase a 2-month-ahead contract at rate F3 (d), which if purchased

on May 22 would be a bet about the July value for rm . Longer-term contracts can also be

traded, though many a bit thinly in the early part of the sample, and this study will focus

on only the very near-term contracts.

        The basic data used in this study are the daily changes (in basis points) of each day’s

settlement futures prices over the period October 3, 1988 to June 30, 2006.3               Let f1 (d)
    3
        Data were purchased from the Chicago Board of Trade.



                                                    6
denote the change on day d for the current month’s contract:
                           
                           
                           
                            F1 (d) − F1 (d − 1) if m∗ (d) = m∗ (d − 1)
                  f1 (d) =                                              .
                           
                           
                            F1 (d) − F2 (d − 1) otherwise

Thus a positive value for f1 (d) might be taken as a signal that investors received some

information during day d leading them to anticipate a higher value for rm∗ (d) than they had

previously expected.     Likewise let f2 (d) denote F2 (d) − F2 (d − 1) for a typical day (and

f2 (d) = F2 (d) − F3 (d − 1) if d is the first day of the month) while f3 (d) = F3 (d) − F4 (d − 1)

if d is the first day of the month and f3 (d) = F3 (d) − F3 (d − 1) otherwise.

   Standard finance theory states that the futures prices should satisfy


                             Ed [λj (d)Fj (d)] = Ed [λj (d)rm∗ (d)+1−j ]


for Ed [] the expectation based on all information available at the end of day d and λj (d) the

pricing kernel relating day d to the first day of the next jth month. As noted by Hamilton

(forthcoming), the pricing kernel λj (d) is in units of a few month’s interest factor, and as

the time horizon becomes shorter, its mean approaches unity and variance goes to zero. For

this reason, daily changes in the prices of the very near-term futures contracts might be

expected to be dominated by new information about interest rates,


                           fj (d) ' Ed (rm∗ (d)+1−j ) − Ed−1 (rm∗ (d)+1−j )                    (2)


with the approximation exact in the special case of risk neutrality.

   My forthcoming paper examined some of the empirical evidence in support of (2). Al-

though most previous researchers such as Sack (2004) and Piazzesi and Swanson (forthcom-

                                                  7
ing) have found4 a statistically significant negative mean for fi (d), this is strongly influenced

by a few big interest rate drops that caught the market by surprise. Maximum likelihood

estimation of the population mean of fi (d) that allows for EGARCH and calendar-based

heteroskedasticity along with a non-Normal distribution ends up implying a positive (and

far from statistically significant) rather than a negative value for the mean.

       My earlier analysis did find some statistically significant serial correlation in fi (d), but

this seems to be of very limited economic significance. The one-day-ahead R2 from these

autoregressions is below 0.03 and the forecastability more than one day ahead is essentially

zero.

       Piazzesi and Swanson (forthcoming) proposed a number of interest rate spreads that seem

to help predict longer-horizon monthly fed funds futures pricing errors. My analysis of daily

data (Hamilton, forthcoming) found that the previous day’s values for these spreads were

generally of very limited use for trying to predict fi (d) for i = 1, 2, or 3. That paper also

confirmed Piazzesi and Swanson’s finding that the monthly nonfarm payroll does seem to

make a statistically significant contribution for predicting f2 (d) and f3 (d), though the R2 of

this regression is only 2%. The results that will be reported below turn out to be unaﬀected

by whether or not these numbers are included as conditioning variables.                    I also found a

statistically significant coeﬃcient on the first lag fi (d−1) in a 5-day autoregression. However,
   4
     Most previous studies have looked at monthly forecast errors such as rm − F2 (d† (m − 1)) for d† (m) the
                                                                                 P
last day of month m. Since I’m using settlement prices, F1 (d† (m)) = rm and d∈A(m) f1 (d) is identically
equal to rm − F2 (d† (m − 1)) for A(m) the set of all days that fall within month m. Thus the sample mean
of f1 (d) is based on exactly the same statistic (namely, the sum of all f1 (d)) as is the sample mean of
rm − F2 (d† (m − 1)).




                                                     8
this coeﬃcient is only 0.15, implying again a tiny R2 and virtually zero predictability more

than one day in advance.

   Furthermore, as documented more fully by Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2007), among

others, the near-term futures contracts oﬀer excellent forecasts of the actual fed funds rate.

For example, let d† (m) denote the last business day of month m. For the full sample of

data studied here, the forecast errors associated with one-month-ahead futures contracts

rm − F2 (d† (m − 1)) have an average squared value of 128 basis points, which is only a third

of the average squared change in the funds rate itself (rm − rm−1 ). The mean squared

errors for two-month-ahead contracts rm − F3 (d† (m − 2)) and three-month-ahead contracts

rm − F4 (d† (m − 3)) have comparable improvements (69% and 64%, respectively) relative to

the forecast errors assuming no change (rm − rm−2 and rm − rm−3 , respectively).

   In more recent years, the futures prices have become quite astounding in the accuracy of

their predictions. For data over 2003:01 through 2006:06, they oﬀer 97% improvements in

mean squared error for purposes of predicting the fed funds rate relative to a random walk.

   I conclude that while one can find some statistical evidence of predictability of fi (d), any

daily fluctuations in the implicit risk premium could at most account for a very small part

of the variance of fi (d). Instead, daily changes in fi (d) primarily reflect changes in market

participants’ assessments of where the federal funds rate is likely to be over the next few

months. Particularly in recent years, markets to a very good job in making this assessment.




                                               9
2.2    Summarizing new information about Fed policy.

The data described above register three conceptually diﬀerent things that the market may

have learned on day d about the near-term course of Fed policy. The news on day d may

have warranted a revision in the expectation of the fed funds rate for the current month

(f1 (d)), the following month (f2 (d)) or the month after that (f3 (d)). Of course, these 3

variables are far from independent— the correlation between f2 (d) and f3 (d), for example, is

0.90. Thus, while one could in principle ask what would happen if f2 (d) were to increase

with f3 (d) constant, in practice such a thought experiment is quite dissimilar to what has

typically been experienced. On the other hand, the variable f3 (d)−f2 (d) has a correlation of

only 0.13 with f2 (d), so it is quite natural to regard f2 (d) and (f3 (d)−f2 (d)) as two separate,

largely uncorrelated shocks. I have for this reason found it instructive to summarize changes

in market expectations about near-term monetary policy in terms of the level, slope, and

curvature of the implied term structure for fed funds, where


                                          `(d) = f2 (d)


                                      s(d) = f3 (d) − f2 (d)

                                 c(d) = f3 (d) − 2f2 (d) + f1 (d).

The fitted values of a regression on (f1 (d), f2 (d), f3 (d))0 are of course numerically identical

to those for a regression on (`(d), s(d), c(d))0 , and the coordinate system in which results

are reported below is simply a rotation of corresponding results that could be expressed in

terms of the original fi (d).   Where these regressions diﬀer is in the nature of the partial

                                                10
derivative questions to which individual regression coeﬃcients represent the answer. In a

regression on (`(d), s(d), c(d))0 , the coeﬃcient on `(d) is telling us what would happen if `(d)

were to increase with s(d) and c(d) were constant, in other words, the coeﬃcient on the level

`(d) is the answer to the question, what would happen if the market’s expectation of the

fed funds rate for the current month, the following month, and the month after that were

all to increase together by 1 basis point.5              The coeﬃcient on the slope s(d) indicates the

consequences if we were told that the fed funds rate is going to be rising by 1 basis point per

month for each of the following two months. Finally, the curvature c(d) tells us what would

happen if the fed funds rate is expected to increase at a faster rate between next month and

the following relative to the increase between this month and next.


3       Mortgage rates.
3.1      Data description.

A survey of U.S. national average mortgage rates is reported weekly by the Federal Home

Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac), and available from FRED, the databank of the

Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.                These data were released on Fridays from April 2,

1971 to January 2, 2004, and have been released on Thursdays since January 8, 2004. The

empirical estimates in this section are all based on the weekly change in this series measured

in basis points, denoted ∆Rw , for the period since fed funds futures have been traded.
    5
     Selecting f2 (d) as the basis for the level rather than f1 (d) is warranted by the fact that it is closer to
being a factor for (f1 (d), f2 (d), f3 (d))0 than is f1 (d), and also tends to have a stronger correlation with other
macro variables of interest than does f1 (d). For these reasons, f2 (d) is a more logical candidate to represent
the overall level of the near-term fed funds term structure than is f1 (d).




                                                         11
3.2       Martingale approximation.

The appendix reviews why a 30-year fixed mortgage rate, when sampled at very high fre-

quencies, should approximately follow a martingale.               We indeed find very little empirical

predictability in changes in the weekly series. In a regression of the 922 observations from

w = November 4, 1988 through June 29, 2006 on a constant and three lags,


                ∆Rw = −0.30 + 0.081∆Rw−1 + 0.028∆Rw−2 + 0.105∆Rw−3 + êw ,                                (3)
                         (0.33)    (0.033)            (0.033)           (0.033)



the constant is statistically insignificant while the coeﬃcients on lags 1 and 3 are statistically

significant.     The magnitude of this serial correlation is quite small; the R2 of the above

regression is only 0.02. We will nevertheless retain the constant term and 3 lags as a base

case for all the other regressions reported in this paper.

       There does not seem to be any evidence of further predictability in this series beyond this

very modest serial correlation, as detailed in Table 1. Weekly or monthly lags of mortgage

rates have no predictive power, nor do any of the variables proposed by Piazzesi and Swanson

(forthcoming) to predict fed funds futures.6          The R2 of each of the 9 regressions summarized

in Table 1 is still only 0.02. I conclude that treating daily values of the mortgage rate as a

martingale is an excellent approximation that appears to be quite consistent with the data.
   6
     For yield spreads, this was based on the value of the relevant interest rates that would have been known
3 days prior to the release day for week w − 1. For example, for week w = June 29, 2006, the previous
week’s reporting day was Thursday, June 22, so the interest rates used are for the first business day prior to
Monday, June 19, which was Friday, June 16. The reason for lagging interest rates by 4 days in this way
will be explained shortly.




                                                     12
3.3    Comovement with fed funds futures.

Under the martingale hypothesis, daily changes (or, more generally, daily innovations) in

the mortgage rate are driven by previously unavailable information about interest rates and

discount factors.    One component of this news must include revised expectations about

what the Fed is going to do over the very near future. For the time being, we will draw

no distinction between news about the Fed itself and news about the economy to which

both the Fed and mortgage rates may be responding. Instead, we focus on the following

conditional forecasting question: suppose some news arrives on day d that causes us to revise

our predictions of what the Fed is going to do over the near future. How would we revise

our expectation of the mortgage rate in response to that news? If daily data were available,

we could find the answer to that forecasting question by estimating the values of θj in the

following regression:


                        R(d) − R(d − 1) = θ 1 `(d) + θ2 s(d) + θ3 c(d) + e(d)                              (4)


where e(d) and each of the regressors would be expected to be approximate martingale

diﬀerence sequences.

   Expression (4) further implies that if we performed a regression of the change in mortgage

rates over a small interval of q days on news about the Fed’s plans that arrived over each of

the intervening days,
                              q                       q                       q
                              X                       X                       X
        R(d) − R(d − q) =           β 1j `(d − j) +         β 2j s(d − j) +         β 3j c(d − j) + ε(d)   (5)
                              j=1                     j=1                     j=1


we should find β ij = θi for i = 1, 2, 3 and j = 1, 2, ..., q where {ε(d), ε(d − q), ε(d − 2q), ...}

                                                      13
would again be a martingale diﬀerence sequence since ε(d) = e(d)+e(d−1)+· · ·+e(d−q+1).

    Consider, then, a regression of the weekly change in mortgage rates on daily innovations

in the level, slope, and curvature of fed funds futures prices. Let `w1 denote the change in the

level of the fed funds futures on the day on which the week w mortgage rate would normally

be released, if the Chicago Board of Trade was open on that day, while `w1 is defined to be

zero if the Chicago Board of Trade was closed on that day. Thus prior to 2004, `w1 is based

on the change on Friday for a fed funds contract settled in the following month, while `w1

would represent a Thursday change for weeks w since 2004. Let `w2 denote the change on

the preceding day (namely, Thursdays prior to 2004, Wednesdays since) if data are available

for that day and zero otherwise.                  Thus (`w1 , `w2 , ..., `w,13 )0 collects all the changes in the

month-ahead fed futures for the 13 most recent usual business days prior to and including

the usual release day.             Collect changes in the slope and curvature in analogous vectors

(sw1 , sw2 , ..., sw,13 )0 and (cw1 , cw2 , ..., cw,13 )0 .

    Figure 3 plots the coeﬃcients and 95% confidence intervals on changes in level, slope,

and curvature in the regression

                                   3
                                   X                      13
                                                          X  ¡                                    ¢
                  ∆Rw = c +              β 0j ∆Rw−j +               β 1j `wj + β 2j swj + β 3j cwj + εw .       (6)
                                   j=1                        j=1


For example, the top panel plots β 1j as a function of j. It is quite striking that there are

no eﬀects of changes in fed funds futures on mortgage rates for the first 3 days.

    In the current system in which the weekly mortgage data are released on a Thursday,

Freddie Mac oﬃcials tell me they stop collecting numbers on Wednesday, and that most of

the reports from individual banks come in on Monday or Tuesday.                                 For a quote from an

                                                                14
individual bank that Freddie Mac receives on Monday, it would be physically impossible

for the unpredicted movements in fed funds futures on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday

(which in turn are reflected in the values of `wj , swj , and cwj for j = 3, 2, and 1, respectively)

to have any eﬀect on the reported mortgage. Moreover, banks that do report on Tuesday

could well be submitting a rate that was set on Monday, in which case `w3 would again not

aﬀect the value of Rw .

        Although there are doubtless some diﬀerences in the specific day and nature of the

number that diﬀerent sources report to Freddie Mac, it is interesting to consider what we

would expect to find in (6) if we considered Rw to be a uniform value determined on Monday

(that is, the day corresponding to `w4 ), and if the framework proposed in (5) were valid. In

that case, we would predict that (1) the coeﬃcients on β ij should all be zero for j ∈ {1, 2, 3},

since these reflect information that came in after the time at which Rw was set; (2) the

coeﬃcients on β ij should also be zero for j ∈ {9, 10, 11, 12, 13}, since information arriving on

these days should have already been reflected in the value of Rw−1 ; and (3) the coeﬃcients

β 1j should all be the same for j ∈ {4, 5, 6, 7, 8}, since these are just alternative estimates

of the single number θ 1 ; likewise the β 2j should all equal θ2 and the β 3j should all equal

θ3 for j ∈ {4, 5, 6, 7, 8}.      Formal tests of these hypotheses all turn out to be accepted7

.   One might see a suggestion in Figure 3 that β 14 and β 24 are smaller than the others,

which would be consistent with the claim that a fraction of the banks are reporting values

set on Friday.     That hypothesis would also imply a nonzero value for β 19 and β 29 , which
    7
     A joint test of hypotheses (1) and (2) produces an F (24,879) statistic of 0.94 (p value of 0.55). A test
of hypothesis (3) results in F (36,879) = 1.32 (p = 0.10).


                                                     15
again is suggested by the figure at least for β 29 . But while that alternative hypothesis is

quite plausible and hinted at by the point estimates, the evidence for it is not statistically

significant. Furthermore, any modification of the statement of the results in this direction

would lend even more credence to the claim that (4) is the correct theoretical framework for

predicting how daily mortgage rates would behave if we had accurate daily data available.

For purposes of having a formal null hypothesis to test, I will maintain the view that ∆Rw

can be interpreted as the Monday-to-Monday change in an implicit daily mortgage series.

   Note further that the curvature coeﬃcients β 3j do not appear to contributing anything

for any j, a hypothesis one readily accepts with an F (13,879) statistic of 0.78 (p value of

0.68).

   Coeﬃcient estimates that result from imposing hypotheses (1) and (2) above, that is,

from estimation of

                               X
                               3                    X
                                                    8
                                                      ¡                      ¢
                   ∆Rw = c +         β 0j ∆Rw−j +         β 1j `wj + β 2j swj + εw          (7)
                               j=1                  j=4


are reported in the first 5 rows of Table 2.    It is natural to interpret the values β̂ 1j as 5

independent estimates of θ1 . These estimates all suggest a value of θ1 around 0.5, meaning

that if something causes market participates to raise their estimate of the near-term level

of the fed funds rate by 10 basis points, the 30-year mortgage rate would go up by 5 basis

points. The slope coeﬃcients β̂ 2j in (7) likewise give 5 independent estimates of θ 2 , each of

which suggests a value for θ2 around 1.3, meaning if the rate at which the Fed is expected

to be raising interest rates goes up by 10 basis points per month, the mortgage rate would

rise by 13 basis points.

                                               16
   The theoretical framework and statistical acceptance of hypothesis (3) above imply that

we could better estimate θ1 and θ2 by combining the information across days of the week,

                              3
                              X                         8
                                                        X                8
                                                                         X
                  ∆Rw = c +         β 0j ∆Rw−j + θ1           `wj + θ2         swj + εw ,
                              j=1                       j=4              j=4


as in row (6) of Table 2.   The R2 of the above regression is 0.35, meaning that about a

third of the variance of weekly changes in mortgage rates is accountable by new information

about what the federal funds rate is likely to be over the next few months.

   Stretching the maintained assumption that daily changes in the risk premium are negligi-

ble on into months may be questionable, but it is interesting to predict what should happen

over longer intervals again under the stark hypothesis that (4) is exactly true.            We can

construct an artificial monthly series, properly and consistently aggregated, as follows. Let

R̃m1 be the mortgage rate for the last week whose release date falls within month m. Let

R̃m2 be the mortgage rate for the week before that (the next-to-last week of the month), and

so on. Our focus will be on the value of R̃m1 − R̃m5 , which corresponds to the cumulative

change in the mortgage over the last four weeks of month m. If the weekly series Rw were a

martingale, then the monthly series R̃m1 − R̃m5 would be uncorrelated with R̃m−1,1 − R̃m−1,5 .

   Let `˜m1 denote the cumulative change in the expected level of the fed funds rate over the

5 days associated with R̃m1 , that is, if w∗ (m) denotes the last week of month m, then

                                                8
                                                X
                                       `˜m1 =         `w∗ (m),j .                              (8)
                                                j=4


Let `˜m2 denote the cumulative level change for the week before that, and let s̃mk denote

analogous cumulative slope changes for various weeks of month m. The weekly martingale

                                                 17
hypothesis would then imply that in the monthly regression,

                                             4
                                             X
                        R̃m1 − R̃m5   = c̃ +   (β̃ 1k `˜mk + β̃ 2k s̃mk ) + ε̃m
                                             k=1


the error ε̃m should again be serially uncorrelated and the coeﬃcients β̃ 1k would give us 4

independent estimates of the same structural coeﬃcient θ1 hypothesized to be governing the

underlying latent daily relation; β̃ 2k likewise give us 4 estimates of θ 2 .     These estimates

are reported in rows (7)-(10) of Table 2. The estimates for θ1 tend to be a little smaller

and those for θ2 a little bigger than those obtained from the original weekly data, though

confidence intervals for each separate estimate easily include the predicted value. Again we

accept the hypothesis (F (6, 203) = 0.97, p = 0.45) that the coeﬃcients β̃ 1k are all the same,

as are the β̃ 2k . Imposing this restriction gives yet another new pair of estimates in row (11)

of Table 2 that are quite consistent with all the others that have been obtained.

3.4    Invariance of the correlations.

The estimates presented so far simply summarize the comovement between fed funds futures

and 30-year mortgage rates, without attempting to identify whether mortgage rates are

responding to news about the Fed or whether both the Fed and mortgage rates are responding

to general news about the economy. In this section we explore how these correlations diﬀer

as a function of the source of news that appears to be hitting the market.

   The first way I addressed this was by singling out those days for which Gürkaynak, Sack,

and Swanson (2005b) identified monetary policy statements to be the key factor driving

changes in the fed funds futures markets. There are 139 such days (all between 1990 and


                                                   18
                                           [MP ]
2005) within the sample. Let aw1                   = 1 if the day on which Rw would usually be reported

happened also to be a day on which Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson determined that a major
                                                       [MP ]
                                                                 otherwise defined to be zero. Let a[MP ]
policy announcement was issued, with aw1                                                            w2    =1

if a policy announcement occurred on the previous day, and so on. I reproduced (7) using
                                                                         [MP ]
only fed funds futures changes on days for which awj                                = 1:
                            3
                            X                          8
                                                       X                 ³                               ´
                                                                 [MP ]        [MP ]           [MP ]
               ∆Rw = c +           β 0j ∆Rw−j +                awj           β 1j     `wj + β 2j      swj + εw .        (9)
                             j=1                        j=4

                                   [MP ]
The estimated values for β kj              are reported in rows (12) through (16) of Table 2.                         This

is asking a lot of the data, since there there are typically only 28 observations relevant for
                                      [MP ]
estimating a given coeﬃcient β ij             , and this is reflected in large standard errors.8                   Even so,

the level coeﬃcients on the third and fifth day of the week are each statistically significantly

diﬀerent from zero, all 10 estimated coeﬃcients are positive, and all are within the range,

given the standard errors, of values that would be expected if they were providing estimates

of the same values θ1 and θ2 identified in earlier rows in the table. One can formally test
                                            [MP ]
that equivalence by testing H0 : λkj                = 0, j = 4, ..., 8, k = 1, 2 in
               3
               X                    8
                                    X ¡                   ¢ X8        ³                 ´
                                                                [MP ]   [MP ]     [MP ]
∆Rw = c +            β 0j ∆Rw−j +      β 1j `wj + β 2j swj +   awj     λ1j `wj + λ2j swj + εw .
               j=1                   j=4                                       j=4
                                                                                                                       (10)

This hypothesis is accepted (F (10, 898) = 1.61, p = 0.10).

       One can get considerably more power by grouping the five days together, and indeed one
                                     [MP ]          [MP ]      [MP ]          [MP ]
accepts the hypothesis that β 1j             = θ1           , β 2j     = θ2           for j = 4, ..., 8 in (9) (F (8, 908) =
   8
     The deterioration in standard errors between rows (1)-(5) and (12)-(16) is not as great as one might
have expected given the huge reduction in the number of useful observations because a disproportionately
                                                                                     [MP ]
large share of the variance of `wj and swj is accounted for by those days for which awj is nonzero.

                                                               19
                                                                                                     [MP ]        [MP ]
0.76, p = 0.64). Imposing this hypothesis, the implied estimates of θ1                                       and θ2       from

                                    3
                                    X                     8
                                                          X              ³                              ´
                                                                 [MP ]        [MP ]          [MP ]
               ∆Rw = c +                  β 0j ∆Rw−j +          awj          θ1       `wj + θ2       swj + εw                   (11)
                                    j=1                   j=4


then have much more accuracy, and are extremely close to those obtained from the full

sample, as seen in row (17) of Table 2.

      I found similar results using only data from days on which other particular announcements
                                            [CU ]
are made. For example, let awj                      = 1 if a capacity utilization figure was released on day
                            [CU ]
j of week w, with awj               = 1 otherwise.9          Although these release dates do not allow one

to estimate each individual day eﬀect, one can calculate eﬀects cumulating over the week,
             [MP ]                          [CU ]
replacing awj        in (11) with awj . Note that such an estimate makes no use of changes

in fed funds futures on any day other than those on which capacity utilization data are

released, and one would expect that this particular news was a key factor accounting for the

variation in `wj and swj on these days. Yet we find in row 1 of Table 3 that the response of

mortgage rates to new information about near-term fed funds rates is virtually the same as

any of the estimates from Table 2, and again we formally accept the hypothesis that capacity
                                                                                                                 [q]      [q]
utilization announcement days are the same as any other; that is, the test of λ1 = λ2 = 0

for [q] = [CU ] in

                     3
                     X                          8
                                                X                                 8
                                                                                  X          ³             ´
                                                                                         [q]   [q]    [q]
       ∆Rw = c +            β 0j ∆Rw−j +              (θ1 `wj + θ2 swj ) +              awj λ1 `wj + λ2 swj + εw
                      j=1                       j=4                               j=4


is readily accepted (F (2, 906) = 0.01, p = 0.99). The same is true if we only use those days

on which unemployment or the consumer price index are released (see Table 3). Release of
  9
      These dates were taken from MMS data kindly provided me by Andra Ghent.


                                                              20
the consumer confidence numbers does not seem to have much eﬀect on fed funds futures,

so the standard errors if we were forced to rely on only these days are quite big (row 4),

though again the estimates using only these days are statistically consistent with those for

all other days.

   We are now in a position to draw the following conclusions.         Suppose we are given

information that the Federal Reserve is going to be setting a level for the fed funds rate over

the next several months that is 10 basis points higher than we had previously anticipated.

We would then expect to see an upward revision in the 30-year mortgage rate of 5 basis

points. Likewise, news that causes us to revise upward by 10 basis points per month the

rate at which the Fed is going to be raising the fed funds rate over the next several months

would lead us to expect a 13-basis-point increase in the mortgage rate. And we would not

particularly care whether the news that caused us to change our anticipations of the fed

funds rate was based on an announcement made by the Fed or release of new information

about output, employment, or inflation— if we change our expectation of what the Fed is

going to do for whatever reason, the data suggest a similar change in the mortgage rate.

The results further imply that any changes in Fed policy will show up in mortgage rates

the instant that they become anticipated by markets, and that the only way the Fed could

change mortgage rates is by doing something unanticipated by the market.

   Given these results, suppose that the Fed Chair were then to ask us, What do you expect

to happen to mortgage rates if I raise the level of the fed funds rate by 10 basis points? A

reasonable answer to give would be, we expect the mortgage rate to rise by 5 basis points.



                                              21
    In the following section, we extend these results to predicting the consequences for the

number of new homes sold.


4     New home sales.
4.1    Mortgage rates and new home sales.

The primary data on home sales used here are the seasonally unadjusted monthly values for

the number of new homes sold, as reported by the Census Bureau and obtained from the

Webstract database (series HZNS). Let hm denote 100 times the natural logarithm of this

series for month m, ym denote the rate of growth of real GDP for the most recently completed

quarter prior to month m, and ∆R̃mj the change in the weekly mortgage rate for the jth

most recent week counting backwards from the last week of month m. For example, for

m corresponding to June 2006, ∆R̃m1 is the diﬀerence between the mortgage rate reported

on Thursday, June 29, 2006 and that for June 22, while ∆R̃m6 is the change between May

18 and May 25. I explored a regression of hm (for m = February 1989 to June 2006) on

seasonal dummies for each of the 12 months, 5 of its own lags, a linear time trend, the prior

quarter’s GDP growth, and changes in the mortgage rate for the 30 most recent weeks,

                   12
                   X                  5
                                      X                                      30
                                                                             X
            hm =         γ 0j dmj +         γ 1j hm−j + γ 21 m + γ 22 ym +         γ 3j ∆R̃mj + εm   (12)
                   j=1                j=1                                    j=1


where dm1 = 1 if month m is January and zero otherwise. The estimated coeﬃcients on the

variables other than the lagged mortgage rates are reported in Table 4. For this estimation,

the sample size is 209 months and the R2 is 0.97.

    New home sales are highly seasonal, with most sales coming in the spring and summer.

                                                       22
Regression (12) models home sales as stationary around monthly dummies and time trend,

with the sum of lag coeﬃcients coming to 0.83.       Additional lags of home sales or GDP

growth, or measures of inflation based on the one-quarter or 12-month change in the personal

consumption expenditures deflator, do not enter statistically significantly.

   The coeﬃcients on weekly mortgage rates for this regression, along with 95% confidence

intervals, are plotted in the top panel of Figure 4. Recalling that these regressors ∆R̃mj are

essentially independent of each other, the large block of coeﬃcients with t-statistics around

-2 for lags 6 through 23 is extremely statistically significant.   Nor are these long lags an

artifact of using the lagged changes rather than levels of mortgage rates as explanatory

variables— if one adds the current level of the mortgage rate or the past log level of GDP

to the above regression, the new coeﬃcients on levels are statistically insignificant and the

long lags on ∆R̃mj remain. The regression indicates that, if your goal is to forecast home

sales, it pays to look not just at seasonals, GDP growth, trend, and lags of home sales, but

also what the mortgage rates have been every week for the last 6 months.

4.2    Interpreting the lags.

What could account for such long lags?       One’s first guess might be delays between the

signing of a contract and the completion of escrow, but that can not explain the findings

here, since the Census counts a home as being sold on the date the contract is signed rather

than the date of escrow.    A second, more promising hypothesis is that for many people,

there is a substantial lag between the time at which they decide to buy a home and the time

at which they find the particular home they want and are able to buy.


                                              23
       The National Association of Realtors conducts a survey of individuals who buy a home,

asking, “How long did you actively search before you located the home you eventually

purchased?” The top panel of Figure 5 plots the cross-section distribution of search times

from their 2005 Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers.10            There is clear measurement error in

these data, with respondents much more likely to report multiples of 4 weeks and considerable

clumping at 52-week and more-than-99-week searches.                Insofar as these simply represent

rounding of the original true values, ignoring this clumping is unlikely to matter for the

statistics reported below, which make no eﬀort to model these reporting regularities.

       A Weibull density is often used to describe a cross-section distribution of search times.

Let j denote the number of weeks a household says it spent searching, k the shape parameter,

and λ the scale parameter:
                                          µ ¶k−1
                                      k    j        ©       ª
                        f (j; k, λ) =            exp −(j/λ)k ;         k, λ, j > 0.                   (13)
                                      λ    λ

Maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters for the search distribution based on the

cross-section data11 are reported in the first panel of Table 5. These estimates imply that

households spent an average of 14.9 weeks searching before purchasing a home.

       Consider the implications for the time series regressions if there is a cross-sectional hetero-

geneity in search times represented by (13). Let S̃mj denote the total number of households

searching for a home as of the jth week counting backward from the end of month m and

H̃mj the actual number of houses sold that week. Suppose that the log of the number of
  10
       I am grateful to NAR for providing me with this data.
  11
     I associated a reported search time of j weeks with the midpoint between j and j + 1 in order to allow
evaluation of (13) for a search time of j = 0 weeks when k < 1.

                                                    24
people searching is a linear function of the interest rate,

                                        ∂ S̃mj
                                               = α∗ S̃mj ,
                                        ∂ R̃mj

in which α∗ gives the proportionate decrease in house-searchers resulting from a 1-basis-

point increase in the mortgage rate. If f (j; k, λ) of these searchers would have otherwise

succeeded in purchasing a house during the last week of month m, then

                                   ∂ H̃m1
                                          = α∗ S̃mj f(j; k, λ).                         (14)
                                   ∂ R̃mj

If month m consisted of exactly 4 weeks, then the change in Hm , the level of month m’s

home sales, would be
                                  ∂Hm
                                         = α∗ S̃mj gW (j; k, λ)
                                  ∂ R̃mj

where
                                                   j
                                                   X
                              gW (j; k, λ) =                  f(i; k, λ)
                                               i=max{1,j−4}

Let ς denote the average ratio of searchers to monthly sales and approximate S̃mj /Hm ' ς.

Then for hm = 100 log(Hm ),
                                      ∂hm
                                            ' αgW (j; k, λ)
                                     ∂ R̃mj

where α = 100α∗ ς, that is, α measures the decrease in home searchers as a percent of monthly

sales that results from a 1-basis-point increase in the mortgage rate.

   These considerations suggest an approach similar to that in Jung (2006), who related the

time-series delays in the impulse-response function between monthly fed funds rate innova-

tions and subsequent investment spending to the distribution across investment projects in


                                                 25
the time required for completion as estimated from cross-section surveys. Here, I propose

to replace (12) with

               12
               X                  5
                                  X                                        30
                                                                           X
        hm =         γ 0j dmj +         γ 1j hm−j + γ 21 m + γ 22 ym + α         gW (j; k, λ)∆R̃mj + εm .   (15)
               j=1                j=1                                      j=1


This also will be recognized as an alternative strategy to those proposed by Ghysels, Santa-

Clara, and Valkanov (2004) for selecting a parsimonious representation of the dynamics

implied by a regression such as (12).
                                                     0   0    0
       The parameter vector θ = (α, k, λ, γ 0 , γ 1 , γ 2 , σ)0 was then estimated by maximum likeli-

hood assuming εm ∼ N(0, σ 2 ), or equivalently by nonlinear least squares. Noting that (15)

is essentially a restricted version12 of (12), we can test the appropriateness of this specifica-

tion with a likelihood ratio test, whose χ2 (27) statistic has a p-value of 0.09. The resulting

estimates of α, k, and λ are reported in the second panel of Table 5. If for illustration 1/5

of the people searching succeed in buying a home each month (ς = 5), then the estimate

α̂ = −0.2 would imply that 100α∗ = −0.04, meaning that a 100-basis-point increase in the

mortgage rate leads to a 4% reduction in the number of people who are trying to purchase

a new home. The values of k and λ estimated from the time-series relation imply a mean

search time of 13.4 weeks, quite similar to the value of 14.9 weeks obtained from the cross-

section estimates in panel 1. Restricting the coeﬃcients in this way tremendously improves

the precision of the estimated eﬀect of mortgage rates on new home sales, whose coeﬃcient

α now has a t statistic of -5.5.

  12
     I am ignoring here the fact that (15) includes coeﬃcients on ∆R̃mj for j > 30 which are not in (12).
This is appropriate since these predicted values are less than 10−3 in absolute value.



                                                             26
   The restricted values for the coeﬃcients on lagged mortgage rates are plotted in the

second panel of Figure 4. The distribution implies that consumers are distributed across

a broad range of search times. Although one can say with a good deal of confidence that

mortgage rates have a big eﬀect on home sales and that this eﬀect is broadly spread out

over a 1- to 6-month interval, alternative specifications of the distribution would also fit

the data. For example, the third panel of Figure 4 reports the results of assuming simply

a uniform distribution between j = 6 and 23 weeks, numerically equivalent to replacing
                    n      o30
the thirty variables ∆R̃mj     with the single regressor R̃m6 − R̃m,24 , i.e., the cumulative
                              j=1

change in the mortgage rate between 24 and 6 weeks earlier. This specification uses 2 fewer

parameters (if one ignores the implicit parameter choice of having used 6 and 24 as endpoints

of the distribution) than (15), and achieves a value for the log likelihood that is only 0.4

below that of (15). I nonetheless find (15) a slightly more attractive formulation, since it

seems unlikely that the eﬀect would be literally zero for j < 6 or > 23, and since it oﬀers a

cleaner treatment of exactly what has been estimated from the data.

   Although the mean lag of the distributions implied by the estimates in panel 1 and panel

2 of Table 5 are similar, the shapes (compared in the second and third panels of Figure

5) are statistically significantly diﬀerent.   The time-series relations imply an increasing

hazard rate (k > 1) while the cross-section hazard rate is nearly constant. There are two

reasons why we might expect these distributions to be diﬀerent.      First, the cross-section

distribution includes a number of households with very long search times of 1 or 2 years,

for which it seems implausible that the mortgage rate prevailing 1 or 2 years previous is a



                                               27
key determinative factor.   If these long-time searchers do not play a material role in the

time-series lags, one would expect the mean delay as estimated by the time-series regression

to be shorter than that from the cross-sectional analysis.   Second, following Reis (2006),

it seems natural to posit that there is some heterogeneity across households in the time

required to receive and process information about changes in mortgage rates, introducing a

heterogeneous delay between the time at which the mortgage rate changes and the time at

which a household initiates or abandons a search for a new home. This factor would cause

the mean lag from the cross-section estimates to be greater than that from the time-series

analysis. The combined eﬀect of the two factors could account for why the two distributions

have the same mean, with the time-series distribution having less mass at very short or very

long delays.

4.3    Linking home sales to monetary policy.

We motivated equation (12) as simply a forecasting regression, though the negative coef-

ficients on lagged mortgage rates suggest it is primarily summarizing demand eﬀects, and

the specific restriction on those lags imposed in (15) was motivated by interpretation as a

demand curve. We now propose that the inference from this restricted forecasting equation

can be combined with the parameters from the preceding section to answer the question,

What should the Federal Reserve expect to happen to new home sales if it raises the fed

funds rate more than expected?

   As support for this interpretation, we might first seek to isolate the eﬀect on new home

sales of that component of mortgage rate changes that are associated statistically with


                                            28
innovations in the fed funds rate by estimating equation (12) by 2SLS, using as instruments

{`˜mk , s̃mk }30                    ˜
              k=1 , where as in (8) `mk is the cumulative innovations in the level in the kth week


counting backward from the last week of month m. The non-mortgage-rate regressors in (12)

were also used as instruments. The resulting 2SLS estimates of the coeﬃcients on lagged

mortgage rates are plotted in the last panel of Figure 4, along with 95% confidence intervals.

The 2SLS estimates are less precise than the OLS estimates in the top panel, though two of

the coeﬃcients (lags 8 and 16) individually are statistically significant, and the broad pattern

of negative coeﬃcients between lags 6 and 21 is reproduced by the 2SLS estimates. Since

there are two instruments (level and slope) for each mortgage rate, Hansen’s J statistic (e.g.,

Hamilton, 1994, p. 421) can be used to test for the validity of the instruments. Alternatively,

one can use the Durbin-Wu-Hausman test13 for whether the OLS and 2SLS estimates are the

same, or simply test whether {`˜mk , s̃mk }30
                                           k=1 should appear as additional OLS regressors in


(12). As reported in the first row of Table 6, our results pass all three of these specification

tests— one accepts the hypothesis that the predicted consequences for home sales of fed funds

innovations are exactly those anticipated on the basis of the eﬀect of those innovations on

mortgage rates, and that the fed funds rate has no eﬀect on new home sales other than that

operating through changes in the mortgage rate.

       One can obtain both more precise estimates and more powerful tests if we treat the

values of k = 3.24 and λ = 14.97 as known and then use this same set of 79 instruments

  13
     This is found by first regressing each ∆R̃mj on the full set of instruments, adding these 30 residuals
to (12), and then calculating the usual OLS F test for whether these 30 new coeﬃcients are all zero. See
equation (6) in Nakamura and Nakamura (1981).




                                                    29
to estimate the 20 parameters in (15) by 2SLS. The resulting estimate of α̂2SLS = −0.19

turns out to be virtually identical to the value α̂MLE = −0.20 reported in Table 5, and all 3

specification tests lead to acceptance of the null hypothesis that 30 weeks of lagged fed funds

innovations contribute nothing to predicting new home sales beyond that captured by the
                        P30
single variable Qm =     j=1   gW (j; k, λ)∆R̃mj , and that the predictive consequences for new

home sales of that portion of movements in Qm that could be explained statistically by fed

funds innovations are identical to those inferred from an OLS regression on the restricted

mortgage rate changes alone.

   It is also interesting to use as instruments only fed funds innovations on days of sig-

nificant monetary policy announcements, namely use as instruments for Qm the values

{`˜[MP ] [MP ] 30                   ˜[MP ] = P8 a[MP   ]
   mk , s̃mk }k=1 where for example `mk       j=4 w∗ (m)−k+1,.j `w∗ (m)−k+1,j . Row 3 of Table


6 shows that we accept the hypothesis that the eﬀects on new home sales of fed funds futures

changes on days of monetary policy announcements are the same as those we would infer

from the original forecasting equation (15).

   It is also possible to examine the relation between new home sales and daily changes

in fed funds futures.    Let `∗mj denote the change in the level of the fed funds futures on

the jth business day counting backwards from the last day of month m and let s∗mj denote

the change in the slope on that day.      Consider the consequences of replacing (15) with a

specification that depends on the change in level and slope over the most recent 125 business




                                               30
days.
                        12
                        X                  5
                                           X
              hm =            γ 0j dmj +         γ 1j hm−j + γ 21 m + γ 22 ym
                        j=1                j=1
                               125
                               X                                   125
                                                                   X
                        +α`          gD (j; kD , λD )`∗mj   + αs         gD (j; kD , λD )s∗mj + εm   (16)
                               j=1                                 j=1


where I assume 21 business days in the month:
                                                        j
                                                        X
                              gD (j; kD , λD ) =                    f (i; kD , λD ).
                                                    i=max{1,j−21}

   The earlier analysis allows us to predict what we should find from estimation of (16).

The average week between January 1989 and June 2006 contained 4.8 business days.                       If

the combined information-processing and search delays measured in weeks are distributed

across households with a W (kW , λW ) distribution, and if these delays are evenly distributed

across business days within a given week, then the delays measured in days should have

a W (kD , λD ) distribution with the same shape parameter (kD = kW ) and translated scale

(λD = 4.8λW ). From the estimates in Section 3, we would expect a 1-basis-point increase in

`∗mj to translate into 0.5-basis-point increase in the mortgage rate quoted that day, implying

α` = 0.5αW , while a 1-basis-point increase in s∗mj would raise the mortgage rate by 1.3

basis points (αs = 1.3αW ). This leads to predicted values for the coeﬃcients reported in

the third panel of Table 5, which are compared with those obtained by direct maximum

likelihood estimation of (16). The standard errors are fairly big, and the level coeﬃcient is

not statistically significant. However, given the estimation uncertainty, the parameters are

in the range of what we had expected, and a likelihood ratio test of the null hypothesis that

the restrictions on kD , λD , αL , and αS are all correct yields a χ2 (4) statistic of 8.31 (p-value

                                                       31
= 0.08), leading to acceptance of the null hypothesis.           The search- and processing-time

distribution implied by the daily time-series regression is converted back into units of weeks

and plotted for comparison with those obtained by the other methods in the bottom panel

of Figure 5.

4.4     Summarizing the dynamic consequences of monetary policy.

We are now in a position to answer the main question posed by this paper: If the Fed were to

change its target for the fed funds rate, what would we expect to happen to new home sales?

If the change were anticipated, the framework above implies there would be no eﬀect. If the

change is unanticipated, the dynamic consequences for new home sales would be identical

regardless of the nature and timing of the change— as soon as any change is anticipated, that

will translate into an immediate one-time shift in the mortgage rate, and this change will

then feed into future home sales through the dynamics governed by the search parameters

k and λ.

   We can calculate the analog of a traditional impulse-response function as follows. I illus-

trate the implications for a change in R̃m2 , the next-to-last week of month m. The framework

above implies ∂ H̃m2 /∂ R̃m2 = α∗ S̃m2 f (1; kW , λW ) and ∂ H̃m1 /∂ R̃m2 = α∗ S̃m2 f(2; kW , λW ). If,

for illustration, the following month m + 1 has 4 weeks, then for home sales in each of that

month’s 4 weeks (H̃m+1,j for j = 4, 3, 2, 1) there is both the direct eﬀect α∗ S̃m2 f(7−j; kW , λW )

and the indirect eﬀect, the latter arising through the coeﬃcient γ 11 in (15) and resulting




                                                  32
from the fact that the preceding month m has now seen a rise in sales:

                      ∂ H̃m+1,j                                ∂ H̃m+1,j ∂Hm
                                = α∗ S̃m2 f(7 − j; kW , λW ) +               .                        (17)
                        ∂ R̃m2                                   ∂Hm ∂ R̃m2

Here
             ∂Hm      ∂(H̃m1 + H̃m2 )
                    =                 = α∗ S̃m2 f (1; kW , λW ) + α∗ S̃m2 f(2; kW , λW )
             ∂ R̃m2       ∂ R̃m2

and evaluating the derivative ∂ log Hm+1 / log Hm = γ 11 at Hm+1 = Hm ,

                         ∂(H̃m+1,4 + H̃m+1,3 + H̃m+1,2 + H̃m+1,1 )
                                                                   = γ 11 .                           (18)
                                          ∂Hm

Imputing this monthly total equally to each week of the month and substituting into (17),

  ∂ H̃m+1,j
            = α∗ S̃m2 f (7 − j; kW , λW ) + (γ 11 /4)[α∗ S̃m2 f (1; kW , λW ) + α∗ S̃m2 f (2; kW , λW )]
    ∂ R̃m2

for j = 1, 2, 3, 4. One can iterate into future weeks in this fashion, analogous to calculating

a standard impulse-response function, except that the calculations depend on the number of

weeks comprising each month during the process. To summarize the typical response lag, I

performed the above calculations starting for every week from October 7, 1988 to May 20,

2004. The average of these functions across all weeks is plotted in Figure 6, standardized

for a change in mortgage rates of 10 basis points. This calculation implies that the maximal

consequences of an increase in mortgage rates is not observed until 15 weeks later, at which

time we would predict new home sales to be 1.04 basis points lower if there is a 10-basis-point

increase in mortgage rates today.

   As a result of the way the mortgage rate has been observed to respond to news, the

dynamic consequences of any unanticipated change in Fed policy have exactly the same

                                                   33
shape as the curve in Figure 6. For example, Figure 6 could equally well be described as

the dynamic response of new home sales to a 20-basis-point increase in the level of the fed

funds term structure, or also as the response to a 10/1.3 = 7.7-basis-point increase in its

slope.

   Given the long lags between a change in policy and the eﬀects on the economy, we

are often in a situation where some monetary easing has followed a period of tightness,

and policy makers would like to know, When will the recent easing start to counteract the

previous tightening? The framework here provides us with a concrete basis for answering

such questions. Let H(d) denote the number of homes sold and S(d) the number of people

searching on day d. As in (14) we expect that

                       ∂ log H(d)                S(d − j)
                 100              = (100)(0.5)α∗          f (j + 1; kD , λD )
                       ∂`(d − j)                   H(d)
                                    Hm∗ (d) 100α∗ S(d − j)
                                  =                        f(j + 1; kD , λD )
                                     H(d)      Hm∗ (d)
                                     ' 20.9(0.5)αW f(j + 1; kW , λW )


with 20.9 business days in a month.         This gives us a way to summarize on a daily basis

the implications for today’s home sales of previous unanticipated monetary policy moves

through calculation of
                "                                                                                            #
                       125
                       X                                               125
                                                                       X
ξ(d) = (20.9)αW 0.5          f (j − 0.5; kD , λD )`(d − j + 1) + 1.3         f (j − 0.5; kD , λD )s(d − j + 1) .
                       j=1                                             j=1
                                                                                                     (19)

I calculated the value of this number for every day d in the sample using αW = −0.20,

kD = 3.24, and λD = 71.85. This index is characterized by an average value of zero by


                                                  34
construction, given that the surprises `(d) and s(d) have mean zero.                A negative value

means that, on balance over the last half year, the Fed has surprised the market by being

more contractionary at the 1-3 month horizon than markets had anticipated.                  The units

of this index are in terms of the consequences that historical fed funds rate surprises are

imputed to be having (in percentage terms) for current home sales. For example, a value of

ξ(d) = −5 means that the home sales on day d are expected to be 5% lower than one would

have predicted had the Fed behaved exactly as markets had been anticipating over the prior

6 months.

       The value of this index is plotted in Figure 7.         It is rarely observed to exceed 5%

in absolute value, with the most significant historical contractions appearing prior to the

recession of 1990, the economic slowdown of 1994, and the recession of 2001. The most recent

episode of Fed tightening in fact did not surprise the markets very much, and accordingly

is not regarded as that unusual by this metric. Instead, the dominant feature of Fed policy

during the last decade is judged to be the aggressively expansionary policy in 2001-2002.

4.5       Application: monetary policy and the summer of 2006.

Figure 8 displays post-sample data14 on the changing predictions for the August, September,

and October fed funds futures contracts during the summer of 2006.                 In early summer,

traders were anticipating a hike from the then-prevailing 5.25% up to 5.5% by the fall.

During July, the market changed this assessment, becoming persuaded (correctly, as it turned
  14
     Fed funds futures data subsequent to June 30, 2006 were downloaded from the now-defunct website
http://www.spotmarketplace.com/futures/prices/ and represent closing rather than settlement prices. Note
that these post-June data were not used in any of the preceding statistical analysis.



                                                  35
out) by the end of August that no rate changes would be forthcoming.

   These changing expectations produced changes in both the level and the slope of near-

term fed funds futures. According to the framework presented in Section 3, the fact that

the Fed ended up choosing a lower target and slower rate of increase for August through

October than the market had been anticipating as of the start of July would be expected to

bring a reduction in the 30-year mortgage rate. The upper solid line in Figure 9 summarizes

this prediction, by taking (1/2) of the cumulative change from July 3 through the indicated

date in the 1-month-ahead fed funds rate, and adding it to 1.3 times the cumulative change

in the 2-month-ahead minus the 1-month-ahead rate. The lower dashed line indicates the

actual cumulative change in the mortgage rate. About a third of the 32-basis-point decline

in the mortgage rate during July and August could be attributed to the fact that lenders

became persuaded that the Fed was going to be less restrictive in August through October

than the market had previously been anticipating.

   One important practical challenge for the Fed is making decisions given the long delays

between changes in policy and the eﬀects on variables such as home sales.     An unantici-

pated monetary policy stimulus, as measured by a sequence of negative values for `(d) and

s(d), began July 13 .   However, according to the estimates presented here, the maximal

eﬀects of this stimulus would not be expected until October, and what happened during

the summer and fall of 2006 would be determined in part by the stance of the Fed prior to

June. The index proposed in (19) oﬀers one convenient tool for summarizing the combined

consequences of current easing with previous tightening.   The subsequent values for this



                                            36
index, plotted in the left half of Figure 10, show that, even though the Fed surprised the

market with a more expansionary stance beginning July 13, the cumulative implications of

that posture combined with previous tightening in fact became increasingly contractionary

through August 23, reflecting the delayed eﬀect of the unanticipated contraction prior to

June 30. The cumulative consequences started to become slightly less contractionary sub-

sequent to August 23, with the turning point reached on October 12, 2006, after which the

net Fed contribution was one of stimulus rather than contraction.

    A calculation that is easy to perform is to project the index (19) forward under the

assumption that there are no subsequent surprises in monetary policy, i.e., by setting future

values of `(d) and s(d) to zero. The resulting series is displayed in the right half of Figure

10. This reveals that the eﬀects of previous monetary policy would have been expected to

grow increasingly expansionary through the end of November.


5     Conclusions.

The current mortgage rate reflects a rational anticipation of all future Fed policy actions. In

order to change the mortgage rate, the Fed must do something other than what the market

anticipated, and any change in Fed policy seems to show up in mortgage rates as soon as

the market anticipates it. An unanticipated 10-basis-point increase in the level of the term

structure of near-term expected fed funds rates raises the mortgage rate by 5 basis points.

An unanticipated 10-basis-point increase in the slope raises the mortgage rate by 13 basis

points.



                                              37
   The consequences of such changes do not have their peak eﬀect on new home sales until

15 weeks after mortgage rates go up.      This delay might be attributed to heterogeneity

across households in the time required to learn about changes in mortgage rates and to buy

a new home. These dynamic relations, which have been directly estimated in detail here

using daily and weekly time-series data, are claimed to account for some of the long lags

found in more traditional analysis using time-aggregated monthly data.     The framework

also enables us to summarize on a daily or even minute-by-minute basis, if desired, the

cumulative consequences of recent innovations in Fed policy or hypothetical future scenario

as of any particular historical moment.




                                            38
                                               Appendix

       This appendix derives the approximate martingale property for a long-term bond sampled

at high frequencies.

       Consider a mortgage that is acquired on day d and requires the household to make a

fixed nominal payment A(d) on the first day of each month for the next 30 years (or for

M ∗ = 360 months).        If V (d) denotes the total amount borrowed on day d, then for the

pricing kernel λs (d) relating a payment made on the first day of the sth following month to

the present day d,
                                                   ∗
                                                M
                                                X
                                     V (d) =           Ed [λs (d)]A(d).                             (20)
                                                 s=1

The terms of such a loan are often quoted in terms of the fixed mortgage interest rate R(d)

that satisfies

                                         V (d) = vd [R(d)]A(d)                                      (21)

for vd (R) a known function.15       Equating (20) with (21) gives
                                                            ∗
                                                       M
                                                       X
                                       vd [R(d)] =              Ed λs (d).                          (22)
                                                        s=1


If the previous day falls within the same month (m∗ (d) = m∗ (d − 1)), then
                                          ∗                                  ∗
                                         M
                                         X                              M
                                                                        X
                     vd−1 [R(d − 1)] =         Ed−1 λs (d − 1) =                 Ed−1 q(d)λs (d)    (23)
                                         s=1                            s=1

  15
    Specifically, if R(d) is quoted at an annual rate (as a fraction of unity) and the loan is compounded
monthly,
                              ·    µ † ∗               ¶      ¸−1 X
                                                                  M∗
                                     d [m (d)] − d + 1                         1
                   vd [R(d)] = 1 +                       R(d)                            .
                                            365                   s=1
                                                                      {1 + [R(d)/12]}s−1




                                                       39
where q(d) denotes the one-day discount factor, e.g.,

                                            βU 0 (c(d))/P (d)
                              q(d) =                            ' 1.
                                       U 0 (c(d − 1))/P (d − 1)

If uncertainty about the one-day discount factor relating today with tomorrow is negligible

as of day d − 1, then (23) implies
                                                                 ∗
                                                                M
                                                                X
                         vd−1 [R(d − 1)] ' [Ed−1 q(d)]                Ed−1 λs (d).        (24)
                                                                s=1


Furthermore, the function vd−1 (R) diﬀers from vd (R) by one-day’s discounting, so approxi-

mately

                                 vd−1 (R) ' [Ed−1 q(d)]vd (R).                            (25)

Equations (24) and (25) imply
                                                      ∗
                                                  M
                                                  X
                                vd [R(d − 1)] '            Ed−1 λs (d).                   (26)
                                                     s=1


Subtracting (26) from (22),
                                                            ∗
                                                 M
                                                 X
                     vd (R(d)) − vd (R(d − 1)) '   (Ed − Ed−1 )λs (d).                    (27)
                                                       s=1


   If we approximated vd (R) with a linear function (vd (R) ' v0 +v1 R), then (27) implies that

daily changes in the quoted mortgage rate R(d) should be very diﬃcult to forecast, reflecting

primarily new information about the discount factor relevant for the next 30 years:
                                                       ∗
                                                     M
                                                     X
                       R(d) − R(d − 1) '      v1−1     (Ed − Ed−1 )λs (d).
                                                     s=1


   The above argument exploited the fact that, as one moves from day d − 1 to day d, the

days on which payment is made (the first day of each of the following months) remain fixed.

                                                40
If one evaluates the expression on the last day of a month, there is an added diﬀerence in

that one drops the near-term payment and adds another at the very end. Again if the term

of the mortgage is very long and discount rates are stationary, this adjustment should make

only a modest diﬀerence in the calculation.




                                              41
                                     References

   Andersson, Malin, Dillén, Hans, and Sellin, Peter.   “Monetary Policy Signaling and

Movements in the Term Structure of Interest Rates.” Journal of Monetary Economics,

2006, 53(8), pp. 1815-1855.

   Brissimis, Sophocles N., and Magginas, Nicholas S. “Forward-looking Information in VAR

Models and the Price Puzzle.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53(6), pp. 1225-1234.

   Christiano, Lawrence J., Eichenbaum, Martin S, and Evans, Charles L. “Monetary Policy

Shocks: What Have We Learned and to What End?” in John B. Taylor and Michael Wood-

ford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland,

1999.

   Cochrane, John H., and Piazzesi, Monika. “The Fed and Interest Rates: A High-

Frequency Identification.” American Economic Review, 2002, 92(2), pp. 90-95.

   Faust, Jon, Eric Swanson, and Jonathan Wright. “Identifying VARs Based on High-

Frequency Futures Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics 2004, 51(6), pp. 1107-31

   Ghysels, Eric, Santa-Clara, Pedro, and Valkanov, Rossen. “The MIDAS Touch: Mixed

Data Sampling Regression Models.” Working paper, UCSD, 2004.

   Gürkaynak, Refet S. (2005) “Using Federal Funds Futures Contracts for Monetary Policy

Analysis.” Working paper, Federal Reserve Board.

   Gürkaynak, Refet S., Sack, Brian, and Swanson, Eric. “The Sensitivity of Long-Term

Interest Rates to Economic News: Evidence and Implications for Macroeconomic Models.”

American Economic Review 2005(a), 95(1), pp. 425-36.

                                           42
   Gürkaynak, Refet S., Sack, Brian, and Swanson, Eric. “Do Actions Speak Louder Than

Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements.” Inter-

national Journal of Central Banking, 2005(b), 1(1), pp. 55-93.

   Gürkaynak, Refet S., Sack, Brian, and Swanson, Eric. “Market-Based Measures of Mon-

etary Policy Expectations.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 2007, 25(2), pp.

201-12.

   Hamilton, James D. Time Series Analysis. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994.

   Hamilton, James D. “Daily Changes in Fed Funds Futures Prices.” Journal of Money,

Credit, and Banking, forthcoming.

   Jung, Yong-Gook. “Investment Lags and Macroeconomic Dynamics.” Working paper,

UCSD, October 2006.

   Kuttner, Kenneth N. “Monetary Policy Surprises and Interest Rates: Evidence from the

Fed Funds Futures Market.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2001, 47(3), pp. 523-544.

   Nakamura, Alice, and Masao Nakamura. “On the Relationships among Several Specifi-

cation Error Tests Presented by Durbin, Wu, and Hausman.” Econometrica, 1981, 49(6),

pp. 1583-1588.

   Piazzesi, Monika, and Swanson, Eric. “Futures Prices as Risk-Adjusted Forecasts of

Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics (forthcoming).

   Poole, William, and Robert H. Rasche (2000). “Perfecting the Market’s Knowledge of

Monetary Policy,” Journal of Financial Services Research, 18, 255-298.

   Reis, Ricardo. “Inattentive Consumers.” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2006, 53(8),



                                            43
pp. 1761-1800.

   Rudebusch, Glenn D. “Do Measures of Monetary Policy in a VAR Make Sense?” Inter-

national Economic Review, 1998, 39(4), pp. 907-931.

   Sack, Brian. “Extracting the Expected Path of Monetary Policy from Futures Rates.”

Journal of Futures Markets, 2004, 24(8), pp. 733-754.

   Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. “Implications of Dynamic Factor Models for

VAR Analysis,” NBER Working Paper, June 2005.




                                           44
                                                        Table 1

Tests of null hypothesis that indicated variables are of no use in predicting weekly
changes in mortgage rate
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

         F tests

                   Variables                            F statistic         p value

More weekly lags {∆Rw− j }6j =4                    F(3,915) = 0.02           0.997
                    ~           ~
Monthly lags {Rm* ( w ) − j − Rm* ( w )− j −1}6j =1 F(6,912) = 0.48          0.82

         t tests

                   Variable                                coefficient   (standard error)   p value

10-year minus 5-year Treasury yield                            0.005          (0.009)        0.60

5-year minus 2-year Treasury yield                             -0.004         (0.006)        0.51

2-year minus 1-year Treasury yield                             -0.016         (0.012)        0.18

1-year minus 6-month Treasury yield                            -0.018          (0.019)       0.36

Baa minus 10-year Treasury yield                               0.001           (0.006)       0.85

12-month job growth as currently reported                      0.26            (0.25)        0.29
  for period ending previous month

12-month job growth as reported at the time                     0.21           (0.27)        0.44
  for most recent period

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes. All entries refer to t or F test of the null hypothesis that the coefficient vector γ is
zero in the regression
                        3
         ∆ R w = c + ∑ β 0 j ∆R w − j + γ ' x w + ε w
                        j =1

for x w the indicated variable or variables. In row 2, m* ( w) refers to the month in which
                     ~
week w occurs and Rm * ( w ) to the average value for Rw across all the weeks of the month in
                                             ~
which week w occurs. Note that Rm is identical to the monthly mortgage series reported
by the FRED database of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.




                                                          44
                                                 Table 2

Coefficients relating change in mortgage rate to innovation in level or slope
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Regression                     Explanatory ----Effects of level----             ----Effects of slope----
description                    variable    Symbol Coefficient                   Symbol Coefficient
                                                      (std error)                         (std error)

weekly change ∆Rw on each day’s innovation

(1)                            1st day of week       Aw8           0.43                s w8        1.16
                                                                  (0.12)                         (0.22)
(2)                            2nd day of week Aw7                 0.59                s w7        1.06
                                                                  (0.13)                         (0.23)
(3)                            3rd day of week        Aw6           0.65              s w6        1.37
                                                                  (0.08)                         (0.18)
(4)                            4th day of week        Aw5          0.70               s w5        1.56
                                                                  (0.11)                         (0.20)
(5)                            5th day of week        Aw4          0.21               s w4        1.14
                                                                  (0.10)                         (0.20)

weekly change ∆Rw on sum of innovations for all 5 days of week

(6)                                            Aw4 + … + Aw8 0.53              s w4 + … + s w8 1.33
                                                            (0.04)                            (0.10)
                                          ~     ~
change in last 4 weeks of month ( Rm1 − Rm 5 ) on each week’s cumulative innovations

                                                           ~                        ~
(7)                           last week of month           Am1     0.14             s m1       1.07
                                                                  (0.22)                      (0.44)
                                                           ~                         ~
(8)                           week before that             Am 2    0.64              sm 2      1.35
                                                                  (0.18)                      (0.43)
                                                           ~                         ~
(9)                           week before that             Am 3    0.30              sm 3      1.96
                                                                  (0.16)                      (0.42)
                                                           ~                         ~
(10)                          week before that             Am 4    0.40              sm 4      1.64
                                                                  (0.20)                      (0.39)




                                                    45
                                     ~     ~
change in last 4 weeks of month ( Rm1 − Rm 5 ) on sum of 4 weeks’ cumulative innovations

                                         ~           ~                ~
(11)                                     Am1 + ... + Am 4     0.41    sm1 + ... + ~
                                                                                  sm 4     1.53
                                                             (0.09)                       (0.18)

weekly change ∆Rw on innovations for only monetary policy announcement days

(12)                         1st day of week       a w[ MP ]
                                                        8 A w8 0.19                  a w[ MP ]
                                                                                          8 s w8     1.31
                                                       (0.28)                                      (0.54)
(13)                         2nd day of week       a w[ MP ]
                                                        1.59
                                                        7 A w7                     a w[ MP ]
                                                                                        7 s w7     1.93
                                                       (0.86)                                      (8.11)
                                                [ MP ]
(14)                         3rd day of week a w 6 A w6 0.76                        a w[ MP ]
                                                                                         6 s w6     0.79
                                                       (0.23)                                       (1.30)
                                              [ MP ]
(15)                        4th day of week a w5 A w5 0.36                          a w[ MP ]
                                                                                         5 s w5      3.53
                                                       (0.26)                                       (2.45)
                                              [ MP ]
(16)                        5th day of week a w 4 A w 4 0.47                        a w[ MP ]
                                                                                         4 s w4      1.05
                                                       (0.21)                                       (0.93)

weekly change ∆Rw on sum of innovations for only monetary policy announcement days
(17)                         a w[ MP ]            [ MP ]          [ MP ]            [ MP ]
                                  4 A w 4 + " + a w8 A w 8 0.53 a w 4 s w 4 + " + a w8 s w8 1.49
                                                          (0.11)                           (0.39)




                                                46
                                                         Table 3

Coefficients relating weekly change in mortgage rates to change in level and slope on the
day that news of the indicated type is released, along with F tests of the null hypothesis
that these coefficients are the same as those for all other days
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                        level            slope
News release (q)                          θˆ1[ q ]         θˆ2[ q ]          F test       p value
--------------------                     ------          -------             ------      ---------

(1) Capacity utilization                 0.46             1.54               0.01         0.99
                                        (0.25)           (0.59)

(2) Unemployment                         0.84            1.54                1.80         0.17
                                        (0.12)           (0.31)

(3) Consumer price index                 0.83             1.59               1.61         0.20
                                        (0.27)           (0.54)

(4) Consumer confidence                  0.14             0.29               0.94         0.39
                                        (0.39)           (0.57)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes. Coefficients θˆ1[ q ] and θˆ2[ q ] (with OLS standard errors in parentheses) are based on
the regression
                       3                           8                   8
         ∆Rw = c + ∑ β 0 j ∆Rw − j + θ1[ q ] ∑ a wj
                                                 [ q]
                                                      A wj + θ 2[ q ] ∑ awj
                                                                         [q]
                                                                             swj + ε w
                       j =1                       j =4                j =4
         [q]
where   awj    = 1 if news of type q is released on day j of week w and is zero otherwise. F
test is the F(2,906) statistic for testing the null hypothesis that λ1[ q ] = λ[2q ] = 0 in the
regression
                       3                      8             8                 8               8
         ∆Rw = c + ∑ β 0 j ∆Rw − j + θ1 ∑ A wj +θ 2 ∑ swj +λ1[ q ] ∑ awj
                                                                      [q]
                                                                          A wj + λ[2q ] ∑ a wj
                                                                                            [q]
                                                                                                swj + ε w .
                       j =1                  j =4          j =4              j =4            j =4




                                                             47
                                                 Table 4

Coefficients from regression of 100 times the log of seasonally unadjusted new home
sales on 30 weekly lags of mortgage rate changes and other explanatory variables;
(standard errors in parentheses).
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

dm1 January                   46.0                    hm-1 1st lag home sales           0.48
                             (14.9)                                                    (0.08)

dm2 February                  60.5                    hm-2 2nd lag home sales           0.15
                             (14.9)                                                    (0.08)

dm3 March                     65.9                    hm-3 3rd lag home sales           0.14
                             (15.2)                                                    (0.08)

dm4 April                     52.7                    hm-4 4th lag home sales          -0.10
                             (15.5)                                                    (0.08)

dm5 May                       53.2                    hm-5 5th lag home sales           0.17
                             (15.7)                                                    (0.07)

dm6 June                      49.7                    m     time trend                  0.073
                             (15.9)                                                    (0.023)

dm7 July                      46.2                    ym    previous GDP growth 2.63
                             (16.0)                                             (1.02)

dm8 August                    46.4
                             (15.9)

dm9 September                 34.2
                             (15.8)

dm,10 October                 39.9
                             (15.6)

dm,11 November                32.4
                             (15.5)

dm,12 December                34.7
                             (15.2)




                                                    48
                                                 Table 5

Estimates of search distribution parameters from alternative sources.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(1) Maximum likelihood estimation of cross-section distribution of reported time to
search before buying new home.

                                  coefficient  standard error
         kW shape                    0.972        (0.014)
         λW scale                   14.70         (0.276)
         mean lag                   14.9 weeks

(2) Maximum likelihood estimation of relation between new home sales and 30 most
recent weekly changes in mortgage rates.

                            coefficient  standard error
         kW shape              3.24         (0.63)
         λW scale             14.97         (1.01)
         αW mortgage effect    -0.20         (0.036)
         mean lag             13.4 weeks


(3) Maximum likelihood estimation of relation between new home sales and 125 most
recent daily changes in level and slope of fed funds futures.

                                  predicted value         MLE       standard error
         k D shape                   3.24                   2.74       (1.02)
         λ D scale                  71.85                 47.94         (8.39)
         α L level effect            -0.10                 -0.01       (0.06)
         α S slope effect            -0.26                 -0.39       (0.14)
         mean lag                    64.4 days            42.6 days




                                                    49
                                                    Table 6

2SLS estimation of effects of mortgage rate on new home sales using fed-funds-based
measures as instruments
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

mortgage                               α̂ 2 SLS       J stat        DWH             OLS F
measure              instruments       (std err)      (p value)     (p value)       (p value)
-----------          --------------    ----------      ---------     ---------        ---------

                                                      χ 2 (30)     F(30,130)        F(60,100)
(1) unrestricted      all weekly -----                28.86          1.07             1.39
                      innovations                     (0.53)         (0.38)           (0.07)

                                                      χ 2 (59)     F(1,188)       F(60,129)
(2) restricted        all weekly         -0.19        74.14           0.19            1.40
                      innovations        (0.05)        (0.09)         (0.66)         (0.06)

                                                       χ 2 (59)    F(1,188)        F(60,129)
(3) restricted        policy days        -0.27         65.89          1.37             1.22
                      only               (0.07)         (0.25)       (0.24)           (0.17)




                                                      50
Figure 1. Response of industrial production (in percentage annual growth rate) to 25-
basis-point increase in fed funds rate for different Cholesky orderings.
                                       Fed funds first
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
          0       5      10      15      20        25    30    35      40     45

                                      Fed funds second
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
          0       5      10      15      20        25    30    35      40     45

                                       Fed funds third
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
          0       5      10      15      20        25    30    35      40     45

                                      Fed funds fourth
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
          0       5      10      15      20        25    30    35      40     45

                                       Fed funds fifth
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
          0       5      10      15      20        25    30    35      40     45




                                              51
Figure 2. Forecast errors for predicting (1) fed funds using lagged variables and all other
current variables in the VAR, (2) fed funds using the previous months’ 1-month futures
contract, and (3) the 2-month-ahead futures rate using the previous months’ 3-month-
ahead futures rate.
                                       VAR residuals
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
  -0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
  -0.4
                    2003                 2004                    2005               2006


                                  Spot-month contract error
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
  -0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
  -0.4
                    2003                 2004                    2005               2006


                              Change in 2-month-ahead contract
   0.4
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
  -0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
  -0.4
                    2003                 2004                    2005               2006




                                                52
Figure 3. OLS coefficients and 95% confidence intervals for each day’s level, slope and
curvature from regressions of ∆Rw on a constant, three of its own lagged values, and
level, slope and curvature for preceding 13 days.
                                   Coefficients on level
  2.0

  1.5

  1.0

  0.5

  0.0

  -0.5

  -1.0
             1    2     3    4     5     6        7   8      9   10   11   12   13


                                   Coefficients on slope
  2.0

  1.5

  1.0

  0.5

  0.0

  -0.5

  -1.0
             1    2     3    4     5     6        7   8      9   10   11   12   13


                                 Coefficients on curvature
  2.0

  1.5

  1.0

  0.5

  0.0

  -0.5

  -1.0
             1    2     3    4     5     6        7   8      9   10   11   12   13




                                             53
Figure 4. Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals relating monthly home sales to
mortgage changes at indicated lags.
                   Unrestricted coefficients on lagged weekly mortgage changes
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
                    5             10             15             20          25   30

                          Coefficients predicted by Weibull distribution
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
                    5             10             15             20          25   30

                          Coefficients predicted by uniform distribution
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
                    5             10             15             20          25   30

                               Unrestricted coefficients from 2SLS
   0.3
   0.2
   0.1
   0.0
  -0.1
  -0.2
  -0.3
                    5             10             15             20          25   30




                                               54
Figure 5. Top panel: sample histogram and MLE density-estimate based on cross-section
distribution of time required (in weeks) to purchase a home based on National
Association of Realtors’ 2005 Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers. Second panel: density
from top panel alone. Third panel: density implied by Weibull parameters fit to time-
series relation between new home sales and lagged weekly changes in mortgage rates.
Fourth panel: density implied by Weibull parameters fit to time-series relation between
new home sales and lagged daily changes in fed funds level and slope.
                                       Distribution of search times
  12.5
  10.0
   7.5
   5.0
   2.5
   0.0
             0                    25                     50                 75              100

                       Density based on National Association of Realtors search time
  12.5
  10.0
   7.5
   5.0
   2.5
   0.0
         0              10             20                30           40               50         60

                  Density based on new home sales response to lagged mortgage changes
  12.5
  10.0
   7.5
   5.0
   2.5
   0.0
         0              10             20                30           40               50         60

                 Density based on new home sales response to lagged fed funds innovations
  12.5
  10.0
   7.5
   5.0
   2.5
   0.0
         0              10             20                30           40               50         60




                                                    55
Figure 6. Average impulse-response function relating 10-basis-point increase in mortgage
rate to 100 times the natural log of new home sales.

 % response of new home sales to 10 bp increase in mortgage rate
  0.0000000



  -0.1600000



  -0.3200000



  -0.4800000



  -0.6400000



  -0.8000000



  -0.9600000



  -1.1200000
                 0     10    20     30    40     50    60     70    80    90
                                    lag (in weeks)




                                          56
Figure 7. Index summarizing the consequences for new home sales on day d (the variable
on the horizontal axis) of the history of monetary policy innovations prior to and
including day d as calculated from equation (14).

   8
   6
   4
   2
   0
  -2
  -4
  -6
   1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006




                                          57
Figure 8. Values for the fed funds rate for October (solid line), September (short-dashed
line), and August (long-dashed line) 2006 as implied by fed funds futures contracts traded
July to October.

   5.55


     5.5


   5.45


     5.4


   5.35


     5.3


   5.25


     5.2
        Jul 3    Jul 17    Jul 31 Aug 14 Aug 28 Sep 11 Sep 25 Oct 9




                                           58
Figure 9. Cumulative change (in basis points) in weekly mortgage rate between July 3,
2006 and indicated date (dashed line) and cumulative change as predicted (solid line) by
changes in level and slope of near-term fed funds futures.

    10

     5

     0

     -5

   -10

   -15

   -20

   -25

   -30

   -35

   -40
      Jul 3           Jul 17           Jul 31          Aug 14           Aug 28




                                           59
Figure 10. Solid line: index summarizing cumulative consequences of monetary policy
through day d on new home sales for day d; dashed line: index summarizing cumulative
consequences of monetary policy through October 16 on new home sales for day d.

     1

   0.5

     0

  -0.5

    -1

  -1.5

    -2
     Jul 3   Aug 7   Sep 11 Oct 16 Nov 20 Dec 25 Jan 29




                                         60
