                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      WHY THE DEA STRIDE DATA ARE STILL USEFUL FOR UNDERSTANDING
                            DRUG MARKETS

                                           Jeremy Arkes
                                       Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
                                         Susan M. Paddock
                                        Jonathan P. Caulkins
                                            Peter Reuter

                                        Working Paper 14224
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14224


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




¸˛This research was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (1R01 DA019993).
   The authors thank Martin Iguchi, Don Kenkel, Beau Kilmer, Jeanne Ringel and members of the National
  Academy of Sciences and Engineering, Committee on Law and Justice for their insightful comments.
   They also thank Terry Zoebeck, Mike Cala, Richard Meyers, and Jeffry Comparin for their assistance
  understanding the STRIDE data, its fields, and the data entry process. The views expressed herein
  are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Jeremy Arkes, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Susan M. Paddock, Jonathan P. Caulkins, and
Peter Reuter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why the DEA STRIDE Data are Still Useful for Understanding Drug Markets
Jeremy Arkes, Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Susan M. Paddock, Jonathan P. Caulkins, and Peter
Reuter
NBER Working Paper No. 14224
August 2008
JEL No. H3,I18,K42

                                              ABSTRACT

In 2001, use of the STRIDE data base for the purposes of analyzing drug prices and the impact of
public policies on drug markets came under serious attack by the National Research Council (Manski
et al., 2001; Horowitz, 2001). While some of the criticisms raised by the committee were valid, many
of the concerns can be easily addressed through more careful use of the data. In this paper, we first
disprove Horowitz's main argument that prices are different for observations collected by different
agencies within a city. We then revisit other issues raised by the NRC and discuss how certain limitations
can be easily overcome through the adoption of random coefficient models of drug prices and by paying
serious attention to drug form and distribution levels. Although the sample remains a convenience
sample, we demonstrate how construction of city-specific price and purity series that pay careful attention
to the data and incorporate existing knowledge of drug markets (e.g. the expected purity hypothesis)
are internally consistent and can be externally validated. The findings from this study have important
implications regarding the utility of these data and the appropriateness of using them in economic
analyses of supply, demand and harms.


Jeremy Arkes                                         Jonathan P. Caulkins
Naval Postgraduate School                            Carnegie Mellon University
555 Dyer St                                          5000 Forbes Avenue
Monterey, CA 93943                                   Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
jaarkes@nps.edu                                      caulkins@cmu.edu

Rosalie Liccardo Pacula                              Peter Reuter
RAND Corporation                                     University of Maryland
1776 Main Street                                     preuter@umd.edu
P.O. Box 2138
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
and NBER
pacula@rand.org

Susan M. Paddock
RAND Corporation
1776 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138
paddock@rand.org
                                       1. INTRODUCTION

         During this period of rising government debt, significant attention is again being given to

the substantial amount of tax payer dollars allocated to controlling illicit drug use. In FY 2008,

the federal government spent nearly $13 billion trying to control the U.S. drug problem, of which

$8.3 billion was spent on disrupting illicit drug markets (ONDCP, 2007). The enormous outlay

continues despite criticisms that the federal government lacks a means for evaluating the

effectiveness of their policies and the money being spent (National Research Council (NRC),

2001).

         One of the primary data sources used for evaluating the impact of supply side strategies

on drug markets is the Drug Enforcement Agency’s (DEA’s) System to Retrieve Information

from Drug Evidence (STRIDE) database. The DEA has been collecting information on drug

transactions made by federal agents, law enforcement and their informants as part of the

STRIDE database since the late 1970s. The data include information on the nature of the

transaction (a purchase or a seizure), where it took place, the total amount paid when the

transaction involved a purchase, the type of illicit substance, the quantity involved, and for most

drugs the purity of the drug. A major criticism of the data is that they represent a convenience

sample and are generated by purposeful policing activities (NRC, 2001; Horowitz, 2001). As

such, the price series generated from STRIDE are believed to be an artifact of the data

acquisition procedure and not an accurate indicator of price variation within the geographic

markets in which they are collected. Evidence supporting this position is provided by Horowitz

(2001), who shows large differences in price estimates obtained from different agencies within

the same city, calling to question the internal validity of the data.
        The question of whether STRIDE is a valid data source is important to answer for policy

makers and researchers alike. Price data are necessary for us to understand both the supply and

demand for drugs and how markets operate, particularly given the illicit nature of this market. A

large stream of research has already been developed using the STRIDE data, informing our

understanding of drug markets and how they work. For example, the data have been used to

examine quantity discounts and quality premia for illicit drugs (Caulkins and Padman, 1993;

Caulkins, 1994 and 1997a), risk premia in black markets (Miron, 2003; Caulkins & Reuter,

1998), geographic variation in drug prices (Caulkins, 1995), the responsiveness of demand for

illicit drugs (Williams et al., 2004; DeSimone and Farrelly, 2003; Grossman and Chaloupka,

1998; Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999) and harms from drug use (Dave, 2006; Dobkins and Nicosia,

Forthcoming; Caulkins, 2001). In addition, policy makers use information to reconcile supply-

and demand- side estimates of the total amount of specific illicit drugs produced and consumed.

If the data are flawed, then knowledge we think we gained from these analyses must also be

reconsidered. Moreover, we lose the only current source of data for which information is

available on transaction price, quantity and potency. No other national data system collects this

kind of information on drug prices.

       In this paper we reconsider the issue of the validity of the STRIDE data for estimating

drug price series. We test the internal validity of STRIDE and demonstrate that when

substantive knowledge about drug markets is incorporated into the use of STRIDE data, the data

do in fact generate consistent trends across agencies within the same market, thus refuting the

main criticism of Horowitz (2001). Another contribution of this paper is that we develop a

statistical model of drug price series that reflect substantive knowledge about drug markets. We

use the Granger-Sims causality framework to demonstrate the external validity of these price




                                                2
 series by using them to predict emergency room mentions, an independent indicator of drug

demand that is available for cities across the United States. Therefore, unlike Horowitz (2001)

and the NRC (2001), we conclude that STRIDE is useful for estimating trends in the price of

illicit drugs.



                                     2. THE STRIDE DATA

        For over 25 years, the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) has maintained detailed

information on drug transactions made by federal, state and local agencies engaged in law

enforcement activities targeting drug markets. The primary purposes of the database are to

catalog and control the inventory of drug acquisitions made by DEA agents; to keep current with

the types of drugs being distributed and the characteristics of those drugs; and to use these data

as part of prosecutions of federal drug offenders. Only acquisitions that are sent to a DEA

laboratory for analysis are included in the database, although the acquisition could be made by

federal agents, local law enforcement, or informants. While most state and local police agencies

do not submit information on their undercover acquisitions to DEA laboratories, there are a few

exceptions—in particular, the Metropolitan Police of Washington, DC.

         It is the extremely rich content of information contained in STRIDE that makes it

particularly appealing to researchers and policy analysts. The STRIDE data indicate the date,

location, nature of the acquisition by law enforcement (seizure or purchase), weight, purity,

chemical nature of the drug, and, for purchases only, the price paid.

        The main limitation of STRIDE is that the data contained within it are neither a random,

probabilistic, or representative sample of all drug transactions occurring in any geographic area.

Of course, it would be difficult to create such a sampling frame given the underground nature of




                                                 3
 drug markets, but the concern is that the data are generated as a result of purposeful law

enforcement activities that are both strategic and deterministic. The timing and location of

encounters are often erratic and the number of observations from a given location can vary

dramatically from year to year, particularly for smaller cities. Furthermore, there is concern that

the data in the sample may be biased if law enforcement agents pay systematically different

prices than typical buyers in the market (Caulkins, 1997b). It has been argued that law

enforcement agents and their informants risk detection if they appear ignorant of reasonable

pricing for specific quantities of drug. Even if law enforcement agents do pay more on average,

as long as the bias is stable over time the data would still be useful for understanding movement

in prices over time. Nonetheless, both the nature of how the sample is created as well as the

biases possibly contained in it have important implications for how these data can be used

(Caulkins et al., 2004).



                              3. THE HOROWITZ CRITIQUE

       Horowitz’ (2001) critique focuses on the issue of representativeness of STRIDE by

examining observations within a single city with an uncharacteristically high number of

observations, Washington, DC. In this city, there are a substantial number of observations

generated by two specific agencies, the DEA and the Metropolitan Police of DC (MPDC), as

well as a number of observations from other Federal and state (Virginia and Maryland) agencies

and programs. The real distribution of prices paid is unknown, so Horowitz tests whether the

distribution of prices generated by DEA and the MPDC agencies are similar, given the argument

that if buyers from different agencies within the same city and time period pay significantly




                                                 4
 different prices per pure gram, then that would raise serious doubts about the reliability of the

data and its utility.

           Although some price dispersion is expected for a black market good, the trend in prices

across agencies should be the same if the variation is random. However, if nonrandom factors

influence the distribution of prices in the market, such as familiarity between buyers and sellers,

then it is possible that changes in these nonrandom factors over time could lead to observed price

changes in that market in the absence of a real change in the distribution of prices. Specifically,

Horowitz argues that law enforcement agents within the MPDC are more likely than DEA agents

in Washington DC to be familiar with the local drug markets and build long term relationships

with low-end dealers.

         Horowitz estimates price models using data from 1990 through the second quarter of

1998. Using Least Absolute Deviation in order to minimize the impact of outliers, his model is

the following:

log Π ijt = β 0 jt + β1 jt [ AMT1ijt ] + β 2 jt [ AMT 2ijt ] + β 3 jt log Pijt + β 4 jt MDijt + β 5 jtVAijt + U ijt (1)

where Πijt is the real (inflation-adjusted) price per gram for observation i by agency j in year t, P

is purity, MD and VA are dummy variables for having the transaction take place in Maryland and

Virginia, and the quantity (AMT) variables are the following (with Q being the measure of

quantity of the transaction in grams):

AMT 1 = [ I (log Qijt ≤ −1.5)(log Qijt + 1.5) − 1.5]
AMT 2 = [(log Qijt + 1.5) I (log Qijt > −1.5)]

         These quantity variables allow for a spline with the knot at log(Q) equal to -1.5, the

equivalent of 0.22 grams. An additional spline knot for DEA observations is used for 1991 and

1992 at 2.7 grams. The additional spline knot is added in partial recognition of the fact that the




                                                              5
 typical transaction amount for DEA agents is systematically larger than that of the MPDC and

hence might reflect higher quantity discounts given the larger transaction purchases made.

        Horowitz estimates this model for both DEA and MPDC observations and conducts

several tests of whether the observed markets are the same across agencies. These include: (1)

asymptotic chi-squared tests for whether the coefficient estimates for each year are the same for

DEA and MPDC observations; (2) asymptotic chi-square tests for the coefficient estimates on

the quantity discount (β2); and (3) asymptotic chi-square tests that the nine annual predicted

prices for the MPDC and DEA models (evaluated at one gram and 75 percent purity) are the

same.

        In the chi-squared tests for crack cocaine, Horowitz finds that the coefficient estimates

and predicted prices are statistically significantly different for the MPDC and DEA models.

Furthermore, he finds that the price levels and trends are different. He concludes that both the

MPDC and DEA sets of observations cannot both be representative of the true crack cocaine

market, so we cannot know what the actual market distribution is. He shows similar results for

heroin and thus concludes that the data should not be used to evaluate policy.



    4. THE IMPORTANCE OF UNDERSTANDING SUPPLY CHAINS FOR DRUGS

        There are two major problems in Horowitz’ analysis. First, he ignores the fact that

distribution levels in drug markets are characterized by differences in average purity and average

quantity traded (Caulkins, 1994). The average purity of a drug traded at the wholesale

distribution level is typically higher than the average purity of a drug traded at the retail level

(e.g., a street dealer selling to an individual user), especially for powder cocaine and heroin.

Drugs get diluted as they move down the distribution chain in the United States (Caulkins,




                                                   6
 1997a). Tables 1 and 2 show that the DEA observations are not only more likely to involve

transactions of 5 or more grams (a higher part of the supply chain) in the case of crack and

heroin, but they also involve higher purity. The MPDC participates in purchases that are

typically much smaller (closer to retail transactions) and on average have lower purity.

Although Horowitz’s models allow for the relationship between price and quantity to differ

across specific quantity levels, they do not allow the relationship between price and the purity of

the drug to change.

       The second major problem with Horowitz’ analysis is that, given the differences in

quantity and purity between higher and lower distribution levels, any chosen quantity and purity

at which to evaluate predicted price could not be in the central part of the range of values for

both distribution levels. Horowitz uses one gram as the evaluation quantity for crack cocaine,

which is high in the distribution for the MPDC sample (85th percentile) and low in the

distribution for the DEA sample (11th percentile).

       To demonstrate the importance of recognizing the differences in quantities and purity

across different levels of the supply chain (i.e., different distribution levels) and in using out-of-

range evaluation quantities, we replicate Horowitz’ model and original findings and then

demonstrate how incorporating knowledge of distribution levels changes his primary results. We

begin by estimating a model identical to Horowitz for crack cocaine. We predict prices by

evaluating them at a quantity of one gram at 75 percent purity in Washington, DC (following

Horowitz). The predicted prices generated from this model yield identical price trends to those

reported in Horowitz (see Figure 1). An asymptotic chi-squared test of the null hypothesis that

the predicted prices from the DEA and MPDC models are equal (χ2(9)=109.91, p=0) is

consistent with the result obtained by Horowitz and we also reject the null. Note that we cannot




                                                   7
    produce the exact price series and test statistics as Horowitz (2001) because the sample changes

over time due to observations being added to the sample as cases get closed.



                                    -- Insert Figure 1 about here ---



Next we examine price series from the same agencies but break the data into two “distribution”

levels. The specification of distribution levels is not a precise science. Although the term “retail”

typically refers to transactions where the buyer is the end-user, there is no way of identifying end

users from low-end sellers in the STRIDE data. Although some transaction sizes are relatively

more common than others in the data, it is not clear which transaction sizes only identify end

users. In previous work (Caulkins et al., 2004; Arkes et al., 2004), transactions involving up to

one gram of crack cocaine were defined as retail-level transactions. Using this cut-off when

examining data from these two agencies, however, we see from Table 1 that we would have very

few observations in the DEA sample for some years in our retail sample, making estimation of a

price series from the DEA series very imprecise. Instead, to increase the number of DEA

observations included in the lower distribution level, we use 5 grams as our threshold for

differentiating two basic markets. Although not ideal, this approach enables us to have

observations from both agencies in both samples and makes the samples more homogenous

relative to specific markets. It is still possible that quantity discounts differ within these markets

given how broadly they have been defined. However, the goal here is not to precisely identify

separate markets and the magnitude of the price discounts across them, but rather to demonstrate

that ignoring their existence can generate misleading results.1 In separating the model into two


1
 For the lower distribution level (less than or equal to 5 grams), we have the problem of over fitting with the DEA
sample, as we only have 217 observations from the DEA and 50 explanatory variables in our Horowitz replication



                                                         8
    distribution levels, we must make one additional modification to Horowitz’s model. For the

lower distribution level, there were several years with too few observations in Maryland and

Virginia for identification so we had to exclude these year-state interaction terms; for the higher

distribution levels, there were more observations in each year, but including them made little

difference for the price series.

          If we assume that these two distribution levels represent different points in a supply

chain, then we need to consider evaluating prices at a quantity and purity that is representative of

the typical transaction occurring within that distribution level. For the lower distribution level,

we use one gram and 75 percent purity, just as Horowitz had. Even with the more homogeneous

samples between DEA and MPDC, one gram is at the 45th percentile for the DEA observations

and 93rd percentile for the MPDC observations. Thus, it is possible that the predicted prices from

these two series will look fairly different because the typical transaction made by each of these

agencies even within this cut-off are quite different. For the higher distribution level, we

evaluate price at 75 percent purity and 25 grams, which is the 35th percentile for DEA

observations and the 49th percentile for MPDC observations.2

          Figure 2 presents the price charts for crack cocaine for the lower quantity distribution

involving amounts less than or equal to 5 grams. The prices for the DEA and MPDC

observations are much more similar in this case than they were when all the observations are

pooled across distribution levels. While the predicted price remains higher for DEA


model due to interactions between year and location identifiers for Maryland and Virginia. We tested for the joint
significance of these interactions and found them to be insignificant. There are hardly any observations from
Maryland or Virginia in the MDPC data, so all coefficient estimates on the interaction terms are dropped from that
model automatically. In the sample of observations greater than 5 grams, the interaction terms are again jointly
insignificant. Thus, to reduce the number of parameters that need to be estimated and the problem of over fitting,
we drop the interaction terms from the models we estimate next.
2
 If we had chosen 30 grams, that would have been the 52nd percentile for DEA observations and the 66th percentile
for MPDC observations.



                                                         9
 observations than MPDC observations, the difference in the prices is no longer statistically

significant (χ2(9)=2.57, p=0.97). In addition, the correlation between the two series is 0.68.

                                --   Insert Figure 2 about here --

         The predicted prices each agency generated from the models at higher quantity

distribution are even closer, as can be seen in Figure 3. Again, the difference in the prices are

insignificant (χ2(9)=7.95, p=.54), and the series are highly correlated (corr=0.89). Further, as

one would expect given the existence of quantity discounts, the predicted prices per gram at the

higher quantity level are actually lower than the predicted prices per gram at the lower quantity

level for both agencies (as can be seen by comparing Figure 2 and Figure 3).


                                -- Insert Figure 3 about here --


         In Figures A1 and A2 in the Appendix, we show that the results by distribution level hold

when we extend the data through the end of 2005. We find no significant differences in

predicted prices generated from the two different agencies at either distribution level and the

agency trends look even more similar in the later years for both levels. The correlations between

the DEA and MPDC price series are 0.65 for the lower level and 0.81 for the higher distribution

level.

         Finally, we formally test whether we need to split the sample into different distribution

levels. For both the DEA and MPDC samples, we include interaction terms of the indicator for

the higher distribution level with each yearly quantity and purity variable. We then test for the

joint significance of the interaction terms. The test statistics for the DEA and MPDC samples,

respectively, are F27, 712 = 2.36 (p<0.0001) and F27, 2608=2.46 (p<0.0001), indicating that it is

important to split the sample by distribution level.




                                                  10
        To summarize the findings from our replication of Horowitz’s work, we find that the

price differences observed between DEA and MPDC observations are primarily due to

differences between these agencies in the level of the supply chain targeted by the policing

activities. Differences in average prices as well as price trends disappear once observations are

analyzed on a market-level basis.



5. ADDITIONAL ISSUES TO CONSIDER WHEN USING STRIDE HEROIN DATA

       The model above demonstrates that recognition of a supply chain has important

implications on the consistency of price trends generated from the STRIDE data. Horowitz also

examined heroin observations, considering three price series in Washington DC in light of what

he believed to be sufficient data observations from MPDC, DEA, and the Domestic Monitoring

Program (DMP). Ignoring differences in distribution levels of the supply chain, Horowitz finds

that different predicted price trends exist by agency/program when evaluated at a common

weight (0.75 grams) and purity (20 percent). It is easy to explain the differences in predicted

trends between the DEA and MPDC in light of the significantly different quantities involved in

typical transactions. Looking at Table 2, DEA observations generally involve higher quantities

than the MPDC (and the DMP) observations, with 88% of DEA observations in the higher

distribution level (g > 1) but 87-88% of MPDC’s and DMP’s observations at the retail level

(g≤1). In fact, Table 2 shows there are not enough small DEA observations or large MPDC

observations to conduct any analysis by market level for both series; the two agencies do not

make enough purchases on overlapping quantities.

       Although the MPDC and DMP series both have a large number of observations less than

or equal to one gram between 1997 and 2004, it would still be inappropriate to compare these




                                                11
    two series in light of the heterogeneous types of heroin represented in the DMP sample. The

DMP observations, unlike other observations in the STRIDE data, are generated by random

purchases made by law enforcement agents or their informants with the sole purpose of

monitoring the quality, type and amount of heroin available on the street in particular cities, as

opposed to collecting data for prosecutions. Each quarter they go out on the streets and see how

much heroin and what type of heroin they can get for $100. These are not part of strategic

activities, but rather reflect random buys out on the street, conducted purely for the purposes of

monitoring heroin supply. Although that may make the DMP series sound ideal for analytical

use, the problem is that different types of heroin are purchased under this program, and the type

varies substantially within and across cities and over time.3 The type of heroin is indicated

through secondary drug codes available in the STRIDE database, but is not usually investigated.

Thus, the only way to use DMP observations in a meaningful way is to disaggregate them into

the actual type of heroin purchased, which dramatically reduces the sample size for Washington

DC. Thus, one should not compare prices from DMP to those of the other agencies but the

reason is that these do not represent a homogenous product.



6. IMPROVING MODELS FOR ESTIMATING PRICES FROM STRIDE

6.1 Constructing an Appropriate Model for Drug Prices

          It is important to realize that the flaws in Horowitz’s previous work were not statistically

based but rather the result of disregarding knowledge of how drug markets operate. Despite this

oversight, Horowitz generally recognized other important aspects of these markets that need to

be considered when using these data. In particular, the paper emphasized considering


3
 There are at least three physically distinguishable types of heroin available in the United States: white heroin,
black tar heroin and brown heroin.



                                                          12
 homogenous drug products and examining trends in localized markets to reduce noise.

However, as demonstrated here, errors can still occur in light of the general lack of knowledge

about these data caused by the unavailability of a codebook (e.g. the fact that DMP observations

mix heterogeneous forms of heroin). We aim to advance the methods for using these data by

producing a model for predicting price and purity trends from the STRIDE data that properly

considers several important aspects of the data and drug markets. We demonstrate that our

model generates price series that are not only internally valid but also externally valid.

        There are four primary aspects of drug markets that are important to consider when

developing price and purity models for illicit drugs. First, drugs are an experience good, and

hence purity is not known with certainty at the point the buyer makes the transaction. Second,

the effects of quantity and purity on price can be different at different levels, so distribution

levels matter. Third, local trends are likely to generally reflect national trends in the long run,

although short term differences are possible. Fourth, quantity discounts and average purity

levels can differ across cities (i.e. drug markets are local).

        To make sure that price series generated from the STRIDE data reflect these four

considerations, we make several adjustments to Horowitz’s empirical model that result in

obtaining price series that are both internally and externally valid. First, to address the fact that

drugs are experience goods, we estimate price as a function of expected pure amount not actual

pure amount. Though a buyer is unlikely to know the purity of a single purchase he/she makes,

the buyer will have expectations about the purity based on prior experience. Prior analyses of

the STRIDE database found evidence of measurement error in observed price and improvements

in model fit when predicting price with expected rather than observed purity (Caulkins, 1994).

Therefore, we retain transactions with zero or very low purity that do not have much lower prices




                                                  13
 than other observations of a more typical purity because we presume they represent a rip-off

and are a realistic reflection of what actually happens in the marketplace.

       The second modification to the empirical model is the separation of models at different

distribution levels. As shown earlier, separate models at different distribution levels are needed

because of differences in how quantity and purity affect price at different quantity levels. We

sought to define market levels with roughly equal numbers of observations in each level but with

round number boundaries for the years for which we have data (1981-2005). In all cases except

powder cocaine, three levels were identified for each drug, with each level in most cases

containing between 25 and 50 percent of the total number of observations for that drug. In the

case of powder cocaine, there were enough data to identify a fourth distribution level. Given that

these market levels’ boundaries were largely data driven, one should assign little meaning to the

labels assigned to each.

       The final modification to the empirical model is the adoption of hierarchical modeling

(HM), which enables unique relationships to exist between quantity, purity and price within each

city while still using information from observations in all cities to estimate general trends

overall. Although drug markets are geographically small and limited in terms of how they

function and their ability to price discriminate, they must all follow a few basic "rules" that are

the same across all cities. Price will be a function of both expected purity and quantity, and the

market would not allow huge deviations from a general range to exist for more then a short

period of time (when sufficient information flows to correct the differences in markets).

       In the models we present here, we apply hierarchical modeling to data from 29 cities and

9 regions across the United States. Models of purity are estimated first using hierarchical linear

modeling, the results of which are used to formulate estimates of expected purity for each




                                                 14
 purchase observation in each city and time period. The model for purity for transaction i from

city j at time k is:

        Purity ijk = γ 0 + γ 1timeijk + γ 2 AMTijk + u 0 j + u1 j timeijk + u 2 j AMTijk + ε ijk   (2)

where time is measured using dummy variables representing a year-quarter (i.e., 100 quarters

over 25 years) or just a year, and AMTijk is the raw weight of the observation. The γ0 through

γ2 coefficients represent the fixed effects for the intercept, amount, and time, respectively, and

the corresponding city-specific random effects, u0j-u2j, are assumed to follow normal

distributions. Errors εijk are assumed to independently follow a normal distribution with mean 0

and variance σ2. Expected purity was estimated for each observation from this model. About

one-half of a percent of heroin cases had predicted purity below 0 percent. For these, we

changed the predicted purity to equal 0.5 percent.

         To model drug prices, we use a hierarchical generalized linear model (Wolfinger &

O’Connell 1993; Breslow & Clayton 1993) in which price is assumed to follow a gamma

distribution with mean μ and variance function φμ2, where

μ = E ( priceijk | ν )
= exp{β 0 + β 1time j + β 2 (ln( AMTijk ) + ln( purˆity ijk )                                       (3)
+ ν 0 j + ν 1 j time j + ν 2 j (ln( AMTijk ) + ln( purˆity ijk ))}

where β represents the fixed effects for intercept, time and the logarithm of the amount plus the

logarithm of the expected purity, φ is a dispersion parameter and the ν terms are the

corresponding city random effects that are assumed to be normally distributed with mean vector

0 and variance/covariance matrix D. The sum of the natural logarithm of quantity (AMT) and

the natural logarithm of expected purity is a way of specifying the price in terms of the natural

logarithm of expected pure grams – i.e., multiplying the weight by expected purity generates an




                                                               15
 estimate of the weight in expected pure grams. Specifying amount and expected purity into one

variable (expected pure grams) also serves to provide identification for the model, which is

necessary because all of the explanatory variables in the purity model of equation (2) are in the

price model of equation (3).



6.2 Properly Cleaning STRIDE Data

        It is important to keep in mind that the STRIDE data set is an administrative data system

used to track inventory of acquisitions; it was not designed for analytical purposes. Some values

in the data are likely to reflect input errors or inaccurate reporting, not actual drug prices and

purities.

        This last point has important implications for how one cleans the data before analyses are

even conducted. For example, while working on a project for the Office of National Drug

Control Policy using STRIDE, we were told by a former DEA lab technician that it is extremely

difficult to detect the actual purity of a drug when the quantity involved is smaller than 0.1

grams. The task is even more difficult depending on the type and form of the drug being

examined. When actual purity cannot be detected, a zero value may be used or purity may be

entered as missing. Thus, to better differentiate true zero purity observations from those that

simply reflect an inability to detect a substance, it is common practice to discard observations

smaller than 0.1 grams.

        In addition to problems determining actual purity in small transaction amounts, it is the

case that gross outliers exist in both the price and purity data. Purity values in excess of 100

percent do exist in the data and are the result of data entry errors. Gross outliers in price are also

common, although it can be difficult to determine what the appropriate bounds are for discarding




                                                  16
 these observations. Following methods similar to those used in the past (Abt, 2001), we specify

a fairly broad range in which to reasonably expect real prices to fall and then use an extreme

residual outlier analysis to identify and discard additional observations that appear extreme and

have a large effect on the regression results. In terms of gross outliers, we discard observations

that have a real price per gram (in 2005 dollars) that are outside the $5 to $1500 range for crack

and powder cocaine and outside the $5 to $2500 range for heroin. We then estimate the model

once with just random intercepts; delete extreme residuals by cutting from the sample the

observations that have the top one percent of residuals on the positive side; and re-estimate the

model with the full set of random effects across cities.



6.3 Results: Predicted price series from STRIDE and internal validity

       The models provide a predicted price for each of the 29 cities and 9 regions for each year.

In Figures 4 through 7, we present price series for each drug for the Washington, DC

metropolitan area, with the corresponding predicted prices in Tables A1-A4 in the Appendix.

We show the series for crack cocaine, powder cocaine, and heroin, with three or four distribution

levels for each drug.

       In Figures 5, 6, and 7, we evaluate prices at 100-percent purity and a quantity that is close

to the median for each distribution level. This set-up produces a “price-per-pure-gram.” In

Figure 4, however, we evaluate the price at the same quantity levels, but at 75 percent purity and

just for 1990-2005 in order to generate series that are more comparable to results presented in

Figures 2 and 3. It should be remembered though that the evaluation amount still differs in these

predicted prices using the HM modeling and that results from all agencies reporting data are

included (not just DEA and MPDC), so direct comparisons need to be made with this in mind.




                                                 17
 Overall the price trends generated in Figures 4 through 7 for each of these drugs demonstrate a

general decrease in the price of each drug since the early- to mid-1980s. Furthermore, they

demonstrate that the price per gram varies considerably across the distribution levels for all

drugs, and that quantity discounts appear to be quite significant.

       If we look more closely at the trend in prices presented in Figure 4 for crack cocaine and

compare the results involving amounts greater than 15 grams (and evaluated at 38 grams) to

those presented in Figure 3 (which show results for the two agencies for amounts greater than 5

grams and evaluated at 25 grams), we see trends that are generally consistent between 1990 and

1998. The level of prices predicted for Washington DC from the HM model are slightly higher

despite being evaluated at a higher quantity level, but this might reflect the fact that transactions

for DC from other agencies are being included and a longer time period is evaluated (which

influences the model through the grand mean and city-specific effects). Despite a relatively

small difference in levels (both hover around $50 per gram), the trends are generally consistent

across the two figures. If you compare the results for up to 1 gram (evaluated at 0.3 grams) in

Figure 4 to those in Figure 2 (evaluated at 1 gram), the HM series in Figure 4 looks a bit noisier

and stays at a level closer to $150. That difference in terms of noise of the series is likely driven

by the exclusion in our lowest distribution of higher level amounts. The trend for the second

distribution level in Figure 4 (amounts involving 1 to 15 grams) is significantly smoother and

closely parallels that for the MPDC, albeit at a lower level (because it is being evaluated at a

higher quantity of 5 grams).

       The main point from these comparisons is that merging the data collected by all agencies

and estimating series for all cities using an HM framework generates a price series that is

generally consistent with what we observe when estimating series for a single agency in a single




                                                 18
 city, providing additional evidence of the internal consistency of the data when used properly.

When prices are evaluated at 100% purity (as shown in Figure 5 through 7) the trend line moves

up (i.e. it costs more per gram because of the higher potency, as theory would predict), but the

trends remain consistent with that observed at lower purities. But the trends do differ in at least

one important way across distribution levels for the same drug evaluated at the same purity. The

retail level trend (i.e. the trend for the lowest quantity amount) is always noisier than that for

higher quantity amounts. There are at least two potential explanations for this: (1) rip offs are

far more likely to occur among buyers and sellers at the retail level, where exchanges are more

frequently made between people who are unfamiliar with each other, and (2) law enforcement

rarely focuses their attention and resources on small retail transactions, so these series may be

more sensitive to data composition issues (agencies involved, location of the transaction, etc)

than transaction at higher levels.




 7. EXTERNAL VALIDITY OF PRICE SERIES GENERATED USING STRIDE PRICE

                                       AND PURITY DATA

       While we previously showed that it is possible to generate internally valid price series

from the data, it is equally important to demonstrate that the trends in price series convey real

information. This can be done by directly modeling prices obtained from our constructed price

series for specific locations with data from external sources tracking other relevant aspects of the

drug problem that should be highly predicted by prices. Here we develop a model that tests

whether the predicted city-specific retail-level prices are reflective of changes in demand, as

indicated by movements in the number of drug-involved emergency department episodes which




                                                  19
    are available at a local level. In particular, we employ a Granger-Sims causality test (Granger,

1969) to assess whether changes in the price of a drug predicts the future number of emergency-

room mentions for that drug.

          Data on emergency room mentions come from the 1994-2002 Drug Abuse Warning

Network (DAWN). The Drug Abuse Warning Network (DAWN) data provides information on

the number of instances of cases in which a given drug is involved in emergency department

(ED) visits or deaths. DAWN is organized so that it provides estimates on the total number of

drug-abuse-related ED visits and deaths and the total number of mentions of drugs in 21 cities,

quarterly, over the 1994-2002 period. Up to four drugs can be mentioned for a given ED visit,

and up to six drugs can be mentioned for a death. We analyze the rate of drug mentions in the

population for each city.

          To estimate this model, we take the predicted heron prices from the price models,

described above, for the DAWN cities. To use a city-quarter observation in our model for ED

visits, we use the condition that there had to be 5 observations in the one-quarter-lagged city-

quarter cell to be used in the model.4 We do this so that the price series for these cities closely

reflected the actual STRIDE data for a given city rather than information borrowed from

different city-quarters. We limit the sample to the 16 DAWN cities that had this sufficient

number of observations for at least 18 of the 36 quarters in the 1994-2002 DAWN period. No

cities met these criteria for powder cocaine and only three cities met the criteria for crack

cocaine.5 Thus we focus on external validation on the heroin price series.




4
 We use lagged because we are examining whether lagged price affects drug mentions.
5
 The cities that we use for the heroin analysis are: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Denver, Detroit, Miami, New Orleans,
New York, Newark, Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle, St. Louis, and Washington, DC.



                                                        20
           To estimate heroin prices, our sample from STRIDE consists of observations that are

between 0.1 and 1 gram and that have the drug code “9200.005.”6 From the price models, the

predicted prices are evaluated at roughly the median quantity and purity levels for the period for

which DAWN data are available (1994-2002). The evaluation quantity and purity are 0.4 grams

and 35%.



7.1 Estimating the Effect of Price or Purity on Emergency-Room Mentions of Heroin

         With the predicted price of heroin, we estimate Poisson regression models to determine

whether the STRIDE price estimates are meaningful. We assume that the mean number of

emergency room visits in city c and quarter t is λct, where:

                    L
ln(λct ) = β c + ∑ {β l Pc ,t −1 + α l Yc ,t −1} + ln(nct ) .
                   l =1


Here Yc,t-l and Pc,t-l are the observed number of emergency room mentions and the price for

heroin in city c in l quarters lagged from quarter t (e.g., l=1 implies time t-1) up to L lags, and nct

represents the population of city c at time t. Thus, for a one-period-lagged model, we are

examining whether last period’s price affects the current period’s rate of drug mentions in

emergency rooms while controlling for last period’s rate of drug mentions and emergency room

mentions.

         Table 3 shows the results of these regressions. The first column of Table 3 provides the

coefficient estimates for the one-quarter-lagged model, which includes the lagged price and the

lagged rate of heroin drug mentions. The second column shows the coefficients from a two-

quarter-lagged model with both the prices and lagged rate of heroin mentions from both one-


6
 The latter criterion makes sure we do not include black tar heroin in our heroin observations, given a buyer can
physically distinguish black tar heroin from white heroin.



                                                                21
 quarter and two-quarters lagged. The model in the third column is the same one-quarter-lagged

model of the first column but is fit to the same set of observations as is the two-quarter-lagged

model in order to facilitate comparison of the one-lagged and two-lagged models using the

Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). The number of observations is lower for the two-quarter-

lagged model because there is the additional requirement that there had to be at least 5 valid

STRIDE observations for the city not just for the lagged quarter, but also for the twice-lagged

quarter.

       In model (1), the one-quarter lagged heroin prices have a negative and significant effect

on emergency room mentions of heroin. A $10 increase in the price of a pure gram leads to a

1.7-percent decrease in heroin mentions in emergency rooms (p<0.01). In the two-quarter-

lagged model (2), the one-quarter-lagged price turns out to be small and insignificant, but the

two-quarter-lagged price is negative and significant, indicating again that a higher price for

heroin leads to fewer heroin-related emergency-room visits. In model (3), again using the one-

quarter-lagged model, but with just the sample size from model (2), the coefficient estimate on

price is no longer significant. The BIC is lower in the two-quarter-lagged model than in the one-

quarter-lagged model (column 3), suggesting that this is a better model than the one-quarter-

lagged model. Though there is a difference in the significance of the one-quarter lagged heroin

price in models (1) and (3), this is attributable to the loss of 78 observations when including two-

quarter lags in the model and we use column (1) as the definitive results for the model containing

a one-quarter lag.

       The results from the first two models support the conclusion that higher prices predict

lower demand for heroin, as indicated by the number of accidents and events related to heroin.

The fact that price series generated from STRIDE data are not just statistically correlated with an




                                                22
 independent city-specific data series tracking a different aspect of the drug problem but also

have predictive power supports the conclusion that real information is being provided in these

data. Such a conclusion goes a step further than findings from other studies that have just shown

a correlation between price series generated from STRIDE and other measures of the drug

problem (Dobkins & Nicosia, Forthcoming, Dave 2006, Williams et al, 2004, DeSimone &

Farrelly, 2003; Caulkins 2001). Unlike those previous studies which simply show a strong

correlation, we empirically test the predictive power of prices using the Granger-Sims causality

framework and show that they do in fact predict a change in consumption, controlling for other

factors.



                                          8. CONCLUSIONS

           The purpose of this paper is to challenge critiques of the STRIDE data and to establish

city-specific drug prices in a manner that generates internally and externally consistent price

series. Horowitz (2001) claimed that STRIDE was internally inconsistent because prices within

Washington, DC collected by different law enforcement agencies (DEA and MPDC) were

different. We demonstrate that these differences are largely the product of the two agencies

being involved in transactions at two different levels of the distribution chain. In particular,

DEA collected data on large transactions typically at the wholesale and mid-level range, while

MPDC collected data at the retail level. When we split the samples by distribution levels, then

differences in the predicted prices between the two agencies’ observations disappeared.

           We then tested the external validity of a price series that more seriously addressed the

issue of differential distribution levels and considered the local nature of drug markets. Price

series generated from this model were again empirically consistent with simpler models




                                                    23
 employing a subset of the data and focusing on just one city. Finally, we tested the external

validity of our price series by assessing the correlation and predictive power of our constructed

prices with an external data source: city-specific heroin-related emergency room episodes. We

find that, consistent with economic theory, higher heroin prices lead to a decrease in such

incidents, thus indicating that demand is lower when price is higher. More importantly, we show

that the price series is statistically correlated with external measures of the drug problem in a

manner one would expect, supporting the notion that real information is conveyed through

temporal movements of these price data.

       The findings suggest that STRIDE, despite having numerous shortcomings, may still be

useful to researchers and policy makers interested in examining factors related to changes in

illicit drug prices over time or using information on changes in prices to understand movements

in demand or supply. The findings also show, however, that estimates of the average price

level from these data at a given point in time are extremely sensitive and uncertain. When

estimating average price levels, the nonrepresentativeness of the data as well as analytic

decisions regarding how to use the data dramatically impact the average price level generated

from models using the data. Hence, our analyses do not support the use of STRIDE for studies

evaluating issues related to the average level of drug prices in a particular point in time. For

example, using these data to determine the total expenditure on drugs in a given year or to back

out total quantity consumed from an expenditure equation at a given point in time is not

recommended. However, once proper methods are used to properly clean the data and to take

into account important aspects of drug markets, the short-term and long-term movements in

average prices for specific cities evidenced in STRIDE can be used to examine changes in

demand or supply over time.




                                                 24
                                               REFERENCES

Abt Associates (2001). The Price of Illicit Drugs: 1981 through the Second Quarter of 2000.
      Office of National Drug Control Policy. October.

Arkes, J., Pacula, R.L., Paddock, S.M., Caulkins, J. P. and Reuter, P. (2004). Technical Report
       for the Price and Purity of Illicit Drugs Through 2003. Office of National Drug Control
       Policy. November.

Caulkins, J. P. (1994). Developing Price Series for Cocaine. MR-317-DPRC, The RAND
       Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.

Caulkins, J. P. (1995), “Domestic Geographic Variation in Illicit Drug Prices.” The Journal of
       Urban Economics, 37, 38-56.

Caulkins, J. P. (1997a), “Modeling the Domestic Distribution Network for Illicit Drugs,”
       Management Science, 43, 1364-1371.

Caulkins, J. P. (1997b), “Is crack cheaper than (powder) cocaine?” Addiction 92,1437-1443.

Caulkins, J. P. (2001), “The Relationship Between Prices and Emergency Department Mentions
       for Cocaine and Heroin,” American Journal of Public Health, 91, 1446-1448.

Caulkins, J. P., Pacula, R. L., Arkes, J., Reuter, P., Paddock, S. M., Iguchi, M. and Riley J.
       (2004). The Price and Purity of Illicit Drugs: 1981 Through the Second Quarter of
       2003. Office of National Drug Control Policy. November.

Caulkins, J. P. and Padman. R. (1993), “Quantity Discounts and Quality Premia for Illicit
       Drugs,” The Journal of the American Statistical Association, 88, 748-757.

Caulkins, J. P. and Reuter P. (1998), “What Price Data Tell Us About Drug Markets.”
       Journal of Drug Issues., 28, 593-612.

Dave, D. (2006), “The Effects of Cocaine and Heroin Price on Drug-Related Emergency
       Department Visits,” Journal of Health Economics, 25, 311-33.

Desimone, J. and Farrelly, M. (2003), “Price and Enforcement Effects on Cocaine and Marijuana
      Demand,” Economic Inquiry, 41, 98-115.

Dobkins, C., and Nicosia, N., “The War on Drugs: Methamphetamine, Public Health and
      Crime", joint with Nancy Nicosia,” American Economic Review, Forthcoming.

Granger, C.W.J. (1969), "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Methods and Cross-
      Spectral Methods," Econometrica, 34, 424-438.

Grossman, M. and Chaloupka. F. J. (1998), “The Demand for Cocaine by Young Adults: A
      Rational Addiction Approach,” Journal of Health Economics, 17, 427-474.



                                                  25
Horowitz, J. L. (2001), “Should the DEA’s STRIDE Data Be Used for Economic Analyses of
      Markets for Illegal Drugs?” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 96, 1254-
      1271.

Miron, J. (2003), “The Effect of Drug Prohibition on Drug Prices: Evidence from the Markets
       for Cocaine and Heroin,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85, 522-530.

National Research Council (NRC) (2001). Informing America’s Policy on Illegal Drugs: What
       We Don’t Know Keeps Hurting Us, eds. Manski, C. F., Pepper, J. V. and Petrie, C. V.
       Washington DC: National Academy Press.

Office of National Drug Control Policy (2007). National Drug Control Strategy: FY2008
       Budget Summary. The White House Printing Office, February.

Saffer H. and Chaloupka F. (1999), “The demand for illicit drugs,” Economic Inquiry, 37, 401-
       11.

Williams, J., Pacula, R. L., Chaloupka, F. J., and Wechsler, H. (2004), “Alcohol and Marijuana Use
       Among College Students: Economic Complements or Substitutes?” Health Economics,
       13, 825-843.




                                                26
 Figure 1. Predicted price trends for for crack cocaine for DEA and MPDC observations
in the Washington metropolitan area, evaluated at 1 gram at 75% purity, 1990-1998Q2
(replication of Horowitz) (N=775 DEA, 2672 MPDC)

  250


  200


  150
                                                                       DEA
                                                                       MPDC
  100


   50


    0
        1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998




Figure 2. Predicted price trends for Washington metropolitan area crack cocaine for DEA
and MPDC observations less than or equal to 5 grams, evaluated at 1 gram and 75%
purity, 1990-1998Q2. (N=217 DEA, 2386 MPDC)

  250


  200


  150
                                                                       DEA
                                                                       MPDC
  100


   50


    0
        1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998




                                                  27
 Figure 3. Predicted price trends for Washington metropolitan area crack cocaine for
DEA and MPDC observations greater than 5 grams, evaluated at 25 grams and 75%
purity, 1990-1998Q2. (N=558 DEA, 286 MPDC)

   250

   200

   150
                                                                                                                          DEA
                                                                                                                          MPDC
   100

     50

      0
          1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998




Figure 4. Predicted price-per-gram for crack cocaine in the Washington metropolitan area
for three distribution levels, 1990-2005, evaluated at 75% purity.

    250


    200


    150                                                                                                                         g≤1
                                                                                                                                1 < g ≤ 15
    100                                                                                                                         g > 15


     50


      0
          1990
                 1991
                        1992

                               1993
                                      1994
                                             1995

                                                    1996
                                                           1997
                                                                  1998
                                                                         1999

                                                                                2000
                                                                                       2001
                                                                                              2002

                                                                                                     2003
                                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                                   2005




Note: The prices for the three distribution levels are evaluated at 0.3, 5, and 38 grams, which
are roughly the median quantities for each distribution level.




                                                                            28
Figure 5. Predicted price-per-pure-gram for crack cocaine in the Washington
metropolitan area for three distribution levels, 1986-2005, evaluated at 100% purity.

  500
  450
  400
  350
  300                                                                                                                                                                 g≤1
  250                                                                                                                                                                 1 < g ≤ 15
  200                                                                                                                                                                 g > 15
  150
  100
   50
    0
        1986
                1987
                       1988
                              1989
                                      1990
                                             1991
                                                     1992
                                                            1993
                                                                   1994
                                                                           1995
                                                                                   1996
                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                                                                                                          2003
                                                                                                                                                 2004
                                                                                                                                                        2005
Note: The prices for the three distribution levels are evaluated at 0.3, 5, and 38 grams, which
are roughly the median quantities for each distribution level.


Figure 6. Predicted price-per-pure-gram for powder cocaine in the Washington
metropolitan area for four distribution levels, 1981-2005, evaluated at 100% purity.

  700

  600

  500
                                                                                                                                                                        g≤2
  400                                                                                                                                                                   2 < g ≤ 10
  300                                                                                                                                                                   10 < g ≤ 50
                                                                                                                                                                        g > 50
  200

  100

    0
        1981
               1982
                      1983
                      1984
                               1985
                                      1986
                                             1987
                                                    1988
                                                           1989
                                                           1990
                                                                    1991
                                                                           1992
                                                                                  1993
                                                                                          1994
                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                        1996
                                                                                                        1997
                                                                                                        1998
                                                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                                              2003
                                                                                                                                                        2004
                                                                                                                                                               2005




Note: The prices for the four distribution levels are evaluated at 0.75, 5, 27, and 108 grams,
which are roughly the median quantities for each distribution level.




                                                                                                   29
Figure 7. Predicted price-per-pure-gram for heroin in the Washington metropolitan area
for three distribution levels, 1981-2005, evaluated at 100% purity.

  3000

  2500

  2000
                                                                                        g≤1
  1500                                                                                  1 < g ≤ 10
                                                                                        g > 10
  1000

   500

      0
          1981
          1982
          1983
          1984
          1985
          1986
          1987
          1988
          1989
          1990
          1991
          1992
          1993
          1994
          1995
          1996
          1997
          1998
          1999
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
Note: The prices for the three distribution levels are evaluated at 0.4, 2.5, and 27.5 grams,
which are roughly the median quantities for each distribution level.




                                                30
Table 1. Crack cocaine observations by different quantity levels for DEA and MPDC data
for the years evaluated by Horowitz.
                                     DEA                                                  MPDC
Year                  g≤1       1<g≤5           g>5            All       g≤1         1<g≤5     g>5                 All
       1990             6         16             60           82         620            4       19                643
       1991             6         24            107           137        846           11       33                890
       1992            13         15             58           86         383           21       55                459
       1993             9          3             48           60         194           10       46                250
       1994             8         31             84           123         45            9       40                 94
       1995            22         14             48           84          62           10       18                 90
       1996            10         22             60           92          35           10       15                 60
       1997             5          4             58           67          55           26       49                130
  1998(Q1&Q2)           3          6             35           44          36            9       11                 56
      Total for
 Horowitz’s years      82         135           558           775        2276           110          286         2672
Distribution
across levels         10.6%     17.4%       72.0%         100%           85.2%       4.1%           10.7%        100%
Average Purity        72.7%     73.0%       67.2%         68.8%          78.6%       68.0%          64.8%        76.7%




Table 2. Heroin observations by different quantity levels for DEA, MPDC, and DEA data
for the years evaluated by Horowitz.
                               DEA                                   MPDC                             DMP
                     g≤1        g>1         All        g≤1            g>1         All         g≤1      g>1                All
 1993                  1         15         16           9               1        10           41         0               41
 1994                  0           3         3           9               2        11           41         0               41
 1995                  3           9        12           8               2        10           31         0               31
 1996                  2           4         6          14              24        38           39         0               39
 1997                  2         32         34          30              14        44           20       11                31
 1998 (Q1 and
                        2        27         29           15              0        15           16            5            24
 Q2)
 Total for
 Horowitz              10        90        100           85             43       128          188           16           204
 years
 Distribution                           100.0                                100.0                                100.0
                    10.0%     90.0%                   66.4%      33.6%                   92.2%       7.8%
 across levels                          %                                    %                                    %
 Average
                    27.3%     59.2%     55.6%         26.3%      33.4%       28.8%       22.2%       18.4%        21.9%
 Purity




                                                        31
 Table 3. Effects of price and purity on the number of emergency room mentions of
cocaine.
                                      (1)                   (2)                 (3)
                              Lag for one quarter:    Lags for two    Lag for one quarter
                                                         quarters:    with same sample as
                                                                       that for lags with
                                                                         two quarters:
                                           ***
One-quarter lagged heroin         -0.0017                0.00008             -0.0007
price                              (0.0005)             (0.00013)           (0.0006)
Two-quarter lagged heroin                              -0.00107**
price                                                   (0.00013)
                                          ***
One-quarter lagged rate of         2395.4               1905.3***           2233.4***
heroin mentions                     (215.0)               (50.4)             (246.4)
                                                                ***
Two-quarter lagged rate of                               412.2
heroin mentions                                           (53.7)
BIC                                 12,441                10,059              10,173
 # observations                       460                  382                 382
***p < 0.01; **p < 0.05

Standard errors are in parentheses.

BIC results show one lag suffices for predicting the model.




                                               32
                                                       APPENDIX




Figure A1. Predicted price trends for DEA and MPDC observations less than or equal to 5
grams, evaluated at 1 gram and 75% purity, 1990-2005. (N=402 DEA, 3336 MPDC)

  250

  200

  150
                                                                                     DEA
                                                                                     MPDC
  100

   50

    0
     90
          91
               92
                    93
                         94
                              95
                                   96
                                        97
                                             98
                                                  99
                                                       00
                                                            01
                                                                 02
                                                                      03
                                                                           04
                                                                                05
   19
        19
             19
                  19
                       19
                            19
                                 19
                                      19
                                           19
                                                19
                                                     20
                                                          20
                                                               20
                                                                    20
                                                                         20
                                                                              20



χ2(16)==10.78 (p=0.82) ; Correlation=0.65



Figure A2. Predicted price trends for DEA and MPDC observations greater than 5 grams,
evaluated at 25 grams and 75% purity, 1990-2005. (N=959 DEA, 485 MPDC)

  250


  200


  150
                                                                                     DEA
                                                                                     MPDC
  100

   50


    0
     90

     91

     92

     93

     94

     95

     96

     97

     98

     99

     00

     01

     02

     03

     04

     05
   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   19

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20

   20




χ2(16)=0.68 (p=1.00); Correlation=0.81




                                                            33
Table A1. Predicted prices per gram for crack cocaine for the Washington, DC
metropolitan area for three distribution levels, 1986-2005, evaluated at 75% purity.

                     g≤1        1 < g ≤ 15          g > 15
     1990             190              140              87
     1991             152              111              63
     1992             151               94              62
     1993             160               93              62
     1994             150               88              53
     1995             169               77              52
     1996             130               78              50
     1997             150               83              52
     1998             130               78              45
     1999             130               88              57
     2000             154               95              58
     2001             150               91              58
     2002             134               70              53
     2003             139               87              47
     2004             104               71              44
     2005             111               65              40

Table A2. Predicted prices for one pure gram of crack cocaine for the Washington, DC
metropolitan area for three distribution levels, 1986-2005, evaluated at 100% purity.

              g≤1      1 < g ≤ 15    g > 15
     1986      435            213       112
     1987      257            174        89
     1988      188            108        83
     1989      182             84        73
     1990      237            170       109
     1991      189            135        79
     1992      188            114        77
     1993      200            113        78
     1994      188            107        67
     1995      210             93        65
     1996      163             95        62
     1997      187            101        65
     1998      162             95        56
     1999      162            106        71
     2000      193            115        73
     2001      187            111        73
     2002      168             85        66
     2003      174            105        59
     2004      130             87        56
     2005      139             79        50

Note: The prices for the three distribution levels are evaluated at 0.3, 5, and 38 grams, which
are roughly the median quantities for each distribution level.




                                               34
 Table A3. Predicted prices for one pure gram of powder cocaine for the Washington, DC
metropolitan area for three distribution levels, 1981-2005, evaluated at 100% purity.

            g≤2        2 < g ≤ 10    10 < g ≤ 50        g > 50
  1981         536            379            303             231
  1982         653            398            292             201
  1983         473            340            223             165
  1984         395            288            199             143
  1985         292            258            144             152
  1986         266            206            156             121
  1987         243            196            117               88
  1988         194            159             97               68
  1989         172            155             83               65
  1990         197            213            109               76
  1991         179            154             94               70
  1992         178            165             98               56
  1993         178              91            73               60
  1994         150            139             75               52
  1995         223            131             87               61
  1996         205            113             58               51
  1997         204              93            67               50
  1998         155              91            58               48
  1999         122              98            72               52
  2000         161            137             68               61
  2001         156            121             74               60
  2002         144            101             64               53
  2003         154            114             63               52
  2004         122              94            56               48
  2005         146              89            47               42

Note: The prices for the four distribution levels are evaluated at 0.75, 5, 27, and 108 grams,
which are roughly the median quantities for each distribution level.




                                                   35
 Table A4. Predicted prices for one pure gram of heroin for the Washington, DC
metropolitan area for three distribution levels, 1981-2005, evaluated at 75% purity.

               g≤1        1 < g ≤ 10     g > 10
     1981        1672           1762          951
     1982        1634           1346          856
     1983        2478           1917          813
     1984        1472           1728          766
     1985        1146           1616          867
     1986        1381           1114          577
     1987        1106           1402          773
     1988         781            858          507
     1989         720            891          536
     1990        1233           1109          717
     1991         913           1157          529
     1992         880            700          504
     1993         770            682          402
     1994         813            548          340
     1995         727            571          282
     1996         741            520          297
     1997         730            466          286
     1998         475            305          198
     1999         424            333          218
     2000         527            286          177
     2001         380            275          118
     2002         386            355          152
     2003         414            373          183
     2004         430            309          172
     2005         471            298          167

Note: The prices for the three distribution levels are evaluated at 0.4, 2.5, and 27.5 grams,
which are roughly the median quantities for each distribution level.




                                                36
