NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DYNAMICS AND STABILITY OF CONSTITUTIONS, COALITIONS, AND CLUBS
Daron Acemoglu
Georgy Egorov
Konstantin Sonin
Working Paper 14239
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14239

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

Daron Acemoglu gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Science Foundation
and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. We thank John Duggan, Matthew Jackson, Robert
Powell, and conference and seminar participants at the ASSA 2008 (New Orleans), the 2008 Game
Theory World Congress, Berkeley, California Institute of Technology, Harvard and Princeton for useful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Dynamics and Stability of Constitutions, Coalitions, and Clubs
Daron Acemoglu, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin
NBER Working Paper No. 14239
August 2008
JEL No. C71,D71,D74
ABSTRACT
A central feature of dynamic collective decision-making is that the rules that govern the procedures
for future decision-making and the distribution of political power across players are determined by
current decisions. For example, current constitutional change must take into account how the new
constitution may pave the way for further changes in laws and regulations. We develop a general framework
for the analysis of this class of dynamic problems. Under relatively natural acyclicity assumptions,
we provide a complete characterization of dynamically stable states as functions of the initial state
and determine conditions for their uniqueness. We show how this framework can be applied in political
economy, coalition formation, and the analysis of the dynamics of clubs. The explicit characterization
we provide highlights two intuitive features of dynamic collective decision-making: (1) a social arrangement
is made stable by the instability of alternative arrangements that are preferred by sufficiently many
members of the society; (2) efficiency-enhancing changes are often resisted because of further social
changes that they will engender.

Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Georgy Egorov
Littauer Center
1805 Cambridge Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
gegorov@fas.harvard.edu

Konstantin Sonin
New Economic School
47 Nakhimovsky prosp.
Moscow, 117418 RUSSIA
ksonin@nes.ru

1

Introduction

Consider the problem of a society choosing its constitution. Naturally, the current rewards
from adopting a specific constitution will influence this decision. But, as long as the members
of the society are forward-looking and patient, the future implications of the constitution may
be even more important. For example, a constitution that encourages economic activity and
benefits the majority of the population may nonetheless create future instability or leave room
for a minority to seize political control. If so, the society–or the majority of its members–may
rationally shy away from adopting such a constitution. Many problems in political economy,
club theory, coalition formation, organizational economics, and industrial organization have a
structure resembling this example of constitutional choice.
We develop a general framework for the analysis of dynamic group-decision-making over
constitutions, coalitions, and clubs. Formally, we consider a society consisting of a finite number
of infinitely-lived individuals. The society starts in a particular state, which can be thought of
as the constitution of the society, regulating how economic and political decisions are made. It
determines stage payoﬀs and also how the society can determine its future states (constitutions),
for example, which subsets of individuals can change the constitution. Our focus is on (Markov
perfect) equilibria of this dynamic game when individuals are suﬃciently forward-looking. Under
natural acyclicity assumptions, which rule out Condorcet-type cycles, we prove the existence and
characterize the structure of (dynamically) stable states, which are defined as states that arise
and persist. An equilibrium is represented by a mapping φ, which designates the dynamically
stable state φ (s0 ) as a function of the initial state s0 . We show that the set of dynamically
stable states is largely independent of the details of agenda-setting and voting protocols.
Although our main focus is the analysis of the noncooperative game outlined in the previous
paragraph, we first start with an axiomatic characterization of stable states. This characterization relies on the observation that suﬃciently forward-looking individuals will not wish to
support change towards a state (constitution) that might ultimately lead to another, less preferred state. This observation is encapsulated in a simple stability axiom. We also introduce two
other natural axioms ensuring that individuals do not support changes that will give them lower
utility. We characterize the set of mappings, Φ, that are consistent with these three axioms and
provide conditions under which there exists a unique φ ∈ Φ (Theorem 1). Even when Φ is not

a singleton, the sets of stable states according to any two φ1 , φ2 ∈ Φ are identical.

Our main results are given in Theorem 2. This theorem shows that for any agenda-setting and

voting protocol the equilibria of the dynamic game we outline can be represented by some φ ∈ Φ

and that for any φ ∈ Φ, there exists a protocol such that the equilibrium will be represented
1

by φ.1 This means that starting with initial state s0 , any equilibrium leads to a dynamically
stable state φ (s0 ) for some φ ∈ Φ. Naturally, when such φ is unique, all equilibria result in the
uniquely-defined dynamically stable φ (s0 ).

An attractive feature of this analysis is that the set of dynamically stable states can be
characterized recursively. This characterization is not only simple (the set of dynamically stable
states can be computed using induction), but it also emphasizes a fundamental insight: a particular state is dynamically stable only if there does not exist another state that is dynamically
stable and is preferred by a set of players that form a winning coalition within the current state.
At the center of our approach is the natural lack of commitment in dynamic decision-making
problems–those that gain additional decision-making power as a result of a reform cannot
commit to refraining from further choices that would hurt the initial set of decision-makers.
This lack of commitment, together with forward-looking behavior, is at the root of the general
characterization result provided in these theorems. It also leads to two simple intuitive results:
1. A particular social arrangement (constitution, coalition, or club) is made stable not by
the absence of a powerful set of players that prefer another alternative, but because of the
absence of an alternative stable arrangement that is preferred by a suﬃciently powerful
constituency. To understand why certain social arrangements are stable, we must thus
study the instabilities that changes away from these arrangements would unleash.2
2. Dynamically stable states can be ineﬃcient–in the sense that they may be Pareto dominated by the payoﬀs in another state.
Our final general result, Theorem 3, provides suﬃcient conditions for the acyclicity assumptions in Theorems 1 and 2 to hold when states belong to an ordered set (e.g., when they are a
subset of R). In particular, it shows that these results apply when (static) preferences satisfy a
single-crossing property or are single peaked (and some minimal assumptions on the structure
of winning coalitions are satisfied). This theorem makes our main results easy to apply in a
variety of environments. We also show that Theorems 1 and 2 apply in a range of situations in
which states do not belong to an ordered set.
The next two examples provide simple illustrations of the dynamic trade-oﬀs emphasized by
our approach.
1
An additional assumption in the analysis of this game is that there is a transaction cost incurred by all
individuals every time there is a change in the state. This assumption is used to prove the existence of a
pure-strategy equilibrium and to rule out cycles without imposing stronger assumptions on preferences (see also
Examples 3 and 4 in Appendix C).
2
This result also shows that, in contrast to Riker’s (1962) emphasis in the context of political coalition formation
games, the equilibrium will typically not involve a “minimum winning coalition,” because the state corresponding
to this coalition is generally unstable.

2

Example 1 (Ineﬃcient Inertia) Consider a society consisting of two individuals, E and M .
E represents the elite and initially holds power, and M corresponds to the middle class. There
are three states: (1) absolutist monarchy a, in which E rules, with no checks and no political
rights for M ; (2) constitutional monarchy c, in which M has greater security and is willing to
invest; (3) democracy d, where M becomes more influential and the privileges of E disappear.
Suppose that stage payoﬀs satisfy
wE (d) < wE (a) < wE (c) , and wM (a) < wM (c) < wM (d) .
In particular, wE (a) < wE (c) means that E has higher payoﬀ under constitutional monarchy
than under absolutist monarchy, for example, because greater investments by M increase tax
revenues. M clearly prefers democracy to constitutional monarchy and is least well-oﬀ under
absolutist monarchy. Both parties discount the stage payoﬀs with discount factor β ∈ (0, 1). As

described above, “states” not only determine payoﬀs but also specify decision rules. In absolutist
monarchy, E decides which regime will prevail tomorrow. To simplify the discussion, suppose

that starting in both regimes c and d, M decides next period’s regime. In terms of the notation
introduced above, this implies that d is a dynamically stable state, and φ (d) = d. In contrast, c
is not a dynamically stable state, since starting from c, there will be a transition to d and thus
φ (c) = d. Therefore, if, starting in regime a, E chooses a reform towards c, this will lead to d
in the following period, and thus give E a discounted payoﬀ of
UE (reform) = wE (c) + β

wE (d)
.
1−β

In contrast, if E decides to stay in a forever, its payoﬀ is UE (no reform) = wE (a) / (1 − β). If

β is suﬃciently small, then UE (no reform) < UE (reform), and reform will take place. However,
when players are forward looking and β is large, then UE (no reform) > UE (reform). In this
case, the unique dynamically stable state starting with a is a–that is, φ (a) = a.
This example, when players are suﬃciently forward-looking, illustrates both of the intuitive
results mentioned above. First, state a is made stable by the instability of another state, c, that

is preferred by those who are powerful in a. Second, both E and M would be strictly better oﬀ
in c than in a, so the stable state starting from a is Pareto ineﬃcient. It also illustrates another
general insight: the set of stable states is larger when players are forward-looking (when β is
small, only d is stable, whereas when β is large, both a and d are stable).
A similar game can be used to model the implications of concessions in wars. For example, a
concession that increases the payoﬀs to both warring parties may not take place because it will
change the future balance of power. It could also be used to illustrate how organizations might
act “conservatively” and resist eﬃciency-enhancing restructuring. For instance, the appointment
3

of a CEO who would increase the value of the firm may not be favored by the board of directors
if they forecast that the CEO would then become powerful and reduce their privileges.3
Example 2 (Voting in Clubs) Consider the problem of voting in clubs. The society consisting
of N individuals. A club is a subset of the society. Each individual i receives a stage payoﬀ
wi (st ), which is as a function of the current club st , and current club members decide (according
to some voting rule) tomorrow’s club st+1 . The seminal unpublished paper by Roberts (1999)
studies a special case of this environment, where individuals are ordered, i = 1, 2, ..., N , any
club st must take the form xk = {1, ..., k} for some k = 1, 2, .., N , and decisions are made by

majoritarian voting. Under a range of additional assumptions Roberts establishes the existence

of mixed-strategy (Markovian) equilibria and characterizes some of their properties. Our model
nests a more general version of this environment and enables us to establish the existence of
a unique dynamically stable club (and a pure-strategy equilibrium) under weaker conditions.
In addition, our approach allows a complete characterization of dynamically stable states and
clarifies the reasons for potential Pareto ineﬃciency.
These examples illustrate some of the possible applications of our approach. We view the
rich set of environments that are covered by our model and the relative simplicity of the resulting
dynamic stable states as its major advantages. Both our specific results and the general ideas can
be applied to a range of problems in political economy, organizational economics, club theory,
and other areas. Some of these additional examples are discussed in Section 6.
On the theoretical side, Roberts (1999) and Barbera, Maschler, and Shalev (2001) can be
viewed as the most important precursors to our paper. Barbera, Maschler, and Shalev (2001)
study a dynamic game of club formation in which any member of the club can unilaterally admit
a new agent. The recent ambitious paper by Lagunoﬀ (2006), which constructs a general model
of political reform and relates reform to the time-inconsistency of induced social rules, is another
precursor. Acemoglu and Robinson’s (2000, 2006a) and Lizzeri and Persico’s (2004) analyses of
franchise extension and Barbera and Jackson’s (2004) model of constitutional stability are on
related themes as well. How these papers can be viewed as applications of our general framework
is discussed in Section 6.
The two papers most closely related to our work are Chwe (1994) and Gomes and Jehiel
3

Ideas related to this example have been discussed in a number of diﬀerent contexts. Robinson (1997) and
Bourguignon and Verdier (2000) discuss how a dictator or an oligarchy may refrain from providing productive
public goods or from educational investments, because they may be afraid of losing power. Rajan and Zingales
(2000) also emphasize similar ideas and apply them in the context of organizations. Acemoglu and Robinson
(2006a) construct a dynamic model in which the elite may block technological improvements or institutional
reforms, because they will destabilize the existing regime. Fearon (1996, 2004) and Powell (1998) discuss similar
ideas in the context of civil wars and international wars, respectively.

4

(2005). Chwe studies a model where payoﬀs are determined by states and there are exogenous
rules governing transitions from one state to another. Chwe demonstrates the relationship
between two distinct notions from cooperative game theory, the consistent and stable sets.
However, in Chwe’s setup, neither a noncooperative analysis nor characterization results are
possible, while such results are at the heart of our paper. The link between Chwe’s consistent
sets and our dynamically stable states is discussed further below. Gomes and Jehiel study a
related environment with side payments. They show that a player may sacrifice his instantaneous
payoﬀ to improve his bargaining position for the future, which is related to the unwillingness
of winning coalitions to make transitions to non-stable states in our paper. They also show
that equilibrium may be ineﬃcient when the discount factor is small. In contrast, in our game
Pareto dominated outcomes are not only possible in general, but they may emerge as unique
equilibria and are more likely when discount factors are large (as illustrated by Example 1).
More generally, we also provide a full set of characterization (and uniqueness) results, which are
not present in Gomes and Jehiel (and in fact, with side payments, we suspect that such results
are not possible). Finally, in our paper a dynamically stable state depends on the initial state,
while in Gomes and Jehiel, as the discount factor tends to 1, there is “ergodicity” in the sense
that the ultimate distribution of states does not depend on the initial state.
Finally, our work is also related to the literature on club theory (see, for example, Buchanan,
1956, Ellickson et al., 1999, Scotchmer, 2001). While early work in this area was static, a number
of recent papers have investigated the dynamics of club formation.

In addition to Roberts

(1999) and Barbera, Maschler, and Shalev (2001), which were discussed above, some of the
important papers in this area include Burkart and Wallner (2000), who develop an incomplete
contracts theory of club enlargement, and Jehiel and Scotchmer (2001), who show that the
requirement of a majority consent for admission to a jurisdiction may not be more restrictive
than an unrestricted right to migrate. Alesina, Angeloni, and Etro (2005) apply a simplified
version of Roberts’s model to the enlargement of the EU and Bordignon and Brusco (2003)
study the role of “enhanced cooperation agreements” in the dynamics of EU enlargement.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the general environment.
Section 3 motivates and presents our axiomatic analysis, which also acts as a preparation for
our noncooperative analysis. In Section 4, we prove the existence of a (pure-strategy) Markov
perfect equilibrium of the dynamic game for any agenda setting and voting protocol and establish the equivalence between these equilibria and the axiomatic characterization in Section 3.
Section 5 shows how the results of Sections 3—4 can be applied when states belong to an ordered
set. Section 6 discusses a range of applications of our framework, including the two examples
presented above. Section 7 concludes. Appendix A presents the main proofs omitted from the
5

text. Appendix B and C, which are not for publication, contain a number of generalizations,
additional results, examples, and some omitted proofs.

2

Environment

There is a finite set of players I. Time is discrete and infinite, indexed by t (t ≥ 1). There

is a finite set of states which we denote by S. Throughout the paper, |X| denotes the number

of elements of set X, so |I| and |S| denote the number of individuals and states, respectively.
States represent both diﬀerent institutions aﬀecting players’ payoﬀs and procedures for decisionmaking (e.g., the identity of the ruling coalition in power, the degree of supermajority, or the
weights or powers of diﬀerent agents). Although our game is one of non-transferable utility, a
limited amount of transfers can also be incorporated by allowing multiple (but a finite set of)
states that have the same procedure for decision-making but diﬀerent payoﬀs across players.
The initial state is denoted by s0 ∈ S. This state can be thought of as being determined

as part of the description of the game or as chosen by Nature according to a given probability
distribution. For any t ≥ 1, the state st ∈ S is determined endogenously. A nonempty set X ⊂ I

is called coalition, and we denote the set of coalitions by C (that is, C is the set of nonempty
¢
¡
subsets of I). Each state s ∈ S is characterized by a pair {wi (s)}i∈I , Ws . Here, for each state
s ∈ S, wi (s) is a (strictly) positive stage payoﬀ assigned to each individual i ∈ I. The restriction

that wi (s) > 0 is a normalization, making zero payoﬀ the worst outcome. Ws is a (possibly

empty) subset of C representing the set of winning coalitions in state s. We use Ws to model

political institutions in state s. This allows us to summarize diﬀerent political procedures, such

as weighted majority or supermajority rules, in an economical fashion. For example, if in state
s a majority is required for decision-making, Ws includes all subsets of I that form a majority;

if in state s individual i is a dictator, Ws includes all coalitions that include i.4 Since Ws is a
function of the state, the procedure for decision-making can vary across states.
Throughout the paper, we maintain the following assumption.
Assumption 1 (Winning Coalitions) For any state s ∈ S, Ws ⊂ C satisfies:
(a) If X, Y ∈ C, X ⊂ Y , and X ∈ Ws then Y ∈ Ws .
(b) If X, Y ∈ Ws , then X ∩ Y 6= ∅.

Part (a) simply states that if some coalition X is winning in state s, then increasing the size
of the coalition will not reverse this. This is a natural assumption for almost any decision rule.
4
Notice that Ws or the political rules do not specify certain institutional details, such as who makes proposals,
how voting takes place and so on. These are specified by the agenda-setting and voting protocols of our dynamic
game. We will show that these only have a limited eﬀect on equilibrium outcomes, justifying our focus on Ws as
a representation of “political rules”.

6

Part (b) rules out the possibility that two disjoint coalitions are winning in the same state, thus
imposing a form of (possibly weighted) majority or supermajority rule. If Ws = ∅, then state s
is exogenously stable. None of our existence or characterization results depend on whether there
exist exogenously stable states.
The following binary relations on the set of states S will be useful for the rest of our analysis.

For x, y ∈ S, we write

x ∼ y ⇐⇒ ∀i ∈ I : wi (x) = wi (y) .

(1)

In this case we call states x and y payoﬀ-equivalent, or simply equivalent. More important for
our purposes is the binary relation ºz . For any z ∈ S, ºz is defined by
y ºz x ⇐⇒ {i ∈ I : wi (y) ≥ wi (x)} ∈ Wz .

(2)

Intuitively, y ºz x means that there exists a coalition of players that is winning (in z) with
each of its members weakly preferring y to x. Note three important features about ºz . First, it

only contains information about stage payoﬀs. In particular, wi (y) ≥ wi (x) does not mean that

individual i will prefer a switch to state y rather than x. Whether or not he does so depends
on the continuation payoﬀs following such a switch. Second, the relation ºz does not presume

any type of coordination or collective decision-making among the members of the coalition in
question. It simply records the existence of such a coalition. Third, the relation ºz is conditioned
on z since whether the coalition of players weakly preferring y to x is winning depends on the

set of winning coalitions, which is state dependent. With a slight abuse of terminology, if (2)
holds, we say that y is weakly preferred to x in z. In light of the preceding comments, this
neither means that all individuals prefer y to x nor that there will be a change from state x to y
in the dynamic game–it simply designates that there exists a winning coalition of players, each
obtaining a greater stage payoﬀs in y than in x. Relation Âz is defined similarly by
y Âz x ⇐⇒ {i ∈ I : wi (y) > wi (x)} ∈ Wz .

(3)

If (3) holds, we say that y is strictly preferred to x in z.
Relation ∼ clearly defines equivalence classes; if x ∼ y and y ∼ z, then x ∼ z. In contrast,

the binary relations ºz and Âz need not even be transitive. Nevertheless, for any x, z ∈ S, we
have x ¨z x, and whenever Wz is nonempty, we also have x ºz x. Finally, from Assumption 1

we have that for any x, y, z ∈ S, y Âz x implies x ²z y, and similarly y ºz x implies x ¨z y.

The following assumption introduces some basic properties of payoﬀ functions and places

some joint restrictions on payoﬀ functions and winning coalitions.
Assumption 2 (Payoﬀs) Payoﬀs {wi (s)}i∈I,s∈S satisfy the following properties:
7

(a) For any sequence of states s1 , s2 , . . . , sk in S,
sj+1 Âsj sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1 =⇒ s1 ¨sk sk .
(b) For any sequence of states s, s1 , . . . , sk in S with sj Âs s for each 1 ≤ j ≤ k,
sj+1 Âs sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1 =⇒ s1 ¨s sk .
Assumption 2 plays a major role in our analysis and ensures “acyclicity” (but is considerably
weaker than “transitivity”). Part (a) of Assumption 2 rules out cycles of the form y Âx x, z Ây y,
x Âz z–that is, a cycle of states (x, y, z) such that in each, a winning coalition of players strictly

prefer the next state. Part (b) of Assumption 2 rules out cycles of the form y Âs x, z Âs y,
x Âs z.5 Assumptions 1 and 2 are natural given our focus. Throughout the paper we suppose

that they hold. In addition, we sometimes impose the following (stronger) requirement.

Assumption 3 (Comparability) For x, y, s ∈ S such that x Âs s, y Âs s, and x ¿ y, either
y Âs x or x Âs y.

Assumption 3 means that if two states x and y are weakly preferred to s (in s), then y and
z are Âs -comparable. It turns out to be suﬃcient to guarantee uniqueness of equilibria.6 This

assumption is not necessary for the majority of our results, including the general characterization.
Our main results are stated without this assumption and are then strengthened by imposing it.
In each period, each individual maximizes his discounted expected utility:
Ui (t) = (1 − β)

X∞

τ =t

β τ ui (τ ) ,

(4)

where β ∈ (0, 1) is a common discount factor and we can think of ui (t) as given by the payoﬀ
function wi (s) introduced in Assumption 2 (see, in particular, equation (9) in Section 4). We
consider situations in which β is greater than some threshold β 0 ∈ (0, 1) (this threshold is

derived as an explicit function of payoﬀs in Appendix A). We will then characterize the Markov
perfect equilibrium (MPE) of this dynamic game and investigate the existence and structure
of dynamically stable states. As defined more formally in Definition 2, a state s is dynamically
stable if there exists a MPE and a finite time T such that this equilibrium involves st = s for
all t ≥ T –that is, a dynamically stable state persists in equilibrium.
5

Neither part of Assumption 2 is implied by the other. Examples 5 and 6 in Appendix C illustrate the types
of cycles that can arise when either 2(a) or 2(b) fails.
6
It is also “necessary” in the sense that if this assumption is dispensed with, it is easy to construct examples
with multiple equilibria. Example 7 in Appendix C illustrates this.

8

3

Axiomatic Characterization

Before specifying the details of agenda-setting and voting protocols, we provide a more abstract
(axiomatic) characterization of stable states. This axiomatic analysis has two purposes. First, it
illustrates that the key economic forces that arise in the context of dynamic collective decisionmaking are largely independent of the details of the agenda-setting and voting protocols. Second,
the results in this section are a preparation for the characterization of the equilibrium of the
dynamic game introduced in the previous section; in particular, our main result, Theorem 2,
will make use of this axiomatic characterization.
The key economic insight enabling an axiomatic characterization is that with suﬃciently
forward-looking behavior, an individual should not wish to transit to a state that will ultimately
lead to another state that gives her lower utility. This basic insight enables a tight characterization of (axiomatically) stable states. Theorem 2 in the next section shows the equivalence
between the notions of axiomatically and dynamically stable states.
More formally, our axiomatic characterization determines a set of mappings Φ such that for
any φ ∈ Φ, φ : S → S assigns an axiomatically stable state s∞ ∈ S to each initial state s0 ∈ S.

We impose the following three axioms on φ.

Axiom 1 (Desirability) If x, y ∈ S are such that y = φ (x), then either y = x or y Âx x.
Axiom 2 (Stability) If x, y ∈ S are such that y = φ (x), then y = φ (y).
Axiom 3 (Rationality) If x, y, z ∈ S are such that z Âx x, z = φ (z), and z Âx y, then
y 6= φ (x).

All three axioms are natural in light of what we have discussed above. Axiom 1 requires
that the society should not (permanently) move from state x to another state y unless there
is a winning coalition that supports this transition. Axiom 2 encapsulates the stability notion
discussed above; if some state is not dynamically stable, it cannot be the (ultimate) stable state
for any initial state, because there will eventually be a transition away from this state (and thus
if mapping φ picks state y starting from state x, then it should also pick y starting from y).
Axiom 3 imposes the reasonable requirement that if there exists a stable state z preferred to
both x and y by winning coalitions in state x, then φ should not pick y in x.
All three axioms refer to properties of φ, but they are closely related to underlying individual preferences. Because collective decision-making aggregates individual preferences, they
indirectly apply to the mapping φ that summarizes these collective preferences (for example,

9

one might think that φ aggregates individual preferences according to majority rule or weighted
supermajority rule, and so on).
We next define the set Φ formally and state the relationship between axiomatically stable
states and the mapping φ.
Definition 1 (Axiomatically Stable States) Let Φ ≡ {φ : S → S: φ satisfies Axioms 1—3}.

A state s ∈ S is (axiomatically) stable if φ (s) = s for some φ ∈ Φ. The set of stable states
(fixed points) for mapping φ ∈ Φ is Dφ = {s ∈ S: φ (s) = s for φ ∈ Φ} and the set of all stable

states is D = {s ∈ S: φ (s) = s for some φ ∈ Φ}.

The next theorem establishes the existence of stable states and provides a recursive characterization of such states. It also paves the way for Theorem 2, which shows the equivalence
between the equilibrium of the dynamic game in the previous section and the mappings φ ∈ Φ.
Theorem 1 (Axiomatic Characterization of Stable States) Suppose Assumptions 1 and
2 hold. Then:
1. The set Φ is non-empty. That is, there exists a mapping φ satisfying Axioms 1—3.
n
o
2. Any φ ∈ Φ can be recursively constructed as follows. Order the states as μ1 , ..., μ|S|
such that for any 1 ≤ j < l ≤ |S|, μl ¨μj μj (this is feasible given Assumption 2(a)). Let
φ (μ1 ) = μ1 . For each k = 2, ..., |S|, define

Then

©
©
ª
ª
Mk = s ∈ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 : s Âμk μk and φ (s) = s .
φ (μk ) =

½

μk
s ∈ Mk : @z ∈ Mk with z Âμk s

if Mk = ∅
.
if Mk =
6 ∅

(5)

(6)

(If there exist more than one s ∈ Mk : @z ∈ Mk with z Âμk s, we pick any of these; this

corresponds to multiple φ functions).

3. The set of stable states of any two mappings φ1 and φ2 in Φ coincide. That is, Dφ1 =
Dφ2 = D.

4. If, in addition, Assumption 3 holds, then any φ ∈ Φ is “payoﬀ-unique” in the sense that
for any two mappings φ1 and φ2 in Φ, φ1 (s) ∼ φ2 (s) for all s ∈ S.

Proof. (Part 1) To prove existence, we first construct the sequence of states
such that
if 1 ≤ j < l ≤ |S| , then μl ¨μj μj .
10

o
n
μ1 , ..., μ|S|
(7)

The construction is by induction. Assumption 2(a) implies that for any nonempty collection of
states Q ⊂ S, there exists z ∈ Q such that for any x ∈ Q, x ¨z z. Applying this results to S,

we obtain μ1 . Now, suppose we have defined μj for all j ≤ k − 1, where k ≤ |S|. Then, applying
ª
©
the same result to the collection of states S \ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 , we conclude that there exists μk
satisfying (7) for each k.

The second step is to construct a candidate mapping φ : S → S. This is again by induction.

For k = 1, let φ (μk ) = μk . Suppose we have defined μj for all j ≤ k − 1 where k ≤ |S|. Define

the collection of states Mk as in (5). This is the subset of states where φ has already been

defined, which satisfy φ (s) = s and are preferred to μk within μk . If Mk is empty, then we
define φ (μk ) = μk . If Mk is nonempty, then take φ (μk ) = z ∈ Mk such that
s ¨μk z for any s ∈ Mk

(8)

(such state z exists because we can apply Assumption 2(b) to Mk ). Proceeding inductively for

all 2 ≤ k ≤ |S|, we obtain φ as in (6).

To complete the proof, we need to verify that mapping φ in (6) satisfies Axioms 1—3. This is

straightforward for Axioms 1 and 2. In particular, by construction, either φ (μk ) = μk (in that
case these axioms trivially hold), or φ (μk ) is an element of Mk . In the latter case, φ (μk ) Âμk μk

and φ (φ (μk )) = φ (μk ) by (5). To check Axiom 3, suppose that for some state μk there exists

z such that z Âμk μk , z = φ (z), and z Âμk φ (μk ). Then z Âμk μk , combined with condition
ª
©
(7), implies that z ∈ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 . But the last condition, z Âμk φ (μk ), now contradicts (8).

This means that such z does not exist, and therefore Axiom 3 is satisfied.

(Part 2) This statement is equivalent to the following: if, given sequence

o
n
μ1 , ..., μ|S|

with the property (7), φ (μk ) is not given by (6) for some k, then φ does not satisfy Axioms

1—3. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that φ (μk ) is not given by (6) at k = 1. Then by
the contradiction hypothesis φ (μ1 ) 6= μ1 , so φ (μ1 ) = μl for l > 1. In this case, φ does not
satisfy Axiom 1, because μl ¨μ1 μ1 by (7), yielding a contradiction. Next, again to obtain a

contradiction, suppose that φ (μk ) is not given by (6) for the first time at k > 1. Then Mk in (5)

is well-defined, so either Mk = ∅ or Mk 6= ∅. If Mk = ∅, the contradiction hypothesis implies
that φ (μk ) 6= μk . Then, Axioms 1 and 2 imply φ (μk ) Âμk μk and φ (φ (μk )) = φ (μk ). Since

Mk = ∅, we must have that φ (μk ) = μl for l > k, but in this case φ (μk ) Âμk μk contradicts

(7). This contradiction implies that φ violates either Axiom 1 or 2 (or both). If Mk 6= ∅

and φ (μk ) = μl for l > k, then Axiom 1 is violated. If Mk 6= ∅ and φ (μk ) = μk , then φ
violates Axiom 3 (to see this, take any z ∈ Mk 6= ∅ and observe that z Âμk μk and φ (z) = z).

Therefore, when Mk 6= ∅, we have φ (μk ) ∈ Mk . Finally, φ (μk ) will not be given by (6) if

there exists some s ∈ Mk such that s Âμk φ (μk ). But in this case φ violates Axiom 3 (since
11

s Âμk φ (μk ), s Âμk μk , and φ (s) = s). This shows that any mapping φ that is not given by (6)
violates one of Axioms 1—3. and completes the proof of part 2.

(Part 3) Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that Dφ1 6= Dφ2 . Then ∃k : 1 ≤ k ≤ |S| such

that μj ∈ Dφ1 ⇔ μj ∈ Dφ2 for all j < k, but either μk ∈ Dφ1 and μk ∈
/ Dφ2 or μk ∈
/ Dφ1 and

/ Dφ2 . Then (6) implies
μk ∈ Dφ2 . Without loss of generality, assume that μk ∈ Dφ1 and μk ∈

that φ2 (μk ) = μl for some l < k. Applying Axioms 1 and 2 to mapping φ2 , we obtain μl Âμk μk
and φ2 (μl ) = μl . The latter implies that μl ∈ Dφ2 . Since, by hypothesis, μj ∈ Dφ1 ⇔ μj ∈ Dφ2

for all j < k, we have μl ∈ Dφ1 . Therefore, μl Âμk μk , μl Âμk φ1 (μk ) (because φ1 (μk ) = μk ),
and φ1 (μl ) = μl , but this violates Axiom 3 for mapping φ1 and establishes the desired result.

(Part 4) Suppose Assumption 3 holds. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that φ1 and φ2
are two non-equivalent mappings that satisfy Axioms 1—3, that is, there exists some state s such
that φ1 (s) ¿ φ2 (s). Part 3 of this Theorem (that Dφ1 = Dφ2 ) implies that φ1 (s) = s if and only

if φ2 (s) = s; since φ1 (s) ¿ φ2 (s), we must have that φ1 (s) 6= s 6= φ2 (s). Axiom 1 then implies

φ1 (s) Âs s, φ2 (s) Âs s, and Assumption 3 implies that either φ1 (s) Âs φ2 (s) or φ2 (s) Âs φ1 (s).
Without loss of generality suppose that the former is the case. Then for y = φ2 (s) there exists
φ1 (s) such that φ1 (s) Âs y, φ1 (s) Âs s, and φ2 (φ1 (s)) = φ1 (s) (the latter equality holds

because φ1 (s) is a φ1 -stable state by Axiom 2, and by part 3 of this Theorem, it is also a
φ2 -stable state). This implies that we can apply Axiom 3 to φ2 and derive the conclusion that
φ2 (s) 6= y. This contradiction completes the proof.

Theorem 1 shows that a mapping that satisfies Axioms 1—3 necessarily exists and provides

a suﬃcient condition for its uniqueness. Even when the uniqueness condition, Assumption 3,
does not hold, we know that axiomatically stable states coincide for any two mappings φ1 and
φ2 that satisfy Axioms 1—3.
Theorem 1 also provides a simple recursive characterization of the set of mappings Φ that
satisfy Axioms 1—3. Intuitively, Assumption 2(a) ensures that there exists some state μ1 ∈ S,

such that there does not exist another s ∈ S with s Âμ1 μ1 . Taking μ1 as base, we order the states
o
n
as μ1 , ..., μ|S| so that (7) is satisfied and then recursively construct the set of states Mk ⊂ S,
k = 2, ..., |S|, that includes stable states that are preferred to state μk (that is, states s such
that φ (s) = s and s Âμk μk ). When the set Mk is empty, then there exists no stable state that

is preferred to μk (in μk ) by members of a winning coalition. In this case, we have φ (μk ) = μk .

When Mk is nonempty, there exists such a stable state and thus φ (μk ) = s for some such s.

In addition to its recursive (and thus easy-to-construct) nature, this characterization is useful

because it highlights the fundamental property of stable states emphasized in the Introduction:
a state μk is made stable precisely by the absence of winning coalitions in μk favoring a transition
to another stable state (i.e., by the fact that Mk = ∅). We will see that this insight plays an
12

important role in the applications in Section 6.
Part 3 of Theorem 1 shows that the set of stable states D does not depend on the specific φ

chosen from Φ. For diﬀerent φ’s in Φ (when Φ is not a singleton), the stable state corresponding
to the same initial state may diﬀer, but the ranges of these mappings are the same. These

ranges and the set of stable states D are uniquely determined by preferences and the structure

of winning coalitions.7 Finally, part 4 shows that when Assumption 3 holds, any stable states

resulting from an initial state must be equivalent. In other words, if s1 = φ1 (s0 ) and s2 = φ (s0 ),
then s1 and s2 might diﬀer in terms of the structure of winning coalitions, but they must give
the same payoﬀ to all individuals.
We have motivated the analysis leading up to Theorem 1 with the argument that, when
agents are suﬃciently forward-looking, only axiomatically stable states should be observed (at
least in the “long run”, i.e., for t ≥ T for some finite T ). The analysis of the dynamic game in

the next section substantiates this interpretation.

4

Noncooperative Foundations of Dynamically Stable States

We now describe the extensive-form game capturing dynamic interactions in the environment of
Section 2 and characterize the MPE of this game. The main result is the equivalence between
the MPE of this game and the axiomatic characterization in Theorem 1.
This game specifies: (1) a protocol for a sequence of agenda-setters and proposals in each
state; and (2) a protocol for voting over proposals. Voting is sequential and is described below
(the exact sequence in which votes are cast will not matter). We represent the protocol for
agenda-setting using a sequence of mappings, {π s }s∈S , and refer to it simply as a protocol. Let
Ks be a natural number for each s ∈ S. Then, π s is defined as a mapping
π s : {1, . . . , Ks } → I ∪ S
for each state s ∈ S. Thus each π s specifies a finite sequence of elements from I ∪ S, where Ks is

the length of sequence for state s and determines the sequence of agenda-setters and proposals.
In particular, if π s (k) ∈ I, then it denotes an agenda-setter who will make a proposal from

the set of states S. Alternatively, if π s (k) ∈ S, then it directly corresponds to an exogenously-

specified proposal over which individuals vote. Therefore, the extensive-form game is general
7
In Appendix C, we relate the set D to two concepts from cooperative game theory, von NeumannMorgenstern’s stable set and Chwe’s largest consistent set. Even though these concepts generally diﬀer, we
show that under Assumptions 1 and 2, both sets coincide with D. This is an intriguing result, though it does
not obviate the need for our axiomatic characterization in this section or the noncooperative analysis in the next
section, since our main focus is on the mappings φ, which determine the axiomatically or dynamically stable
states as a function of the initial state. Von Neumann-Morgenstern’s stable set and Chwe’s largest consistent set
are silent on this relationship.

13

enough to include both proposals for a change to a new state initiated by agenda-setters or
exogenous proposals. We make the following assumption on {π s }s∈S :
Assumption 4 (Protocols) For every state s ∈ S, one (or both) of the following two conditions
is satisfied:

(a) For any state z ∈ S \ {s}, there is an element k : 1 ≤ k ≤ Ks of sequence π s such that

π s (k) = z.

(b) For any player i ∈ I there is an element k : 1 ≤ k ≤ Ks of sequence π s such that

π s (k) = i.

This assumption implies that either sequence π s contains all possible states (other than
the “status quo” s) as proposals or it allows all possible agenda-setters to eventually make a
proposal. It ensures that either all alternatives will be considered or all players will have a
chance to propose (unless a proposal is accepted earlier).
At t = 0, state s0 ∈ S is taken as given (as noted above, it might be determined as part

of the description of the environment or determined by Nature according to some probability
distribution). Subsequently (for t ≥ 1), the timing of events is as follows:
1. Period t begins with state st−1 inherited from the previous period.
2. For k = 1, . . . , Kst−1 , the kth proposal Pk,t is determined as follows. If π st−1 (k) ∈ S, then
Pk,t = π st−1 (k). If π st−1 (k) ∈ I, then player π st−1 (k) chooses Pk,t ∈ S.

3. If Pk,t 6= st−1 , then there is a sequential voting between Pk,t and st−1 (we will show that

the sequence in which voting takes place has no eﬀect on the equilibrium and we do not
specify it here). Each player votes yes (for Pk,t ) or no (for st−1 ). Let Yk,t denote the

set of players who voted yes. If Yk,t ∈ Wst−1 , then alternative Pk,t is accepted, otherwise

/ Wst−1 ), it is rejected. If Pk,t = st−1 , there is no voting and we adopt the
(that is, if Yk,t ∈

convention that in this case Pk,t is rejected.

4. If Pk,t is accepted, then we transition to state st = Pk,t , and the period ends. If Pk,t is
rejected or if there is no voting because Pk,t = st−1 and k < Kst−1 , then the game moves
to step 2 with k increased by 1; if k = Kst−1 , the next state is st = st−1 , and the period
ends.
5. In the end of the period, each player receives instantaneous utility ui (t).
Payoﬀs in this dynamic game are given by (4), with
½
wi (st ) if st = st−1
ui (t) =
0
if st 6= st−1
14

(9)

for each i ∈ I. In other words, in the period in which a transition occurs, each individual receives

zero payoﬀ. In all other periods, each individual i receives the payoﬀ wi (st ) as a function of
the current state st . The period of zero payoﬀ can be interpreted as representing a “transaction

cost” associated with the change in the state and is introduced to guarantee the existence of a
pure-strategy MPE. Since the game is infinitely-repeated and we will take β to be large, this
one-period “transaction cost” has little eﬀect on discounted payoﬀs. In particular, once (and if)
a dynamically stable state s is reached, individuals will receive wi (s) at each date thereafter.8
Examples 3 and 4 in Appendix C demonstrate that if the transaction cost is removed from (9),
a (pure-strategy) equilibrium may fail to exist or may induce cycles along the equilibrium path.
A MPE is defined in the standard fashion as a subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE) where
strategies are only functions of “payoﬀ-relevant states.” Here payoﬀ-relevant states are diﬀerent
from the states s ∈ S described above, since the order in which proposals have been made within
a given period are also payoﬀ relevant for the continuation game. Since the notion of MPE is

familiar, we do not provide a formal definition. For completeness, such a definition is provided
in Appendix C. In what follows, we will use the terms MPE and equilibrium interchangeably.
We next define dynamically stable states.
Definition 2 (Dynamically Stable States) State s∞ ∈ S is a dynamically stable state
if there exist an initial state s ∈ S, a set of protocols {π s }s∈S , a MPE strategy profile σ, and

T < ∞ such that along the equilibrium path we have st = s∞ for all t ≥ T .

Put diﬀerently, s∞ is a dynamically stable state if it is reached by some finite time T and
is repeated thereafter. Our objective is to determine whether dynamically stable states exist
in the dynamic game described above and to characterize them as a function of the initial
state s0 ∈ S. We also establish the equivalence between dynamically and axiomatically stable

states characterized in the previous section. We first introduce a slightly stronger version of
Assumption 2(b).
Assumption 2(b)* For any sequence of states s, s1 , . . . , sk in S with sj Âs s for 1 ≤ j ≤ k
and sj ¿ sl for 1 ≤ j < l ≤ k,

sj+1 ºs sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1 =⇒ s1 ²s sk .
Moreover, if for x, y, s ∈ S we have x Âs s and y ¨s s, then y ¨s x.
8
Various diﬀerent alternative game forms also lead to the same results. We chose to present this one because
it appears to be the simplest one to describe and encompasses the most natural protocols for agenda setting and
voting. In particular, it allows votes to take place over all possible proposals (or all possible agenda-setters to
have a move), which is a desirable feature, since otherwise some transitions would be ruled out by the game form.

15

In addition to cycles of the form y Âs x, z Âs y, x Âs z (which are ruled out by Assumption

2(b)), this assumption rules out cycles of the form y ºs x, z ºs y, x ºs z, unless the states x,

y, and z are payoﬀ-equivalent. It also imposes the technical requirement that when x Âs s and
y ¨s s, then y ¨s x. Both requirements of this assumption are relatively mild.
The main result of the paper is summarized in the following theorem.
Theorem 2 (Characterization of Dynamically Stable States) Suppose that Assumptions
1, 2(a,b) and 4 hold. Then there exists β 0 ∈ (0, 1) such if for all β > β 0 , we have the following

results.

1. For any φ ∈ Φ there exists a set of protocols {π s }s∈S and a pure-strategy MPE σ of the

game such that st = φ (s0 ) for any t ≥ 1; that is, the game reaches φ (s0 ) after one period

and stays in this state thereafter. Therefore, s = φ (s0 ) is a dynamically stable state.
Moreover, suppose that Assumption 2(b)* holds. Then:

2. For any set of protocols {π s }s∈S there exists a pure-strategy MPE. Any such MPE σ has

the property that for any initial state s0 ∈ S, st = s∞ for all t ≥ 1. Moreover, there exists
φ ∈ Φ such that s∞ = φ (s0 ). Therefore, all dynamically stable states are axiomatically

stable.

3. If, in addition, Assumption 3 holds, then the MPE is essentially unique in the sense that
for any set of protocols {π s }s∈S , any pure-strategy MPE σ induces st ∼ φ (s0 ) for all t ≥ 1,

where φ ∈ Φ.

Proof. See Appendix A.
Parts 1 and 2 of Theorem 2 state that the set of dynamically stable states and the set of
stable states D defined by axiomatic characterization in Theorem 1 coincide; any mapping φ ∈ Φ

(satisfying Axioms 1—3) is the outcome of a pure-strategy MPE and any such MPE implements

the outcome of some φ ∈ Φ. This theorem therefore establishes the equivalence of axiomatic

and dynamic characterizations. An important implication is that the recursive characterization
of axiomatically stable states in (6) applies exactly to dynamically stable states.
The equivalence of the results of Theorems 1 and 2 is intuitive. Had the players been shortsighted (impatient), they would care mostly about the payoﬀs in the next state or the next few
states that would arise along the equilibrium path (as in the concept of myopic stability introduced next). However, when players are suﬃciently patient, in particular, when β > β 0 , they
care more about payoﬀs in the ultimate state than the payoﬀs along the transitional states. Consequently, winning coalitions are not willing to move to a state that is not (axiomatically) stable
16

according to Theorem 1; this leads to the equivalence between the concepts of axiomatically and
dynamically stable states.
To highlight some of the implications of our analysis so far and to emphasize the diﬀerence
between dynamically stable states and states that may arise when individuals are shortsighted,
we next introduce a number of corollaries of Theorems 1 and 2. We start with a simple definition.
Definition 3 (Myopic Stability) A state sm ∈ S is myopically stable if there does not exist
s ∈ S with s Âsm sm .

Myopic stability would apply if individuals made choices only considering their implications
in the next period. Clearly, a myopically stable state is (axiomatically and dynamically) stable,
but the converse is not true. This is stated in the next corollary, which emphasizes that a state
is made stable not by the absence of a powerful group preferring change, but by the absence of
an alternative stable state that is preferred by a powerful group. This corollary is an immediate
implication of Theorems 1 and 2, in particular, of equation (5). Its proof is omitted.
Corollary 1

1. State s∞ ∈ S is a (dynamically and axiomatically) stable state only if for

any s ∈ S with s Âs∞ s∞ , and any φ satisfying Axioms 1—3, s 6= φ (s).

2. The set of myopically stable states is a subset of D (the set of axiomatically and dynamically
stable states). In particular, a myopically stable state sm is a stable state, but a stable state
s∞ is not necessarily myopically stable.
The final part of the corollary implies that s∞ may be stable even if it is not myopically
stable (recall Example 1). In particular, there may exist a state s such that s Âs∞ s∞ ; but s∞

may still be stable because s 6= φ (s) and leads to some other state s0 , which is not preferred by

a winning coalition in s∞ (if we had s0 = φ (s) Âs∞ s∞ , then s∞ would not be a stable state).

Another direct implication of this corollary is that forward-looking behavior enlarges the set of
stable states.
For the next corollary, we first introduce an additional definition.
Definition 4 (Ineﬃciency) State s ∈ S is (strictly) Pareto ineﬃcient if Ws 6= ∅ and
there exists a state s0 ∈ S such that wi (s0 ) > wi (s) for all i ∈ I.

State s ∈ S is (strictly) winning coalition ineﬃcient if there exists state s0 ∈ S such

that s0 Âs s.

Clearly, if a state s is Pareto ineﬃcient, it is winning coalition ineﬃcient, but not vice versa.

17

Corollary 2
ficient.

1. A stable state s∞ ∈ S can be winning coalition ineﬃcient and Pareto inef-

2. Whenever s∞ is not myopically stable, it is winning coalition ineﬃcient.
Proof. The first part again follows from Example 1 in the Introduction. The second part
follows from the fact that if s∞ is not myopically stable, then there must exist s ∈ S such that
s Âs∞ s∞ .

5

Ordered States

Theorems 1 and 2 provide a complete characterization of axiomatically and dynamically stable
states as a function of the initial state s0 ∈ S provided that Assumptions 1 and 2 are satisfied.
While the former is a very natural assumption and easy to check, Assumption 2 may be somewhat
more diﬃcult to verify. In this section, we show that when the set of states S admits a (linear)

order according to which individual (stage) payoﬀs satisfy single-crossing or single-peakedness
properties (and the set of winning coalitions {Ws }s∈S satisfies some natural additional conditions), Assumption 2 is satisfied. This result enables more straightforward application of our

main theorems in a wide variety of circumstances.
In a number of applications, the set of states S has a natural order, so that any two states

x and y can be ranked (e.g., either x is “greater than” or “less than” y). When such an order
exists, we can take, without loss of any generality, S to be a subset of R. Similarly, let I ⊂ R,

which is also without loss of any generality. Given these orders on the set of states and the set
of individuals, we introduce certain well-known restrictions on preferences.9 All of the following
restrictions and definitions refer to stage payoﬀs and are thus easy to verify.
Definition 5 (Single-Crossing) Given I ⊂ R, S ⊂ R, and {wi (s)}i∈I,s∈S , the singlecrossing condition (SC) holds if, for any i, j ∈ I and x, y ∈ S such that i < j and x < y,

wi (y) > wi (x) implies wj (y) > wj (x) and wj (y) < wj (x) implies wi (y) < wi (x).

Definition 6 (Single-Peakedness) Given I ⊂ R, S ⊂ R, and {wi (s)}i∈I,s∈S , preferences are

single-peaked (SP) if for any i ∈ I there exists state x such that for any y, z ∈ S, y < z ≤ x

or x ≥ z > y implies wi (y) ≤ wi (z).

We next introduce a generalization of the notion of the “median voter” to more general
political institutions (e.g., those involving supermajority rules within the society or a club).
9

See Barbera and Moreno (2008) for the connection between these notions.

18

Definition 7 (Quasi-Median Voter) Given I ⊂ R, S ⊂ R, and {Ws }s∈S , player i ∈ I is
a quasi-median voter (in state s) if for any X ∈ Ws such that X = {j ∈ I : a ≤ j ≤ b} for
some a, b ∈ R we have i ∈ X.

Denote the set of quasi-median voters in state s by Ms . Theorem 3 shows that it is nonempty
(provided that Assumption 1 is satisfied).
Definition 8 (Monotonic Median Voter Property) Given I ⊂ R and S ⊂ R, the sets

of winning coalitions {Ws }s∈S has monotonic median voter property if for each x, y ∈ S
satisfying x < y there exist i ∈ Mx , j ∈ My such that i ≤ j.

The last definition is general enough to encompass majority and supermajority voting as well
as these voting rules that apply for a subset of players (such as club members or those that are
part of a limited franchise). Finally, we also impose the following weak genericity assumption.
Assumption 5 (Weak Genericity) Preferences {wi (s)}i∈I,s∈S and the set of winning coalitions {Ws }s∈S are such that for any x, y, z ∈ S, x ºz y implies x Âz y or x ∼ y.

Assumption 5 is satisfied if no player is indiﬀerent between any two states (though it does
not rule out such indiﬀerences). The main results of this section are presented in the following
theorem.
Theorem 3 (Characterization with Ordered States) For any I ⊂ R, S ⊂ R, preferences

{wi (s)}i∈I,s∈S , and winning coalition {Ws }s∈S satisfying Assumption 1, we have that:

1. If single-crossing condition and monotonic median voter property hold, then Assumption
2(a,b) is satisfied and thus Theorem 1 applies.
2. If preferences are single-peaked and for any x, y ∈ S and any X ∈ Wx , Y ∈ Wy we have
X ∩ Y 6= ∅, then Assumption 2(a,b) is satisfied and thus Theorem 1 applies.

3. If in either part 1 or 2, Assumption 5 also holds, then Assumption 2(b)* is also satisfied
and thus Theorem 2 applies.
Proof. See Appendix A.
The conditions of Theorem 3 are relatively straightforward to verify and can be applied in a
wide variety of applications and examples. Notice that part 2 of Theorem 3 requires a stronger
condition than the monotonic median voter property. It can be verified that this condition
implies the monotonic median voter property, so part 1 of the theorem continues to be true
under the hypothesis of part 2. However, the converse is not true.10
10

In particular, consider the following environment: there are two states, x < y, and two voters, i < j.

19

6

Applications

We now illustrate how the characterization results provided in Theorems 1 and 2 can be applied
in a variety of situations, including a number of political economy environments considered in
the literature. We show that in many of these environments we can simply appeal to Theorem
3. Nevertheless, we will also see that the conditions in Theorem 3 are more restrictive than
those stipulated in Theorems 1 and 2. Thus, when Theorem 3 does not apply, Theorems 1 and
2 may still be applied directly.

6.1

Voting in Clubs

Let us return to Example 2. The society consists of N individuals, so I = {1, . . . , N }. Following

Roberts (1999), suppose that there are N states, of the form sk = {1, . . . , k} for 1 ≤ k ≤ N .

Roberts (1999) imposes the following strict increasing diﬀerences condition:

for all l > k and j > i, wj (sl ) − wj (sk ) > wi (sl ) − wi (sk ) ,

(10)

and considers two voting rules: majority voting within a club (where in club sk one needs more
than k/2 votes for a change in club size) or median voter rule (where the agreement of individual
(k + 1) /2 if k is odd or k/2 and k/2 + 1 if k is even are needed). These two voting rules lead to
corresponding equilibrium notions, which Roberts calls Markov Voting Equilibrium and Median
Voter Equilibrium, respectively. He establishes the existence of mixed-strategy equilibria with
both notions and shows that they both lead to the same set of stable clubs.
It is straightforward to verify that Roberts’s model and his two voting rules are special cases
of the general voting rules allowed in our framework. In particular, let us first weaken Roberts’s
strict increasing diﬀerences property to single-crossing, in particular, let us assume that
for all l > k and j > i,

wi (sl ) > wi (sk ) =⇒ wj (sl ) > wj (sk ) , and

(11)

wj (sk ) > wj (sl ) =⇒ wi (sk ) > wi (sl ) .
Clearly, (10) implies (11) (but not vice versa). In addition, Roberts’s two voting rules can be
represented by the following sets of winning coalitions:

Wsmed
k

= {X ∈ C : |X ∩ sk | > k/2} , and
Wsmaj
k
½
{X ∈ C : (k + 1) /2 ∈ X}
if k is odd;
=
{X ∈ C : {k/2, k/2 + 1} ⊂ X} if k is even.

Preferences are such that wi (x) < wi (y), but wj (x) > wj (y). These preferences are single-peaked (so are any
preferences with two states). Suppose, in addition, that Wx = {{i} , {i, j}}, and Wy = {{j} , {i, j}}. In that case,
i and j are quasi-median voters in states x and y, respectively, and thus monotonic median voter property holds.
However, Assumption 2(a) is violated for {x, y} (we have y Âx x and x Ây y).

20

oN
n
Clearly, both Wsmaj
k

k=1

©
ªN
and Wsmed
satisfy Assumption 1 as well as the monotonic median
k
k=1

voter property in Definition 8. Let us also assume that Assumption 5 holds. In this case, this

can be guaranteed by assuming that wi (s) 6= wi (s0 ) for any i ∈ I and any s, s0 ∈ S (though a

weaker condition would also be suﬃcient). Then, it is clear that Theorem 3 from the previous
section applies to Roberts’s model and establishes the existence of a pure-strategy MPE and
characterizes the structure of stable clubs.
It can also be verified that Theorem 3 applies with considerably more general voting rules.
For example, we could allow a diﬀerent degree of supermajority rule in each club. The following
set of winning coalitions nests various majority and supermajority rules: for each k, let the
degree of supermajority in club sk be lk where k/2 < lk ≤ k and define the set a winning
coalitions as:

Wslkk = {X ∈ C : |X ∩ sk | ≥ l}
Then, a relatively straightforward application of Theorem 3 establishes the following proposition
(for completeness, the proof is provided in Appendix C).
Proposition 1 In the voting in clubs model, with winning coalitions given by either Wsmaj
,
k
Wsmed
, or Wslkk , where k/2 < lk ≤ k for all k, the following results hold.
k

(i) The monotonic median voters property in Definition 8 is satisfied.
(ii) Suppose that preferences satisfy (11) and Assumption 5. Then Assumptions 2(a,b) and

2b* hold and thus the characterization of MPE and stable states in Theorems 1 and 2 applies.
(iii) Moreover, if only odd-sized clubs are allowed, then in the case of majority or median
voter rules Assumption 3 also holds and thus the dynamically stable state (club) is uniquely
determined as a function of the initial state (club).
This proposition shows that a sharp characterization of dynamics of clubs and the set of
stable clubs can be obtained easily by applying Theorem 3 to Roberts’s original model or to
various generalizations. Another generalization, not stated in Proposition 1, is to allow for a
richer set of clubs. For example, the feasible set of clubs can also be taken to be of the form of
{k − n, . . . , k, . . . , k + n} ∩ I for a fixed n (and diﬀerent values of k). It is also noteworthy that

the approach in Roberts’s paper is considerably more diﬃcult and restrictive (though Roberts

also establishes the existence of mixed-strategy MPE for any β). Therefore, this application
illustrates the usefulness of the general characterization results presented in this paper.

6.2

The Structure of Elite Clubs

In this subsection, we briefly discuss another example of dynamic club formation, which allows
a simple explicit characterization. Suppose there are N individuals 1, 2, . . . , N and N states
21

s1 , s2 , . . . , sN , where sk = {1, 2, . . . , k}. Preferences are such that for any n0 = n1 < j ≤ n2 < n3 ,
wk (sn0 ) = wk (sn1 ) < wk (sn3 ) < wk (sn2 ) .

(12)

These preferences imply that each player k wants to be part of the club, but conditional on being
in the club, he prefers to be in a smaller (more “elite”) one. In addition, a player is indiﬀerent
between two clubs he is not part of. Suppose that decisions are made by a simple majority rule
of the club members, so that winning coalitions are given by
Wsk = {X ∈ C : |X ∩ sk | > k/2} .

(13)

It is straightforward to verify that this environment satisfies Assumptions 1, 2(a,b), 2b*, and
3.11

Hence, we can use Theorems 1 and 2 to characterize the set of stable states and the unique

outcome mapping. First, notice that state s1 is stable. This club only includes player 1, who is
thus the dictator, and who likes this state best, and thus by Axiom 1 we must have φ (s1 ) = s1 .
In state s2 , a consensus of players 1 and 2 is needed for a change. But s2 is the best state for
player 2, so φ (s2 ) = s2 . In state s3 , the situation is diﬀerent: state s2 is stable and is preferred
to s3 by both 1 and 2 (and is the only such state), so φ (s3 ) = s2 . Proceeding inductively, we
can show that club sj is stable if and only if j = 2n for n ∈ Z+ , and the unique mapping φ that
satisfies Axioms 1—3 is

φ (sk ) = s2blog2 kc ,

(14)

where bxc denotes the greatest integer less than or equal to x ∈ R.
The following proposition summarizes the above discussion.

Proposition 2 In the elite club example considered above with preferences given by (12) and
set of winning coalitions given by (13), the following results hold.
1. Assumptions 1, 2(a,b), 2b*, and 3 hold.
2. If, instead of (12), for n0 < n1 < k ≤ n2 < n3 we have wk (sn0 ) < wk (sn1 ) < wk (sn3 ) <
wk (sn2 ), then single-crossing condition is satisfied (and monotonic median voter property
is always satisfied in this example).
3. Club sk is stable if and only if k = 2n for n ∈ Z+ .
11

This is formally shown in Appendix C. Alternatively, one could consider a slight variation where a player
who does not belong to either of any two clubs prefers the larger of the two. In this case, Theorem 3 can also be
applied. In particular, with this variation, the single-crossing condition is satisfied (if wi (sy ) > wi (sx ) for y > x
and j > i, then i ∈
/ x and thus, j ∈
/ x, and wj (sy ) > wj (sx ); conversely, wj (sy ) < wj (sx ) means j ∈ sy , thus
i ∈ sy , and therefore wi (sy ) < wi (sx )). The monotonic median voter condition holds as well (one can choose
quasi-median voter in state sj to be b(j + 1) /2c ∈ Msj ; this sequence is weakly increasing in j).

22

4. The unique mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3 is given by (14).
Proof. See Appendix C.

6.3

Stable Voting Rules and Constitutions

Another interesting model that can be analyzed using Theorem 3 is Barbera and Jackson’s
(2004) model of self-stable constitutions. In addition, our analysis shows how more farsighted
decision-makers can be easily incorporated into Barbera and Jackson’s model.
Motivated by Barbera and Jackson’s model, let us introduce a somewhat more general framework. The society takes the form of I = {1, . . . , N } and each state now directly corresponds to
a “constitution” represented by a pair (a, b), where a and b are integers between 1 and N . The
utility from being in state (a, b) is fully determined by a, so that each player i receives utility
wi [(a, b)] = wi (a) .

(15)

In contrast, the set of winning coalitions needed to change the state is determined by b ∈ Z+ :
W(a.b) = {X ∈ C : |X| ≥ b}

(16)

(so b may be interpreted as the degree of supermajority).
In Barbera and Jackson’s model, individuals diﬀer according to the probability with which
they will support a proposal for a specific reform away from the status quo. The parameter a
determines the (super)majority necessary for implementing the reform. The parameter b, on
the other hand, is the (super)majority necessary (before individual preferences are realized) for
changing the voting rule a. Expected utility is calculated before these preferences are realized
and defines wi [(a, b)]. Ranking individuals according to the probability with which they will
support the reform, Barbera and Jackson show that individual preferences satisfy (strict) singlecrossing and are (weakly) single-peaked.
For our analysis here, let us consider any situation in which preferences and winning coalitions
satisfy (15) and (16). It turns out to be convenient to reorder all pairs (a, b) on the real line
as follows: if (a, b) and (a0 , b0 ) satisfy a < a0 , then (a, b) is located on the left of (a0 , b0 ), and
we write (a, b) < (a0 , b0 ); the ordering of states with the same a is unimportant. Suppose that
wi (a), and thus wi [(a, b)], satisfies the single-crossing condition in Definition 5. This enables
us to apply Theorem 3 to any problem that can be cast in these terms, including the original
Barbera and Jackson model.
Let us next follow Barbera and Jackson in distinguishing between two cases. In the case of
constitutions, any combination (a, b) is allowed, while in the case of voting rules, only the subset
23

of states where a = b is considered (then a = b is the voting rule); in both cases it is natural
to assume b > N/2. Barbera and Jackson call a voting rule or a constitution (a, b) self-stable if
there is no alternative voting rule (a0 , b0 ) with a0 = b0 (or, respectively, constitution (a0 , b0 )) such
that (a0 , b0 ) is preferred to (a, b) by at least b players. Clearly, this stability notion is equivalent
to our notion of myopic stability. Given Corollary 1, it is not surprising that when we allow
players to be farsighted, the set of stable states may be enlarged.12
The following proposition shows summarizes this discussion.
Proposition 3 Consider the above-described environment and assume that preferences satisfy
single-crossing condition and Assumption 5 holds. Then:
1. Assumptions 1, 2(a,b) and 2b* are satisfied.
2. There exist mappings φv for the case of voting rules (a = b) and φc for the case of constitutions that satisfy Axioms 1—3.
3. In the case of voting rules, the set of self-stable voting rules (in the sense of Barbera and
Jackson) coincides with the set of myopically stable states. In particular, any such state
(a, b), where a = b, satisfies φv [(a, b)] = (a, b). The set of self-stable voting rules is a
subset of set of dynamically stable states.
4. In the case of constitutions, the set of self-stable constitutions (in the sense of Barbera
and Jackson), the set of myopically stable states and the set of dynamically stable states
coincide.
Proof. See Appendix C.

6.4

Coalition Formation in Nondemocracies

As mentioned above, Theorems 1 and 2 can be directly applied in situations where the set of
states does not admit a (linear) order. We now illustrate one such example using a modification
of the game of dynamic coalition formation in Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008).
12

In particular, the set of stable states is enlarged in the case of voting rules, but remains the same in the
case of constitutions. This can be seen as follows: suppose constitution (a0 , b0 ) is preferred to (a, b) by at least b
players; without loss of generality, we may assume that (a, b) is Pareto-eﬃcient (otherwise we could pick (a00 , b00 )
which Pareto dominates (a0 , b0 ) and thus is preferred to (a, b) by these b players). Then these b players also
prefer constitution (a0 , N) to (a, b), since the payoﬀs are the same. But constitution (a0 , N) is stable by Axiom
1. Moreover, it is impossible that all N players prefer some other constitution (a00 , b00 ) because (a0 , b0 ), and thus
(a0 , N), are Pareto eﬃcient. Hence, if state (a, b) is not myopically stable, it is also not dynamically stable, for
the players may move to constitution (a0 , N), which is dynamically stable and preferred to (a, b) by at least N
players.

24

Suppose that each state determines the ruling coalition in a society and thus the set of
states S coincides with the set of coalitions C. Members of the ruling coalition determine the
composition of the ruling coalition in the next period. A transition to any coalition in C is

allowed, which highlights that the set of states does not admit a complete order (one could
define a partial order over states, though this is not particular useful for the analysis here).13
Each agent i ∈ I is assigned a positive number γ i , which we interpret as “political influence”

or “political power.” For any coalition X ∈ C, let
γX =

X

γj .

j∈X

Suppose that payoﬀs are given by
wi (X) =

½

γ i /γ X
0

if i ∈ X
if i ∈
/X

(17)

for any i ∈ I and any X ∈ C ≡ S.14 The restriction to (17) here is just for simplicity. Also,

take any α ∈ [1/2, 1) as a measure of the extent of supermajority requirement. Define the set of
winning coalitions as

n
X
WX = Y ∈ C :

j∈Y ∩X

γj > α

X

j∈X

o
γj .

(18)

Clearly, this corresponds to weighted α-majority voting among members of the incumbent coalition X (with α = 1/2 corresponding to simple majority). In addition, suppose that the following
simple genericity assumption holds:
γ X = γ Y only if X = Y .

(19)

The following proposition can now be established.
Proposition 4 Consider the environment in Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008). Then:
1. Assumptions 1, 2(a,b), 3 are satisfied, so that Theorem 1 applies and characterizes the
axiomatically stable states.
13

In Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2008), not all transitions were allowed. In particular, there we focused
on a game of “eliminations” from ruling coalitions in nondemocracies, so that once a particular individual was
eliminated, he could no longer be part of future ruling coalitions (either because he is “killed,” permanently exiled,
or is permanently excluded from politics by other means). Moreover, we assumed that payoﬀs were realized at
the end of the game. Appendix B discusses how the current framework can be generalized so that there are limits
on the feasible set of transitions.
14
This is a special case of the payoﬀ structure in Acemoglu, Egorov and Sonin (2008), where we allowed for any
payoﬀ function satisfying the following three properties: (1) if i ∈ X and i ∈
/ Y , then wi (X) > wi (Y ); (2) if i ∈ X
/ X and i ∈
/ Y , then wi (X) = wi (Y ).
and i ∈ Y , then wi (X) > wi (Y ) if and only if γ i /γ X > γ i /γ Y ; and (3) i ∈
The form in (17) is adopted to simplify the discussion here.

25

2. Moreover, there exists an arbitrarily small perturbation of payoﬀs such that Assumption
2(b)* also holds. In this case, Theorem 2 also applies and characterizes the dynamically
stable states.
Proof. See Appendix C.
In Appendix B we introduce the possibility of restrictions on feasible transitions and show
how Proposition 4 can be generalized to cover the case of political eliminations considered in
Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008). We also illustrate how not allowing previously-eliminated
players to be part of the ruling coalition aﬀects the results and the structure of stable coalitions.

6.5

Coalition Formation in Democracy

We next briefly discuss how similar issues arise in the context of coalition formation in democracies, for example, in coalition formation in in legislative bargaining.15
Suppose that there are three parties in the parliament, 1, 2, 3, and any two of them would be
suﬃcient to form a government. Suppose that party 1 has more seats than party 2, which
in turn has more seats than party 3. The initial state is ∅, and all coalitions are possible states. Since any two parties are suﬃcient to form a government, we have W∅ = Ws =
{{1, 2} , {1, 3} , {2, 3} , {1, 2, 3}} for all s. First, suppose that all governments are equally strong
and a party with a greater share of seats in the parliament will be more influential in the coali-

tion government. Consequently, w3 (∅) ≤ w3 ({1, 2}) < w3 ({1, 2, 3}) < w3 ({1, 3}) < w3 ({2, 3});

other payoﬀs are defined similarly. In this case, it can be verified that φ (∅) = {2, 3}: indeed,
neither party 2 nor party 3 wishes to form a coalition with party 1, because party 1’s influence
in the coalition government would be too strong. The equilibrium in this example then coincides
with the minimum winning coalition.

However, as emphasized in the Introduction (recall footnote 2), the dynamics of coalition
formation does not necessarily lead to minimum winning coalitions. To illustrate this, suppose
that governments that have a greater number of seats in the parliament are stronger, so that
w2 (∅) ≤ w2 ({1, 3}) < w2 ({1, 2, 3}) < w2 ({2, 3}) < w2 ({1, 2}). That is, party 2 receives a

higher payoﬀ even though it is a junior partner in the coalition {1, 2}, because this coalition

is suﬃciently powerful. We might then expect that {1, 2} may indeed arise as the equilibrium

coalition, that is, φ (∅) = {1, 2}. Nevertheless, whether this will be the case depends on the

continuation game after coalition {1, 2} is formed. Suppose, for example, that after the coalition

15
See, for example, Baron and Ferejohn (1986), Austen-Smith and Banks (1988), Baron (1991), Jackson and
Moselle (2002), and Norman (2002) for models of legislative bargaining. The recent paper by Diermeier and Fong
(2008) that studies legislative bargaining as a dynamic game without commitment also raises a range of issues
related to our general framework here.

26

{1, 2} forms, party 1, by virtue of its greater number of seats, can sideline party 2 and rule

by itself. Let us introduced the shorthand symbol “7→” to denote such a feasible transition,
so that we have {1, 2} 7→ {1} (which naturally presumes that W{1,2} = {X ∈ C : 1 ∈ X}).

Similarly, starting from the coalition {2, 3}, party 2 can also do the same, so that W{2,3} =

{X ∈ C : 2 ∈ X} and {2, 3} 7→ {2}. However, it is also reasonable to suppose that once party 2

starts ruling by itself, then party 1 can regain power by virtue of its greater seat share, that is,

W{2} = {C ∈ C : 1 ∈ C} and thus {2} 7→ {1}. In this case, the analysis in this paper immediately
shows that φ (∅) = {2, 3}, that is, the coalition {2, 3} emerges as the dynamically stable state.

What makes {2, 3} dynamically stable in this case is the fact that {2} is not dynamically

stable itself. This example therefore reiterates, in the context of coalition formation in democracies, the insight (discussed after Theorem 1 and in Corollary 1) that the instability of states
that can be reached from a state s contributes to the stability of state s.

6.6

Ineﬃcient Inertia and Lack of Reform

We now provide a more detailed example capturing the main trade-oﬀs emphasized in Example 1
in the Introduction. Consider a society consisting of N individuals and a set of finite states S. We

start with s0 = a corresponding to absolutist monarchy, where individual E holds power. More

formally, Wa = {X ∈ C : E ∈ X}. Suppose that for all x ∈ S \ {a}, we have that I \ {E} ∈ Wx ,

that is, all players except E together form a winning coalition. Moreover, there exists a state,
“democracy,” d ∈ S such that φ (x) = d for all x ∈ S \ {a}. In other words, starting with any
regime other that absolutist monarchy, we will eventually end up with democracy. Suppose also

that there exists y ∈ S such that wi (y) > wi (a), meaning that all individuals are better oﬀ in

state y than in absolutist monarchy, a. In fact, the gap between the payoﬀs in state y and those
in a could be arbitrarily large. It is then straightforward to verify that Assumptions 1—3 are
satisfied in this game.
To understand economic interactions in the most straightforward manner, consider the
extensive-form game described in Section 4. It is then clear that for β suﬃciently large, E
will not accept any reforms away from a, since these will lead to state d and thus φ (a) = a.

This example illustrates the potential (and potentially large) ineﬃciencies that can arise in
games of dynamic collective decision-making and emphasizes that commitment problems are at
the heart of these ineﬃciencies. If the society could collectively commit to stay in some state
y 6= d, then these ineﬃciencies could be partially avoided. And yet such a commitment is not
possible, since once state y is reached, E can no longer block the transition to d.

27

6.7

Middle Class and Democratization

Let us next consider a variation of the environment discussed in the previous subsection. Suppose
again that the initial state is s0 = a, where Wa = {X ∈ C : E ∈ X}. To start with, suppose that

there is only one other agent, P , representing the poor, and two other states, d1, democracy
with limited redistribution, and d2, democracy with extensive redistribution. Suppose that
Wd1 = Wd2 = {X ∈ C : P ∈ X}. Suppose
wE (d2) < wE (a) < wE (d1) and wP (a) < wP (d1) < wP (d2) ,

so that P prefers “extensive” redistribution. Given the fact that Wd1 = Wd2 = {P }, once

democracy is established, the poor can implement extensive redistribution. Anticipating this,
E will resist democratization.
Now consider an additional social group, M , representing the middle class, and suppose that
the middle class is suﬃciently numerous so that
Wd1 = Wd2 = {{M, P } , {E, M, P }} .

The middle class is also opposed to extensive redistribution, so
wM (a) < wM (d2) < wM (d1) .
This implies that once state d1 emerges, there no longer exists a winning coalition to force
extensive redistribution. Now anticipating this, E will be happy to establish democracy (extend
the franchise). Thus, this example illustrates how the presence of an additional powerful player,
such as the middle class, can have a moderating eﬀect on political conflict and enable institutional
reform that might otherwise be impossible (see Acemoglu and Robinson, 2006a, for examples in
which the middle class may have played such a role in the process of democratization).

6.8

Concessions in Civil War

Let us briefly consider an application of the ideas in this paper to the analysis of civil wars. This
example can also be used to illustrate how similar issues arise in the context of international
wars (see, e.g., Fearon, 1996, 2004, Powell, 1998). Suppose that a government, G, is engaged
in a civil war with a rebel group, R. The civil war state is denoted by c. The government can
initiate peace and transition to state p, so that Wc = {C ∈ C : G ∈ C}. However, using the

shorthand “7→” introduced in subsection 6.5, we now have p 7→ r, where r denotes a state in

which the rebel group becomes strong and suﬃciently influential in domestic politics. Moreover,
Wp = {X ∈ C : R ∈ X}, and naturally, wR (r) > wR (p). If wG (r) < wG (c), there will be no
28

peace and φ (c) = c despite the fact that we may also have wG (p) > wG (c). The reasoning for
why civil war may continue in this case is similar to that for ineﬃcient inertia discussed above.
As an interesting modification, suppose next that the rebel group R can first disarm partially,
in particular, c 7→ d, where d denotes the state of partial disarmament. Moreover, d 7→ dp,
where the state dp involves peace with the rebels that have partially disarmed. Suppose that

Wdp = {{G, R}}, meaning that once they have partially disarmed, the rebels can no longer
become dominant in domestic politics. In this case, provided that wG (dp) > wG (d), we have

φ (c) = dp. Therefore, the ability of the rebel group to make a concession changes the set of
dynamically stable states. This example therefore shows how the role of concessions can also be
introduced into this framework in a natural way.

6.9

Taxation and Public Good Provision

In many applications preferences are defined over economic allocations, which are themselves
determined endogenously as a function of political rules. Our main results can also be applied
in such environments. Here we illustrate this by providing an example of taxation and public
good provision.
Suppose there are N individuals 1, 2, . . . , N and N states s1 , s2 , . . . , sN , where sk =
{1, 2, . . . , k}. We assume that decisions on transitions are made by an absolute majority rule of
individuals who are enfranchised, so that winning coalitions take the form
Wsk = {X ∈ C : |X ∩ sk | > k/2} .
We also assume that the payoﬀ of individual i is given by
wi (sj ) = E

¢
¤
£¡
1 − τ sj Ai + Gsj ,

(20)

where Ai is individual i’s productivity (we assume Ai > Aj for i < j, so that lower-ranked
individuals are more productive), E denotes the expectations operator, and τ sj is the tax rate
determined when the voting franchises sj . When an odd number of individuals are allowed to
vote, the tax rate is determined by the median. When there is an even number of voters, each
of two median voters gets to set the tax rate with equal probability. The expectations in (20)
is included because of the uncertainty of the identity of the median voter in this case. Finally,
´
³P
k
Gsj = h
τ
A
l=1 sj l is the public good provided through taxation, where h is an increasing

concave function.

For the single-crossing property, we require that for any i < j ∈ I and for any sl , sl+1 ∈ S,
wj (sl+1 ) > wj (sl ) ⇒ wi (sl+1 ) > wi (sl ) and wi (sl+1 ) < wi (sl ) ⇒ wj (sl+1 ) < wj (sl ) .
29

Denoting the equilibrium taxes in states sl and sl+1 by τ sl+1 and τ sl , the following condition is
suﬃcient (but not necessary) to ensure this:
¡
¢
¢
¡
E 1 − τ sl+1 Aj − E (1 − τ sl ) Aj > E 1 − τ sl+1 Ai − E (1 − τ sl ) Ai ,

since the equilibrium levels of public goods, Gsl and Gsl+1 , cancel out from both sides. Therefore,
Eτ sl+1 > Eτ sl

(21)

is suﬃcient for single-crossing. Notes that individual i, when determining the tax rate in sl ,
would maximize

µ X
l
(1 − τ ) Ai + h τ

m=1

Am .

This implies that individual i would choose τ i such that
µ X
¶X
l
l
0
Am
Ai = h τ i
m=1

¶

m=1

Am .

From the concavity of h it follows that for i < j, τ i > τ j . Now consider a switch from sl to
sl+1 . Then, with probability 1/2, the tax is set by the same individual (then the tax rate is
the same in sl+1 as in sl ), and with probability 1/2, by a less productive individual (then the
tax rate is greater in sl+1 than in sl ). Therefore, (21) holds and we can apply Theorem 3 to
characterize the dynamically stable states in this society. More interestingly, these results can
also be extended to situations where public goods [taxes] are made available diﬀerentially to
[imposed on] those who have voting rights (club members).

7

Conclusion

A central feature of collective decision-making in many social situations, such as societies choosing their constitutions or political institutions, or political coalitions, international unions, or
private clubs choosing their membership, is that the rules that govern the regulations and procedures procedures for future decision-making, and inclusion and exclusion of members are made
by the current members and under the current regulations. This feature implies that dynamic
collective decisions must recognize the implications of current decisions on future choices. For
example, current constitutional change must recognize how the new constitution will open the
way for further changes in laws and regulations and how these further changes might aﬀect the
long-run payoﬀs of diﬀerent players.
We developed a general framework for a systematic study of this class of problems. We
provided both an axiomatic and a noncooperative characterization of stable states and showed

30

that the set of (dynamically) stable states can be computed recursively. This recursive characterization highlights that a particular state s is stable if there does not exist another stable
state that makes a winning coalition (in s) better oﬀ. An implication of this reasoning is that
stable states need not be Pareto eﬃcient; there may exist a state that provides higher payoﬀs
to all individuals, but is itself not stable.
We also showed that our framework is general enough to nest various diﬀerent models that
have been used in the literature to analyze specific problems in which current collective decisions
aﬀect future decision-making procedures. These include models of ineﬃcient inertia (lack of
reform) because of fear of changes in the future balance of political power, models of institutional
change and enfranchisement (such as Acemoglu and Robinson, 2001, 2006a, Lizzeri and Persico,
2004, and Jack and Lagunoﬀ, 2006), models of voting in clubs (such as Roberts, 1999, and
Barbera, Maschler, and Shalev, 2001), models of the stability of constitutions (such as Barbera
in Jackson, 2004), and models of coalition formation in democracies and nondemocracies. In
these cases and in a number of others, we illustrated how models previously studied in the
literature are special cases of our framework and how our approach highlights the main economic
insights in these diverse environments
Although our framework is fairly general, our analysis still relies on a number of important
assumptions. Some of those are necessary for our general approach (for example, a minimum
amount of acyclicity is essential). Others are adopted for convenience and can be relaxed, though
often at the cost of further complication. Among possible extensions, we believe that most
interesting would be to introduce stochastic elements, so that the set of feasible transitions or
the distribution of powers stochastically vary over time, and to include capital-like state variables
so that some subcomponents of the state have autonomous dynamics. Such extensions would
allow us to incorporate an even larger set of dynamic political games within this framework. We
view the analysis of such dynamics as an interesting area for future research.

31

Appendix A
7.1

Proof of Theorem 2

We start with a lemma about the structure of MPE and SPE in voting games. This lemma plays
an important role in the proof of Theorem 2 and is of independent interest in the context of
dynamic political economy models. It establishes that there always exists a pure-strategy MPE
(and SPE) in which each individual votes for the outcome that he or she strictly prefers and
that in any (mixed- or pure-strategy) equilibrium the outcome that is preferred by suﬃciently
many players (a “winning coalition”) will be implemented.
Lemma 1 Consider the following I-player extensive-form game GN with perfect information
and N stages. In each stage k, one player ik (this player may be the same for diﬀerent k’s) takes
action ak ∈ {y,n}. The payoﬀ vector is given by the mapping v : {y, n}N → {ȳ, n̄}, where ȳ,

n̄ ∈ RI are the two possible vectors of payoﬀs. Suppose that if for some k, v (ak = n, a−k ) = ȳ,
then we also have v (ak = y, a−k ) = ȳ (i.e., if for any profile of actions other than that at stage

k, a−k , the vote ak = n leads to ȳ, then so does ak = y; this ensures that action y does not make
outcome ȳ less likely). Then the following results hold.
(i) There exists a pure-strategy MPE (and SPE) in GN where ak = y if vik (ȳ) > vik (n̄) and
ak = n if vik (ȳ) < vik (n̄) (where vi (ȳ) and vi (n̄) denote the payoﬀs of player i under the payoﬀ
vectors ȳ and n̄, respectively).
(ii) Suppose that the set of players Y = {i : vi (ȳ) > vi (n̄)} is large enough, in the sense that

v (a1 , . . . , aN ) = ȳ whenever ak = y for all ik ∈ Y. Then in any SPE of GN , the equilibrium
payoﬀ vector will be ȳ with probability 1. Similarly, if the set of players N = {i : vi (ȳ) < vi (n̄)}

is large enough, so that v (a1 , . . . , aN ) = n̄ whenever ak = n for all ik ∈ N , then in any SPE of
GN , the equilibrium payoﬀ vector will be n̄ with probability 1.

(iii) Suppose that the first N stages of a finite or infinite extensive-form game GN 0 with
perfect information satisfy the requirements above, except that instead of payments at terminal
nodes taking two values only, we have that there are two classes of isomorphic subgames, Sȳ and
Sn̄ , with payoﬀ vectors ȳ and n̄ respectively. Take any MPE σ and let Y = {i : vi (Sȳ ) > vi (Sn̄ )}
and N = {i : vi (Sȳ ) < vi (Sn̄ )}, where vi (Sȳ ) and vi (Sn̄ ) are continuation payoﬀs of player i.

If v (a1 , . . . , aN ) = ȳ whenever ak = y for all ik ∈ Y, then the equilibrium continuation game

reached after N stages is Sȳ and the expected utility players receive in this MPE is v (Sȳ ). Conversely, if v (a1 , . . . , aN ) = n̄ whenever ak = n for all ik ∈ N , then the equilibrium continuation

game reached after N stages is Sn̄ and the expected utility players receive in this MPE is v (Sn̄ ).

32

Proof of Lemma 1 (Part 1) We need to show that for the profile of strategies in which
ak = y if vik (ȳ) > vik (n̄) and ak = n if vik (ȳ) < vik (n̄) (and ak is either y or n if vik (ȳ) =
vik (n̄)), there is no profitable deviation for any player at any stage (this will establish the
existence of a pure-strategy MPE and SPE). Consider player ik such that vik (ȳ) > vik (n̄) and
suppose that he plays ak = y. If he switches to a0k = n, this would not change the action of
any of the subsequent voters, and therefore this either would not change the outcome of the
voting (i.e., the payoﬀ vector) or will change it from ȳ to n̄. In both cases this deviation is not
profitable. Similarly, for player ik with vik (ȳ) < vik (n̄), deviation from ak = n to a0k = y can
change the payoﬀ vector from n̄ to ȳ only, which is not profitable for such player. Finally, if for
player ik , vik (ȳ) = vik (n̄), then any outcome yields the same payoﬀ and thus this player does
not have a profitable deviation, which completes the proof of part 1.
(Part 2) We prove this by induction on the number of stages k.
Base: take k = 1. Suppose that set Y is large enough, so that player i1 choosing action

a1 = y is suﬃcient for the payoﬀ vector to be ȳ. To obtain a contradiction, suppose that in a

SPE the equilibrium payoﬀ vector may be diﬀerent from ȳ with a positive probability, in which
case the payoﬀ vector is n̄. But then player i1 is better oﬀ if he chooses action a1 = y with
probability 1, since he would then receive vi1 (ȳ), which cannot be the case in an equilibrium.
We can similarly consider the case where set N is large enough. We have thus proved the base.
Step from k − 1 to k: suppose that we have proved the result for all l ≤ k − 1; consider the

game with k stages. Suppose that set Y is large enough. Consider two cases.

Case 1: suppose that vi1 (ȳ) > vi1 (n̄). In this case, if player i1 in stage 1 takes action

a1 = y, then in the subgame starting at stage 2 the following is true: if all players for whom
vij (ȳ) > vij (n̄) for all 2 ≤ j ≤ k choose aj = y, then the payoﬀ vector will be ȳ. By induction,
any SPE in this subgame will lead to ȳ with probability 1. Now if for some SPE of the entire

game the payoﬀ vector were n̄ with positive probability, then player i1 could ensure that the
payoﬀ vector is ȳ with probability 1 by choosing a1 = y and would thus have a profitable
deviation. Therefore, in this case, the payoﬀ vector must be ȳ with probability 1.
Case 2: suppose that vi1 (ȳ) ≤ vi1 (n̄). Then, by assumption, if in the subgame starting at

stage 2 all players for whom vij (ȳ) > vij (n̄) for all 2 ≤ j ≤ k choose aj = y, then the payoﬀ

vector will be ȳ. By induction, for any SPE in any subgame starting at stage 1, the payoﬀ vector
is ȳ with probability 1. But this implies that the same holds for the entire k-stage game.
The two cases together complete the induction step for the case where Y is large enough.

The case where N is large enough is analogous. This argument completes the proof of part 2.

(Part 3) This immediately follows from part 2, since a MPE induces a SPE in the truncated

game of first k stages with payoﬀs given by continuation payoﬀs of the original game. ¥
33

7.2

Proof of Theorem 2

Proof of Theorem 2 (Part 1) First, suppose that β satisfies the following conditions:
for any i ∈ I and s, s0 ∈ S,
¡ ¢
1−β
wi (s) − wi (s0 )
wi (s0 )
and
<
.
wi s0 < wi (s) implies β |S| >
wi (s)
β
maxz∈S wi (z)

(A1)

There is a finite number (not more than |I| × |S| × (|S| − 1)) of conditions in (A1). It is
straightforward to verify that there exists β 0 ∈ (0, 1) such that for all β > β 0 , (A1) holds.

We construct a MPE of the game with the following property: for each period t ≥ 1,

st = φ (st−1 ). We introduce the following notation: for i ∈ I and s, q ∈ S, let
¾
½
¾ ½
βwi (φ (q)) if φ (q) = q
(1 − β) wi (s) if s = q
.
Vi (s, q) =
+
0
if s 6= q
β 2 wi (φ (q)) if φ (q) 6= q

(A2)

(This means that Vi (s, q) is given by one of the four expressions in (A2) depending on whether
s = q and φ (q) = q). In the equilibrium we construct below, Vi (s, q) will be the continuation
payoﬀ of player i as a function of the current state s and accepted proposal is q. Given the focus
on MPE, we drop the time indices.
For each s ∈ S, take Ks ≥ |S| − 1. Take π s (·) such that π s (Ks ) = φ (s) if φ (s) 6= s;

otherwise, take π s (k) arbitrarily (making sure that Assumption 4 is satisfied). Consider the
strategy profile σ ∗ constructed as follows:
Each player player i ∈ I votes for proposal Pk (says yes) if and only if:

(i) either k = Ks (we are at the last stage of voting), PKs = φ (s) and Vi (s, φ (s)) > Vi (s, s);
(ii) or Vi (s, Pk ) > Vi (s, φ (s)).

In addition, if π s (k) ∈ I for some k, this player chooses proposal Pk arbitrarily.

The strategy profile σ ∗ is Markovian. We will show that it is an MPE in three steps.
First, we will show that under the strategy profile σ ∗ , there is a transition to φ (s) if φ (s) 6= s

and no transition if φ (s) = s. If φ (s) 6= s, then Axiom 1 implies that the set of players for
whom Vi (s, φ (s)) > Vi (s, s) is a winning coalition in s, that is,

Xs ≡ {i : wi (φ (s)) > wi (s)} ∈ Ws .
To see this, observe that (A1) and the fact that β > β 0 imply that βwi (φ (s)) > wi (s) for all
i ∈ Xs . Therefore, for all i ∈ Xs , we have
Vi (s, φ (s)) = βwi (φ (s)) > (1 − β) wi (s) + β 2 wi (φ (s)) = Vi (s, s) .
Next, we can similarly show that there exists no Xs0 ∈ Ws such that Vi (s, Pk ) > Vi (s, φ (s)) for
all i ∈ Xs0 , that is, the set of players for whom Vi (s, Pk ) > Vi (s, φ (s)) does not form a winning
34

coalition in s. To obtain a contradiction, suppose there exists such a Xs0 . Then since Pk 6= s
and φ (φ (s)) = φ (s), we would have that

βwi (φ (Pk )) ≥ Vi (s, Pk ) > Vi (s, φ (s)) ≥ βwi (φ (s)) for all i ∈ Xs0 ,
and thus
wi (φ (Pk )) > wi (φ (s)) for all i ∈ Xs0 .
Then the fact that Xs0 ∈ Ws implies φ (Pk ) Âs φ (s), which, given that φ (s) Âs s, yields

φ (Pk ) Âs s by Assumption 2(b)*. But φ (Pk ) Âs φ (s), φ (Pk ) Âs s, and φ (Pk ) = Pk contradicts

Axiom 3 and yields a contradiction to our hypothesis that Xs0 ∈ Ws . Therefore, the set of

players with Vi (s, Pk ) > Vi (s, φ (s)) does not form a winning coalition in s. We have therefore

established that under σ ∗ , PKs = φ (s) if φ (s) 6= s is accepted and all other proposals are

rejected.

Second, we verify that given σ ∗ , continuation payoﬀs after acceptance of proposal q are given
by (A2). If proposal q 6= s is accepted, then there is an immediate transition, and there is

another transition next period in case φ (q) 6= q. If no proposal is accepted, so that q = s, then

there is no transition in the current period, and each player i receives stage utility (1 − β) wi (s);
in addition, if φ (s) = φ (q) 6= q = s, then there is a transition next period. In either case, the
continuation payoﬀs are given by (A2).

Third, we show that there are no profitable deviations from σ ∗ at any stage. For an agendasetter this holds because no proposal that an agenda-setter makes is accepted. For a voter
this follows from Lemma 1(a): the continuation strategies are Markovian, and therefore each
voting stage constitutes a finite game with two possible outcomes. Lemma 1(a) then establishes
that it is always a best response for a voter to vote for the option that he (weakly) prefers. If
φ (s) 6= s, then in the last voting stage, each player i compares continuation payoﬀ Vi (s, φ (s))

if the proposal is accepted and Vi (s, s) if it is rejected. In all other voting stages, player i

receives Vi (s, Pk ) if proposal Pk is accepted and Vi (s, φ (s)) if it is rejected (because φ (s) will be
eventually accepted if φ (s) 6= s and no proposal will be accepted, in which case each player will
receive Vi (s, φ (s)) = Vi (s, s) if φ (s) = s). Therefore, there are no profitable deviations from σ ∗

given the continuation payoﬀs in (7). This argument establishes that the strategy profile σ ∗ is
a best response to itself for any s ∈ S in the truncated game given the continuation payoﬀs in

(7). Since we have already established that under σ ∗ , the continuation payoﬀs starting in state

s are given by Vi (s, q) in (A2), σ ∗ is a MPE of the entire game, which completes the proof of
the first part of the Theorem.
(Part 2) We first prove that a MPE exists. We then show that it has the properties stated
in part 2 of the Theorem.
35

Let us first construct a specific mapping φ satisfying Axioms 1—3. Take a sequence of states
n
o
μ1 , ..., μ|S| satisfying (7). Then, follow the procedure described in Theorem 1. First, we set

φ (μ1 ) = μ1 . If for k ≥ 2 we have Mk = ∅, then φ (μk ) = μk ; otherwise, let Zk ⊂ Mk be defined

as

©
ª
Zk = z ∈ Mk : ∀s ∈ Mk : s ²μk z .

The set Zk is nonempty by Assumption 2(b)*, and according to the procedure, any element of
Zk may be chosen as φ (μk ). Proceeding inductively, a specific mapping φ is obtained.
We construct an equilibrium in which continuation payoﬀ of player i if the current state is s
and proposal q is accepted, Vi (s, q), is given by (A2) (in particular, if no alternative is accepted
at a given period, each player i receives Vi (s, s)). Given these continuation payoﬀs, each period
can be viewed as a finite (truncated) game with terminal payoﬀs given by Vi (s, q). By backward
induction, we can construct a SPE σ 0 of this truncated game as follows: let k∗ be such that
π s (k∗ ) = φ (s) if such k ∗ exists; otherwise, let k∗ be the first stage where π s (k ∗ ) = i ∈ I

where wi (φ (s)) > wi (s) (such i exists, because φ satisfies Axiom 1). We require that φ (s) is
proposed and accepted at stage k∗ , and that no proposal is accepted at any stage l < k ∗ . Given

the continuation payoﬀs in (A2), it is straightforward to verify that there are no profitable
deviations from σ 0 and thus σ 0 is indeed a SPE. Since actions in σ 0 only depend on proposals
and on the stage of this finite truncated game, we can choose σ 0 to be Markovian (the only
requirement is to choose an SPE σ 0 , where each player votes no when indiﬀerent; clearly, such
an SPE exists). Therefore, we have established the existence of an MPE.
We now establish the properties that any MPE satisfies. Take any set of sequences {π s (·)}s∈S

and any pure-strategy MPE σ. For any state s, the proposal q that is accepted along the
equilibrium path is well-defined (let q = s if all proposals are rejected) and let us denote it by
χ (s) = q. First, note that χ : S → S has “no cycles,” in the sense that if χ (s) 6= s then for

any n > 1, χn (s) 6= s (where χ2 (s) ≡ χ (χ (s)) etc.). This can be established by contradiction.
Suppose there exists n such that χn (s) = s, but χ (s) 6= s. Denote by Js ⊂ {1, . . . , Ks } the

set of voting stages in state s where a proposal Pk made along the equilibrium path is accepted
(this proposal and whether it is accepted do not depend on the play before current stage k, since
strategies are Markovian). By the definition of the mapping χ, the first voting stage in Js leads
to χ (s). Now it suﬃces to consider two cases.
Case (i): all voting stages in Js lead to cycles. Suppose this is the case and consider the
last voting stage k0 . Here each player knows that he will receive zero utility if Pk0 is accepted,
and that he will receive (1 − β) ws (i) > 0 if Pk0 is accepted. Then Lemma 1(c) implies that Pk0
cannot be accepted in any MPE, thus yielding the desired contradiction.

36

Case (ii): not all voting stages in Js lead to cycles. In this case, denote the voting stages
that do not lead to cycles by Js0 ⊂ Js . Consider the last voting stage k in Js that precedes the

first voting stage in Js0 . Accepting the proposal made at k 0 , Pk0 , leads to zero utility to each
player, while rejecting it leads to a positive payoﬀ. Therefore, proposal Pk0 cannot be accepted
in any MPE, again yielding a contradiction and establishing the “no cycle” result.
This “no cycle” result in turn implies that χn (s) = χ|S| − 1 (s) for all n ≥ |S| − 1. Then,

define ψ (s) = χ|S|−1 (s), and

m (s) = min {n ∈ N∪ {0} : χn (s) = ψ (s)} ,

(A3)

(with χ0 (s) = s). Evidently, 0 ≤ m (s) ≤ |S| − 1, and m (s) = 0 if and only if ψ (s) = χ (s) = s.
Moreover,

ψ (ψ (s)) = χ (ψ (s)) = ψ (χ (s)) = ψ (s)
for any state s, as follows from the definition of mapping ψ). Finally, let us also define
½
¾
(1 − β) wi (s) if s = q
+ β m(q)+1 wi (ψ (q)) .
V̄i (s, q) =
0
if s =
6 q

(A4)

(A5)

Clearly, V̄i (s, a) gives the continuation payoﬀ of player i if in state s alternative q is implemented,
and subsequently equilibrium play (according to the MPE σ) follows. The rest of the proof
involves showing that (1) ψ (s) satisfies Axioms 1—3, and then (2) χ (s) = ψ (s) (this second
statement is equivalent to showing that χ (s) is the dynamically stable state reached with zero
or one transition, so that in the MPE σ, st = χ (s0 ) for all t ≥ 1). We start with an intermediate

result. Then we prove that ψ (s) satisfies Axioms 1—2. Then we prove that χ (s) = ψ (s). Finally,
we prove that ψ satisfies Axiom 3. (This order makes the proof simpler).

¡ ¢
Proof that if proposals Pkj and Pkl are proposed and accepted in state s, then ψ Pkj ∼

ψ (Pkl ). To establish this, for each state s consider again the set of voting stages J such that
©
ª
for each k ∈ J, the proposal Pk is accepted. Let J = k1 , . . . , k|J| , where kj < kl for j < l (we

drop index s for convenience), and suppose that J 6= ∅ (this implies χ (s) 6= s and m (s) ≥ 1).
In equilibrium, proposal Pk1 is accepted, so ψ (Pk1 ) = ψ (s) and m (Pk1 ) = m (s) − 1 (which
implies that ψ (s) 6= s). Since each Pkl for 1 ≤ l ≤ |J| is accepted in this equilibrium, we must

have, again by Lemma 1(c), that

¡
¢
ψ (Pkl ) ºs ψ Pkl+1 for 1 ≤ l ≤ |J| − 1

¡
¢
(in particular, only players who weakly prefer ψ (Pkl ) to ψ Pkl+1 could vote for acceptance,
¡ ¡
¢¢
¡
¢
since wi (ψ (Pkl )) < wi ψ Pkl+1 is suﬃcient to imply V̄i (s, Pkl ) < V̄i s, Pkl+1 in view of the
fact that β > β 0 ).

37

In addition, we also have

´
³
ψ Pk|J| ºs ψ (Pk1 ) .

³
´
This can be seen as follows. If Pk|J| is accepted, each player i will receive V̄i s, Pk|J| =


³ ³
´´
m Pk|J| +1
β
wi ψ Pk|J| , while if it is rejected, each player will receive V̄i (s, s) =
³ ³
´´
(1 − β) wi (s) + β m(s)+1 wi (ψ (Pk1 )). Now if wi ψ Pk|J|
< wi (ψ (Pk1 )), then we would have


³ ³
´´
³
´
m Pk|J| +1
β
wi ψ Pk|J|
< β m(s)+1 wi (ψ (Pk1 )), and hence V̄i s, Pk|J| < V̄i (s, s). Since Pk|J|
³ ³
´´
< wi (ψ (Pk1 )) must be suﬃciently small,
is accepted, the set of players for whom wi ψ Pk|J|
and, more precisely, we must have

n
³ ³
´´
o
i ∈ I : wi ψ Pk|J|
≥ wi (ψ (Pk1 )) ∈ Ws .

³
´
This establishes that ψ Pk|J| ºs ψ (Pk1 ). Now, since Assumption 2(b)* holds, we have
¡
¢
¡ ¢
ψ Pkj ∼ ψ (Pkl ) for all 1 ≤ j < l ≤ |J|. In addition, we prove that m (Pkl ) ≤ m Pkl+1

for all 1 ≤ l ≤ |J| − 1. Indeed, if this were not the case, each player would receive a strictly
higher payoﬀ if Pkl was rejected at stage kl , so Pkl could not be accepted in the equilibrium.

Proof that ψ satisfies Axiom 1. Consider the set J introduced above and consider stage k|J| ,
i.e., the last stage where acceptance is possible. If Pk|J| is accepted, each player receives


³
´
³ ³
´´
m Pk|J| +1
wi ψ Pk|J| .
V̄i s, Pk|J| = β

If Pk|J| is rejected, each player receives
V̄i (s, s) = (1 − β) wi (s) + β m(s)+1 wi (ψ (s)) .

³ ³
´´
= wi (ψ (s)) and that m (s) = m (Pk1 ) + 1 ≤
We have established, however, that wi ψ Pk|J|
³
´
Pk|J| +1. Since Pk|J| is accepted in equilibrium, by Lemma 1(c) we must have that V̄i s, Pk|J| ≥
V̄i (s, s) for a winning coalition of players in s, that is,

³
´
n
o
Xs = i ∈ I : V̄i s, Pk|J| ≥ V̄i (s, s) ∈ Ws .
Then for all i ∈ Xs , we must have
β

m(s)

wi (ψ (s)) ≥ β



m Pk|J| +1

wi (ψ (s)) ≥ (1 − β) wi (s) + β m(s)+1 wi (ψ (s)) .

This implies that
β m(s) wi (ψ (s)) ≥ wi (s) for all i ∈ Xs ,

38

which, in view of the fact that β > β 0 , implies that wi (ψ (s)) ≥ wi (s) for all i ∈ Xs . However,

if for some i ∈ Xs , wi (ψ (s)) = wi (s), then we would have β m(s) wi (ψ (s)) < wi (s), because
m (s) ≥ 1 and ψ (s) 6= s. Consequently, wi (ψ (s)) > wi (s) for all i ∈ Xs , which implies that
{i ∈ I : wi (ψ (s)) > wi (s)} ∈ Ws ,
thus establishing that
ψ (s) Âs s for any s ∈ S with ψ (s) 6= s,
and therefore Axiom 1 holds.

Proof that ψ satisfies Axiom 2. This is straightforward in view of the fact that ψ (ψ (s)) =
ψ (s).
Proof that χ (s) = ψ (s). Let us prove that if ψ (s) 6= s, then transition to state ψ (s) takes

place in one step, i.e., that ψ (s) = χ (s) (or, equivalently, in (A3) m (s) = 1 whenever χ (s) 6= s).

Consider two cases.

¡ ¢
Case (i): ψ (s) = Pkj for some j : 1 ≤ j ≤ |J|. In this case, m Pkj = 0 since Axiom 2

is proven to hold. But we proved that m (Pkl ) is weakly increasing in l, therefore, m (χ (s)) =
m (Pk1 ) = 0, and therefore m (s) = 1.
Case (ii): ψ (s) = Pkj does not hold for any j. This implies that m (Pk1 ) ≥ 1 and ψ (s) 6=

χ (s). First observe that in this case, if for some k ∈
/ J we have Pk = ψ (s) (regardless of whether

this happens on or oﬀ equilibrium path), then Pk should be accepted. This can be established
with the following argument: take any player i. If Pk = ψ (s) is accepted, this player will receive
V̄i (s, ψ (s)) = βwi (ψ (s)), while if it is rejected, he will receive
V̄i (s, Pkl ) = β m(Pkl )+1 wi (ψ (s)) ≤ β 2 wi (ψ (s))
for some l if k < k|J| and
V̄i (s, s) = (1 − β) wi (s) + β m(Pk1 )+1 wi (ψ (s)) ≤ (1 − β) wi (s) + β 2 wi (ψ (s))
if k > k|J| . In the first case, all players prefer to have Pk accepted, while in the second case,
each player with wi (ψ (s)) > wi (s) will have βwi (ψ (s)) > wi (s) since β > β 0 , and therefore
V̄i (s, ψ (s)) > V̄i (s, s). Since such players form a winning coalition, we conclude that Pk = ψ (s)
will necessarily be accepted. Since we know that this k ∈
/ J, it must be the case that proposal

ψ (s) is never considered on equilibrium path. By Assumption 4, it must be that each player
become agenda-setter for some k. But then take any player i such that wi (ψ (s)) > wi (s) and

suppose that he is agenda-setter at stage k. This player’s equilibrium proposal will give him
utility V̄i (s, Pkl ) for some l if k ≤ k|J| and V̄i (s, s) if k > k|J| . However, proposing ψ (s) will give
39

him a strictly higher utility V̄i (s, ψ (s)), as shown above. Therefore, player i has a profitable
deviation. This contradiction shows that the case where ψ (s) = Pkj does not hold for any j is
impossible, and thus finishes the proof that transition to state ψ (s) takes place in one step, so
that ψ (s) = χ (s).
Proof that ψ satisfies Axiom 3. Suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that Axiom 3 does not
hold. This implies that there exists state s, z ∈ S such that ψ (z) = z, z Âs s (which implies
z 6= s), and z Âs ψ (s) (which implies ψ (z) ¿ ψ (s)). As before, we can prove that if Pk = z

for some k, then proposal Pk must be accepted. In particular, accepting proposal z will lead to
utility V̄i (s, z) = βwi (z) for any player i, while rejecting can lead to one of two possible payoﬀs.
These possible payoﬀs are:
Case (i): V̄i (s, Pkl ) ≤ βwi (ψ (s)) for some l if J 6= ∅ and k < k|J| ;

Case (ii): V̄i (s, s) = (1 − β) wi (s) + β m(s)+1 wi (ψ (s)) ≤ (1 − β) wi (s) + βwi (ψ (s)) if J = ∅

or k > k|J| .

The fact that (by hypothesis) z Âs ψ (s) implies that {i : wi (z) > wi (ψ (s))} ∈ Ws (that is,

players that obtain higher stage payoﬀ from z than from ψ (s) form a winning coalition in s).
In case (i), from (A5), we have
V̄i (s, z) = βwi (z) > βwi (ψ (s)) ≥ V̄i (s, Pkl ) .
In case (ii), because β > β 0 (recall (A1)), we have
βwi (z) ≥ (1 − β) wi (s) + βwi (ψ (s)) ,
and therefore V̄i (s, z) > V̄i (s, s).
We have therefore established that in both cases Lemma 1(c) applies and implies that proposal Pk = z must be accepted. However, we have already shown that any proposals that are
proposed and accepted is mapped (by ψ)to equivalent states. Hence, if z is ever proposed, we
must have ψ (z) ∼ ψ (s). Since ψ (z) ¿ ψ (s), it must be the case that z is not proposed.

Assumption 4 now implies that either each state is proposed or that each player becomes

agenda-setter for some k. The former clearly cannot be the case, so suppose the latter applies.
Consider player i for whom wi (z) > wi (ψ (s)) and suppose that he is the agenda-setter at some
stage k. If he makes his equilibrium proposal, he receives either
V̄i (s, Pkl ) ≤ βwi (ψ (s)) ,
where 1 ≤ l ≤ |J|, or
V̄i (s, s) = (1 − β) wi (s) + β m(s)+1 wi (ψ (s)) ≤ (1 − β) wi (s) + βwi (ψ (s)) ,
40

depending on k ≤ k|J| or k > k|J| . Instead, if he proposes Pk = z, he will receive
V̄i (s, z) = βwi (z) > max {βwi (ψ (s)) , (1 − β) wi (s) + βwi (ψ (s))} ,
where the inequality follows from wi (z) > wi (ψ (s)) and β > β 0 . This implies that player i has
a profitable deviation, yielding a contradiction. This establishes that ψ satisfies Axiom 3, and
thus completes the proof of part 2 of the Theorem.
(Part 3) This result immediately follows from Theorem 1 and part 2 of this Theorem. ¥

7.3

Proof of Theorem 3

The first step is again a key lemma, which is of potential independent interest. This lemma
characterizes properties of quasi-median voters under more general political institutions (parallel
to the properties of median voters in majoritarian elections). For this lemma, recall that Ms
denotes the set of quasi-median voters in state s.
Lemma 2 Given I ⊂ R, S ⊂ R, payoﬀ functions {wi (s)}i∈I,s∈S , and winning coalition

{Ws }s∈S satisfying Assumption 1, the following are true.
1. For each s, the set Ms is nonempty.

2. If the single-crossing property (SC) in Definition 5 holds, then for any states x, y, z ∈ S,
x Âz y ⇔ wi (x) > wi (y) for all i ∈ Mz , and
x ºz y ⇔ wi (x) ≥ wi (y) for all i ∈ Mz .
3. If monotonic median voter condition in Definition 8 holds, then there exists a sequence
{ms }s∈S of players such that ms ∈ Ms for all s ∈ S and whenever states x, y ∈ S satisfy
x < y, mx ≤ my .

Proof.

(Part 1) Let b be such that B

=

{j ∈ I : −∞ < j ≤ b}

∈

Ws and

{j ∈ I : −∞ < j < b} ∈
/ Ws . Intuitively, such B is the “leftmost” winning coalition. Simi-

/ Ws , so that
larly, let a be such that A = {j ∈ I : a ≤ j < ∞} ∈ Ws and {j ∈ I : a < j < ∞} ∈

A is the “rightmost” winning coalition. Assumption 1 implies that Z = A ∩ B 6= ∅. Since
all quasi-median voters must be both in A and B, we also have Ms ⊂ Z. Next, we show that

Z ⊂ Ms is also true. To obtain a contradiction, assume the opposite. Then for some “con-

nected” coalition X = {j ∈ I : x ≤ j ≤ y} ∈ Ws the inclusion Z ⊂ X does not hold. Then,

evidently, either the lowest or the highest quasi-median voter is not in X. Suppose, without loss

of generality, the latter is the case. Since X is winning, coalition Y = {j ∈ I : −∞ < j ≤ y}
41

(where y is the highest player in X) is winning, and therefore Z ⊂ Y . But this implies that

the highest quasi-median voter is neither in X nor in Y , which is impossible and thus yields a
contradiction. This proves that Ms = Z 6= ∅.

(Part 2) Consider the case x ≥ y (the case x < y is treated similarly). Suppose x Âz y.

Then {i ∈ I : wx (i) > wy (i)} ∈ Wz (is winning in z). But by SC, this coalition is connected,
and therefore includes all players from Mz . Conversely, suppose that wi (x) > wi (y) for all

i ∈ Mz . Now SC implies that the same inequality holds for player j whenever j ≥ i ∈ Mz .
Part 1 of the Lemma implies that {j ∈ I : ∃i ∈ Mz such that j ≥ i} ∈ Wz . This establishes

that wi (x) > wi (y) for all i ∈ Mz implies x Âz y, and completes the proof for this case. The

proof of the results for the º relation is analogous.

(Part 3) By part 1 of this Lemma, the set Ms is nonempty for each s ∈ S. Let
ms = max

min m.

x∈S:x≤s m∈Mx

(A6)

Evidently, if x < y, then mx ≤ my . Moreover, ms ∈ Ms . To prove this last statement, assume

the opposite; then ms = minm∈Mx for some x < s. Since we assumed ms ∈
/ Ms , then either

ms ∈ Mx is less than all elements in Ms or greater than all elements in Ms . In the first case,

ms < minm∈Ms m, which violates the definition of ms in (A6). In the second case, we find that

Ms lies to the left of Mx , violating the monotonic median voter property. This contradiction
proves that ms ∈ Ms for all s ∈ S. Since the sequence (A6) is increasing, part 3 follows.
Proof of Theorem 3 (Part 1) We start with Assumption 2(a). Suppose that it does not
hold, and there is a cycle s1 , . . . , sl such that sk+1 Âsk sk for 1 ≤ k ≤ l − 1 and s1 Âsl sl .

Take a monotonic sequence of median voters {ms }s∈S . Recall that ms is part of any connected

winning coalition in s, therefore, if for some x and z, x Âz z, then wx (mz ) > wz (mz ). Now
for each s ∈ S consider an alternative set of winning coalitions where ms is the dictator, i.e.,

Ws0 = {X ∈ C : ms ∈ X}. Denoting the induced relation between states by Â0 , we have that

if x Âz z, then x Â0z z. Consequently, if there was a cycle s1 , . . . , sl such that sk+1 Âsk sk

for 1 ≤ k ≤ l − 1 and s1 Âsl sl , then we have sk+1 Â0sk sk for 1 ≤ k ≤ l − 1 and s1 Â0sl sl ;

therefore, a cycle for Â0 exists. Now take the shortest cycle for Â0 (this need not be a cycle

for Â). Without loss of generality, suppose that s2 is the lowest state (so s2 ≤ s1 and s2 ≤ s3 ;
then ms2 ≤ ms1 and ms2 ≤ ms3 . Since s3 Â0s2 s2 and s2 Â0s2 s1 , we have wms2 (s3 ) > wms2 (s2 )

and wms1 (s2 ) > wms1 (s1 ). But s2 ≤ s3 and ms2 ≤ ms1 , hence, wms2 (s3 ) − wms2 (s2 ) > 0

implies wms1 (s3 ) − wms1 (s2 ) > 0, i.e., wms1 (s3 ) > wms1 (s2 ). Combining this with wms1 (s2 ) >
wms1 (s1 ), we conclude that wms1 (s3 ) > wms1 (s1 ). But then s3 Â0s1 s1 , since ms1 is the dictator

in s1 . This implies that the link s2 may be skipped in the cycle, which contradicts the assumption
42

that the cycle {sk }lk=1 was the shortest one. This contradiction establishes that Assumption
2(a) holds.

To show that Assumption 2(b) holds, take any s ∈ S and some ms ∈ Ms . From Lemma 2

it follows that if for some x, y we have x Âs y, then wms (x) > wms (y). Suppose, to obtain a

contradiction, that there is a cycle s1 , . . . , sl such that sk+1 Âs sk for 1 ≤ k ≤ l − 1 and s1 Âs sl .

Without loss of generality, we may assume that state sl maximizes the payoﬀ of ms among states

s1 , . . . , sl . This means that wms (sl ) ≥ wms (s1 ), which implies s1 ¨s sl and thus contradicts the
existence of a cycle.This shows that Assumption 2(b) holds and completes the proof of part 1.

(Part 2) Note that if preferences of player i are single-peaked, then his preferences’ restricted
to any subset Q of S are also single-peaked. For any nonempty subset Q ⊂ S and i ∈ I, let
bi (Q) ∈ arg max wi (s)
s∈Q

(A7)

(in case this maximum is achieved at multiple states, we pick any of these).
We start with Assumption 2(a). Suppose there is a cycle s1 , . . . , sl such that sk+1 Âsk sk

for 1 ≤ k ≤ l − 1 and s1 Âsl sl . Let us re-enumerate players in I as i1 , . . . , i|I| so that

bik ({s1 , . . . , sl }) is nondecreasing in k. It is straightforward to use the assumption that any two

winning coalitions, even for diﬀerent states, intersect, and prove that for this order there exists
a quasi-median voter im such that im ∈ X for any X ∈ C that satisfies X ∈ Wsk for some
1 ≤ k ≤ l and X = {ij ∈ I : ip ≤ ij ≤ iq } for some ip , iq ∈ I. Let z = bim ({s1 , . . . , sl }) be the
favorite state of quasi-median voter im . Then there exists sk such that sk Âz z. Without loss

of generality, assume sk > z. Because preferences are single-peaked, all players ip with p ≤ m,

including im , (weakly) prefer z to sk . By the choice of im , players who strictly prefer sk to z

do not form a winning coalition, which is a contradiction proving that Assumption 2(a) holds
in this case.
Now, suppose that Assumption 2(b) is violated, i.e., there exist s ∈ S and a cycle s1 , . . . , sl

such that s0k+1 Âs sk for 1 ≤ k ≤ l − 1 and s1 Âs sl . Again, we re-enumerate players in I,
so that bik ({s1 , . . . , sl }) is nondecreasing for this new cycle s1 , . . . , sl and choose im such that

im ∈ X for any X ∈ Ws such that X = {ij ∈ I : ip ≤ ij ≤ iq } for some ip , iq ∈ I. Now take

z = bim ({s1 , . . . , sl }); then there exists sk such that sk Âs z. Without loss of generality, assume

sk > z. But then sk Âs z is impossible, since all players ip with p ≤ m (weakly) prefer z to x.

This proves that Assumption 2(a,b) holds.

(Part 3) The case of part 1: The first part of Assumption 2(b)* is shown similarly to
Assumption 2(b), making use of Assumption 5 to rule out indiﬀerences between x and y when
x ºz y. Finally, if x, y ∈ S are such that x Âs s and y Âs x, then for any i ∈ Ms we have
wi (y) > wi (x) > wi (s), which, in turn, implies y Âs s.
43

The case of part 2: The first part of Assumption 2(b)* is proved with an argument analogous
to part 2, but also making use of Assumption 5. To prove the last part, take states x, y, s such
that x Âs s and y Âs x; this implies that these three states are diﬀerent. Take the median

voter ms ∈ Ms . We must have bms ({x, y, s}) = y (with b defined by (A7)). To see this note

that if bms ({x, y, s}) = s, then x Âs s would be impossible, and if bms ({x, y, s}) = s, then

y Âs x would not hold. Now consider two cases. First, suppose that either x, s > y or x, s < y.

Without loss of generality assume x, s > y, in which case x Âs s implies y < x < s. Now, we

have that wi (y) > wi (x) if and only if bi ({x, y, s}) = y, so such players form a winning coalition
in s. This implies y Âs s. Second, suppose that either x < y < s or s < y < x. Without loss of

generality assume the former. Now, if a player prefers x to s, he must also prefer y to s; given
that x Âs s, we must therefore have y Âs s. In both cases, we have y Âs s, which completes the

proof. ¥

References
Acemoglu, Daron (2003) “Why Not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Conflict, Commitment,
and Politics,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31, 620-652.
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin (2008) “Coalition Formation in NonDemocracies,” Review of Economic Studies, forthcoming.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson (2000) “Why Did The West Extend The Franchise?
Democracy, Inequality, and Growth In Historical Perspective,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
115(4), 1167-1199.
Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson (2006a) Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy, Cambridge University Press, New York.
Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson (2006b) “Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective” American Political Science Review, 100(1), 115-131.
Alesina, Alberto, Ignazio Angeloni, and Federico Etro (2005) “International Unions,” American
Economic Review, 95(3), 602-615.
Austen-Smith, David and Jeﬀrey Banks (1988) “Elections, Correlations and Legislative Outcomes,” American Political Science Review 82 405-422.
Barbera, Salvador and Matthew Jackson (2004) “Choosing How to Choose: Self-Stable Majority
Rules and Constitutions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 1011-1048.
Barbera, Salvador, Michael Maschler, and Jonathan Shalev (2001) “Voting for Voters: A Model
of the Electoral Evolution,” Games and Economic Behavior, 37: 40-78.
Barbera, Salvador and Bernardo Moreno (2008) “Top Monotonicity: A Common Root for Single

44

Peakedness, Single Crossing, and the Median Voter Result,” mimeo.
Baron, David (1991) “A Spatial Bargaining Theory of Government Coalition Formation in Parliamentary Systems”, American Political Science Review, 83: 993-967.
Baron, David and John Ferejohn (1989) “Bargaining in Legislatures,” American Political Science
Review 83: 1181-1206.
Bordignon, Massimo and Sandro Brusco (2006) “On Enhanced Cooperation,” mimeo.
Bourguignon, François and Thierry Verdier (2000) “Oligarchy, Democracy, Inequality and
Growth,” Journal of Development Economics, 62, 285-313.
Buchanan, James (1965) “An Economic Theory of Clubs,” Economica, 32, 125, pp. 1-14.
Burkart, Mike and Klaus Wallner (2000) “Club Enlargement: Early Versus Late Admittance,”
mimeo.
Chwe, Michael S. Y. (1994) “Farsighted Coalitional Stability,” Journal of Economic Theory, 63:
299-325.
Diermeier, Daniel and Pohan Fong (2008) “Endogenous Limits on Proposal Power,” mimeo.
Fearon, James (1996) “Bargaining Over Objects that Influence Future Bargaining Power,”
mimeo.
Fearon, James (1998) “Commitment Problems and the Spread of Ethnic Conflict,” in David
Lake and Donald Rothchild, eds., The International Spread of Ethnic Conflict: Fear, Diﬀusion,
and Escalation, Princeton: Princeton Univ. Press.
Fearon, James (2004) “Why Do Some Civil Wars Last so Much Longer Than Others,” Journal
of Peace Research, 41, 275-301.
Giovannoni, Francesco and Toke Aidt (2004) “Constitutional Rules,” mimeo.
Gomes, Armando and Philippe Jehiel (2005) “Dynamic Processes of Social and Economic Interactions: On the Persistence of Ineﬃciencies,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(3), 626-667.
Hirshleifer, David, Michelle Boldrin, and David K. Levine (2008) “The Slippery Slope of Concessions,” mimeo.
Jack, William and Roger Lagunoﬀ (2006) “Dynamic Enfranchisement,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 90(4-5), pages 551-572.
Jackson, Matthew and Boaz Moselle (2002) “Coalition and Party Formation in a Legislative
Voting Game” Journal of Economic Theory 103: 49-87.
Jehiel, Philippe and Suzanne Scotchmer (2001), “Constitutional Rules of Exclusion in Jurisdiction Formation,” Review of Economic Studies, 68: 393-413.
Konishi, Hideo, and Debraj Ray (2003), “Coalition Formation as a Dynamic Process,” Journal
of Economic Theory, 110: 1-41.

45

Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2004) “Why Did the Elites Extend the Suﬀrage? Democracy and the Scope of Government, With an Application to Britain’s ‘Age of Reform’,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, vol. 119(2), 705-763.
Messner, Matthias and Mattias Polborn (2004) “Voting on Majority Rules,” Review of Economic
Studies, 71(1), 115-132
Moldovanu, Benny and Eyal Winter (1995) “Order Independent Equilibria,” Games and Economic Behavior 9(1): 21-34.
Norman, Peter (2002) “Legislative Bargaining and Coalition Formation,” Journal of Economic
Theory 102: 322-353.
Powell, Robert (1998) In the Shadow of Power: States and Strategies in International Politics,
Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ.
Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (2000) The Tyranny of Ineﬃcient: An Enquiry into the
Adverse Consequences of Power Struggles, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 76, no.3, 521-558.
Ray, Debraj (2008) A Game-Theoretic Perspective on Coalition Formation, Oxford University
Press.
Riley, John (1979) “Informational Equilibrium,” Econometrica, 47, 331-59.
Roberts, Kevin (1999) “Dynamic Voting in Clubs,” mimeo.
Robinson, James A. (1997) “When Is the State Predatory?” mimeo.
Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph Stiglitz (1976) “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
An Essay in the Economics of Imperfect Information,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80, 62949.
Schwarz, Michael, and Konstantin Sonin (2008) “A Theory of Brinkmanship, Conflicts, and
Commitment”, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, forthcoming.
Scotchmer, Suzanne (2002) “Local Public Goods and Clubs,” In Alan Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein (editors) Handbook of Public Economics, IV. Chapter 29, Amsterdam: North-Holland
Press, 1997-2042.
von Neumann, John and Oskar Morgenstern (1944) Theory of Games and Economic Behavior,
Princeton University Press.

46

Appendix B: Limited Transitions (Not for Publication)
7.4

Modeling Limited Transitions

In the main body of the paper we assumed that any transition (from any state to any other state)
is possible. In certain applications, not all transitions across states may be possible. For example,
in Example 1 discussed in the Introduction, it may be that a transition to democracy is only
possible from constitutional monarchy (and not directly from absolutist monarchy). Another
more substantial example highlighting the importance of limited transitions is the model in
Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008), also discussed in subsection 6.4. In that model, only
current members of the ruling coalition can be part of future ruling coalitions and thus transitions
to states that include individuals previously eliminated are ruled out. Here in Appendix B we
show that our analysis, after proper reformulation of the Assumptions and the Axioms of Section
3, is applicable to the case where only certain state transitions are allowed and generalize the
results in Theorems 1 and 2.
The key to the analysis in this section is the binary relation Ã on the set of states S. For

any x, y ∈ S, we write x Ã y to denote that a transition from x to y is possible and x Ã Q for
some Q ⊂ S to denote that the transition to any state z in Q is possible, provided that these

positions are supported by a winning coalition in x (similarly, Q1 Ã Q2 ). The analysis in the

main body of the paper thus corresponds to the special case where S Ã S for any x ∈ S. We

adopt the following natural assumption on the transition relation.

Assumption 6 (Feasible Transitions) Relation Ã satisfies the following properties:
(a) (reflexivity) ∀x ∈ S : x Ã x;

(b) (transitivity) ∀x, y, z ∈ S : x Ã y and y Ã z imply x Ã z.

Part (b) Assumption 6 requires that if some indirect transition from x to z is feasible, so is
a direct transition between the states. Without requiring transitivity, there would be additional
technical details to take care of, because, for instance, if transition from x to z is possible through
y only, then it is only possible if both a winning coalition in x prefers z to x and a winning
coalition in y prefers z to y.16 Nevertheless, this assumption can be dispensed with, and we
could assume instead that whenever x Ã y and y Ã z but x 6Ã z, then Wx = Wy (or a weaker

version of this assumption).17
16

See Chwe (1994) for another model where diﬀerent transitions require diﬀerent winning coalitions.
One set of economically interesting cases in which Assumption 6 fails to hold includes economic games in
which there is a capital-stock-like variable, such as capital, that is determined as a result of the actions in the
current state (for example, capital accumulation, which might depend on the current enforcement of property
rights). Since our game does not involve such dynamic linkages, Assumption 6 is natural here. In particular,
17

47

We next consider slightly weaker versions of Assumption 2 and Assumption 3, incorporating
the fact that only certain transitions are feasible (since when some transitions are not feasible,
it becomes easier to rule out cycles).
Assumption 20 (Payoﬀs with Limited Transitions) Payoﬀ functions {wi (s)}i∈I,s∈S satisfy the following properties:

(a) For any sequence of states s1 , . . . , sk in S with sj Ã sj+1 for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1 and
sk Ã s1 ,

sj+1 Âsj sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1 =⇒ s1 ¨sk sk .
(b) For any sequence of states s, s1 , . . . , sk in S with s Ã sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k, sk Ã s1 ,
and sj Âs s for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k,

sj+1 Âs sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1 =⇒ s1 ¨s sk .
(b)* For any sequence of states s, s1 , . . . , sk in S with s Ã sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k, sj ¿ sl
for some 1 ≤ j < l ≤ k, and sj Âs s for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k,

sj+1 ºs sj for all 1 ≤ j ≤ k − 1 =⇒ s1 ²s sk .
Moreover, if for x, y, s ∈ S we have s Ã x, s Ã y, x Âs s and y ¨s s, then y ¨s x.
Assumption 30 (Comparability with Limited Transitions) For x, y, s ∈ S such that s Ã
x, s Ã y, x Âs s, y Âs s, and x ¿ y, either y Âs x or x Âs y.

Finally, let us reformulate Axioms 1—3 for this slightly modified set up (note that Axiom 3
is unchanged, though we state it again for completeness).
Axiom 10 (Desirability) If x, y ∈ S are such that y = φ (x), then either y = x or x Ã y and
y Âx x.

Axiom 20 (Stability) If x, y ∈ S are such that y = φ (x), then y = φ (y).
Axiom 30 (Rationality) If x, y, z ∈ S are such that x Ã z, z Âx x, z = φ (z), and z Âx y,
then y 6= φ (x).

With this new set of Axioms, a slightly modified version of Theorem 1 holds:
there is no reason for a suﬃciently powerful coalition not to be able to implement a change that is feasible in
the continuation game. An interesting model of a gradual dynamic enfranchisement where capital accumulation
changes agents’ preferences over time is provided in Jack and Lagunoﬀ (2006).

48

Theorem 4 (Dynamically Stable States with Limited Transitions) Suppose that binary
relation Ã satisfies Assumption 6, and that Assumptions 1 and 20 hold. Then:
1. There exists mapping φ satisfying Axioms 10 —30 .
2. Any mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 10 —30 can be recursively constructed as follows. Conn
o
struct sequence μ1 , ..., μ|S| with the property that for any 1 ≤ j < l ≤ |S|, either μj 6Ã μl
or μl ¨μj μj .Let φ (μ1 ) = μ1 . For each k = 2, . . . , |S|, let

and define

©
©
ª
ª
Mk = s ∈ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 : μk Ã s, s Âμk μk , and φ (s) = s

φ (μk ) =

½

μk
if Mk = ∅
.
s ∈ Mk :@z ∈ Mk with μk Ã z and z Âμk s if Mk 6= ∅

3. For any two mappings φ1 and φ2 that satisfy Axioms 10 —30 the stable states of these mappings coincide.
4. If, in addition, Assumption 30 holds, then the mapping that satisfies Axioms 10 —30 is
“payoﬀ-unique” in the sense that for any two mappings φ1 and φ2 that satisfy Axioms
10 —30 and for any s ∈ S, φ1 (s) ∼ φ2 (s).
Proof. The proof is an extension of that of Theorem 1. The idea of the proof is to construct a
mapping (sequence) μ : {1, . . . , |S|} ↔ S such that for any 1 ≤ k < |S| we have that
if 1 ≤ j < l ≤ |S| , then μj 6Ã μl or μl ¨μj μj .

(B1)

To construct mapping μ, we introduce a binary relation ! defined as
x ! y if and only if x Ã y and y Ã x.
Assumption 6 guarantees that ! is an equivalence relation, inducing equivalence classes
{Ex }x∈S defined as

Ex = {y ∈ S : x ! y}

to be such that Ex and Ey either coincide or do not intersect. The binary relation Ã on elements

of S induces relation Ã in equivalence classes by letting Ex Ã Ey if and only if x Ã y; note

that this relation is well-defined in the sense that it does not depend on the elements x and
y picked from Ex and Ey , respectively. Furthermore, this relation is acyclical in the sense that

there do not exist distinct classes E 1 , . . . , E l such that E j Ã E j+1 for 1 ≤ j < l and E l Ã E 1 .
49

Consequently, we can form a sequence of all equivalence classes E 1 , . . . , E m (where m is the

number of classes) such that E j 6Ã E k for any 1 ≤ j < k ≤ m. Now, within each class E k , we
¯ ¯
enumerate its elements as μk1 , . . . , μkE k so that μkl ¨μk μkj for 1 ≤ j < l ≤ ¯E k ¯ (this is feasible
j
| |
due to Assumption 20 (a)). Next, construct the sequence μ as follows: we give members of class
´
³
1
1
1
E1 numbers 1 to |E1 | in the order they are listed in the sequence μ ≡ μ1 , . . . , μ|E 1 | , then we

take members of class E2 as they are listed in the sequence μ2 , and so on. It is easy to show
that the sequence μ constructed in this way satisfies (B1). The rest of the proof closely follows
the one of Theorem 1 and is omitted.
Similarly, an equivalent of Theorem 2 again applies.

Theorem 5 (Noncooperative Foundations of Dynamically Stable States with Limited Transitions) Suppose that binary relation Ã satisfies Assumption 6, that Assumptions 1,
20 (a),(b) and 4 hold. Then there exists β 0 ∈ [0, 1) such if the discount factor β > β 0 , then:
1. For any mapping φ : S → S satisfying Axioms 10 —30 there exists a set of protocols {π s }s∈S

and a pure-strategy MPE σ of the game such that st = φ (s0 ) for any t ≥ 1; that is, the

game reaches φ (s0 ) after one period and stays in this state thereafter. Therefore, s = φ (s0 )

is a dynamically stable state.
Moreover, suppose that Assumption 20 (b)* holds. Then:
2. For any set of protocols {π s }s∈S there exists a pure-strategy MPE. Any such MPE σ has
the property that for any initial state s0 ∈ S, st = s∞ for all t ≥ 1. Moreover, there

exists mapping φ : S → S satisfying Axioms 10 —30 such that s∞ = φ (s0 ). Therefore, all
dynamically stable states are axiomatically stable.

3. If, in addition, Assumption 30 holds, then the MPE is essentially unique in the sense that
for any set of protocols {π s }s∈S , any pure-strategy MPE σ induces st ∼ φ (s0 ) for all t ≥ 1,
where φ satisfies Axioms 10 —30 .

Proof. The proof is essentially identical to that of Theorem 2 and is omitted.
These theorems therefore show that the essential results of Theorems 1 and 2 generalize
to an environment with limited transitions. The intuition for these results and the recursive
characterization of dynamically stable states are essentially identical to those in Theorems 1
and 2.

50

7.5

Generalization of Proposition 4

We now show how Proposition 4 can be generalized by allowing only certain types of transitions.
This generalization makes the political elimination model of Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008)
(and its extension to infinite horizon) also a special case of the analysis here.
Proposition 5 Consider the environment in Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008). Then:
1. Assumptions 1, 20 , 30 , and 6 are satisfied (provided that X Ã Y is feasible if and only if
Y ⊂ X).
2. There exists an arbitrarily small perturbation of payoﬀs such that Assumption 20 (b)* holds.
3. If only eliminations are possible, there exists a unique outcome mapping φelim that satisfies
Axioms 10 —30 . This mapping yields the same equilibrium (dynamically stable) states as in
Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008).
4. In the case where any transition is feasible (as in Proposition 4 in the text), there exists a
unique outcome mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3. This mapping is potentially diﬀerent
from φelim .
Proof. (Part 1) Assumption 1 is satisfied by Proposition 4 (part 1), since it has not changed.
Assumptions 20 and 30 are in fact weaker than corresponding Assumptions 2 and 3, because in
the latter two, all transitions are allowed, which makes the set of potential cycles larger. Finally,
if transitions X Ã Y and Y Ã Z are feasible, then Y ⊂ X and Z ⊂ Y , hence Z ⊂ X, and
therefore transition X Ã Z is feasible, so Assumption 6 is satisfied.

(Part 2) The proof of this result is very similar to the proof of part 2 of Proposition 4 and
is omitted.
(Part 3) Existence and uniqueness of a mapping φelim that satisfies Axioms 10 —30 follows
from part 1, since Theorem 1 is applicable. Similarly, in Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008)
it is shown that under these assumptions, there exists a unique outcome correspondence φaes
that satisfy Axiom 1—4 of that paper This correspondence φaes is single-valued due to genericity
assumption, so below, we will treat φaes as a mapping, not a correspondence. To prove that
φelim = φ it suﬃces to show that mapping φelim satisfies Axiom 1—4 of that paper. For Axiom 1
(Inclusion): Take any X; Axiom 10 implies that either φelim (X) = X or X Ã φelim (X). In both
cases, φelim (X) ⊂ X. For Axiom 2 (Power): Again, Axiom 10 implies that either φelim (X) = X

or X Ã φelim (X) and φelim (X) ÂX X. In both cases, φelim (X) ⊂ X and γ φelim (X) > αγ X , so

φelim (X) ∈ WX in the notation of that paper. Axiom 3 (Self-Enforcement): Take any X and
51

let Y = φelim (X). Axiom 20 implies φelim (Y ) = φelim (φelim (X)) = φelim (X) = Y . Finally,
Axiom 4 (Rationality): Take any X, Y = φelim (X), and suppose that Z ∈ WX (meaning

that Z ⊂ X and γ Z > αγ X ) and Z = φelim (Z). If γ Y < γ Z , then we have X Ã Y , Y ÂX X,

Y = φelim (Y ) by Axiom 20 , and Y ÂX Z. Axiom 30 then implies that Z 6= φelim (X). Conversely,
if γ Z ≤ γ Y , then γ Z = γ Y , for γ Z < γ Y would imply that X Ã Z, Z ÂX X, Z = φelim (Z),
and Z ÂX Y , in which case we would get a contradiction with Y = φelim (X), as Axiom 30

would imply Y 6= φelim (Y ). But γ Z = γ Y , together with genericity, implies Z = Y , and
hence Z = φelim (X). This proves that Axioms 1—4 of Acemoglu, Egorov, and Sonin (2008) are
satisfied, hence, φelim = φaes .
(Part 4) Existence and uniqueness follow from Proposition 4 (part 1). To show that the two
mappings, φelim and φ may be diﬀerent, consider four individuals, A, B, C, Z with powers γ A = 3,

γ B = 4, γ C = 5, γ D = 4.5. It is straightforward to verify that φelim ({A, B, C}) = {A, B, C}, but

φ ({A, B, C}) = {A, B, Z}. Moreover, it is possible that for some coalition X, φelim (X) ⊂ X and

φ (X) ⊂ X, but φ (X) 6= φelim (X): this would be the case for six players A, B, C, D, E, F with

powers 100, 101, 103, 107, 115, 131, respectively (here, φelim ({A, B, C, D, E, F }) = {A, B, F },
but φ ({A, B, C, D, E, F }) = {D, E, F }).

In fact, {A, B, F } is the winning coalition in

{A, B, C, D, E, F } with the least power; it also happens to be φelim -stable. However, it is

not φ-stable (φ ({A, B, F }) = {A, B, C}), and in this case {D, E, F } is the φ-stable winning
coalition with the least total power (in {A, B, C, D, E, F }).

52

Appendix C: Examples, Proofs From Section 6 and Additional
Results (Not for Publication)
Definition of MPE
Consider a general n-person infinite-stage game, where each individual can take an action at
¡
¢
every stage. Let the action profile of each individual be ai = a1i , a2i , . . . for i = 1, . . . , n, with
¡ 1
¢
Q
t
t
t be the history of play up to stage t (not
ati ∈ Ati and ai ∈ Ai = ∞
t=1 Ai . Let h = a , . . . , a

including stage t), where as = (as1 , . . . , asn ), so h0 is the history at the beginning of the game,
and let H t be the set of histories ht for t : 0 ≤ t ≤ T − 1.

We denote the set of all potential histories up to date t by
Ht =

t
S

H s.

s=0

Let t-continuation action profiles be ai,t

¡
¢
= ati , at+1
i , . . . for i = 1, . . . , n, with the set of con-

tinuation action profiles for player i denoted by Ai.t . Symmetrically, define t-truncated action
¡
¢
for i = 1, . . . , n, with the set of t-truncated action profiles
profiles as ai,−t = a1i , a2i , . . . , at−1
i

for player i denoted by Ai,−t . We also use the standard notation ai and a−i to denote the action

profiles for player i and the action profiles of all other players (similarly, Ai and A−i ). The payoﬀ
¡
¢
functions for the players depend only on actions, i.e., player i’s payoﬀ is given by ui a1 , . . . , an .

A pure strategy for player i is

σ i : H∞ → Ai .
A t-continuation strategy for player i (corresponding to strategy σ i ) specifies plays only after
time t (including time t), i.e.,
σ i,t : H∞ \ Ht−2 → Ai,t ,
where H∞ \ Ht−2 is the set of histories starting at time t.
We then have:

Definition 9 (Markovian Strategies) A continuation strategy σ i,t is Markovian if
³
´
σ i,t (ht−1 ) = σ i,t h̃τ −1

for all τ ≥ t, whenever ht−1 , h̃τ −1 ∈ H∞ are such that for any ai,t , ãi,τ ∈ Ai,t and any a−i,t ∈
A−i,t ,

ui (ai,t , a−i,t | ht−1 ) ≥ ui (ãi,τ , a−i,t | hτ −1 )
implies

³
´
³
´
ui ai,t , a−i,t | h̃t−1 ≥ ui ãi,τ , a−i,t | h̃τ −1 .
53

Markov perfect equilibria in pure strategies are defined formally as follows:
Definition 10 (MPE) A pure strategy profile σ̂ = (σ̂ 1 , ..., σ̂ n ) is Markov perfect equilibrium (MPE) (in pure strategies) if each strategy σ̂ i is Markovian and
ui (σ̂ i , σ̂ −i ) ≥ ui (σ̂ i , σ̂ −i ) for all σ i ∈ Σi and for all i = 1, . . . , n.

Examples
Example 3 (Nonexistence without Transaction Costs) In this example, we show that
a MPE in pure strategies may fail to exist if we assume away the transaction cost. There
are 8 states S = {A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H} and 7 players. The set of winning coalitions are:
WA = {X ∈ C : |{1, 2, 3} ∩ X| ≥ 2} (i.e., majority voting between 1, 2, 3), WB = [4], WD = [5],

WF = [6], WC = WE = WG = WH = [7] (here, [i] denotes the set of winning coalitions where i is

the dictator, so [i] = {X ∈ C : i ∈ X}). The payoﬀs are as follows: w1 (·) = (0, 30, 0, 0, 20, 0, 0, 1),

w2 (·) = (0, 0, 0, 30, 0, 0, 20, 1), w3 (·) = (0, 0, 20, 0, 0, 30, 0, 1), w4 (·) = (0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0),
w5 (·) = (0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0), w6 (·) = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0), w7 (·) = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1).

It is

straightforward to show that Assumptions 1, 2 and 2b* are satisfied (it is helpful to notice
that the only state s that satisfies s ÂA A is s = H).

Evidently, state H is stable (dictator 7 will never deviate), and similarly any of the states

E, F, G will immediately lead to H. It is also evident that B will immediately lead to C, because
C is the only state where dictator 4 receives a positive utility; similarly, D immediately leads
to E and F immediately leads to G. Let us prove that no move from state A can form a
pure-strategy equilibrium. First, it is impossible to stay in A: players 1, 2, 3 would be better oﬀ
moving to H. Moving to H immediately is not possible in an equilibrium either: Then players
1 and 3 would rather deviate and move to B, which would then lead to C and only then to H,
since the average payoﬀ of this path would be higher for each of these players (recall that the
discount factor is close to 1).
Let us consider possible moves to B and C (the moves to D, E, F, G are considered similarly).
If the state were to change to C, then players 1 and 2 would rather deviate and move to D (and
then to E, followed by H). Finally, if the state were to change to B, then 2 and 3 could deviate
to F , so as to follow the path to G and H after that; this is better for these players than
moving to B, followed by C and H. So, without imposing a transaction cost it is possible that
a pure-strategy equilibrium does not exist.

54

Example 4 (Cycles without Transaction Costs) In this example, we show that in the
absence of transaction cost, an equilibrium may involve a cycle even though Assumptions 1, 2
and 2b* hold. There are 6 players, I = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}, and 3 states, S = {A, B, C}. Play-

ers’ preferences are given by w1 (A, B, C) = (5, 10, 4), w2 (A, B, C) = (5, 4, 10), w3 (A, B, C) =

(4, 5, 10), w4 (A, B, C) = (10, 5, 4), w5 (A, B, C) = (10, 4, 5), w3 (A, B, C) = (4, 10, 5), and winning coalitions are defined by WA = {X ∈ C : 1, 2 ∈ X}, WB = {X ∈ C : 3, 4 ∈ X}, WC =

{X ∈ C : 5, 6 ∈ X}. Then one can see that there is an equilibrium which involves moving from
state A to state B, from B to C, and from C to A. To see this, because of the symmetry it
suﬃces to see that the players will not deviate if the current state is A. The alternatives are to
stay in A or move to C. But staying in A hurts both player 1 and player 2 (for player 2 who
dislikes state B this is true because it postpones the move to C, the state that he likes best,
while for player 1 this is evident). At the same time, moving to C hurts player 1, because state
C is the worst of the three states for him not only in terms of instantaneous payoﬀ, but also
in terms of discounted present value (if the cycle continues, as it should due to the one-stage
deviation principle). So, this cycle constitutes a (Markov Perfect) equilibrium.
It is also easy to see that in this example, Assumptions 1, 2 and 2b* are satisfied: in fact, there
are no two states s, s0 ∈ {A, B, C} such that s Âs0 s0 . Finally, notice that the aforementioned

cycle is not the only equilibrium. In particular, the cycle in the opposite direction may also arise
in an equilibrium (this holds because of symmetry), and situation where all three states are
stable is also possible (indeed, if B and C are stable, then players 1 will always block transition
from A to C whereas player 2 will always block transition from A to B).

Example 5 (Nonexistence without Assumption 2(a)) There are 3 players, I = {1, 2, 3},
and 3 states, S = {A, B, C}.

Players’ preferences satisfy w1 (A) > w1 (B) > w1 (C),

w2 (B) > w2 (C) > w2 (A), and w3 (C) > w3 (A) > w3 (B) (for example, w1 (A, B, C) =
(10, 8, 5), w2 (A, B, C) = (5, 10, 8), w3 (A, B, C) = (8, 5, 10)). Winning coalitions are given
by WA = {X ∈ C : 3 ∈ X}, WB = {X ∈ C : 1 ∈ X}, WA = {X ∈ C : 2 ∈ X} (in other words,
states A, B, C have dictators 1, 2, 3, respectively). We then have A ÂB B, B ÂC C, C ÂA A, so
Assumption 2(a) is violated.

It is easy to see that there are no dynamically stable states in the dynamic game in this case.
To see this, suppose that state A is dynamically stable, then state B is not, since player 1 would
enforce transition to A. Therefore, state C is stable: player 2, who is the dictator in C, knows
that a transition to B will lead to A, which is worse than C. However, then player 3, knowing
that C is stable, will have an incentive to move from A to C. In equilibrium this deviation
55

should not be profitable, but it is; hence, there is no equilibrium where A is stable. Now, given
the transition costs, there is no MPE in pure strategies, since if no state is dynamically stable,
the players would benefit from blocking every single transition in every single state.
Let us now formally show that there is no mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3. Assume
that there is such mapping φ. By Axiom 2, there is a stable state (for any state s, φ (s) is
stable). Without loss of generality, suppose that A is such a state: φ (A) = A. Then state C is
not stable: if it were, we would obtain a contradiction with Axiom 3, since C ÂA A. If C is not

stable, then either φ (C) = A or φ (C) = B. The first is impossible by Axiom 1, since player 2,
who is a member of any winning coalition in C, has w2 (C) > w2 (A). Therefore, φ (C) = B,

and by Axiom 2, φ (B) = B. But we have A ÂB B and φ (A) = A; this means, by Axiom 3,
that φ (B) = B cannot hold. This contradiction shows that with these preferences, there is no
mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3.

Example 6 (Nonexistence without Assumption 2(b)) There are 3 players, I = {1, 2, 3},

and 4 states, S = {A, B, C, D}. Players’ preferences satisfy w1 (A) > w1 (B) > w1 (C) >

w1 (D), w2 (B) > w2 (C) > w2 (A) > w2 (D), and w3 (C) > w3 (A) > w3 (B) > w3 (D)

(for example, w1 (A, B, C, D) = (10, 8, 5, 4), w2 (A, B, C, D) = (5, 10, 8, 4), w3 (A, B, C, D) =
(8, 5, 10, 4)).

Winning coalitions are given by WA = WB = WC = {I} = {{1, 2, 3}},

WD = {{1, 2} , {1, 3} , {2, 3} , {1, 2, 3}} (in other words, in states A, B, C there is unanimity

voting rule, while in state D there is majority voting rule). We then have A ÂD D, A ÂD D,

A ÂD D and A ÂD B, B ÂD C, C ÂD A, so Assumption 2(b) is violated. Assume, in addition,

that KD = 3, and π D (1) = C, π D (2) = B, π D (3) = A.

In this case, states A, B, C are dynamically stable: evidently, player who receives 10 (1, 2, 3,
respectively) will block transition to any other state. Consider state D; it is easy to see that
it is not dynamically stable. Indeed, if it were, then all three players would be better oﬀ from
transition to either of the three other states A, B, C, so they must vote for any such proposal in
equilibrium. Now that it is not dynamically stable, we must have that some of proposals C, B, A
are accepted in equilibrium. Suppose that A is accepted, then B may not be accepted (because
two players, 1 and 3, strictly prefer A to B), and therefore C must be accepted (because two
players, 2 and 3, strictly prefer C to A). But then A may not be accepted, as players 2 and 3
would prefer to have it rejected so that C is accepted in the next period, and by Lemma 1(c)
A must be rejected in the equilibrium. This contradicts our assertion that A is accepted, and
we would obtain a similar contradiction if we assumed that some other proposal is accepted.
Hence, there is no MPE in pure strategies in this case.
56

We now show that there is no mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3. Assume that there is
such mapping φ. Since for each of the states A, B, C there is no state that is preferred to it by
all three players, then Axiom 1 implies that φ (A) = A, φ (B) = B, and φ (C) = C. Consider
state D. If φ (D) = D, this would violate Axiom 3, since, for instance, state A satisfies A ÂD D

and φ (A) = A. Hence, φ (D) 6= D; without loss of generality assume φ (D) = A. But then state

C satisfies C ÂD A, C ÂD D, and φ (C) = C. By Axioum 3 we cannot have φ (D) = A. This

contradiction proves that there does not exist mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3.

Example 7 (Multiple Equilibria without Assumption 3) There are 2 players, I = {1, 2},
and 3 states, S = {A, B, C}.

Players’ preferences satisfy w1 (A) > w1 (B) > w1 (C),

w2 (B) > w2 (A) > w2 (C) (for example, w1 (A, B, C) = (5, 3, 1), w2 (A, B, C) = (3, 5, 1)).
Winning coalitions are given by WA = WB = WC = {I} = {{1, 2}} (in other words, there is a
unanimity voting rule in all states A, B, C). Then Assumptions 1 and 2(a,b) are satisfied, while

Assumption 3 is violated (both A and B are preferred to C, but neither A ÂC B nor B ÂC A).
One can easily see that in this case there exist two mappings, φ1 and φ2 , which satisfy Axioms

1—3. Let φ1 (A) = φ1 (C) = A and φ1 (B) = B. Let φ2 (A) = A and φ2 (B) = φ2 (C) = B.
Mappings φ1 and φ2 diﬀer in only that the first one maps state C to state A, and the second
one maps state C to state A. It is straightforward to verify that φ1 and φ2 satisfy Axioms 1—3,
and also that no other mapping satisfies these Axioms. Note that the sets of stable states under
these two mappings satisfy Dφ1 = {A, B} = Dφ2 , as they should according to Theorem 1.

Proofs of Propositions From Section 6
Proof of Proposition 1 (Part 1) Take msk = (k + 1) /2 if k is odd and ms = k/2 if k is
even. Evidently, for any of the rules Wsmaj
, Wsmed
, or Wslkk where k/2 < lk ≤ k for all k, msk is
k
k

a quasi-median voter and, moreover, the sequence {msk }N
k=1 is monotonically increasing.

(Part 2) In all cases Wsmaj
, Wsmed
, or Wslkk where k/2 < lk ≤ k, Assumption 1 trivially
k
k

holds. From part 1 it follows that Theorem 3 (part 1) is applicable, so Assumption 2(a,b) holds.
Finally, Assumption 2b* follows from 5, as Theorem 3 (part 3) is applicable in this case.

(Part 3) In an odd-sized club sk , median voter is a single person (k + 1) /2, and in the case
of majority voting, we have sl Âsk sk if and only if w(k+1)/2 (sl ) > w(k+1)/2 (sk ) because of the
single-crossing condition. In either case, if sl and sj are two diﬀerent clubs, player (k + 1) /2 is

not indiﬀerent between them by Assumption 5. This implies that either sl Âsk sj of sj Âsk sl
for any sj and sl , which completes the proof. ¥

57

Proof of Proposition 2. (Part 1) Assumption 1 holds in each club sk , because the voting
rule is simple majority. To show that Assumption 2(a) holds, we notice that it is impossible to
have sl Âsk sk for l > k, because all members of sk prefer sk to sl . Therefore, any cycle that

we hypothesize to exist will break at its smallest club. To show that Assumption 2(b) holds,
take any club s = sk . The set of clubs {sl } that satisfy sl Âsk sk is the set of clubs that satisfy

k/2 < l ≤ k. Hence, for any clubs sl , sm with l < m that satisfy sl Âsk sk and sm Âsk sk we

have sl Âsk sm : indeed, players i ∈ {1, . . . , l} which form a simple majority will prefer sl to sm ,
as they are included in both clubs, but prefer the smaller one. Therefore, sm Âsk sl is impossible
for l < m, which proves that Assumption 2(b) holds. Likewise, sm ºsk sl is impossible, so the

first part of Assumption 2b* holds as well.

Let us now take sl Âsk sk and sm ¨sk sk . This means k/2 < l ≤ k, and either m ≤ k/2 or

m ≥ k. If m ≤ k/2, then the set of members of club sk who prefer sm to sl is {1, . . . , m}: those

who belong to sl but not to sm prefer sl , while those who do not belong to either of sm and

sl are indiﬀerent. So, players only players in sm may strictly prefer sm to sl . But they do not
constitute at least half of the club in sk , so sm ¨sk sl . Consider the second case, m ≥ k. But

then all players in sl (i.e., a majority) will prefer sl to sm , and therefore sm ¨sk sl . We have
proved that Assumption 2b* holds.
Finally, to show that Assumption 3 holds, take s = sk , sl and sm such that sl Âsk sk ,

sm Âsk sk , and sl ¿ sm . Without loss of generality assume l < m. But then sl Âsk sm , since all
players from sl prefer sl , and they form a majority in sk . This proves that Assumption 3 holds.

(Part 2) Monotonic median voter property holds, since we can take msk to be player k/2
if k is even and (k + 1) /2 is odd; clearly, {msk }N
k=1 is an increasing sequence of quasi-median

voters. To show that the single-crossing condition holds, take i, j ∈ I such that i < j and

sk , sl ∈ S with k < l. Suppose wi (sl ) > wi (sk ). This is possible if i ∈ sl but i ∈
/ sk or i ∈
/ sk , sl .
/ sk . But then wj (sl ) > wj (sk ). Suppose now that
In either case, i ∈
/ sk , and therefore j ∈

wj (sl ) < wj (sk ); this means that j ∈ sk , sl . But then i ∈ sk , sl , and therefore wi (sl ) < wi (sk ).

This establishes that the single-crossing condition holds.

(Part 3) Notice that it is never possible that sl Âsk sk if k < l. We can therefore start with

smaller clubs. Club s1 is stable and 1 = 20 . Suppose we proved the statement for j < k and

/ Z, then club sj for j = 2blog2 kc is stable and contains more
now consider club sk . If log2 k ∈

than half members of sk . Hence, sk is unstable. Conversely, if log2 k ∈ Z, then the only clubs

we know to be stable do not contain more than k/2 members, so sk is stable. This proves the
induction step.

(Part 4) If log2 k ∈ Z, then 2blog2 kc = k, and the statement follows from part 3. If log2 k ∈
/ Z,

then s2blog2 kc is the only club which is preferred to sk by a majority (other stable clubs are either
58

larger than sk or at least twice as small as s2blog2 kc , i.e., more than two times smaller than sk ).
The result follows. ¥
Proof of Proposition 3. (Part 1) Assumption 1 follows from b > N/2. Therefore,
Theorem 3 applies and Assumption 2(a,b) and 2b* are satisfied.
(Part 2) By part 1, Theorem 1 is applicable. The result immediately follows.
(Part 3) We prove this result for constitutions and voting rules simultaneously. By definition, a voting rule (constitution) (a, b) is self-stable (or self-stable, in terminology of Barbera and Jackson) if |i ∈ I : wi (a0 ) > wi (a)| < b for all feasible a0 . But this is equivalent to

(a0 , b0 ) ¨(a,b) (a, b) for all (a, b), which is the definition of myopic stability. By Corollary 1, any
myopically stable state is dynamically stable, but not vice versa, which establishes the result.
(Part 4) In light of part 3 we only need to prove that any dynamically stable state is
myopically stable. Take any constitution (a, b) which is not myopically stable; let us prove that
φc [(a, b)] 6= (a, b). Consider the set of constitutions Q = {(a0 , b0 )} such that (a0 , b0 ) Â(a,b) (a, b);
since (a, b) is unstable, this set is nonempty. Note that if (a0 , b0 ) ∈ Q, then (a0 , N ) ∈ Q (because

the second part of the pair of rules does not enter the utility directly). Now take some player i and
(a0 , b0 ) ∈ Q that is most preferred by i among the states within Q (or one of such states if there

are several of these). Consider state (a0 , N ) ∈ Q. First, since it lies in Q, (a0 , N ) Â(a,b) (a, b).

Second, this state is φc -stable: indeed, if it were not the case, we would have some other
(a00 , b00 ) Â(a0 ,N) (a0 , N ). This means that each player prefers (a00 , b00 ) to (a0 , N ), which of course

implies that at least a players prefer (a00 , b00 ) to (a, b), so (a00 , b00 ) ∈ Q. But there is player i

who at least weakly prefers (a0 , b0 ) (and therefore (a0 , N), which is the same as far as immediate
payoﬀs are concerned) to any other element in Q. This means that such (a00 , b00 ) does not exist,
and state (a0 , N ) is stable. Axiom 3 then implies that φc (a, b) cannot equal (a, b), since state

(a0 , N ) is φc -stable and is preferred to (a, b). This completes the proof. ¥
Proof of Proposition 4. (Part 1) Assumption 1 immediately follows from (18) and that
α ≥ 1/2. To prove that Assumption 2(a) holds, it suﬃces to notice that Y ÂX X is impossible if

γ Y > γ X , so any cycle would break at the least powerful coalition in it (which is unique because
of genericity). Similarly, to prove that Assumption 2(b) holds, one can notice that if Y ÂX X

and Z ÂX X, then γ Y > γ Z implies Z ÂX Y , and thus Y ¨X Z: indeed, all players in Z

prefer Z to Y , and they form a winning coalition in X, for if they did not, Z ÂX X would be

impossible. Again, this means that any cycle would break at the least powerful coalition in it.
One can similarly show that Assumption 3 holds: is proved likewise: if Y ÂX X and Z ÂX X,
then, by genericity, X ¿ Y implies γ Y 6= γ Z . Without loss of generality, γ Y > γ Z , and in this
case Z ÂX Y . Hence, Assumption 3 is satisfied.

59

(Part 2) Let us perturb players’ payoﬀs so that if i ∈
/ X, then wi (X) = εγ X where ε > 0 is

small. After this perturbation, Assumptions 1, 2 and 3 still hold, as the proofs from part 1 are
still valid. The first part of Assumption 2b* follows, for if a corresponding º-cycle existed, then

by genericity we would get a Â-cycle which is ruled out by Assumption 2(b). To show that the

second part of Assumption 2b* holds, take Y ÂX X and Z ¨X X. This implies αγ X < γ Y < γ X

and either γ Z ≤ αγ X or γ Z > γ X . If γ Z ≤ αγ X , all players who are not in Z prefer Y to Z:

this is obviously true for the part that belongs to Y , while if a player is neither in Y nor in Z,
this is true because of the perturbation we made, for in this case γ Y > αγ X ≥ γ Z . Since players
in Z do not form a winning coalition in this case, we have Z ¨X Y . Consider the second case

where γ Z > γ X ; then all players in Y prefer Y to Z, since γ Y < γ Z . This means that Y ÂX Z

and thus Z ¨X Y . This proves that Assumption 2b* holds, which completes the proof. ¥

The Relationship Between D, von Neumann-Morgenstern Stable Set, and
Chwe’s Largest Consistent Set
The following definitions are from Chwe (1994) and von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944).
Definition 11 (Consistent Sets) For any x, y ∈ S and any X ∈ C, define relation →X by
x →X y if and only if either x = y or x 6= y and X ∈ Wx .

1. We say that state x is directly dominated by y (and write x < y) if there exists X ∈ C

such that x →X y and x ≺X y, where we write x ≺X y as a shorthand for wi (x) < wi (y)

for all i ∈ X.

2. We say that state x is indirectly dominated by y (and write x ¿ y) if there exist
x0 , x1 , . . . , xm ∈ S such that x0 = x and xm = y and X0 , X1 , . . . , Xm−1 ∈ C such that
xj →Sj xj+1 and xj ≺Sj y for j = 0, 1, . . . , m − 1.

3. A set S ⊂ S is called consistent if x ∈ S if and only if ∀y ∈ S, ∀X ∈ C such that x →X y
there exists z ∈ S, where y = z or y ¿ z, such that x ⊀X z.

Definition 12 (von Neumann-Morgenstern’s Stable Set)A set of states X ⊂ S is von
Neumann-Morgenstern stable if it satisfies the following properties:
1. (Internal stability) For any x, y ∈ X we have y ¨x x;
2. (External stability) For any x ∈ S \ X there exists y ∈ X such that y Âx x.
Proposition 6 Suppose Assumptions 1 and 2 hold. Then:
60

1. The set of stable states D is the unique von Neumann-Morgenstern stable set;
2. D is the largest consistent set;
3. Any consistent set is either D or any subset of the set of exogenously stable states (and
vice versa, all such sets are consistent).

n
o
Proof. (Part 1) We take the sequence of states μ1 , ..., μ|S| satisfying (7). Suppose that set

of states X is von Neumann-Morgenstern stable; let us prove that X = D. Clearly, μ1 ∈ X ,
©
ª
since μk ¨μ1 μ1 for any state μk . Now suppose that we have proved that X ∩ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 =
ª
©
D ∩ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 for some k ≥ 2; let us prove that μk ∈ X if and only if μk ∈ D. From
Theorem 1 it follows that it suﬃces to prove that μk ∈ X if and only if Mk = ∅. Suppose first
©
ª
that Mk 6= ∅; then, since Mk = X ∩ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 by construction, we have that μl Âμk μk

for some l < k such that μl ∈ X . Hence, if μk ∈ X , then internal stability property would

be violated, and therefore μk ∈
/ X . Now consider the case where Mk = ∅. This means that
ª
©
X ∩ μ1 , . . . , μk−1 = ∅, and therefore there does not exist μl ∈ X such that l < k and μl Âμk μk .
But by (7), μl ¨μk μk whenever l > k. Hence, for any μl ∈ X such that l 6= k we have μl ¨μk μk ,
and therefore μk ∈ X , for otherwise external stability condition would be violated. This proves
the induction step, and therefore completes the proof that X = D.

(Part 2) It is obvious that for any x, y ∈ S, x < y implies x ¿ y. In our setup, however,

the opposite is also true, so x < y if and only if x ¿ y. To see this, suppose that x ¿ y; take a

sequence of states and a sequence of coalitions as in Definition 11. Let k ≥ 0 be lowest number

such that xk+1 6= x. This means that x →Xk xk+1 (because xk = x) and ∀i ∈ Xk : wx (i) <

wy (i). By definition, x < y; note also that Xk ∈ Wx , since x 6= xk+1 .

To show that set D is consistent, consider some mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3. Take

any x ∈ D, and then take any y ∈ S and any X ∈ C such that x →X y. Let z = φ (y); then, as

follows from Axiom 1, either z = y or y ¿ z. Now consider two possibilities: x = y and x 6= y. In

the first case, x = y ∈ D, so z = y = x. Since X is nonempty, property ∃i ∈ X : wx (i) ≥ wz (i)

is satisfied. Now suppose that x 6= y; then X ∈ Wx . On the other hand, z ∈ D. But it is

impossible that z Âx x, since both x and z are stable (otherwise, Axiom 1 would be violated for

mapping φ), hence, in this case, ∃i ∈ X : wi (x) ≥ wi (z), too.

Now take some x ∈
/ D. We need to show that there exist y ∈ S and X ∈ C such that

x →X y and for any z ∈ D which satisfies that either z = y or y ¿ z, we necessarily have

∀i ∈ X : wi (x) < wi (z). Take y = φ (x) and X = {i ∈ I : wi (x) < wi (y)} ∈ Wx ; then x →X y.

Note that it is impossible that for some z ∈ D we have y ¿ z, for then y < z, and therefore

z Ây y, which would violate Axiom 1. Therefore, any z ∈ D such that either z = y or y ¿ z
61

must satisfy z = y. But then, by our choice of X, we have ∀i ∈ X : wi (x) < wi (z). This proves
that D is indeed a consistent set.

To show that D is the largest consistent set, suppose, to obtain a contradiction, that the

largest consistent set is S 6= D. Since D is consistent, we must have D ⊂ S. Consider sequence
n
o
μ1 , ..., μ|S| satisfying (7), and among all states in S \ D 6= ∅ pick state x = μk ∈ S \ D with
the smallest number, i.e., such that if μl ∈ S \ D, then l ≥ k. We now show that, according
to the definition of a consistent set, x ∈
/ S, which would contradict the assertion that state S

is consistent. Take some mapping φ that satisfies Axioms 1—3. Now let y = φ (x) ∈ D and
/ D, y 6= x, which by (7) implies
X = {i ∈ I : wi (x) < wi (y)} ∈ Wx ; then x →X y and, since x ∈

that y = μl for l < k. Now if for some z ∈ S we have y ¿ z, then y < z, and hence z Ây y,
/ S \D, and therefore z ∈ D. However, it is
which implies z = μj for some j < l < k. But then z ∈

impossible that y, z ∈ D and z Ây y, as this would violate Axiom 1. Therefore, if for some z ∈ S

either z = y or y ¿ z, then in fact z = y. But for such z, we do have ∀i ∈ X : wi (x) < wi (z),

by construction of X. We get a contradiction, since by definition of a consistent set x ∈
/ S, while

we picked x ∈ S \ D. This proves that D is the largest consistent set.

(Part 3) By part 2, if S is a consistent set, then S ⊂ D. Suppose that S 6= D, but S includes

a state which is not exogenously stable. Suppose x ∈ S is not exogenously stable and y ∈ D \ S;
then x →X y for some X ∈ Wx . Since x ∈ S, there exists z ∈ S where either z = y or y ¿ z,

such that ∃i ∈ X : wi (x) ≥ wi (z). But y ∈ D \ S, and hence y ¿ z, which implies, as before,

y < z and z Ây y. However, this is impossible, since y, z ∈ D. This contradiction proves that if
S 6= D, S may not include any state which is not exogenously stable.

Consider, however, any S which consists of exogenously stable states only. Take any x ∈ S.

If y ∈ S and X ∈ C are such that x →X y, then x = y. In that case, we can take z = y ∈ S and

/ S. Consider two
find that condition ∃i ∈ X : wi (x) ≥ wi (z) trivially holds. Now take any x ∈

possibilities. If state x is exogenously stable, then take X = I and y = x; then x →X y. If for
some z ∈ S we had y ¿ z, then, in particular, y →Y z for some Y ∈ C, which is incompatible

with z 6= y; at the same time, z = y is impossible, as z ∈ S and y = x ∈
/ S. This means that for
this y there does not exist z ∈ S such that either z = y or y ¿ z, and therefore x = y should not

be in S. Finally, suppose that x is not exogenously stable. Again, consider mapping φ satisfying

Axioms 1—3 and take y = φ (x) and X = {i ∈ I : wi (x) < wi (y)} ∈ Wx ; then x →X y. By

the same reasoning as before, if for some z ∈ S either z = y or y ¿ z, then z = y, because

y ¿ z would imply z Ây y for y, z ∈ D. But for such z, we have ∀i ∈ X : wi (x) < wi (z) by
construction of X. This proves that S is indeed a consistent set, which completes the proof.

62

