NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO WORKERS GAIN BY SHARING? EMPLOYEE OUTCOMES UNDER EMPLOYEE
OWNERSHIP, PROFIT SHARING, AND BROAD-BASED STOCK OPTIONS
Douglas Kruse
Richard Freeman
Joseph Blasi
Working Paper 14233
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14233

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

Presented at the Russell Sage/NBER conference in New York City, October 2006. We thank Michael
Handel and other participants for valuable comments. An earlier version of this paper was presented
at the Labor and Employment Relations Association conference, January 5-8, 2006, Boston, Massachusetts.
This research is supported by a grant from the Russell Sage Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation.
The National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago provided valuable assistance
with the General Social Survey segment that forms the basis for some of the analysis. Refen Koh,
Michelle Pinheiro, Rhokeun Park, and Patricia Berhau provided excellent assistance in survey scanning,
entry, and verification. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Workers Gain by Sharing? Employee Outcomes under Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing,
and Broad-based Stock Options
Douglas Kruse, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi
NBER Working Paper No. 14233
August 2008
JEL No. J33,J54,L23
ABSTRACT
This paper examines how shared capitalism compensation systems - those that link employee pay
to company performance - affect diverse employee outcomes. It uses two data sets: the national GSS
survey that provides a broad representative view of the extent of the programs; and the NBER Shared
Capitalism Project surveys of workers in 14 companies that use shared capitalism programs extensively.
We find that greater involvement in the programs is generally linked to greater participation in decisions,
higher quality supervision and treatment of employees, more training, higher pay and benefits, greater
job security, and higher job satisfaction. We also find positive interactions of shared capitalism with
high-performance policies in predicting participation in decisions and overall job satisfaction, and
negative interactions of shared capitalism with close supervision in affecting almost all of the outcomes.
Overall the results support the idea that workers can gain by sharing, but whether this happens is contingent
on other workplace policies.

Douglas Kruse
School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University
94 Rockafeller Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854
and NBER
dkruse@rci.rutgers.edu
Richard Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
freeman@nber.org

Joseph Blasi
Rutgers University
School of management and Labor Relations
Levin Building
New Brunswick, NJ 08544
and NBER
jrbru@hotmail.com

Today, more employees than ever before have ownership stakes in their firms through
ESOPs and firm-based stock ownership plans, receive stock options once limited to top
executives, and are covered by profit-sharing plans. The media has publicized both the rewards
and dangers of tying worker pay and wealth to company performance. The 1990's produced many
stories of regular employees becoming millionaires by working in Silicon Valley firms with
broad-based options that paid off handsomely. The early 2000’s produced stories about Enron
employees losing their retirement moneys in a 401(k) plan that was heavily concentrated in
company stock. Apart from the extreme cases that get publicized, are these programs generally
good or bad for workers?
This paper analyzes the relationship of shared capitalism programs to a range of employee
outcomes: participation in decisions, supervision, training, company treatment of employees, pay,
job security, and job satisfaction. It uses data from the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys
(GSS), which covered 2226 persons in for-profit firms from a nationally representative sample,
and data from an NBER-sponsored firm based survey of over 40,000 employees at 320 worksites
in 14 companies for whom these programs are a key part of their compensation systems.
WHAT WE EXPECT
On the basis of incentive and organization theory and previous empirical work, we expect
that linking employee pay to company performance will impact workers in several ways.
Employee Participation in Decision-Making
Shared capitalist compensation systems should be associated with greater freedom for
workers to make decisions at their workplace. It is difficult to imagine a firm devolving decisions
to workers without developing some pecuniary mechanism for motivating them to make decisions
in the firm's interest, be it profit-sharing, gain-sharing, stock options or share ownership. Indeed,
1

one common reason for firms to institute compensation systems relating employee pay to company
performance is to induce workers to make decisions that improve firm performance.1
Two national surveys of workers have found the expected relation. For the U.S., Dube and
Freeman (2001) found a positive relation between shared capitalist compensation systems and
employee decision-making in Freeman and Rogers’ (1999) Workers Representation and
Participation Survey, with strong results for profit-sharing but weak results for employee
ownership. For the UK, Conyon and Freeman (2004) found a positive link between changes in
variable pay and changes in decision-making in the Workplace Employment Relations Survey.
However, firm-based studies of employee ownership find only a weak pattern between perceived
or desired participation in decision-making and employee ownership. Half of the ten studies
reviewed by Kruse and Blasi (1997) found participation levels higher with employee ownership
while half found no difference in participation. None of the studies found a connection between
participation in decisions and the size of one's ownership stake. Two of the studies that asked
about desired participation found no difference between employee-owners and non-owners, while
a third study found a decline in desired worker participation after an employee buyout, which the
author attributes to wariness by employees about the commitment levels of new employees and
trust in management (Long, 1981, 1982).
Supervision, Training, and Treatment of Workers
Any shared compensation system must overcome potential free rider problems. The larger
the number of people who share in the rewards of the firm or group, the lower is the incentive for
1

Over 60 studies indicate that profit sharing, employee ownership, and stock options are associated with better firm
performance on average. However, there is a great dispersion around that average as some companies greatly
outperform, and others under perform their non-sharing counterparts, for reasons that research has not yet pinned
down. (Kruse and Blasi, 1997; Kruse, 2003; Blasi, Kruse, and Bernstein, 2003).

2

the individual to work hard and the greater the reward to shirking. In our companion paper, we
find that worker monitoring of the group is an important mode for overcoming the free rider
problem (Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi 2008). Firms cannot force workers to self-monitor but they
can provide supportive supervision, training, and a workplace climate that encourages group
norms to sustain a self-monitoring equilibrium.
Few studies have examined the relation of shared capitalism programs to supervision,
training, and workplace climate. Brown and Sessions (2003) report that employees in
performance-related pay plans have more positive views about management-employee relations
and how the workplace is run. Two studies have found that employee in profit-sharing plans are
more likely to receive employer-provided training (Azfar and Danninger, 2001; Robinson and
Zhang, 2005). Two studies have examined whether workplaces are safer under shared employee
ownership. Rooney (1992) found fewer OSHA injuries in employee ownership companies with
greater worker participation in decisions, but otherwise found mixed results for ownership without
participation. Rhodes and Steers (1981) found that accidents were no lower in a plywood
cooperative compared to a standard plywood company.
Pay and Benefits
There are two reasons for expecting shared capitalist compensation systems to be
associated with higher pay and benefits.
First, shared capitalist systems could operate in part as a "gift exchange" between the
worker and the firm, in which the higher pay increases worker effort, decreases turnover, and
increases worker loyalty (Akerlof, 1982). By encouraging employee cooperation, shared
capitalism programs could increase output, some of which would go to workers as their share of

3

profits and some as higher base wages or benefits. The sharing system would be a key component
of a mutual-gains or high-commitment system where both workers and the firms come out ahead
(Handel and Levine, 2004: 5). Second, since shared capitalism increases risk to workers,
compensating differential theory predicts that workers will want higher overall compensation.
Whether this compensation takes the form of fixed pay and benefits or shows up in a larger share in
profits and ownership is unclear. Again, what creates the potential for higher income to workers is
the higher productivity generated by the system.
Despite some well-publicized examples of wage concessions when workers buy out their
companies or accept large ownership stakes (which make up a very small percentage of the
employee ownership landscape), workers in employee ownership plans tend to have comparable
or higher wages or compensation than other workers. Blasi et al. (1996) found that public
companies with broad-based employee ownership plans had 8% higher average compensation
levels than other comparable public companies, and compensation increased with the percentage
of stock held by employees. Studies of pay and benefits in ESOP and non-ESOP firms in
Massachusetts and Washington state also found that the levels of pay and other benefits were
similar between these two types of firms, so that ESOPs appear to come on top of other worker pay
and benefits (Kardas et al., 1998; Scharf and Mackin, 2000). With regard to other forms of
ownership, Renaud et al. (2004) found that stock purchase plan participation was associated with
subsequent pay increases for employees, and employer stock held in 401(k) plans appears to come
largely on top of other pension assets (Kroumova, 2002). Seven studies from the U.S., Great
Britain, and Germany find that profit-sharing firms also have generally higher average
compensation than otherwise-comparable firms (Kruse, 1993: 113-114; Handel and Gittleman,
2004).
4

Still, it is possible that the higher pay levels associated with shared capitalist compensation
reflect higher unmeasured worker quality, and that workers in fact take a cut in compensation to
link their pay to company performance. But the evidence runs against these possibilities. Kruse
(1998) found that average base pay levels and other benefits increase as young workers join
profit-sharing firms and decrease as they leave such firms, so worker selectivity cannot dominate
the cross-sectional relation. Similarly, Azfar and Danninger (2001) found that employees in
profit-sharing plans receive higher annual raises in base pay than employees in other firms,
connected in part to the greater training noted earlier. Other studies find that neither wages nor
total labor costs exclusive of the sharing component fall significantly in pre/post comparisons of
firms that adopt profit sharing (Black et al., 2004, for wages; Cappelli and Neumark, 2004, for
total labor costs). The implication is that trade-offs between base pay and shared capitalist
compensation are minimal and that profit sharing may be used in conjunction with higher base pay
levels as part of an efficiency wage strategy.
Another possibility is that the higher monetary compensation associated with shared
capitalist systems may come at the cost of greater effort, stress, workplace danger, or other
disamenities at work. Some analysts view the systems as a bit of a sham, designed to elicit greater
worker effort and to shift risk to workers, without increasing the pay or quality of jobs. This is
"'management by stress' … which believes that [employee involvement] is simply a method of
sweating the workforce and curbing worker power and influence" (Handel and Levine, 2004: 6).
Our data allows us to compare compensation for workers covered and not covered by the
shared capitalist compensation and to compare compensation for workers by the intensity of their
shared compensation arrangements.

5

Job security
Traditional analysis of labor-run firms predicts that they have lower employment than in
management-run firms, and respond perversely to demand shocks, lowering employment when
output prices increase (reviewed in Bonin and Putterman, 1987). Most analyses show that
employee ownership firms tend to have more stable employment than other firms, but do not
respond perversely to demand shocks (Craig and Pencavel, 1992, 1993; Blair et al., 2000). Two
studies report that employment grew faster in firms following the adoption of ESOPs, particularly
if they have greater employee participation in decision-making (Quarrey and Rosen, 1993;
Winther and Marens, 1997). In addition, public firms with substantial employee ownership are
more likely than other comparable firms to survive over time (Blair et al., 2000; Park et al., 2004).
French worker cooperatives also have high rates of survival (Estrin and Jones, 1992).
Profit sharing, in contrast, should create excess demand for employment and thus provide
substantial job security (Weitzman, 1984). Nineteen studies have examined Weitzman's
predictions that profit sharing should stabilize firm employment (Kruse, 1998: 109-113). A
majority found that firms view profit sharing differently from fixed wages in making employment
decisions. Of the twelve studies directly examining employment stability, six found greater
employment stability under profit sharing; four showed greater stability in some but not all
samples; while two have little or no support for the stabilizing effects of profit sharing.
Job satisfaction
If shared capitalism is associated with greater participation and decision-making at the
workplace, better supervision, more training, more job security and higher total compensation,
these modes of pay ought to raise job satisfaction. But the 12 existing studies on job satisfaction

6

under employee ownership yield no clear generalization.2 Several studies show higher
satisfaction; several show no relationship; and one study shows lower satisfaction among
employee-owners where the union had lost a bitter strike the year before.3 Participation in
decisions seems to be important: one longitudinal study found that satisfaction went up only
among those who perceived increased participation in decisions after an employee buyout (Long,
1982). Our data provide the largest sample for assessing these inconclusive findings.
In sum, prior research on employee outcomes under shared capitalism has yielded
generally positive results, though there is sufficient variability in some results to suggest that they
depend on the context in which they are implemented. By addressing all of the employee
outcomes with the GSS and the NBER data sets, and providing more robust measures of the
employment context inside these firms, we should be better able to provide a more consistent
generalization than the existing work.
DATA AND ANALYSIS
The NBER Shared Capitalism Research Project uses two data sets to analyze how shared
capitalist arrangements affect workers. The first is the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys
(GSS), on which we placed several questions on shared capitalism programs. The 2002 GSS has a
representative sample of 1,145 employees, and the 2006 GSS has a sample of 1,081 employees, in
for-profit companies. The second is a data set of employee surveys in 14 companies with one or
more shared capitalism programs, which we conducted over the 2001-2006 period. We selected
these companies to vary in company size, industry, and type of shared capitalism program. Even
2

This is based on nine studies on job satisfaction reviewed in Kruse and Blasi (1997), plus Pendleton et al. (1998),
Keef (1998), and Bakan et al. (2004). The studies were selected if they used systematic data collection from
representative samples of employees, and used statistical techniques to rule out sampling error. Many used
multivariate analysis to hold constant the effect of other factors on employee attitudes or behavior.

7

so, our sample is non-representative, first because many firms refused our requests to run the
survey; and second because two of the firms were bought out by others who refused to proceed
with the planned survey. Each company in the sample agreed to have our research group
administer a survey to all or a random sample of employees. The survey included core questions
common across all companies, and some questions of special interest or relevance to that
company. Six company surveys were conducted entirely by web, seven company surveys were
done on paper, and one survey was done using both the web and paper surveys. The company
response rates ranged from 11% to 80%, with an average of 53% across the 14 companies. A total
of 41,206 respondents provided usable surveys. Appendix A describes the variables used in this
analysis. Companion papers that analyze the GSS and NBER datasets include Blasi, Kruse, and
Markowitz (2008), Blasi et al. (2008), Buchele et al. (2008), Budd (2008), Carberry (2008),
Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi (2008), Harden, Kruse, and Blasi (2008), and Kruse, Freeman, and
Blasi (2008).
The overall prevalence of shared capitalist compensation is presented in Appendix Table
A-1, with fuller presentation in our companion paper (Kruse, Blasi, and Park 2008). For our
purposes here the most important result is that 45% of the for-profit private sector employees in the
GSS sample report participating in some kind of shared capitalism program (36% in profit sharing,
25% in gainsharing, 19% in employee ownership, and 11% in stock options), which gives us good
variation for examining the relation of these programs to worker outcomes. The prevalence is of
course higher in the NBER sample, since these firms were selected on the basis of having these
programs.

3

Reminders by management that the strike would hurt ESOP account values brought the response "We don't vote; we
don't control the company; we don't care" (Kruse, 1984).

8

As a first step in assessing the relation of shared capitalism to employee outcomes, we
constructed a thermometer-style index of shared capitalism, which assigns points based on
coverage by shared capitalism programs and the size of the financial stakes. This index is
described in Appendix B. We also present results breaking out the different forms of shared
capitalism types and intensities using the NBER data.
Turning to employee outcomes, we have organized responses to questions in eight areas:
participation in decisions, company treatment of employees, supervision, training, pay and
benefits, co-worker relations, job security, and job satisfaction. These outcomes are related to
each other—e.g., training generally leads to higher pay; participation in decisions, training, job
security, and supervision are likely to affect perceptions of how the company treats employees;
and so on. We lack instruments to identify causality, so we do not try to tease out possible causal
links among the outcomes. Rather, we first test for the reduced form relationship between shared
capitalism and each of the individual outcomes conditional on demographic and job
characteristics, and in some cases on other outcomes as well—e.g., since company training is
likely to affect pay, we examine whether shared capitalism is related to pay both before and after
controlling for training.
EMPIRICAL RESULTS
We first use the shared capitalist index to predict each of the outcomes (Table 1), and then
probe the impact of different types and intensities of shared capitalist compensation (Tables B-1 to
B-5). We estimate OLS regressions when outcomes are numeric and use ordered probits when the
outcomes have three or four values with a natural ordering (e.g., "not at all true, not very true,
somewhat true, and very true"). The regression predicting hours of training use a Tobit
specification, to account for the censoring at zero. Most of the regressions using the NBER dataset
9

include company fixed effects so that coefficients reflect within-company differences rather than
cross-company differences that might be due to unmeasured differences among the companies.
At the bottom of Tables B-1 to B-5, some ESOP coefficients are reported where company fixed
effects are not used. Federal ERISA law imposes strict requirements on coverage so that most or
all employees are covered by an ESOP within a firm; the small number of excluded employees are
thus likely to differ in some particular way from other employees in the same firm. Because of this
the ESOP effects are better determined by comparing otherwise-similar ESOP and non-ESOP
workers across firms in the specifications without fixed effects.
Table 1 summarizes our empirical results in terms of the coefficients on the shared
capitalism summated rating index variable for the seven outcomes under study. In most cases, we
examine more than one outcome under the specified domain.
1. Employee participation in decisions
Almost all of the measures of participation in decision-making in Table 1 are positively
and significantly related to the shared capitalism index. There are two exceptions in the NBER
data -- the relationships with participation in company decisions and satisfaction with participation
in the NBER data, but only after controlling for other outcomes (employee involvement team,
training, and job security). This indicates that shared capitalism is strongly correlated with these
policies, and the package of these policies may be the most important determinant (which we
examine in Table 2).
When the shared capitalism policies are broken out in Appendix Table B-1, the most
consistent result is that profit sharing intensity (measured using the most recent bonus as a percent
of pay) is linked to greater participation in decisions and greater satisfaction with participation
(cols. 1-5). The small negative coefficients on profit sharing eligibility (cols. 2, 3, and 5) indicate
10

that very low profit sharing bonuses are associated with lower participation and satisfaction—an
effect that is erased as the bonus size increases. In addition, while employee ownership is linked to
greater participation in decisions (cols. 1-4) but satisfaction with participation is linked to
employee-owned stock as a percent of pay (col. 5).
Examining the different types of employee ownership, the data show some significant
associations but no strong patterns. 401(k) stock intensity is associated with greater involvement
in job and department decisions (cols. 1-2), while involvement in company decisions is highest
among those with any 401(k) employer stock or those who retain stock from exercised options
(col. 3). These latter two groups are also more likely to be in EI teams (col. 4), while satisfaction
with participation is highest among those holding open market stock or with large ESOP or 401(k)
stakes (col. 5). As noted earlier, given the ERISA rules about coverage within a company, it is
more sensible to make inferences about the effects of ESOPs by comparing workers between
companies with and without ESOPs, which requires elimination of company fixed effects in the
calculations. When this is done at the bottom of Table B-1, the estimates show that ESOP
participants are more likely to be involved in job, department, and company decisions (cols. 1-3),
but are much less likely to be satisfied with their participation (col. 5). This latter result, which is
consistent with the within-company comparison, suggests that the simple membership in ESOPs in
these companies may have raised the desire for participation more than they raised actual
participation (or alternatively, that the additional participation itself raised desires for more
participation in ESOP companies). The impact of an ESOP on worker outcomes may be more
closely tied to the ESOP value as a percent of pay -- i.e. ownership intensity in relationship to
one’s economic situation – rather than simply membership in an EOSP plan.
2. Company treatment of employees
11

Both the GSS and the NBER company survey asked a variety of quality of work life
questions. Item 2 in Table 1 contains results for ten of those measures.4
The national survey data give generally positive results. Shared capitalism employees are
more likely to say that they are treated with respect, management-employee relations are good,
promotions are handled fairly, and worker safety is a high priority with management. A measure
that reflects directly on the "management by stress" theories is the employee's perception of stress
at work, which is not significantly related to the shared capitalism index. In additional calculations
not presented here, we examined the positive worker safety result using breakdowns by type of
shared capitalism program. In contrast to studies that found no consistent relationship between
employee ownership and worker safety (Rooney, 1992; Rhodes and Steers, 1981), our data show
that employee-owners as well as profit-sharers are more likely to report that worker safety is a high
priority with management.
The NBER data, in contrast, show consistently positive results for shared capitalism and
company treatment. Shared capitalism is positively linked to perceptions that the company shares
success with employees and is fair to employees, and to grades workers give to the company on
sharing information, trustworthiness, and employee relations. These positive associations become
smaller in magnitude but remain positive and highly significant when controlling for several
human resource policies (being in an EI team, training, and job security). Disaggregating by
type of shared capitalism program in Table B-2, profit sharing and gainsharing eligibility are
strongly linked to perceptions that the company shares and is fair to employees (cols. 1-2), while

4

The GSS contains other quality of work life measures which we also analyzed. The results (available on request)
were broadly similar across these measures, generally showing positive relationships to profit sharing but not to the
other shared capitalism measures.

12

profit sharing intensity is strongly associated with all three of the grades (cols. 3-5).
Employee-owners are also more likely to say the company shares with employees (col. 1), while
the size of the ownership stake is a strong predictor of each of the five measures.
Comparisons among employee ownership types show an interesting disparity. Having
more employer stock in a 401(k) plan is positively linked to each of the measures, while ESOP
membership and stake are positively associated with perceptions that the company shares with
employees, but ESOP membership is negatively associated with the other four perceptions of
company treatment both with and without company fixed effects. This is consistent with the
finding that ESOP members are less likely to be satisfied with their participation in decisions.
3. Supervision
Since incentive programs are one way to reduce the principal-agent problem when
supervision is difficult or costly, we expect less supervision in shared capitalist environments. In
addition, we expect supervisors to be more concerned with maintaining a cooperative atmosphere
that helps solve the free rider problem than with watching workers work.
The GSS asked respondents for views of their supervisors, while the NBER survey asked
about the degree of supervision. As seen in item 3 of Table 1, shared capitalism employees are
more likely to see their supervisors as helpful and caring, while they are less likely to report that
they are closely supervised both before and after controlling for other HR policies. When broken
out by type of shared capitalism program in Table B-3, the strongly significant result is that ESOP
members have greater freedom from supervision (col. 1). Most of the coefficients on other
programs are positive, which indicates that each program contributes to the strongly positive
shared capitalism coefficient in Table 2.
4. Training
13

The national GSS data in Table 2 show that shared capitalism employees are more likely to
say they have the training opportunities they need. The NBER data show that they report a higher
likelihood of formal job training in the past year, greater hours of training, and higher levels of
informal job training from fellow workers, with and without controls for participation in an EI
team and job security. The breakdowns by plan in Table B-3 show that both training and hours of
training are higher among workers with profit sharing and employee owners, and are also
positively linked to size of gain sharing bonus and employee ownership stake. But training is
negatively related to the size of stock option value from future potential profits (cols. 2-3). Among
the types of employee ownership, training and training hours are highest among ESOP participants
and those with 401(k) employer stock.
The pattern of coefficients is quite different for informal job training from coworkers,
which suggests that informal job training often substitutes for formal training. Both stock option
holding and the size of the stake are positively linked to informal training (Table B-3, col. 4).
Also, while ESOP members are more likely to get formal training, they are less likely to get
informal training. Gainsharing is positively associated with informal training, as is the size of a
workers’ higher profit-sharing stake. The broad range of associations between shared capitalism
and formal and informal training suggest that training is complementary with shared capitalism.
5. Pay and benefits
Table 1 shows that pay tends to be higher among employees with greater shared capitalist
forms of pay in both the national and NBER company data. Employees in the NBER company
data set with greater shared capitalism are more likely to say that their fixed pay is as at least equal
to market and rate their total compensation as higher than market and to rate their company as
higher on wages than others. Employees in the national shared capitalism survey are more likely
14

to feel they are paid what they deserve. Employees with greater shared capitalism in both datasets
rate their companies as better on fringe benefits. The NBER results are not affected by the
inclusion of several human resource policies. When the shared capitalism programs are broken out
in Table B-4, most of the shared capitalism types are associated with higher fixed pay, though the
gainsharing bonus intensity and employee ownership stake are inversely related to pay. There are
few associations with the employee's rating of fixed pay relative to market (col. 2), but total
compensation relative to market is higher among gainsharers and those with higher profit sharing
benefits when they receive profit sharing, have bigger profit sharing bonuses, and are
employee-owners through ESPP's and 401(k) plans (cols. 4-5). The pay and benefit results
indicate that shared capitalism does not generally substitute for fixed pay or other benefits. This
rejects a simple compensating differences story of shared capitalist modes of pay, although the
higher pay may help compensate for greater effort or other forms of costly behavior.
6. Co-worker Relations
Does shared capitalism help or hurt relations with fellow workers? Employees with greater
shared capitalism in the GSS dataset are more likely to report that their co-workers can be relied on
for help when needed, and that their co-workers take a personal interest in them. Such helpfulness
and interest presumably make work more pleasant and increase employee welfare directly, but
may also lay the foundation for cooperation among employees that can increase workplace
performance (explored in the companion papers by Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi 2008, and Blasi et
al. 2008).
6. Job Security
Shared capitalism is associated with greater job security. Employees higher in the shared
capitalist index report a lower likelihood of losing their jobs, and in the national data they report a
15

lower likelihood of being laid off in the past year. The NBER results are maintained when
controlling for participation in an EI team and receipt of training. When broken out by shared
capitalism policy, both profit sharing eligibility and the size of the profit share are linked to greater
job security (Table B-5, col. 1). Owning employer stock, and the size of the ownership stake and
stock option value, are also positively associated with job security. The breakdowns by type of
employee ownership indicate that job security is highest among ESOP participants and those
holding 401(k) employer stock, and those with greater holdings in both of those plans. The
findings that job security is greater for employee-owners than for other workers is consistent with
prior research on the employment stability and company survival of employee ownership firms
(Blair et al., 2000, Park et al., 2004).
7. Job satisfaction
Job satisfaction is positively linked to the shared capitalism index in both the national and
NBER company data, but the result is statistically significant only in the NBER data. This NBER
result disappears, however, when controlling for the human resource policies. The strong
association between shared capitalism and these human resource policies indicates that there may
be important complementarities, which we explore in Table 2. When the policies are broken out in
Table B-5, job satisfaction is positively associated with the size of the profit sharing and
gainsharing bonuses, and with participation in an ESOP when company fixed effects are removed
(col. 2). The positive ESOP result on job satisfaction presumably reflects the positive effects of
ESOP membership on training, freedom from supervision, rating of benefits, and job security
overpowering ESOP participants' lower satisfaction with participation in decisions (Table B-1)
and their lower ratings for the company on several measures (Table B-2).
Complementarities
16

Both theory and evidence support the idea that there may be important complementarities
among human resource policies in affecting workplace performance (e.g., Levine and Tyson,
1990; Huselid, 1995; Ichniowski et al., 1996). These complementarities may also affect employee
outcomes: for example, job satisfaction may be increased more by combining shared capitalism
with employee involvement and training than by the sum of the policies in isolation.
Measurement of high-performance human resource policies varies among studies. One
analysis divides them into seven broad categories: group incentive pay, teamwork/employee
involvement, training, employment security, information sharing, flexible job assignment, and
recruitment and selection (Ichniowski et al., 1997). The NBER surveys contain measures of each
of these, but not for every company.5 For our investigation of complementarities, we created a
human resource policy index that gives one point each for being in an employee involvement team,
receiving formal training in the past 12 months, and having high job security, and we then interact
this index with the shared capitalism index.6
Shared capitalism may also interact with supervision in affecting employee outcomes.
Shared capitalist policies may, as noted, help substitute for close supervision of workers by
providing greater incentives for workers to work hard and monitor their co-workers. The finding
that shared capitalism is associated with greater freedom from supervision lends support to this
idea (Table 1). When shared capitalist policies are combined with close supervision, however, the
results may be negative. If workers are not given much latitude in how they do their work, shared

5

Flexible job assignment was measured as job rotation at six companies, and rigorous selection was measured at one
large company.
6
We also experimented with indices using measures of information sharing, job rotation, and rigorous selection,
producing a similar pattern of results. Here we use the index based only on employee involvement, training, and job
security since the sample sizes are smaller for job rotation and rigorous selection, and the grade of the company on
sharing information reflects an employee evaluation of the policy's success (highly correlated with evaluations of the
company on other dimensions), rather than the existence of a policy.

17

capitalist policies may serve mainly to shift financial risk to workers, resulting in more negative
worker behaviour and attitudes. At a minimum, combining shared capitalism with close
supervision sends a mixed message to employees: "We want you to work harder and be more
committed to the company because of your (profit share/employer stock/stock options), but we're
still going to keep a close eye on you." Workers may not respond well to this mixed message.
Table 2 assesses interactions between the shared capitalism index and other workplace
policies to assess possible complementarities in effects on employee attitudes. The statistical
analysis shows that shared capitalism interacts with high performance policies and supervision in
affecting a number of employee outcomes.7 The interaction with high performance policies shows
that employees are especially likely to have high participation, and to be satisfied with their
participation, when they are covered by both shared capitalist and high performance policies (col.
3). The interaction is also positive with informal training and overall job satisfaction. The
interaction is negative, however, on perceptions of company sharing, fairness, and benefits; the
coefficients indicate that shared capitalism has a positive effect both for those with and without
high performance policies, but has a more positive effect for those who are not also covered by
high performance policies.
The pattern is more straightforward with respect to supervision: the combination of shared
capitalism with close supervision produces a more negative outcome in almost every case (col. 5).
The main effect of close supervision is generally positive (col. 4), indicating that in the absence of
shared capitalism, having close supervision may often be a good thing (e.g., giving workers a

7

When the high performance index included the outcome being predicted, that item was deleted from the high
performance index (e.g., employee involvement was deleted from the high performance index in predicting
participation in an employee involvement team).

18

better sense of what they are supposed to do). But the main effect is counteracted in most cases,
however, by the negative shared capitalism interaction—e.g., the predicted overall effect of
increased supervision on perceptions of company fairness is negative whenever the shared
capitalism index is 2 or greater.
The contingent effects of shared capitalism on job satisfaction are illustrated in Figure 1,
which uses the regression results from Table 2. When workers are covered by high performance
policies and have low or average levels of supervision, the effects of increased shared capitalism
are positive (top two lines). When they are not covered by high-performance policies, and/or are
very closely supervised, the effects of shared capitalism are slightly or very negative (bottom four
lines). While the overall relationship between shared capitalism and job satisfaction is close to
zero after controlling for other policies (Table 1), these results illustrate that the other policies can
greatly condition the effects of shared capitalism.

CONCLUSION
Do workers gain by sharing? The evidence generally supports an answer of "yes", with
some caveats. Both the national and NBER company data indicate that shared capitalism is
positively linked to participation in decisions, evaluations of company climate and employee
treatment, perceptions of helpfulness by supervisors, lower levels of supervision, and higher levels
of training, pay and benefits, job security, and job satisfaction. Almost all of these relationships
remain strong when controlling for other human resource policies. This rejects the "management
by stress" theories of work innovation.
When broken out by type of shared capitalist program, profit sharing was most consistently
linked to the positive outcomes, although gainsharing, stock options, and employee ownership also
19

affect some outcomes positively. In many cases the positive effect was tied to simply being
covered by a policy (e.g., being eligible for profit sharing, or being an employee-owner), but there
were also many cases in which the effect was tied to the size of the financial stake involved (size of
most recent bonus, or value of employer stock or stock options).
Estimated negative relations between some aspects of shared capitalism and some
outcomes are also informative about how this form of financial sharing operates. In particular,
while being a member of an ESOP was linked to a number of positive outcomes (participation in
decisions, perception that the company shares, freedom from supervision, formal training, pay and
benefit levels, job security, and job satisfaction), ESOP members also had lower satisfaction with
participation in decisions and lower ratings of the company on fairness, trustworthiness, and
employee relations. One possible reason is that employee-owners may be frustrated by unfulfilled
desires for greater participation in decisions (above the higher levels they already have). Another
possible reason is that some ESOP accounts have too little stock to be meaningful and some
employees may have negative attitudes when they are called owners but have very little
ownership. The importance of the ownership stake is highlighted by the finding that satisfaction
with participation rises with the value of employee-owned stock as a percent of pay. The
dynamics of employee ownership may work differently for ESOPs than for other forms of
ownership: it is the only form where all eligible workers are automatically enrolled and called
owners even with miniscule accounts.
Finally, our data reveals potentially important complementarities of shared capitalism with
other workplace policies, particularly with high performance work policies and closeness of
supervision. Those who are covered by the combination of high-performance policies with shared
capitalism are most likely to report high participation in decisions, satisfaction with participation,
20

and overall job satisfaction. The combination of close supervision with shared capitalism,
however, has negative effects on almost every outcome.
Overall, our findings are consistent with theories that stress the linkage between group
incentive pay systems and other labor and personnel relations policies. Taken as a package, a high
performance work system involves greater participation, higher quality of supervision, more
formal training, better wages and benefits, higher job satisfaction, and better job security.
Employers who are concerned about company performance, and workers who are concerned about
the quality of their working life, have reasons to be interested in this package. Our findings that
shared capitalist programs are often associated with these policies and outcomes indicate that there
is good potential for workers to gain through sharing.

21

Bibliography
Akerlof, George. 1982. "Labor Contracts as Partial Gift Exchange," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 97, pp. 543-569.
Azfar, Omar, and Stephan Danninger. 2001. "Profit-Sharing, Employment Stability, and Wage
Growth," Industrial & Labor Relations Review, Vol. 54 (3), April, pp. 619-30.
Bakan, Ismail, Yuliani Suseno, Ashly Pinnington, and Arthur Money. 2004. "The Influence of
Financial Participation and Participation in Decision-making on Employee Job Attitudes,"
International Journal of Human Resource Management, Vol. 15(3), May, pp. 587-616.
Bartholomew, David, J. Galbraith, Irini Moustkaki, Fionay Steele. 2002. The Analysis and
Interpretation of Multivariate Data for Social Scientists. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Bartholomew, David. 1996. The Statistical Approach to Social Measurement Academic Press.
Blair, Margaret, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2000. “Is Employee Ownership an Unstable
Form? Or a Stabilizing Force?" in Thomas Kochan and Margaret Blair, eds., The New
Relationship: Human Capital in the American Corporation. Washington, D.C.: The
Brookings Institution.
Black, Sandra, Lisa Lynch, and Anya Krivelyova. 2004. "How Workers Fare When Employers
Innovate," Industrial Relations, Vol. 43 (1), pp. 44-66.
Blasi, Joseph. 1988. Employee Ownership: Revolution or Ripoff? New York: Basic Books.
Blasi, Joseph, Michael Conte and Douglas Kruse. 1996. “Employee Ownership and Corporate
Performance Among Public Corporations,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol.
50, No. 1, October, pp. 60-79.
Blasi, Joseph, Richard Freeman, Chris Mackin, and Douglas Kruse. 2008. "Creating a Bigger
Pie? The Effects of Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Stock Options on
Workplace Performance." Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New
York, NY, October 2006.
Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Aaron Bernstein. 2003. In the Company of Owners: The Truth
About Stock Options (And Why Every Employee Should Have Them). New York: Basic
Books.
Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Harry M. Markowitz. 2008. “Risk and Lack of Diversification
under Employee Ownership and Shared Capitalism. ” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage
Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Bonin, J.P., and Louis Putterman. 1987. Economics of Cooperation and the Labor-Managed
22

Economy. New York: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Brown, Sarah, and John G. Sessions. 2003. "Attitudes, Expectations, and Sharing," Labour, Vol.
17, No. 4, pp. 543-569.
Buchele, Robert, Douglas Kruse, Loren Rodgers, and Adria Scharf. 2008. “Show Me the Money:
The Wealth Impact of Shared Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation
conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Budd, John. 2008. “Does Employee Ignorance Undermine Shared Capitalism” Presented at
NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Cappelli, Peter, and David Neumark. 2004. "External Churning and Internal Flexibility: Evidence
on the Functional Flexibility and Core-Periphery Hypotheses," Industrial Relations, Vol.
43 (1), pp. 148-182.
Carberry, Edward. 2008. “An Analysis of Social Stratification in Companies with Shared
Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY,
October 2006.
Conyon, Martin and Richard Freeman “Shared Modes of Compensation and Firm Performance:
UK Evidence”, Chapter 3 in Seeking a Premiere League Economy, Richard Blundell,
David Card and Richard Freeman (eds). Chicago: Univ of Chicago Press, pp 109-146.
NBER WP #8448, August 2001.
Craig B. and J. Pencavel. 1992. "The Behavior of Worker Cooperatives: The Plywood
Companies of The Pacific Northwest," American Economic Review, 82, 1083-1105.
-----. 1993. "The Objectives of Worker Cooperatives," Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol.
17(2), June, pp. 288-308.
-----. 1995. "Participation and Productivity: A Comparison of Worker Cooperatives and
Conventional Firms in The Plywood Industry," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
212-160.
Dube, Arindrajit and Richard Freeman 2001. “Shared Compensation Systems and
Decision-Making in the US Job Market”, Incomes and Productivity in North America,
Papers from the 2000 Seminar. (Washington, DC: Secretariat of the Commission for
Labor Cooperation).
Estrin, Saul, and Derek C. Jones. 1992. "The Viability of Employee-Owned Firms: Evidence
from France," Industrial & Labor Relations Review, Vol. 45 (2). p 323-38, January.
Freeman, R and Joel Rogers. 1999. What Workers Want. New York: Russell Sage and Cornell
University Press.
23

Freeman, Richard, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Worker Responses to Shirking under
Shared Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York,
NY, October 2006.
Grunberg, Leon, Sarah Moore, and Edward Greenberg. 1996. “The Relationship of Employee
Ownership and Participation to Workplace Safety,” Economic and Industrial Democracy,
Vol. 17(2), May, pp. 221-241.
Handel, Michael, and Maury Gittleman. 2004. "Is There A Wage Payoff to Innovative Practices?"
Industrial Relations, Vol. 43 (1), pp. 67-97.
Handel, Michael, and David Levine. 2004. "Editors' Introduction: The Effects of New Work
Practices on Workers," Industrial Relations, Vol. 43 (1), pp. 1-43.
Harden, Erika, Douglas Kruse, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Who Has a Better Idea: Innovation,
Shared Capitalism, and Human Resource Policies.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage
Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Heywood, John, Uwe Jirjahn, and Georgi Tsertsvadze, "Getting Along with Colleagues – Does
Profit Sharing Help or Hurt?" Kyklos, Vol. 58, No. 4, pp. 557-573.
Ichniowski, Casey, Thomas Kochan, David Levine, Craig Olson, and George Strauss. 1996.
"What Works at Work: Overview and Assessment," Industrial Relations, 35(3) 299-333.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanni Prennushi. 1997. "The Effects of Human
Resource Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel finishing Lines," American
Economic Review, Vol. 87, No. 3, June, pp. 291-313.
Kalmi, Pamu, Andrew Pendleton, and Erik Poutsma. 2005. "Financial Participation and
Performance in Europe," Human Resource Management Journal, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp.
545-67.
Kardas, Peter; Adria L. Scharf; and Jim Keogh. 1998. “Wealth and Income Consequences of
ESOPs and Employee Ownership: A Comparative Study from Washington State," Journal
of Employee Ownership Law and Finance. Vol. 10, No. 4, Fall.
Keef, Stephen P. 1998. “The Causal Association between Employee Share Ownership and
Attitudes: A Study Based on the Long Framework,” British Journal of Industrial Relations,
Vol. 36(1), March, pp. 73-82.
Kruse, Douglas. 1984. Employee Ownership and Employee Attitudes: Two Case Studies.
Norwood, PA: Norwood Editions.
-----. 1993. Profit Sharing: Does It Make A Difference? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute
24

for Employment Research.
-----. 1998. "Profit Sharing and the Demand for Low-Skill Workers," in Richard Freeman and
Peter Gottschalk, eds., Generating Jobs: Increasing the Demand for Low-Skill Workers.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
-----. 2002. “Research Evidence on Prevalence and Effects of Employee Ownership,” Testimony
before the Subcommittee on Employer-Employee Relations, Committee on Education and
the Workforce, U.S. House of Representatives, February 13.
-----, and Joseph Blasi. 1997. "Employee Ownership, Employee Attitudes, and Firm
Performance: A Review of the Evidence," in The Human Resources Management
Handbook, Part 1. Edited by David Lewin, Daniel J.B. Mitchell, and Mahmood A. Zaidi.
Greenwich, CT.: JAI Press.
Kruse, Douglas, Joseph Blasi, and Rhokeun Park. 2008. “Shared Capitalism in the U.S.
Economy: Prevalence, Characteristics, and Employee Views of Financial Participation in
Enterprises.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY,
October 2006.
Levine, David, and Laura D'Andrea Tyson. 1990. "Participation, Productivity, and the Firm's
Environment," in Alan Blinder, ed., Paying For Productivity: A Look at the Evidence.
Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Long, R.L. 1981. "The Effects of Formal Employee Participation in Ownership and Decision
Making on Perceived and Desired Patterns of Organizational Influence: A Longitudinal
Study," Human Relations, Vol. 34, pp. 847-876.
-----. 1982. "Worker Ownership and Job Attitudes: A Field Study," Industrial Relations, Vol. 21,
pp. 196-215.
Logue, John, and Jacquelyn Yates. 2001. The Real World of Employee Ownership. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Pendleton, Andrew, Nicholas Wilson, and Mike Wright. 1998. "The Perception and Effects of
Share Ownership: Empirical Evidence from Employee Buy-outs," British Journal of
Industrial Relations, Vol. 36(1), March, pp. 99-123.
Quarrey, M., & Rosen, C. 1993. Employee Ownership and Corporate Performance. Oakland, CA:
National Center for Employee Ownership.
Renaud, Stephane, Sylvie St-Onge, and Michael Magnan. 2004. "The Impact of Stock Purchase
Plan Participation on Workers' Individual Cash Compensation," Industrial Relations, Vol.
43 (1), pp. 120-147.
25

Rhodes, S.R., and R.M. Steers. 1981. "Conventional vs. Worker-Owned Organizations," Human
Relations, Vol. 24, pp. 1013-1035.
Robinson, Andrew, and Hao Zhang. 2005. "Employee Share Ownership: Safeguarding
Investments in Human Capital," British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 43(3),
September, pp. 469-488.
Rooney, Patrick. "Employee Ownership and Worker Participation: Effects on Health and Safety,"
Economic Letters, Vol. 39, pp. 323-328.
Scharf, Adria, and Christopher Mackin. 2000. "Census of Massachusetts Companies with
Employee Stock Ownership Plans (ESOPs)." Boston: Commonwealth Corporation.
Spector, Paul E. 1992 Summated Rating Scale Construction: An Introduction, Sage, London,
Quantitative Applications in Social Sciences, 82
Weitzman, Martin L. 1984. The Share Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
-----, and Douglas Kruse. 1990. “Profit Sharing and Productivity,” in Alan Blinder, ed., Paying
For Productivity: A Look at the Evidence. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Wilson, Nicholas, and Michael Peel. 1991. “The Impact on Absenteeism and Quits of
Profit-Sharing and Other Forms of Employee Participation,” Industrial and Labor
Relations Review, Vol. 44(3), April, pp. 454-468.
Winther, Gorm, and Richard Marens. 1997. "Participatory Democracy May Go A Long Way:
Comparative Growth Performance of Employee Ownership Firms in New York and
Washington States," Economic and Industrial Democracy, Vol. 18(3), August, pp.
393-422.

26

APPENDIX A: Variable definitions and descriptive statistics
COMPENSATION
Shared capitalism index (GSS): 8-point index with one point each for profit sharing
eligibility, gain sharing eligibility, owning any company stock, holding any stock options,
receiving a profit sharing bonus in the past year, receiving a gain sharing bonus in the past
year, having an above-median profit- and gain sharing bonus as a percent of pay, and
having an above-median company stock holding as a percent of pay. Mean=1.48,
s.d.=2.14, n=1919
Shared capitalism index (NBER): 10-point index with all items in GS index, plus one
point each for receiving a stock option grant in the past year, and having above-median
stock option holdings as a percent of pay. Mean=3.60, s.d.=2.65, n=40522
Profit sharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-sharing?
What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on? Company profits or
performance" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.372, n=2184, NBER mean=.713, n=41018
Profit sharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to profit sharing, answer to "What
was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent
year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. GSS mean=.024, s.d.=.066,
n=1944, NBER mean=.068, s.d.=.124, n=40485
Gainsharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-sharing?
What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on? Workgroup or
department performance" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.257, n=2184, NBER mean=.207,
n=41023
Gainsharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to gainsharing, answer to "What
was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent
year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. GSS mean=.017, s.d.=.061,
n=2013, NBER mean=.033, s.d.=.106, n=40767
Individual bonus (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-sharing?
What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on? Individual
performance" (0=no, 1=yes). GSS mean=.290, n=2184, NBER mean=.290, n=41019
Individual bonus as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to individual bonus, answer to "What
was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent
year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. Mean=.050, s.d.=.125,
n=40547
27

Hold employer stock (GSS): "Do you own any shares of stock in the company where you
now work, either directly or through some type of retirement or stock plan?" (0=no,
1=yes), mean=.212, n=2202
Employer stock as % of pay (GSS): If "yes" to "hold employer stock," answer to "Please
give a general estimate of how much cash you would get if all this stock were sold today?"
divided by annual earnings, otherwise 0, mean=.111, s.d.=.977, n=2186
Hold employer stock (NBER): Any employer stock held through ESOP, Employee Stock
Purchase Plan, 401(k), exercised stock options, or open market purchases (0=no, 1=yes),
mean=.640, n=41206
Employer stock as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold employer stock," the sum of
answers to questions about value of stock held in different plans, divided by
basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. NBER mean=.398, s.d.=.808, n=40367
Hold stock options (GSS and NBER): "Do you currently hold any stock options in your
company (vested or unvested)?" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.123, n=2188, NBER
mean=.219, n=41166.
Stock options as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold stock options," the sum of answers
to questions about value of vested and unvested stock, divided by basepay+overtime,
otherwise 0. NBER mean=.395, s.d.=1.490, n=40922
ESOP (NBER): Participant in ESOP (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.081, n=41109
ESOP stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held in ESOP, divided by
basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.067, s.d.=.417, n=41002
ESPP (NBER): Hold stock purchased through Employee Stock Purchase Plan (0=no,
1=yes), mean=.176, n=41169
ESPP stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held in Employee Stock Purchase
Plan, divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.078, s.d.=.304, n=41168
401(k) stock (NBER): Hold employer stock in 401(k) plan (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.335,
n=40885
401(k) stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held in 401(k) plan, divided by
basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.189, s.d.=.525, n=40730
Stock from exercised options as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held from exercised
options, divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.052, s.d.=.396, n=40956
28

Stock from exercised options (NBER): Hold employer stock from exercised options
(0=no, 1=yes), mean=.050, n=41032
Open mkt. stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock purchased on open market,
divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.019, s.d.=.165, n=41144
Open mkt. stock (NBER): Hold stock purchased on open market (0=no, 1=yes),
mean=.073, n=41145
EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION IN DECISIONS
Lot of say on job (GSS): "I have a lot of say about what happens on my job" (1-4 scale,
1=strongly disagree, 4=strongly agree), mean=2.83, s.d.=.88, n=2204
Make decisions with others (GSS): "In your job, how often do you take part with others
in making decisions that affect you?" (1-4 scale, 1=never, 4=often), mean=3.08, s.d.=.93,
n=2211
Help set way things done on job (GSS): "How often do you participate with others in
helping set the way things are done on your job?" (1-4 scale, 1=never, 4=often),
mean=3.14, s.d.=.92, n=2210
Freedom in doing work (GSS): "I am given a lot of freedom to decide how to do my own
work" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all true, 4=very true)
, mean=3.31, s.d.=.85, n=2208
Involved in job decisions (NBER): "How much involvement and direct influence do
YOU have in: Deciding HOW to do your job and organize the work" (1-4 scale, 1=none,
4=a lot), mean=3.27, s.d.=.87, n=40750
Involved in department goals (NBER): "How much involvement and direct influence do
YOU have in: Setting GOALS for your work group or department" (1-4 scale, 1=none,
4=a lot), mean=2.59, s.d.=1.04, n=40594
Involved in company decisions (NBER): "How much involvement and direct influence
do YOU have in: Overall company decisions" (1-4 scale, 1=none, 4=a lot), mean=1.71,
s.d.=.86, n=40520
In EI team (NBER): " Some companies have organized workplace decision-making in
ways to get more employee input and involvement. Are you personally involved in any
team, committee or task force that addresses issues such as product quality, cost cutting,
productivity, health and safety, or other workplace issues?" (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.35,
n=40122
Satisfied with participation (NBER): "Overall, how satisfied are you with the influence
you have in company decisions that affect your job and work life?" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all
29

satisfied, 4=very satisfied), mean=2.61, s.d.=.85, n=40545
SUPERVISION
Supervisor helpful (GSS): "My supervisor is helpful to me in getting the job done" (1-4
scale, 1=not at all true, 4=very true), mean=3.26, s.d.=.88, n=2197
Supervisor cares (GSS): "My supervisor is concerned about the welfare of those under
him or her" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all true, 4=very true), mean=3.26, s.d.=.88, n=2185
Free from supervision (NBER): "Are you closely supervised, or do you work fairly
independently of close supervision?" (0-10 scale, 0=closely supervised, 10=independent of
close supervision), mean=6.65, s.d.=2.63, n=40845
COMPANY TREATMENT OF EMPLOYEES
Treated with respect (GSS): "At the place where I work, I am treated with respect" (1-4
scale, 1=strongly disagree, 4=strongly agree), mean=3.27, s.d.=.68, n=2209
Mgt.-ee relations (GSS): "In general, how would you describe relations in your work
place between management and employees?" (1-5 scale, 1=very bad, 5=very good),
mean=3.95, s.d.=.99, n=2205
Promotions handled fairly (GSS): "Promotions are handled fairly" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all
true, 4=very true), mean=2.84, s.d.=.98, n=2083
Worker safety is high priority (GSS): "The safety of workers is a high priority with
management where I work" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all true, 4=very true), mean=3.31, s.d.=.70,
n=2194
Stress (GSS): "How often do you find your work stressful?" (1-5 scale, 1=always,
5=never), mean=3.08, s.d.=1.03, n=2209
Employees share when co. does well (NBER): "When the company does well,
employees share the benefits" (1-7 scale, 1=strongly disagree, 7=strongly agree),
mean=5.00, s.d.=1.78, n=40676
Company fair to employees (NBER): "Overall, this company is fair to its employees"
(1-7 scale, 1=strongly disagree, 7=strongly agree), mean=4.75, s.d.=1.71, n=40632
Co. grade on ee. relations (NBER): "If you were to rate how well this company takes care
of workers on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give in these areas?
Overall relations with employees" (0-4 scale, 0=F, 4=A), mean=2.45, s.d.=1.07, n=40464
Co. grade on sharing info (NBER): "If you were to rate how well this company takes
30

care of workers on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give in these
areas? Sharing information with employees" (0-4 scale, 0=F, 4=A), mean=2.44, s.d.=1.11,
n=40523
Co. grade on trustworthy (NBER): "If you were to rate how well this company takes
care of workers on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give in these
areas? Trustworthiness in keeping its promises" (0-4 scale, 0=F, 4=A), mean=2.33,
s.d.=1.15, n=40385
TRAINING
Training opportunities (GSS): "I have the training opportunities I need to perform my job
safely and competently" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all true, 4=very true), mean=3.48, s.d.=.74,
n=2204
Formal training (NBER): "In the last 12 months have you received any formal training
from your current employer, such as in classes or seminars sponsored by the employer?"
(0=no, 1=yes), mean=.564, n=40460
Training hours (NBER): If "yes" to formal training, answer to "About how many hours of
formal training have you received in the last 12 months? If "no" to formal training, coded
as 0. Mean=17.80, s.d.=40.38, n=39426
Informal training (NBER): "To what extent have fellow employees taught you job skills,
problem solving, short cuts, or other ways to improve your work, on an informal basis?"
(1-4 scale, 1=not at all, 4=to a great extent), mean=2.89, s.d.=.85, n=40651
PAY AND BENEFITS
Yearly earnings (GSS): Total yearly earnings from main job (natural log) , mean=10.12,
s.d.=1.05, n=1888
Paid what you deserve (GSS): "How fair is what you earn on your job in comparison to
others doing the same type of work you do?" (1-5 scale, 1=much less than what you
deserve, 5=much more than you deserve), mean=3.43, s.d.=.86, n=2171
Fringe benefits good (GSS): "My fringe benefits are good" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all true,
4=very true), mean=2.87, s.d.=1.09, n=2198
Fixed pay (NBER): Yearly base pay+overtime (natural log), mean=10.710, s.d.=.783,
n=31162
Fixed pay difference from mkt. (NBER): "Do you believe your fixed annual wages are
higher or lower than those of employees with similar experience and job descriptions in
other companies in your region? By what percent is it higher or lower?" mean=-4.76,
31

s.d.=17.10, n=31793
Total comp. difference from mkt. (NBER): "Do you believe your total compensation is
higher or lower than those of employees with similar experience and job descriptions in
other companies in your region? By what percent is it higher or lower?" mean=-2.07,
s.d.=18.81, n=30440
Grade of co. on wages (NBER): "If you were to rate how well this company takes care of
workers on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give in these areas?
Paying good wages" (0-4 scale, 0=F, 4=A), mean=2.54, s.d.=1.06, n=40679
Grade of co. on benefits (NBER): "If you were to rate how well this company takes care
of workers on a scale similar to school grades, what grade would you give in these areas?
Giving fair benefits to workers" (0-4 scale, 0=F, 4=A), mean=2.64, s.d.=1.08, n=40611

CO-WORKER RELATIONS
Co-workers can be relied on for help (GSS): “The people I work with can be relied on
when I need help.” (1-4 scale, 1=not at all true, 4=very true), mean=3.37, s.d.=.75, n=2207
Co-workers take personal interest in me (GSS): “The people I work with take a
personal interest in me” (1-4 scale, 1=not at all true, 4=very true), mean=3.21, s.d.=.82,
n=2197
JOB SECURITY
Not likely to lose job (GSS and NBER): "Thinking about the next twelve months, how
likely do you think it is that you will lose your job or be laid off?" (1-4 scale, 1=not at all
likely, 4=very likely), GSS mean=3.27, s.d.=.87, n=2198, NBER mean=3.09, s.d.=.76,
n=38510
Not laid off in past year (GSS): "Were you laid off your main job at any time in the last
year?" (0=yes, 1=no), mean=.920, n=2212.
JOB SATISFACTION
GSS measure: "All in all, how satisfied would you say you are with your job?" (1-4 scale,
1=not at all satisfied, 4=very satisfied), mean=3.27, s.d.=.80, n=1656
NBER measure: "How satisfied are you in your job?" (1-7 scale, 1=completely
dissatisfied, 7=completely satisfied), mean=5.04, s.d.=1.29, n=40842

32

OTHER VARIABLES
High performance policies: Additive index of:
i) Employee involvement team: "Some companies have organized workplace
decision-making in ways to get more employee input and involvement. Are
you personally involved in any team, committee or task force that addresses
issues such as product quality, cost cutting, productivity, health and safety,
or other workplace issues?" (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.347, n=40122
ii) Formal training: "In the last 12 months have you received any formal training
from your current employer, such as in classes or seminars sponsored by the
employer?" (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.564, n=40460
iii) Job security: "Thinking about the next twelve months, how likely do you think
it is that you will lose your job or be laid off?" (coded for scale as 0=very likely
or fairly likely, 1=not too likely or not at all likely), mean=.843, n=38510
Index mean=1.77, s.d.=.86, n=37125
Closely supervised: "Are you closely supervised, or do you work fairly independently of
close supervision?" (0-10 scale, 0=independent of close supervision, 10= closely
supervised), mean=3.35, s.d.=2.63, n=40845

33

APPENDIX B: The shared capitalist thermometer index
As a first step in assessing the relation of shared capitalism to employee outcomes, we
constructed a thermometer-style index of shared capitalism. This index assigns one point each
when the worker was covered by any of the shared capitalist forms of compensation about which
the survey asked, with additional points for recent bonuses or grants, and for large bonuses or stock
holdings. For questions with a continuous numeric answer, we gave the item a value of 1 if the
respondent had a value greater than the median value. Because there is no natural ordering of
shared capitalist systems in the sense that a firm first introduces profit-sharing, then adds employee
ownership, and then gain-sharing, the index is not a Guttman scale. It is a simple summated rating
(Bartholomew et al, 2002; Bartholomew, 1996), using dichotomous scoring.
In the GSS, there are eight variables in the index: profit sharing eligibility, gain sharing
eligibility, owning any company stock, holding stock options, receiving a profit sharing bonus in
the past year, receiving a gain sharing bonus in the past year, having an above-median profit- and
gain sharing bonus as a percent of pay, and having an above-median company stock holding as a
percent of pay. In the NBER data there are ten variables in the index: all of the above items plus
one point each for receiving a stock option grant in the past year, and having above-median stock
option holdings (including unvested options if they could be exercised today) as a percent of pay.
Indices of this style have both advantages and disadvantages. On the plus side, they
provide a quick and ready measure of the extent of shared capitalist arrangements that makes it
easy to compare results across surveys and to summarize the broad thrust of findings. Since our
firm surveys covered only firms with some shared capitalist arrangements, the index allows us to
differentiate workers with differing degrees of incentive to their firm’s programs. On the negative
side, the index treats different programs the same even though they potentially have different
34

effects on particular outcomes. It postulates a single scale with equal weights rather than using
factor analysis or other statistical modelling to obtain weights for given factors. To deal with
these problems, we estimated the relationship of the outcomes to the different types of shared
capitalism, introduced as dummy or continuous variables in regressions.8 Tables B-1 to B-5 give
the results of those calculations. By comparing the results in the appendix tables with those in the
text, we can assess the loss of information due to the amalgamation of the measures into a single
index.
Figure B1 shows the distribution of our shared capitalism index in the GSS. This survey
estimates that 40% of US workers have some form of shared capitalist program. This estimate is
close to that obtained by Dube and Freeman in the WRPS. The mean score of the index is 1.48 – a
figure greatly affected by the substantial number of workers without shared capitalism systems.
Conditional on having a program, most workers report scores in the range of 2 to 5, with 6%
reporting scores of 6 or greater. Figure B2 gives the distribution of the index in the NBER survey
data. It also shows a non-normal distribution, with the most common scores as 2 to 4 but a sizeable
number of workers scoring 7 or above. There is sufficient variation in the index to differentiate the
extent of the shared capitalist “treatment” on workers.

8

There are statistical techniques to deal with the formation of latent variable indices from questions of the sort that we
are amalgamating into a single summated rating. See Bartholomew et al. (2002) and Spector (1992).

35

TABLE 1: Relation of Eight Employee Outcomes to Shared Capitalist Compensation
Each row represents results of separate regression.

Dependent variables
1. PARTICIPATION IN DECISIONS
National data
Lot of say about what happens on job (1-4 scale)
Take part with others in making decisions (1-4 scale)
Participate with others in setting way things are done (1-4 scale)
Lot of freedom to decide how to do work (1-4 scale)
NBER company data
Part. in job decisions (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Part. in group/dept. goals (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Part. in company decisions (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
In employee involvement team (0-1)(linear prob.)
Satisfaction with participation (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
2. COMPANY TREATMENT OF EMPLOYEES
National data
Am treated with respect at work (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Mgt-employee relations (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Promotions are handled fairly (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Worker safety is high priority with mgt. (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Lack of stress at work (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
NBER company data
When co. does well, ees. share benefits (1-7 scale)(OLS)

Coeff. (s.e.) of
shared capitalism
Index

Job and
demog.

EI team

Training

Job
security

N

0.064
0.100
0.084
0.053

***
***
***
***

(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.015)
(0.015)

x
x
x
x

1677
1680
1679
1680

0.039
0.019
0.020
0.004
0.012
-0.002
0.020
0.017
0.016
-0.002

***
***
***
**
***

(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.004)

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

39117
35596
38997
35501
38942
35462
38576
35838
38964
35494

0.029
0.036
0.042
0.067
0.008

*
***
***
***

(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.013)

x
x
x
x
x

1679
1677
1610
1671
1681

0.126

***

(0.006)

x

39065

36

***
***
***

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Co. is fair to ees. (1-7 scale)(OLS)
Grade of co. on sharing info (0-4 scale)(OLS)
Grade of co. on trustworthiness (0-4 scale)(OLS)
Grade of co. on employee relations (0-4 scale)(OLS)
3. SUPERVISION
National data
Supervisor is helpful to me (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Supervisor cares about welfare of those under him or her (1-4
scale)(ordered probit)
NBER company data
Freedom from close supervision (0-10 scale)(OLS)
4. TRAINING
National data
Have training opportunities I need
NBER company data
Formal job training in past 12 mos. (0-1)(OLS)
Hours of training in past 12 mos. (Tobit)
Informal job training from co-workers (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
5. PAY AND BENEFITS
National data
Yearly earnings (natural logarithm)(OLS)
Paid what you deserve (1-5 scale)(ordered probit)
Fringe benefits are good (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)

0.104 ***
0.063 ***
0.038 ***
0.023 ***
0.008 **
0.029 ***
0.012 ***
0.023 ***
0.008 **

(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

0.038

***

(0.015)

x

1675

0.055

***

(0.015)

x

1667

0.039
0.034

***
***

(0.009)
(0.009)

x
x

0.045

***

(0.016)

x

0.019
0.015
2.289
1.838
0.022
0.009

***
***
***
***
***
***

(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.226)
(0.236)
(0.004)
(0.004)

x
x
x
x
x
x

0.092
0.059
0.117

***
***
***

(0.009)
(0.013)
(0.014)

x
x
x

37

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

35592
39030
35548
38932
35452
38821
35394
38884
35420

39488
35838

1678

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

38863
35838
37905
34974
39033
35597

1681
1841
1860

NBER company data
Fixed pay (natural logarithm)(OLS)

***
***
***
***
***
***

(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.067)
(0.070)
(0.072)
(0.075)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.004)

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

0.030
0.047

**
***

(0.015)
(0.015)

x
x

1680
1675

0.047
0.012

***
***

(0.015)
(0.003)

x
x

1676
1681

0.054
0.051

***
***

(0.004)
(0.004)

x
x

37052
35838

(0.018)

x

(0.005)
(0.005)

x
x

0.023
0.024
0.094
0.051
0.511
0.468
0.025
0.018
0.034
0.024

***
***

Co-workers can be relied on for help
Co-workers take personal interest in me
7. JOB SECURITY
National data
Not likely to lose job (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
Not laid off in past year (0-1 dummy)
NBER company data
Not likely to lose job (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)

Fixed pay % diff. from market (OLS)
Total compensation % diff. from market (OLS)
Grade of co. on wages (0-4 scale)(OLS)
Grade of co. on benefits (0-4 scale)(OLS)

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

30122
28324
30782
28152
29569
27199
39068
35564
39011
35519

6. CO-WORKER RELATIONS
National data

8. JOB SATISFACTION
National data
Job satisfaction (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
NBER company data
Job satisfaction (1-7 scale)(OLS)

0.022
0.015
-0.004

***

x

x

1262

x

x

x

39192
35685

* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 Coefficients in bold are significant at p<.05
See Appendix A for variable definitions and descriptive statistics
Job and demographic controls include age, sex, race, tenure, occupation, earnings, full-time status, and ease of seeing co-workers for all regressions, plus work in a team for national
regressions, and management level, supervisory status, disability status, closeness of supervision, payment on an hourly rate, and company fixed effects for the NBER company
regressions. Earnings controls include ln(yearly earnings) for the national data and ln(base pay) for the NBER company regressions.

38

TABLE 2: Complementarities of Shared Capitalist Compensation in Affecting Employee Outcomes
Each row represents results of a separate regression, with standard errors in parentheses underneath.
Shared
High performance policies
capitalism
Shared cap.
base effect
Base effect
Interaction
Dependent variables
(1)
(2)
(3)
PARTICIPATION IN DECISIONS
Part. in job decisions (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
0.056 ***
0.212
***
0.009
***
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.003)
Part. in group/dept. goals (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
0.017 **
0.238
***
0.013
***
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.003)
Part. in company decisions (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
-0.020 **
0.211
***
0.021
***
(0.008)
(0.013)
(0.003)
In employee involvement team (0-1)(linear prob.)
0.011 ***
0.070
***
0.006
***
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.002)
Satisfaction with participation (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
-0.010
0.251
***
0.024
***
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.003)
COMPANY TREATMENT OF EMPLOYEES
When co. does well, ees. share benefits (1-7 scale)(OLS)
0.187 ***
0.396 ***
-0.031 ***
(0.011)
(0.018)
(0.004)
Co. is fair to ees. (1-7 scale)(OLS)
0.090 ***
0.422 ***
-0.010 ***
(0.010)
(0.017)
(0.004)
Grade of co. on sharing info (0-4 scale)(OLS)
0.043 ***
0.272 ***
-0.002
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.003)
Grade of co. on trustworthiness (0-4 scale)(OLS)
0.050 ***
0.287 ***
-0.004
(0.007)
(0.012)
(0.003)
Grade of co. on employee relations (0-4 scale)(OLS)
0.043 ***
0.257 ***
0.000
(0.007)
(0.011)
(0.002)
SUPERVISION
Freedom from close supervision (0-10 scale)(OLS)
0.017
0.031
0.012
(0.014)
(0.027)
(0.006)
TRAINING
Formal job training in past 12 mos. (0-1)(OLS)
0.015 ***
0.092 ***
0.001

39

Closely supervised
Shared cap.
Base effect interaction
(4)
(5)
-0.037
(0.004)
0.008
(0.004)
0.030
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
0.019
(0.004)
0.013
(0.006)
0.017
(0.006)
0.029
(0.004)
0.028
(0.004)
0.029
(0.004)

0.005

***
*
***

***

**
***
***
***
***

***

-0.015
(0.001)
-0.011
(0.001)
-0.007
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.000)
-0.010
(0.001)
-0.008
(0.001)
-0.010
(0.001)
-0.010
(0.001)
-0.010
(0.001)
-0.011
(0.001)

0.000

***
***
***

***

***
***
***
***
***

Hours of training in past 12 mos. (Tobit)
Informal job training from co-workers (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
PAY AND BENEFITS
Fixed pay (natural logarithm)(OLS)
Fixed pay % diff. from market (OLS)
Total compensation % diff. from market (OLS)
Grade of co. on wages (0-4 scale)(OLS)
Grade of co. on benefits (0-4 scale)(OLS)
JOB SECURITY
Not likely to lose job (1-4 scale)(ordered probit)
JOB SATISFACTION
Job satisfaction (1-7 scale)(OLS)

(0.003)
2.047
(0.398)
0.005
(0.007)
0.028
(0.003)
0.249
(0.124)
0.558
(0.134)
0.041
(0.007)
0.057
(0.007)
0.065
(0.006)
-0.007
(0.008)

***

***
**
***
***
***

***

(0.007)
11.048
(1.002)
0.188
(0.012)
0.017
(0.005)
0.870
(0.218)
0.771
(0.239)
0.141
(0.011)
0.187
(0.011)

***
***

***
***
***
***
***

(0.002)
0.076
(0.209)
0.008
(0.003)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.012
(0.047)
0.094
(0.050)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.008
(0.002)

0.098
(0.015)

***

0.002
(0.003)

0.264
(0.014)

***

0.019
(0.003)

***

*

***

***

(0.002)
0.344
(0.239)
0.030
(0.004)

***

-0.009
(0.002)
0.297
(0.071)
0.184
(0.078)
0.007
(0.004)
0.007
(0.004)

***

-0.029
(0.004)

***

0.001
(0.004)

***
**
**
*

(0.000)
-0.106
(0.055)
-0.004
(0.001)

*
***

-0.001
(0.000)
-0.073
(0.016)
-0.084
(0.018)
-0.006
(0.001)
-0.006
(0.001)

*

-0.005
(0.001)

***

-0.009
(0.001)

***

***
***
***
***

* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01
See Appendix A for variable definitions and descriptive statistics
Based on NBER company data. Job and demographic controls include age, sex, race, tenure, occupation, earnings, full-time status, management level, supervisory status, disability
status, closeness of supervision, ease of seeing workers, payment on an hourly rate, and company fixed effects.

40

Table A-1: Prevalence of Shared Capitalism Programs
General
Social
Survey
2002-2006
Bonus eligibility
Profit sharing
Gainsharing
Size of most recent bonus, if eligible for any
Mean dollar value
Median dollar value
Mean % of pay
Median % of pay
Employee ownership
Own employer stock in any form
Own employer stock through:
Employee Stock Ownership Plan
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
401(k) plan
Exercising options and keeping stock
Open market purchase
Value of employer stock, if own stock
Dollar value: Mean
Median
% of pay: Mean
Median
% of wealth: Mean
Median

NBER
company
dataset

Sample sizes
GSS

35.9%
24.9%

71.3%
20.7%

2386
2386

41018
41023

$6,265
$1,500
8.9%
4.6%

$11,329
$2,000
12.1%
5.7%

693
693
645
645

26113
26113
22019
22019

19.4%

64.0%

2406

41206

8.1%
17.6%
33.5%
5.0%
7.3%

Stock options
Currently hold stock options
Ever granted stock options
Granted stock options last year
Value of stock options, if hold options:
Mean dollar value of unvested options
Mean dollar value of vested options
Total dollar value: Mean
Median
% of pay:
Mean
Median
% of wealth:
Mean
Median

NBER

41109
40990
40885
41032
41145

$63,130
$10,000
81.7%
23.0%

$60,078
$14,375
65.0%
30.6%
19.6%
10.0%

318
318
302
302

25447
25447
22715
22715
23141
23141

11.3%

21.9%
22.3%
20.4%

2392

41166
41166
41158

$112,882
$143,117
$249,901
$75,000
183.7%
100.0%
60.3%
28.6%

8390
8497
8656
8656
8403
8403
8104
8104

Any of above programs
44.9%
85.7%
2430
41206
Source: Tabulated from GSS and NBER surveys. The GSS sample is limited to private for-profit employees.

41

Table B-1: Participation in Decisions by Type of Shared Capitalism Plan
Dep var.:

Involved in
job decs.
(1-4 scale)
oprobit
(1)

Involved in
dept. goals
(1-4 scale)
oprobit
(2)

Involved in
co. decs.
(1-4 scale)
oprobit
(3)

Satisfied w/
participation
(1-4 scale)
oprobit
(5)

In EI team
(0-1 dummy)
OLS
(4)

Bonuses
Profit sharing
Profit sharing bonus as %
of base pay
Gainsharing
Gainsharing bonus as % of
base pay
Individual bonus
Indiv. bonus as % of base
pay
Stock options
Stock option holding
Stock option value as % of
base pay
Employee ownership
Any employee ownership
Employee-owned stock
as % of pay
n
(pseudo) R-sq.
Cut point 1
Cut point 2
Cut point 3
Breakdowns by type of
employee ownership
ESOP

0.016

(0.022)

-0.067

(0.021)

***

-0.101

(0.022)

***

0.046

(0.008)

***

-0.048

(0.021)

**

0.269
-0.052

(0.115)
(0.030)

**
*

0.547
-0.071

(0.098)
(0.027)

***
***

0.389
-0.002

(0.097)
(0.028)

***

0.087
0.013

(0.039)
(0.011)

**

0.321
0.028

(0.096)
(0.026)

***

0.188
0.096

(0.133)
(0.028)

(0.111)
(0.025)

***

0.129
0.093

(0.107)
(0.027)

0.074
0.005

(0.043)
(0.010)

*

***

0.149
0.123

0.040
0.040

(0.106)
(0.025)

0.280

(0.135)

**

-0.044

(0.112)

-0.174

(0.111)

-0.036

(0.044)

0.207

(0.110)

-0.002

(0.045)

0.052

(0.039)

0.033

(0.038)

-0.052

(0.015)

***

-0.054

(0.037)

0.007

(0.007)

0.017

(0.006)

***

0.011

(0.005)

**

0.008

(0.002)

***

0.015

(0.005)

0.043

(0.020)

**

0.039

(0.019)

**

0.043

(0.021)

**

0.032

(0.008)

***

-0.016

(0.019)

0.018
34439
0.125
0.149
0.937
2.026

(0.010)

*

(0.009)

*

0.002
34671
0.123

(0.004)

(0.262)
(0.262)
(0.263)

0.026
34337
0.074
0.132
1.194
2.743

(0.009)

(0.256)
(0.256)
(0.256)

0.007
34309
0.086
2.617
3.541
4.631

(0.009)

(0.292)
(0.292)
(0.292)

0.016
34347
0.117
1.958
2.709
3.911

(0.252)
(0.252)
(0.252)

0.071

(0.056)

-0.008

(0.054)

-0.040

(0.056)

-0.253

(0.053)

42

***

0.055

(0.022)

**

*

***

***

***

ESOP stock as % of pay
0.029
(0.022)
0.048
ESPP
0.027
(0.044)
0.065
ESPP stock as % of pay
-0.031
(0.036)
-0.032
401(k) stock
0.031
(0.018)
0.016
401(k) stock as % of pay
0.046
(0.017) ***
0.030
Stock from options
-0.067
(0.043)
0.044
Stock from options as % of
pay
0.029
(0.025)
-0.012
Open mkt. stock
-0.046
(0.032)
0.014
Open mkt. stock as % of
pay
-0.072
(0.053)
-0.046
ESOP coefficients without
fixed effects
ESOP
0.126
(0.035) ***
0.227
ESOP stock as % of pay
0.007
(0.021)
0.047
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
^ All regressions include the control variables from table 2.

(0.021)
(0.039)
(0.031)
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.038)

0.029
0.038
-0.003
0.032
0.011
0.089

(0.020)
(0.040)
(0.030)
(0.019)
(0.016)
(0.037)

(0.021)
(0.028)

-0.030
0.027

(0.045)

(0.033)
(0.019)

43

**
*

**

***
***

0.002
-0.006
0.003
0.042
-0.007
0.039

(0.008)
(0.016)
(0.012)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.015)

(0.020)
(0.029)

-0.009
0.002

(0.008)
(0.011)

0.000

(0.044)

0.061

(0.018)

0.252
0.003

(0.034)
(0.018)

0.014
-0.001

(0.013)
(0.007)

*
**

***

***
***

***

0.052
0.057
-0.035
0.021
0.028
-0.009

(0.020)
(0.038)
(0.030)
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.037)

0.025
0.069

(0.020)
(0.028)

-0.044

(0.045)

-0.103
0.015

(0.032)
(0.018)

***

*

***

***

Table B-2: Company Treatment of Employees by Type of Shared Capitalism Plan

Dep var.:

Ees. share when
co. does well
(1-7 scale)
OLS
(1)

Co. fair
to ees.
(1-7 scale)
OLS
(2)

Co. grade:
sharing info
(0-4 scale)
OLS
(3)

Co. grade:
trustworthy
(0-4 scale)
OLS
(4)

Co. grade:
ee. relations
(0-4 scale)
OLS
(5)

Bonuses
Profit sharing
Profit sharing bonus as % of
base pay
Gainsharing
Gainsharing bonus as % of
base pay
Individual bonus
Indiv. bonus as % of base pay
Stock options
Stock option holding
Stock option value as % of
base pay
Employee ownership
Any employee ownership
Employee-owned stock as %
of pay
n
(pseudo) R-sq.
Breakdowns by type of employee
ownership
ESOP
ESOP stock as % of pay
ESPP
ESPP stock as % of pay

0.481

(0.030)

***

0.126

(0.029)

***

-0.003

(0.019)

0.089
0.106

(0.136)
(0.038)

***

0.188
0.136

(0.131)
(0.037)

***

0.258
0.021

(0.087)
(0.024)

-0.079
0.047
0.475

(0.151)
(0.036)
(0.156)

***

-0.167
0.023
0.398

(0.146)
(0.035)
(0.151)

***

0.074
0.074
0.030

(0.097)
(0.023)
(0.100)

-0.078

(0.054)

-0.061

(0.052)

0.033

0.006

(0.008)

0.004

(0.007)

0.116

(0.028)

***

0.005

(0.027)

0.041
34433
0.196

(0.013)

***

0.027
34395
0.203

(0.012)

-0.021
0.027
0.120
0.006

(0.077)
(0.028)
(0.055)
(0.042)

-0.207
0.026
0.075
-0.001

(0.074)
(0.027)
(0.053)
(0.041)

**

44

-0.018

(0.019)

-0.031

(0.018)

*

0.261
0.037

(0.089)
(0.025)

0.397
0.021

(0.083)
(0.023)

***

0.005
0.105
0.142

(0.099)
(0.024)
(0.102)

0.107
0.082
-0.022

(0.092)
(0.022)
(0.095)

***

(0.034)

0.059

(0.035)

*

0.035

(0.033)

0.003

(0.005)

0.000

(0.005)

0.003

(0.005)

-0.016

(0.018)

-0.008

(0.018)

-0.013

(0.017)

**

0.027
34303
0.164

(0.008)

***

0.022
34242
0.205

(0.008)

***

0.016
34271
0.179

(0.008)

**

***

-0.242
0.035
-0.009
-0.016

(0.049)
(0.018)
(0.035)
(0.027)

***
*

-0.158
0.027
0.028
0.010

(0.050)
(0.018)
(0.036)
(0.028)

***

-0.197
0.023
0.006
0.002

(0.047)
(0.017)
(0.034)
(0.026)

***

***

***

***

***

401(k) stock
0.161 (0.025)
401(k) stock as % of pay
0.065 (0.022)
Stock from options
0.042 (0.053)
Stock from options as % of
pay
0.008 (0.028)
Open mkt. stock
0.010 (0.040)
Open mkt. stock as % of pay
0.013 (0.064)
ESOP coefficients without fixed
effects
ESOP
0.231 (0.047)
ESOP stock as % of pay
0.102 (0.026)
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
^ All regressions include the control variables from table 2.

***
***

***
***

0.037
0.066
0.001

(0.025)
(0.021)
(0.051)

0.031
0.055
-0.010

(0.027)
(0.039)
(0.062)

-0.119
0.033

(0.045)
(0.025)

45

***

***

0.019
0.067
-0.088

(0.016)
(0.014)
(0.034)

0.024
0.056
-0.029

(0.018)
(0.026)
(0.041)

-0.042
0.050

(0.030)
(0.017)

***
***

**

***

0.024
0.048
-0.068

(0.017)
(0.014)
(0.034)

0.027
0.062
-0.071

(0.019)
(0.026)
(0.041)

-0.103
0.024

(0.030)
(0.017)

***
**

0.020
0.042
-0.050

(0.016)
(0.013)
(0.032)

**
*

0.016
0.030
-0.025

(0.017)
(0.024)
(0.039)

-0.047
0.017

(0.028)
(0.016)

***

***

*

Table B-3: Supervision and Training by Type of Shared Capitalism Plan

Dep var.:

Bonuses
Profit sharing
Profit sharing bonus as % of base
pay
Gainsharing
Gainsharing bonus as % of base
pay
Individual bonus
Indiv. bonus as % of base pay
Stock options
Stock option holding
Stock option value as % of base
pay
Employee ownership
Any employee ownership
Employee-owned stock as % of pay
n
(pseudo) R-sq.
Cut point 1
Cut point 2
Cut point 3
Breakdowns by type of employee
ownership
ESOP
ESOP stock as % of pay

Free from
supervision
(0-10 scale)
OLS
(1)
0.068

(0.044)

0.175
-0.106

(0.203)
(0.057)

0.174
0.029
0.344

Formal
training
(0-1 scale)
OLS
(2)

Training
hours

Informal
training
(1-4 scale)
oprobit
(4)

Tobit
(3)

0.021

(0.009)

**

2.487

(1.192)

0.067
-0.010

(0.039)
(0.011)

*

6.948
-0.081

(5.084)
(1.470)

(0.225)
(0.054)
(0.233)

0.125
0.050
-0.138

(0.044)
(0.011)
(0.045)

***
***
***

24.545
3.718
-20.235

(5.652)
(1.403)
(5.823)

-0.014

(0.080)

0.006

(0.016)

-1.398

(2.053)

0.017

(0.011)

-0.009

(0.002)

***

-1.010

(0.280)

0.034
0.025
34671
0.177

(0.041)
(0.019)

0.045
0.011
34671
0.148

(0.008)
(0.004)

***
***

5.437
1.041
33834
0.024

(1.133)
(0.493)

0.402
0.056

(0.114)
(0.042)

*

***

0.054
-0.002

46

(0.022)
(0.008)

**

7.987
0.205

(3.198)
(1.090)

**

-0.014

(0.021)

0.190
0.081

(0.095)
(0.026)

0.036
0.035
-0.023

(0.105)
(0.025)
(0.109)

0.096

(0.037)

***

***

0.016

(0.005)

***

***
**

-0.047
-0.005
34437
0.031
-1.497
-0.598
0.786

(0.019)
(0.009)

**

-0.099
-0.019

(0.054)
(0.019)

***
***
***

**

**
***

(0.252)
(0.252)
(0.252)

*

ESPP
0.051 (0.082)
ESPP stock as % of pay
-0.005 (0.063)
401(k) stock
0.057 (0.038)
401(k) stock as % of pay
0.016 (0.032)
Stock from options
-0.006 (0.078)
Stock from options as % of pay
-0.018 (0.042)
Open mkt. stock
-0.027 (0.060)
Open mkt. stock as % of pay
0.046 (0.095)
ESOP coefficients without fixed effects
ESOP
0.403 (0.067)
ESOP stock as % of pay
0.121 (0.040)
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
^ All regressions include the control variables from table 2.

***
***

47

0.011
0.015
0.050
0.022
0.028
-0.007
-0.004
0.003

(0.016)
(0.012)
(0.007)
(0.006)
(0.015)
(0.008)
(0.012)
(0.018)

0.169
0.018

(0.014)
(0.008)

***
***
*

***
***

2.352
0.986
6.971
1.973
1.093
-0.086
0.584
-0.268

(2.120)
(1.595)
(1.056)
(0.835)
(1.974)
(1.068)
(1.507)
(2.357)

15.145
2.043

(1.857)
(1.000)

***
**

***
**

0.024
-0.012
-0.007
0.012
-0.015
-0.003
-0.028
-0.012

(0.038)
(0.030)
(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.037)
(0.020)
(0.028)
(0.044)

-0.087
-0.012

(0.032)
(0.018)

***

Table B-4: Pay and Benefits by Type of Shared Capitalism Plan

Dep var.:

Fixed pay
(natural log)
OLS

Fixed pay

Total comp.

(% diff.

(% diff.

from mkt.)

from mkt.)

OLS

(1)

Grade of co. on

OLS

(2)

Wages

Benefits

(0-4 scale)

(0-4 scale)

OLS

(3)

OLS

(4)

(5)

Bonuses
Profit sharing
Profit sharing bonus
as % of base pay
Gainsharing
Gainsharing bonus
as % of base pay
Individual bonus
Indiv. bonus as % of
base pay

0.015

(0.007)

**

0.222

(0.340)

-0.051

(0.362)

0.069

(0.018)

***

0.068

(0.018)

***

0.168

(0.032)

***

1.057

(1.490)

8.130

(1.587)

***

0.194

(0.085)

**

0.329

(0.084)

***

0.028

(0.009)

***

0.374

(0.439)

1.544

(0.456)

***

0.033

(0.024)

0.026

(0.024)

-0.079

(0.035)

**

-0.664

(1.668)

-3.522

(1.765)

*

0.059

(0.095)

0.021

(0.094)

0.007

(0.008)

-0.725

(0.423)

*

-0.607

(0.444)

0.023

(0.023)

0.089

(0.022)

0.039

(0.036)

4.148

(1.712)

**

12.875

(1.832)

0.193

(0.098)

-0.119

(0.097)

0.160

(0.013)

***

0.594

(0.629)

1.013

(0.666)

-0.002

(0.033)

0.024

(0.033)

0.012

(0.002)

***

0.282

(0.081)

0.601

(0.088)

0.007

(0.005)

0.002

(0.005)

***

**

***

Stock options
Stock option holding
Stock option value
as % of base pay

***

***

Employee ownership
Any employee
ownership
Employee-owned
stock as % of pay

0.066

(0.007)

***

0.012

(0.308)

0.251

(0.331)

-0.008

(0.016)

0.040

(0.016)

-0.009

(0.003)

***

-0.127

(0.158)

0.244

(0.158)

0.000

(0.008)

0.002

(0.008)

n

27359

27320

26401

34408

34363

(pseudo) R-sq.

0.765

0.063

0.137

0.108

0.164

(continued)

48

**

Breakdowns by type of
employee ownership
ESOP
ESOP stock as % of
pay

-0.168

(1.020)

0.751

(1.331)

-0.414

(0.360)

0.949

(0.401)

***

0.943

(0.651)

1.629

(0.698)

(0.010)

***

0.079

(0.488)

-0.041

0.042

(0.007)

***

-0.188

(0.307)

-0.006

(0.005)

-0.270

(0.309)

0.012

(0.012)

1.354

(0.580)

0.005

(0.007)

-0.233

(0.306)

0.072

(0.010)

0.833

(0.434)

-0.018

(0.015)

-1.548

(0.684)

ESOP
0.193
ESOP stock as % of
pay
0.037
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in
parentheses)

(0.017)

***

0.834

(0.555)

(0.010)

***

-0.766

(0.388)

ESPP
ESPP stock as % of
pay
401(k) stock
401(k) stock as % of
pay
Stock from options
Stock from options
as % of pay
Open mkt. stock
Open mkt. stock as %
of pay
ESOP coefficients
without fixed effects

0.144

(0.020)

-0.006

(0.007)

0.051

(0.013)

-0.086

***

***

-0.051

(0.048)

0.031

(0.047)

**

-0.008

(0.018)

0.018

(0.017)

**

0.037

(0.034)

0.060

(0.034)

(0.532)

0.002

(0.027)

-0.008

(0.026)

0.219

(0.323)

-0.004

(0.016)

0.029

(0.016)

-0.079

(0.252)

0.011

(0.014)

-0.008

(0.013)

1.503

(0.620)

-0.003

(0.033)

-0.035

(0.033)

-0.126

(0.332)

0.007

(0.018)

0.017

(0.018)

*

0.956

(0.463)

0.003

(0.025)

0.011

(0.025)

**

-1.006

(0.743)

-0.058

(0.040)

-0.034

(0.039)

-0.674

(0.665)

0.006

(0.028)

0.299

(0.027)

1.643

(0.379)

-0.063

(0.017)

-0.010

(0.016)

**

**

^ All regressions include the control variables from table 2.

49

**

**

***

***

*

*

***

Table B-5: Job Security and Satisfaction by Type of Shared Capitalism Plan

Dep var.:

Bonuses
Profit sharing

Not likely to
lose job
(1-4 scale)
oprobit
(1)

Job
satisfaction
(1-7 scale)
OLS
(2)

0.102

(0.021)

***

-0.063

(0.023)

***

Profit sharing bonus as % of base pay

0.486

(0.098)

***

0.255

(0.105)

**

Gainsharing

0.068

(0.027)

***

0.025

(0.029)

-0.021

(0.109)

0.270

(0.117)

0.057
-0.046

(0.026)
(0.112)

0.023
0.168

(0.028)
(0.121)

0.040
0.011

(0.039)
(0.005)

**

-0.008
0.007

(0.041)
(0.006)

0.082
0.018
34671
0.042
-1.917
-1.175
0.476

(0.020)
(0.009)

***
**

-0.006
0.001
34525
0.107

(0.021)
(0.010)

(0.259)
(0.259)
(0.259)

-0.001
0.042
-0.058
-0.005

(0.056)
(0.021)
(0.040)
(0.031)

-0.038
-0.002
-0.027
-0.001

(0.059)
(0.022)
(0.042)
(0.033)

Gainsharing bonus as % of base pay
Individual bonus
Indiv. bonus as % of base pay
Stock options
Stock option holding
Stock option value as % of base pay
Employee ownership
Any employee ownership
Employee-owned stock as % of pay
n
(pseudo) R-sq.
Cut point 1
Cut point 2
Cut point 3
Breakdowns by type of employee ownership
ESOP
ESOP stock as % of pay
ESPP
ESPP stock as % of pay

50

**

**

**

401(k) stock
0.096
401(k) stock as % of pay
0.054
Stock from options
-0.089
Stock from options as % of pay
0.013
Open mkt. stock as % of pay
0.038
Open mkt. stock
0.008
ESOP coefficients without fixed effects
ESOP
0.299
ESOP stock as % of pay
0.043
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
^ All regressions include the control variables from Table 2.

(0.018)
(0.015)
(0.038)
(0.020)
(0.046)
(0.029)

***
***
**

-0.001
0.018
-0.006
-0.003
-0.033
0.005

(0.020)
(0.017)
(0.041)
(0.022)
(0.049)
(0.031)

(0.034)
(0.020)

***
**

0.090
-0.029

(0.036)
(0.020)

51

***

Figure 1: The Contingent Effects of Shared Capitalism on Job Satisfaction
6
Not closely supervised,
covered by hi-perf. policies
5.5

Predicted job satisfaction

Avg. supervision,
covered by hi-perf.
Very closely supervised,
covered by hi-perf. policies

5

Not closely supervised,
no hi-perf. policies

4.5

Avg. supervision,
no hi-perf. policies
4

Very closely supervised,
no hi-perf. policies

3.5

3
0

10
Shared capitalism index

52

Figure B1: Distribution of Shared Capitalism Index in GSS
70.0%

60.0%

59.5%

Percent of employees

50.0%

40.0%

30.0%

20.0%

8.8%

10.0%

6.9%

6.8%

7.0%

4.8%
2.6%

2.6%

6

7

1.1%

0.0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

Score on 8-point shared capitalism index

53

8

Figure B2: Distribution of Shared Capitalism Index in NBER Companies
18.0%
16.6%

16.5%

16.0%
14.3%

14.2%

14.0%

Percent of employees

12.0%
10.0%
10.0%

8.0%
6.0%
6.0%

5.5%

5.4%
4.3%

4.0%

3.5%

3.7%

9

10

2.0%

0.0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Score on 10-point shared capitalism index

54

7

8

