                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            HIRING CHEERLEADERS:
                BOARD APPOINTMENTS OF "INDEPENDENT" DIRECTORS

                                          Lauren Cohen
                                         Andrea Frazzini
                                        Christopher Malloy

                                       Working Paper 14232
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14232


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008


We would like to thank Joakim Bang, Brad Barber, Nick Barberis, Sugato Bhattacharya, John Campbell,
Josh Coval, Simon Gervais, Gustavo Grullon, Kathleen Hanley, Ayla Kayhan, Bruce Kraus, Alexander
Ljunqqvist, Ulrike Malmendier, Jennifer Marietta-Westberg, Cade Massey, Matt Spiegel, Erik Stafford,
Jeremy Stein, Jake Thomas, Steen Thomsen, Sheridan Titman, Lori Walsh, and seminar participants
at Emory, Harvard Business School, Helsinki School of Economics, Northeastern University, Oxford
University, University of Melbourne, University of New South Wales, the Texas Finance Festival,
the Yale SOM Behavioral Sciences Conference, the American Finance Association (AFA) meetings,
the European Finance Association (EFA) meetings, the Singapore International Conference on Finance,
the Families, Networks, and Firms Conference at Thammasat Business School, and the United States
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for helpful comments. We also thank Alex Tang for excellent
research assistance. In addition, we are grateful to BoardEx and Linda Cechova for providing firm
board data. We also thank Alex Tang for excellent research assistance. In addition, we are grateful
to BoardEx and Linda Cechova for providing firm board data. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Lauren Cohen, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hiring Cheerleaders: Board Appointments of "Independent" Directors
Lauren Cohen, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher Malloy
NBER Working Paper No. 14232
August 2008, Revised April 2010
JEL No. G28,G34,J24,J44

                                              ABSTRACT

We provide evidence that firms appoint independent directors who are overly sympathetic to management,
while still technically independent according to regulatory definitions. We explore a subset of independent
directors for whom we have detailed, micro-level data on their views regarding the firm prior to being
appointed to the board: sell-side analysts who are subsequently appointed to the board of companies
they previously covered. We find that boards appoint overly optimistic analysts who are also poor
relative performers. The magnitude of the optimistic bias is large: 82.0% of appointed recommendations
are strong-buy/buy recommendations, compared to 56.9% for all other analyst recommendations. We
find that appointed analysts’ optimism is stronger at precisely those times when firms’ benefits are
larger, and that appointing firms increase earnings management, and perform poorly, following these
board appointments.


Lauren Cohen                                         Christopher Malloy
Harvard Business School                              Harvard Business School
Baker Library 273                                    Baker Library 277
Soldiers Field                                       Boston, MA 02163
Boston, MA 02163                                     cmalloy@hbs.edu
and NBER
lcohen@hbs.edu

Andrea Frazzini
AQR Capital Management, LLC
Two Greenwich Plaza, 3rd Floor
Greenwich, CT 06830
andrea.frazzini@aqr.com
What makes a good monitor? Embodied in recent regulatory requirements is the notion
that independent directors provide a particular type of objective, shareholder-minded
monitoring.1 At the same time, little is known about the characteristics of independent
directors, or the factors that influence the selection process of these directors. It seems
almost necessary that a senior officer or board member has some relationship with, or
prior knowledge of, a potential independent director in order to ensure they have
enough information to be able to recommend the member for board election.                            This
reality need not be problematic, as although it could be that this relationship skews the
view of these “independent” directors, it could also reduce information asymmetries
regarding the potential value of the director for the given board.2
        In this paper we exploit a unique, hand-collected database of independent
directors to test the hypothesis that boards appoint directors who, while technically
independent according to regulatory definitions, nonetheless may be overly sympathetic
to management. To do so we investigate a subset of independent directors for whom we
have detailed, micro-level data on their views regarding the firm prior to being
appointed to the board. We use these track records to compare the roles of optimism
(i.e., hiring a cheerleader for management) versus skill (i.e., hiring an objective and able
observer) in the board appointment process.                     Focusing on ex-ante, observable
characteristics of the independent directors themselves allows us to directly evaluate the
objectivity and potential efficacy of independent directors based solely on their actual
opinions about the firm in question.
        The agents we examine are former sell-side analysts who end up serving on the
board of companies they previously covered. Motivating our empirical strategy is the
fact that 91% of the board members of the appointing firms in our sample are on the


1
  See, for example, the SEC’s press release on November 4, 2003, in which the SEC approved new rules
proposed and adopted by the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq Stock Market requiring
widespread strengthening of corporate governance standards for listed companies. The new rules
"establish a stricter, more detailed definition of independence for directors and require the majority of
members on listed companies’'boards to satisfy that standard...Pursuant to NYSE Section 303A(2) of the
NYSE Manual, no director would qualify as "independent" unless the board affirmatively determines that
the director has no material relationship with the company (either directly or as a partner, shareholder or
officer    of   an     organization   that    has    a    relationship   with     the   company)."     See
http://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/34-48745.htm for more details. See also Duchin et al. (2008) for a review
of recent changes to the regulatory requirements for corporate boards.
2
  See Adams and Ferreira (2007) for a discussion of the tradeoffs involved in board construction.

                                      Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 1
board both at the time the analyst was covering the firm and at the time of the
subsequent board appointment, suggesting that the firm-analyst relationships we explore
exhibit a great deal of continuity.      Further, unlike former CEOs or other senior
executives who serve on corporate boards, for whom past performance attribution is
complicated by the fact that firm performance is difficult to disentangle from individual
performance, sell-side analysts’ opinions and performance can be easily assessed. We
can explicitly compute measures of skill/ability and optimism by examining the
composition and stock return performance of analysts’ buy/sell recommendations. In
doing so we find evidence that boards appoint overly optimistic analysts who are also
poor relative performers.
      In particular, board-appointed analysts issue significantly more positive
recommendations on companies that subsequently appoint them to the board; both
relative to the other stocks they cover, and relative to other analysts covering these
same stocks. The magnitude of this result is large: 82.0% of these recommendations are
strong-buy or buy recommendations, compared to 56.9% for all other analyst
recommendations (an over 25% difference). In regressions of recommendation levels
(1=Strong Sell, 5=Strong Buy) on an appointment dummy (equal to 1 if the analyst
recommending the given stock is subsequently appointed to the board of directors of
that firm), the coefficient on appointment implies an increase in favorableness of rating
from between a Hold and a Buy for the average recommendation to between a Buy and
Strong Buy for appointed recommendations. This result is nearly three times as large as
the optimism effect associated with affiliation (here a dummy variable equal to 1 if the
given firm has an underwriting relationship with the analyst’s brokerage house), which
is the subject of a vast analyst literature (see, for example, Lin and McNichols (1998),
Lin et al. (2005), Michaely and Womack (1999), Hong and Kubik (2003)).
      Additionally, we find that board-appointed analysts exhibit poor relative
performance on their stock recommendations on appointing firms. For example, we find
that appointed analysts issue 60-90% more directionally incorrect calls on stock
recommendations for firms that appoint them compared to the typical analyst
recommendation. Also, while the typical analyst upgrade earns a significant 9.4% in the
year following the upgrade, upgrades by appointed analysts on appointing firms earn


                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 2
only an insignificant 3.6%. Finally, we show that appointed analysts demonstrate
inferior overall forecasting ability, both for earnings forecasts and for stock
recommendations, across the entire portfolio of stocks they cover. Thus, while it is true
that an optimistic analyst may simply be more likely to accept a board seat than an
otherwise similar analyst, our results imply that firms are either appointing the wrong
analysts, or that firms should simply demand zero analysts if the only willing supply
consists of biased and poor performing analysts.
      To get a richer understanding of the behavior of board-appointed analysts, we
also explore the dynamics of optimism in our sample.           In doing so we find that
appointed analysts’ optimism is stronger: a) when firms have high short interest, b)
before times of increased stock issuance by the firm, and c) when the last
recommendation issued on the firm was a downgrade. All of these instances are times
when a manager would most welcome good news on his stock.           Further, we find no
evidence of optimism in the earnings forecasts of appointed analysts, which helps to rule
out the possibility that appointed analysts are simply uniformly optimistic about all
prospects of the appointing firm, in contrast to a specific pattern of recommendations
that benefits the managers of the firm (i.e., sympathetic to management). We provide
additional evidence on this distinction between being optimistic versus being
sympathetic towards management when we demonstrate below that CEO compensation
increases post-analyst-appointment.
      Of course, appointing overly bullish analysts need not imply bad monitoring. It
is possible that optimistic directors might facilitate productive cooperation and
communication among board members, or have ideas on new strategies and directions
for growth.   To explore these issues, we examine the behavior and performance of
appointing firms after these appointments.      We find that appointing firms engage in
increased questionable behavior after the appointment of these analysts: appointing
firms significantly increase their earnings management behavior, reporting higher
discretionary accruals post-appointment relative to the pre-appointment period. Finally,
the post-appointment performance of these firms is poor: a calendar-time portfolio of
appointing stocks underperforms a portfolio of non-appointing stocks by 1.3-2.0% per
month in the year after these appointments.


                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 3
       To overcome the potential endogeneity of analyst board appointments, we
instrument for the appointment of a cheerleader analyst by exploiting the post-Global
Settlement time period when analysts were widely scrutinized and scorned and hence in
low demand to serve as potential directors.         We use this exogenous shock to the
desirability/availability of analysts in the pool of potential directors as an instrument
for the actual appointment of cheerleader analysts.             We first show that Global
Settlement did have a significant negative impact on the appointment of analysts to
boards of directors (first-stage). We then find that the instrumented-appointment of
analysts to the board led to a large and significant increase in earnings management
post-(instrumented)-appointment.      We also examine CEO compensation in this IV
framework, and find that appointing firms significantly increase CEO compensation
post-appointment of a cheerleader analyst, suggesting that appointing firms’ boards are
sympathetic to management post-appointment, despite the poor subsequent stock return
performance.
       Overall, our findings provide new evidence on the board selection process, and on
the characteristics of independent directors. Our unique micro-level data on analyst
board appointments enables us to investigate the track records of a subset of
independent directors in a clean and direct way in order to investigate their optimism
and expertise with respect to the appointing firms. To our knowledge, although papers
have used measures of director relationships, this paper is the first to empirically
document this phenomenon of firms actively appointing board "cheerleaders" (i.e.,
board members who have an empirically documented optimistic view of the
firm/management, but who possess little skill in assessing the firm or its prospects,
suggesting them to be unsuitable monitors).         Since these cheerleaders are of course
technically labeled as independent directors, our findings call into question the idea that
increasing the representation of independent directors on the board is by definition a
positive step.
       Additionally, our results on the behavior and ultimate performance of the
appointing firms suggest that exploring the past track records and backgrounds of board
members is a useful way to identify cross-sectional variation in firm governance quality.
Although we focus on subset of board appointments in this paper, we believe our results


                                 Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 4
help shed light on independent directorships in general. Even in this pool of former sell
side analysts of the firm, who are potentially very informed and skilled monitors, firms
either seem to be demanding (or at the very least settling) for overly optimistic analysts
who are poor relative performers.      Collectively our results suggest that the board
appointment process involving other classes of independent directors, where the same
potential monitoring skill might not be present, could be even more problematic.
      The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I provides background
and motivation. Section II describes the data. Section III reports our results on the
positive bias in the recommendations of board-appointed analysts. Section IV documents
the relative underperformance of appointed analysts. Section V explores the dynamics of
appointed analysts’ recommendations. Section VI examines the post-appointment
behavior and performance of appointing firms, including the IV estimation for board
appointments. Section VII discusses the distinction between optimism in general versus
sympathy towards management, as well as the interplay between the supply and
demand for biased analysts. Section VIII concludes.



I. Background and Motivation

      Our data and approach allow us to investigate the micro foundations of several
competing views on how boards function.           Specifically, by looking at observable
measures of the optimism and ability of a subset of board appointees, we can directly
test the hypothesis that boards engage in a type of "window-dressing" when appointing
independent directors.   This view, embraced by many skeptics of recent regulatory
reforms and articulated by Romano (2005), maintains that setting numerical targets for
independent directors will not improve corporate governance (nor have any effect on
firm performance) because managers can still appoint directors who are independent
according to regulatory definitions, but nonetheless still overly sympathetic to
management.
      A competing viewpoint, which forms the foundation of recent regulatory changes
(including the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX), as well as rules enacted by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), and
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD)), argues that independent directors
                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 5
are objective, shareholder-focused monitors of management, and therefore that
increasing their representation on boards should uniformly improve corporate
governance.     Independent directors, under this view, are custodians of shareholder
interests, whose presence on the board help reduce agency problems and improve firm
performance.
       Yet another hypothesis suggests that boards are optimally constructed so as to
maximize shareholder value, such that any mandated increases in board independence
will likely hurt firm performance. Not surprisingly, since all three of these theories have
predictions on how changes in board independence may affect future performance, the
typical approach in the literature to evaluating these stories has been to relate measures
of board independence (e.g., increases in the percentage of independent directors on a
board) to future performance of the firm. The problem with this strategy is that board
composition is endogenous, so identifying a link between board independence and firm
performance is difficult (even if one exists) if poor performance causes an increase in
board independence (as in Hermalin and Weisbach (1998)), or if other factors cause
comovement in board composition and firm performance (as in Harris and Raviv
(2007)).   Recent theory also suggests that board independence is unlikely to have a
uniform effect across firms, and that the effectiveness of independent directors may
depend on the information environment of the firm (see Hermalin and Weisbach (1998),
Raheja (2005), Adams and Ferreira (2007), and Harris and Raviv (2007)).3
       Perhaps as a result of these issues, many studies fail to find a strong relation
between board independence and firm performance (see, for example, Bhagat and Black
(2002), Hermalin and Weisbach (2003), Fields and Keys (2003)). However, more recent
studies (see, for example, Dahya and McConnell (2007) and Duchin et al. (2008))
identify exogenous changes in board structure by exploiting shifts in regulatory
environments and provide evidence that increases in board independence precede
improvements in firm performance. In particular, Duchin et al. (2008) find that the
effect of outside directors on firm performance is small on average; however, consistent


3
  Note that incorporating information considerations into evaluations of board composition builds off a
long-understood notion (see Berle and Means (1932), Fama and Jensen (1983), Jensen (1993)) that the
effectiveness of outside directors may be limited by their inferior information relative to corporate
insiders.

                                     Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 6
with the recent theory above, the effect of outside directors on firm performance varies
according to the information environment of a firm: outside directors are effective when
the cost of acquiring information about a firm is low, but ineffective when the cost of
acquiring information is high.
        The paper most closely related to ours is perhaps Brickley et al. (1999), who
investigate a sample of former CEOs who end up on boards of companies after they
retire as CEOs.4 Their focus is on the managerial incentives that these possible future
board appointments provide for CEOs during their tenures, but they do provide
evidence that boards may consider ability and merit when selecting directors by showing
that the likelihood of post-retirement board service by a CEO is positively related to the
stock market performance of that CEO’s firm during her tenure.5                        The problem of
course with using CEOs and senior executives is that past performance attribution is
complicated by the fact that firm performance is difficult to disentangle from individual
performance.6 In addition, in the majority of past CEO appointments (outside CEOs
onto the board of another firm), one cannot calculate skill of the CEOs with respect to
the exact firm they subsequently serve on the board of, making it more difficult to
assess their suitability for the appointing firm in particular. By contrast, our focus on
sell-side analysts alleviates this issue, since we can explicitly compute measures of
skill/ability and optimism for each analyst with respect to the appointing firm (and
with respect to her entire portfolio); in doing so, we can directly test the true track
record and implicit firm motivation for our sample of appointed independent directors.



II. Data

        The data in this study are collected from several sources. We obtain biographical
information and past employment history for directors and senior company officers from

4
  See also Lee (2007) for more recent evidence on post-retirement board service by former CEOs. In
addition to this work, Stern and Westphal (2006) use survey evidence to find that managers who engage
in ingratiatory behavior toward CEOs are more likely to receive appointments on boards with the CEO.
5
  See also Kaplan and Reishaus (1990) and Gilson (1990), as well as a body of empirical research
(summarized in Yermack (2006)) that argues that what matters for firm performance are the
qualifications of outside directors, such as financial expertise (DeFond et al. (2005)), business knowledge
and experience (Fich (2005)), and the time commitments of outside directors (Fich and Shivdasani
(2006)).
6
  See Bertrand and Schoar (2003).

                                      Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 7
Boardex of Management Diagnostics Limited. The Boardex data contain relational links
among boards of directors and other corporate officials. Links in the dataset are
constructed by cross-referencing employment history, educational background and
professional qualifications. For each firm, we use the link file to reconstruct the annual
time series of identities of board members and senior officers of the firms.
       We use analysts’ stock recommendation data from the I/B/E/S historical
recommendation detail file, which codes recommendations on a common scale from 1 to
5, where 1=Strong Buy, 2=Buy, 3=Hold, 4=Sell, and 5=Strong Sell. We search public
filings and other miscellaneous information available over the World Wide Web to
identify security analysts that are subsequently appointed to the board of directors of
the companies they follow. We start by identifying all analysts on the I/B/E/S tape
who provide at least one recommendation on a domestic stock between 1993 and 2006.
For each analyst, I/B/E/S provides a numeric identifier, the analyst’s last name, the
initial of his/her first name, and the analyst’s brokerage house. Since our data
construction methodology involves name searches, we delete observations with multiple
names for a given analyst numeric identifier or multiple analyst and brokerage
identifiers for a given name. Finally, we discard teams, as attribution of the
recommendation is less clean in these cases.
       We look at analysts exiting the industry during our sample period and generate
an initial list of potential hires by matching the analyst’s initials and last name to the
names of all board members of all firms covered by the analyst during her tenure. For
example if analyst J. Smith covered stock ABC and XYZ between 1994 and 1998 and
exits the industry in 1998, we search the list of directors of ABC and XYZ for board
members named J* SMITH appointed in or after 1998. Finally we hand-check each
entry from this initial list in order to positively identify analysts appointed to the board
of firms they used to cover. To do so, we search press releases regarding the
appointment (which usually describe the board member’s background and prior
employment) and Zoominfo.com, a search engine that specializes in collecting and
indexing biographical and employment data from publicly available documents over the
Web. We also use a variety of other sources on a case-by-case basis, including
contacting the company to confirm the identity and the background of the board


                                 Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 8
member. We use a conservative approach and only retain entries for which we can
positively identify the board member as a former security analyst from multiple sources.
       We match our recommendation data to accounting and stock return data from
CRSP/COMPUSTAT. We also utilize data on firm-level governance measures, drawn
from the IRRC database available through WRDS.
       Table I reports summary statistics for our sample. We can positively identify 51
unique situations where analysts exiting the industry are later appointed to the board of
directors of a firm that they themselves previously covered. Collectively these analysts
cover a total of 1,163 firms issuing 4,130 recommendations between 1993 and 2006. Our
identification relies on the fact that these analysts cover a large number of stocks and
produce numerous recommendations. Also, firms appointing former analysts to their
board are covered by many other analysts: a total of 1,212 analysts making 4,716
recommendations on these firms. We therefore exploit variation within and across
analysts to identify systematic differences in recommendations.     Panels B, C, and D
report board-, firm-, and analyst-level characteristics for our sample. Panels B and C
reveal that firms that appoint analysts to the board are slightly larger than other firms
and have a slightly higher percentage of independent directors, but these differences are
not statistically significant. Panel D indicates that analysts who are appointed to the
board tend to work for slightly larger brokerage houses and cover more stocks than
other analysts, but again the differences are not significant.
       Table II reports the distribution of our analyst appointments across industries
The appointments are spread across a wide range of industries (29 of the Fama-French
49 industries), with the two largest appointment shares coming from Finance and
Trading (10%) and the Petroleum and Natural Gas industry (10%).                The total
frequency (68) is greater than the total number of firm-appointments (51), as a number
of the firms switch industry classifications throughout our sample period.     As we do
analyses both pre- and post- appointment, we retain all industries that are represented.


III. Bias in Appointed Recommendations

A. Distribution of recommendations

       The mere fact that analysts are subsequently appointed to boards of firms that

                                 Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 9
they previously covered may not be unreasonable from a shareholder’s perspective.
Analysts spend years (and in some cases their entire careers) covering a small set of
stocks, and so may be expected to have relative expertise on these firms. They may be
the types of informed agents that shareholders would like as representatives on the
board of directors. However, motivations based solely on this expertise carry no
prediction on the level of recommendations. Actions based on window-dressing motives
by firms, in contrast, do. In this section we examine the stock recommendations of
analysts on firms that subsequently appoint them to their board of directors.
      Table III presents the distribution of analysts’ recommendations and tests the
hypothesis that analysts hired by the firm they formerly covered issued more optimistic
recommendations on these firms. Panel A reports the distribution of recommendations
issued by analysts on firms who subsequently appoint them to the board of directors
(i.e., if analyst Jim Smith covers firm XYZ and he is later hired by XYZ to serve on the
board, we report the distribution of his recommendations on XYZ in Panel A). We refer
to these as “Appointed recommendations.”
      We compare this distribution to three benchmarks. Panel B reports the
distribution of all other recommendations on the I/B/E/S tape. Panel C reports the
distribution of recommendations by analysts who are not appointed to the board, on
those same firms that do appoint an analyst to the board. (I.e. we report
recommendations on XYZ by all other analysts, excluding the appointed analyst Jim
Smith).     Panel D reports the distribution of recommendation by analysts who are
appointed to the board, on all the stocks they cover excluding the firm who appoints
them to the board. (I.e. we report Jim Smith’s recommendations on all other firms he
covered, excluding the appointing firm XYZ).
          Comparing Panel A and Panel B reveals that appointed recommendations are
significantly more optimistic than the I/B/E/S population. Roughly 42% of
recommendations issued by analysts subsequently hired by the firm they cover are
Strong Buy recommendations compared with only 25% for the whole sample. Similarly,
over 82% of appointed recommendations are buys (Buy or Strong Buy), compared with
only 57% of all of the non-appointed recommendations; we are able to safely reject the
null hypothesis of no difference between the two distribution (Chi-square statistic=39.2,


                               Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 10
p-value<0.001). Panels C and D report very similar results in comparison to the
Appointed recommendations of Panel A (Chi-square tests in both cases reject equal
distributions with p-values<0.001). To summarize, we find that analysts hired by the
firm they previously covered issue significantly more optimistic recommendations on
these firms relative to: 1) the universe of all sell side analysts, 2) recommendations on
all other firms that they themselves issue, 3) recommendations on the appointing firm
issued by all other analysts.

B. Regression results on the positive bias in board-appointed analyst recommendations

       In this section we run panel regressions on analyst recommendations to control
for other determinants of recommendation levels. The dependent variable is the
recommendation level of (1-5), which we reverse-score such that 1=Strong Sell, 2=Sell,
3=Hold, 4=Buy, and 5=Strong Buy.7 The key independent variable of interest is a
categorical variable (Appointed Rec) that is equal to 1 if the recommendation is issued
by an analyst who is subsequently appointed by the given firm as a board member, and
0 otherwise. A positive coefficient on this variable indicates that the appointed analyst
issues more optimistic stock recommendations on the appointing firm relative to all
other recommendations.
         We include a number of firm-level controls: size, book-to-market, past 1-month,
and past 1-year returns (from month t-12 to t-2). In addition, control variables for
analyst and brokerage house include: two measure of analyst experience, the number of
years an analyst has been issuing recommendations on I/B/E/S, and the number of
years the analyst has been issuing recommendations on the given stock; an affiliation
dummy, equal to one if the analyst is employed by a bank that has an underwriting
relationship with the given firm; an All-Star dummy variable, equal to one if the analyst
is listed as an "All-Star" in the October issue of Institutional Investor magazine in that
year;8 a measure of brokerage size, equal to the total number of analysts employed by
the brokerage house, a measure of if the analyst shares an alumni connection with any


7
  Note that on I/B/E/S, Strong Buys are coded equal to 1, and Strong Sells are coded equal to 5; we
reverse this convention and set Strong Buys=5 and Strong Sell=1, and so on, such that increases in
recommendation levels correspond to increases in optimism.
8
  The list of affiliated analysts and all-star analysts are from Ljungqvist at al. (2006, 2007).

                                   Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 11
of the senior officers in the firm (CEO, CFO, or Chairman of the Board) (see Cohen,
Frazzini, and Malloy (2010)); and fixed effects for recommendation month, analyst,
firm, and industry, where indicated.9                   Standard errors are clustered at the
recommendation month level.
        Table IV reports the regression results. Consistent with the results in Table III,
in every specification the coefficient on Appointed Rec is positive and highly significant,
indicating that the appointed recommendations are significantly more optimistic. The
interpretation of the coefficient in the first column, equal to 0.48 (t=5.90), is that
analysts’ recommendations are shifted half of a rating higher on firms that subsequently
appoint them as board members; so while the mean rating is between a Buy and a Hold
(3.74), the appointed analyst’s recommendation rises to between a Strong Buy and a
Buy (4.22) on firms to which he is subsequently appointed. The appointment effect is
largely unaffected by other firm-level, analyst-level, and brokerage-level controls. The
effect does not seem to be driven by a certain time period of overly positive
recommendations (month fixed-effects), by recommendations in a specific industry
(industry fixed-effects), by something specific about analysts appointed to boards
(analyst fixed-effects), or by something specific about the firms that appoint covering
analysts to their boards (firm fixed-effects).10 Finally, in the last column we run the
same regression specification, but as an ordered logit, and find nearly identical results.11
        To get an idea of the magnitude of the Appointed Rec effect, we compare it with
a well-documented conflict of interest effect: underwriting affiliation of a given analyst’s
investment bank with the firm in question (Lin and McNichols (1998), Lin, McNichols,
and O’Brien (2005)). This literature shows that analysts have positively biased
recommendations on these affiliated firms to which their investment banks do business.

9
   We use a 48-industry classification from Ken French’s website.
10
   Given that we include fixed effects in all the regressions, constants are not reported. We have also run
all the tests in the paper clustering at the firm- or analyst-level. These results, which are very similar to
those reported here, are available on request. For example, replicating the full specification of Table IV
but adjusting the standard errors for clustering at the firm- (analyst-) level gives a t-stat on Appointed
Rec of 2.57 (3.13), significant at the one-percent level. We have also included firm age (which is highly
correlated with size) in the regressions as a robustness check, and the results are virtually identical in
terms of magnitude and significance.
11
   When the coefficients are transformed back into marginal effects, the predicted appointment effect is
0.42. We only report one set of coefficients, while the coefficients in an ordered logit can theoretically
change for each increment of the dependent variable (1 to 2, 2 to 3, etc.). We have checked this,
especially for Appointed Rec, and the coefficient estimates are nearly identical across the increments.

                                       Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 12
We include this affiliation effect in the regressions (Columns 2-9), and find that
affiliation does have a positive effect on recommendations. However, it has no impact on
the appointment effect (Appointed Rec), and the affiliation effect magnitude is 3 to 4
times smaller than the appointment effect (0.11 to 0.14 vs. 0.36 to 0.44).
       In Columns 6-9, we include a dummy variable (Connected to Firm) that is equal
to one if the analyst is connected to a senior officer through a school alumni link to
control for the possibility that social ties may be driving the bias in recommendations
that we observe for appointed analysts. The coefficient on Appointed Rec is virtually
unchanged, while the coefficient on Connected to Firm is small and insignificant.12
       We also break up our sample and examine our main result both before and after
Regulation Fair Disclosure (Reg FD). Columns 7 and 8 show that the coefficient on
Appointed Rec is very similar both before and after Reg FD, suggesting that changes in
the information environment that may have accompanied the imposition of this law had
virtually no impact on the appointment effect that we document here.


IV. Performance of Appointed Analysts

A. Performance on the appointing firm

       In this section we explore appointed analyst predictive ability.                    Under the
hypothesis that analysts are selected to serve on the board on the basis of their
perceived ability, potential efficacy, and general understanding of the appointing firm,
one might expect that appointed analysts would demonstrate higher predictive ability
on their stock recommendations on the appointing firm. We run a variety of tests to
examine this conjecture.
       First, we run panel regressions where the dependent variable is a dummy variable
(Wrong Bet) equal to one if the return in the year immediately following the analyst’s
recommendation is the opposite sign from that implied by the recommendation. For
example, if the subsequent annual stock return is negative (positive) and the
recommendation is a strong buy or buy (strong sell or sell), then the variable Wrong

12
  Cohen et al. (2010) find, as we do here, that the social ties have no effect on recommendation levels.
Note that we are only able to match 20% of analysts’ education data (roughly 80,000 recommendations
versus the full sample of 400,000). Our power is thus slightly reduced in Columns 6-9 where connections
are included, which explains the slightly smaller (though still significant) t-stats.

                                     Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 13
Bet is set equal to one.13 On the right-hand side of these regressions we control for
known determinants of stock returns such as size, book-to-market, past 1-month, and
past 1-year returns (from month t-12 to t-2), as well as the complete set of analyst-level
controls used in Table IV.
        The first three columns of Table V indicate that appointed analysts’
recommendations on appointing firms are incorrect significantly more often than the
typical analyst recommendation.            For example, the coefficient on Appointed Rec in
Column 3 of 0.154 (t=2.67) is positive and highly significant. As the mean for Wrong
Bet across all analyst recommendations is approximately 26%, the coefficient on
Appointed Rec here of indicates that appointed analysts’ calls on appointed firms are
around 50% more likely to be incorrect than the typical analyst recommendation,
controlling for firm- and analyst-level characteristics (15.4%/26%).
        We also employ a similar set of tests for changes in recommendations.                          The
changes we examine are upgrades from the consensus recommendation (Upgrade), and
downgrades from the consensus recommendation (Downgrade).                         Here, Wrong Bet is
defined such that if the subsequent annual stock return is negative (positive) and the
recommendation is an upgrade (downgrade), then the variable Wrong Bet is set equal to
one. Once again, the last three columns of Table V indicate that appointed analysts’
upgrades and downgrades on appointing firms are wrong bets significantly more often
than the typical recommendation change.14 In Column 6, for instance, while the mean
for Wrong Bet across all analyst recommendation changes is approximately 18%, the
coefficient on Appointed Rec here (0.165, t=3.11) indicates that appointed analysts’
calls on appointed firms are around 90% more likely to be incorrect than the typical
analyst recommendation change (16.5%/18%).

13
   We have also run these regressions where Wrong Bet is defined relative to positive and negative 4-
factor alphas, rather than returns. For example, if an analyst recommends a strong buy and the stock
experiences a negative alpha over the next year, then Wrong Bet would be equal to one. Not
surprisingly, since we already control for the known determinants of returns on the right-hand side of
these regressions, the results using alphas are virtually identical to those reported here; for example, the
coefficient on Wrong Bet using alphas as the threshold variable in Table V column 1 is 0.183 (t=3.46).
14
   Since appointed analysts issue very few holds, sells, and downgrades, the results here in Table V are
driven largely by the large number of incorrect calls on buys and upgrades by appointed analysts;
restricting our definition of Wrong Bet to include only the performance on buys and upgrades yields very
similar results. We document a similar finding in Table VI below that appointed analyst
underperformance is concentrated in buys/upgrades on appointing firms when we explore the magnitude
of the returns following appointed recommendations.

                                      Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 14
         We then run another set of panel regressions where the dependent variable is the
actual    return   to   the    recommendation        in     the   year   immediately     following    a
recommendation, rather than the dummy variables designed to capture right or wrong
bets used in Table V. The key variable of interest is an interaction term Appointed
Rec*Upgrade (Appointed Rec*Downgrade), which equals 1 if the analyst recommending
the stock in question is subsequently appointed to the board of directors of that firm,
and the recommendation in question is an upgrade (downgrade) from consensus.15
Dummy variables for Appointed Rec and Upgrade (Downgrade) are also included. The
rest of the independent variables are the same as those used in Table IV. Again, by
controlling for firm size, book-to-market, and past year returns on the right-hand side,
we control for the well-known determinants of firm-level expected returns.
         Consistent with the prior results on wrong bets, Table VI indicates that
appointed analysts exhibit poor performance on their recommendations on appointing
firms. For example, the negative and significant coefficient on the interaction term in
Column 1 (-19.5%, t=2.35) implies that appointed analysts do much worse on their
upgrades on appointed firms than on the rest of their recommendations.                        Further,
Column 1 also shows that while the typical analyst upgrade earns 9.4% in the
subsequent year, suggesting that upgrades in general are informative about future
returns, appointing analysts’ upgrades on appointing firms earn only an insignificant
3.1% (=-19.5%+9.4%+13.3%, F-test=0.67).                   Also, the fact that appointed analysts’
upgrades perform significantly worse than the rest of their recommendations on these
firms (which earn between 10.6% to 13.3%) is particularly surprising, since upgrades
from consensus are presumably a bullish indicator, while the rest of these
recommendations consist of agreements with consensus and downgrades from consensus.
Columns 4-6 reveal no significant differences between appointed analysts’ downgrades
on appointing firms and the rest of their recommendations; the interaction term
Appointed Rec*Downgrade is always insignificant, and is not consistent in sign.16

15
    We have experimented with different definitions of upgrades and downgrades, e.g. upgrades from an
analyst’s last recommendation rather than upgrades from consensus, and the results are similar to those
reported here. We prefer changes from consensus, as consensus is a measure of industry-aggregated
information sets of analysts covering the firm that are currently revealed to the market.
16
   The coefficient on Downgrade suggests that the typical analyst downgrade is uninformative for future
returns. Untabulated statistics indicate that the typical analysts’ downgrades are weakly informative at

                                     Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 15
Importantly, for both upgrades and downgrades, we find no evidence that appointed
analysts exhibit superior performance on their recommendations of appointing firms.
       Overall, whether we look at the number of incorrect calls, whether we look at
recommendation levels or changes, or whether we look at the actual returns earned
following these recommendations, we find a similar pattern of relative underperformance
by appointed analysts on the firms that appoint them. In fact, we cannot find anything
in the track records of appointed analysts to suggest that these analysts would be
particularly effective monitors of the firms that appoint them.


B. Overall performance of appointed analysts

       One argument that could be made in response to the results above is that
perhaps analysts are selected to serve on the board on the basis of their overall
perceived ability, and not necessarily on their stock return performance on a single firm.
Under this hypothesis, one might expect these analysts to outperform other analysts in
a more general sense. To explore this idea, we examine the overall earnings forecasting
ability17 and the overall stock return forecasting ability of appointed analysts.
       Our first tests examine overall earnings forecasting ability. From the point of
view of a firm hiring an analyst to serve on its board, the predictions in terms of analyst
ability would seemingly apply to earnings forecasting ability as well as stock return
forecasting ability. To conduct these tests, we compute the identical score measure used
in Hong and Kubik (2003) in order to rank analysts across all the firms they cover in a
given year.    Specifically, we rank each analyst on each firm based on their absolute
forecast error, computed as the absolute difference between her forecast for firm j in
year t and the actual EPS of the firm, scaled by the stock price. For each analyst, we
choose her most recent earnings per share forecast of year-end earnings issued by
analyst i on firm j between January 1st and July 1st of year t. As in Hong and Kubik
(2003), we then transform these rankings into a score measure (Score_EPS) where an
analyst with a rank of one in terms of the lowest absolute forecast error receives a 100,


shorter horizons. However, irrespective of horizon, we find no evidence that appointed analysts’
downgrades (or upgrades) on appointing firms are informative for future returns.
17
   We examine the earnings forecasts of appointed analysts specifically on the firms that subsequently
appoint them to the boards of directors further in Section VII.

                                    Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 16
while the least accurate analyst receives a score of 0; the median and mean score for a
firm in a year is 50.18 This relative measure of earnings forecasting ability allows us to
compare all analysts, regardless of coverage, on the same scale. We take the average of
this score measure across all the firms an analyst covers in a given year.19 We then run
panel regressions of these annual analyst-level score measures on the same set of control
variables used in Tables IV-VI, except that these control variables are now averaged
across all firms that an analyst covers in a given year. Thus, observations are at the
analyst-year level.20
          The first three columns of Table VII present the results from these tests. The
coefficient on Appointed Analyst is strongly negative, indicating that appointed analysts
perform worse overall on their earnings forecasts, across all the firms they cover, than
other analysts. The mean of the left-hand side variable equals 50 by construction, so
the magnitude of the coefficients in Column 1-3 implies that appointed analysts’ earn a
ranking that is approximately 7-11% worse than the average analyst ranking. Column
1’s coefficient on Appointed Analyst of -5.63 (t=4.16), for instance, implies that
appointed analysts earn an over 11% worse ranking than the average analyst.
          We adopt a similar analyst-level ranking procedure in order to compare the
overall stock return forecasting ability of appointed analysts. To do so, we compute the
variable Wrong Bet as in Table V for each recommendation for each analyst; in these
tests Wrong Bet is set equal to one if the recommendation is an upgrade (downgrade)
and the subsequent year’s stock-level four-factor alpha is negative (positive). We then
sum across each analyst for each year to compute each analyst’s proportion of incorrect
calls in a given year; we then rank analysts inversely by this proportion, and then
transform these rankings into a score measure (Score_Rec) similar to the one described
above.      This variable Score_Rec again varies between 0 and 100, where the most
accurate analyst (i.e., with a rank of 1 in terms of the lowest proportion of incorrect
18
     As in Hong and Kubik (2003), we compute this measure as: SCOREi,j,t=100 - [(Rank-1)/(Number of
Analystsj,t - 1)]*100.
19
   Results are not sensitive to using multiple-year averages to compute annual analyst-level score
measures.
20
   As we are now collapsing and evaluating at the analyst level, our Appointed Analyst variable will not
change for a given analyst over time (the analyst either is, or is not, subsequently appointed to a board),
so we cannot include analyst fixed effects (nor firm fixed effects, as everything is collapsed to the analyst
level). We can, and do, include year fixed effects in the regressions (Time) and all standard errors are
adjusted for clustering at the ranking year level.

                                       Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 17
calls) receives a score of 100, and the least accurate analyst receives a score of 0; the
median and mean score for a firm in a year is 50.
      The last three columns of Table VII present the results from these tests. The
coefficient on Appointed Analyst is again strongly negative, indicating that appointed
analysts also perform worse overall on their entire set of recommendations relative to
other analysts.   The magnitude of the coefficient is similar to the coefficient on the
earnings rankings, again implying that appointed analysts earn a ranking that is about
6-11% lower than the average analyst ranking. The Column 4 coefficient on Appointed
Analyst of -5.28 (t=3.81) implies that appointed analysts earn a recommendation
ranking over 10% worse than the average analyst.
      Taken together, the findings in Tables V-VII indicate that appointed analysts are
not only poor relative performers on their stock recommendations on appointing firms,
but are also poor relative performers in a much broader sense as well.       Specifically,
appointed analysts perform poorly on both their earnings forecasts and their stock
recommendations, across the entire portfolio of firms that they cover.


 V.   The Timing of Positive Recommendations

      In this section we examine the dynamics of appointed analysts’ recommendations.
Specifically, we identify situations where firms may find a positive recommendation
especially advantageous, and examine the behavior of the appointed analysts versus all
other analysts at these times. The three situations we examine are: i.) periods preceding
large amounts of stock issuance by the firm, ii.) periods following especially high short
interest in the firm, and iii.) periods where the last analyst’s recommendation
downgraded the stock from the consensus.

      To examine the first two scenarios, we use the same framework as in Table IV:
the dependent variable is the level of recommendation, and as before the variable
Appointed Rec measures the recommendations of analysts on the firms that
subsequently appoint them to the board. All of the control variables from Table IV are
included (but unreported) in Table VIII. In addition to these variables we include the
following dummy variables: Last Rec. Downgrade, which equals 1 when the prior
recommendation by the last analyst was a downgrade from consensus; High Short

                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 18
Interest, which equals 1 if the firm had above median short interest level in the month
prior to the recommendation being issued; and High Future Issuance, which is equal to
1 if the firm has above median stock issuance in the 6 months following the
recommendation. The results are in Columns 1-3 of Table VIII. From Column 1, the
average analyst’s recommendation is significantly more negative following times of high
short interest (i.e., the coefficient on high short interest is negative and significant).
However, Column 2 shows that analysts who are subsequently appointed to boards of
the firms they cover have the complete opposite behavior and issue significantly more
positive recommendations following months of high short interest on these firms. From
Column 3, these same analysts also issue especially positive forecasts when the
appointing firm has a large amount of stock issuance in the near future. Specifically,
the coefficients on [High Short*Appointed Rec] of 0.326 (t=2.14) and on [High
Issue*Appointed Rec] of 0.303 (t=2.19) imply that the appointed analysts issue
recommendations roughly twice as upwardly biased at these times.
      To test the effect following a downgrade by another analyst, we use a slightly
different specification. In Columns 4 and 5, the dependent variable is a categorical
variable equal to 1 if the given recommendation is a downgrade from the current
consensus estimate. While the average analyst downgrades 42% of the time, the
coefficient on Appointed Rec in Column 4 of -0.17 (t=3.06) indicates that appointed
analysts downgrade only 25% of the time, or about 40% less often (17%/42%) on firms
to which they are subsequently appointed to the board.          In Column 5, we see that
consistent with prior findings on analyst herding, the average analyst is about 7% more
likely to downgrade from consensus if the prior analyst downgraded. Analysts later
appointed to boards again do the exact opposite: they are especially unlikely to
downgrade the firms they are appointed to at exactly those times when the last analyst
downgraded from the consensus. To get an idea of the magnitude of the difference in
behavior, when the prior recommendation was a downgrade, the average analyst will
downgrade roughly 49% of the time (42%+7%), while analysts later appointed to the
boards of firms will only downgrade these appointing firms roughly 21% of the time
(42%+7%-2%-26%), making them roughly 60% less likely to downgrade.
      All of these tests point to the same types of behaviors: not only do analysts who


                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 19
are subsequently appointed to boards of firms they cover have significantly more
positive recommendations, but they have especially large positive biases at precisely
those times likely to be most valuable to these firms.


VI. The Post-Appointment Behavior and Performance of Appointing Firms

        In this section we explore the impact of appointing a former analyst to the board.
We focus on the behavior and performance of appointing firms in the period after the
appointment of a former analyst.21

A. Behavior and Performance of Appointing Firms in the Post-Appointment Period

        As noted earlier, appointing overly bullish analysts need not imply bad
monitoring. It is possible that optimistic directors might facilitate productive
cooperation and communication among board members, or have ideas on new strategies
and directions for growth. On the other hand, if firms are simply hiring cheerleaders for
the current management and board, we might expect these firms to engage in more
potentially questionable activities for shareholders once having the cheerleader on the
board. One of these questionable behaviors that is both well documented and
established in the literature is earnings management.                Specifically, we focus on the
portion of earnings management that is discretionary, and that has been shown to have
a positive short-term impact on a firm’s stock price: discretionary accruals (Sloan
(1996)).
        In this section we use the actual appointment dates (given in Table II) to
identify changes in behavior and valuation implications.22 We present the results from
regressions that test whether firms change their behavior after appointing their former
analyst in Panel A of Table IX. Specifically, we regress a firm’s discretionary accruals23

21
   We have also examined the characteristics of appointing firms, and find that appointing firms have
significantly weaker governance, as measured by the Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2003) index (e.g.,
regressions of the GIndex on Appointing Firm yield a positive and significant on Appointing Firm
(=0.284, t=4.05)). These results are available on request.
22
   In the next section we address the endogeneity of these appointment dates using an instrument for
appointment dates.
23
   Discretionary accruals are computed using the modified Jones model described in Dechow, Sloan, and
Sweeney (1995), and are equal to the residuals from firm-level regressions of total accruals on non-
discretionary accruals (where non-discretionary accruals are equal to the change in sales minus the change

                                     Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 20
on After Appointment, a categorical variable equal to 1 if the former analyst is a board
director, and zero otherwise. In these tests, we include only those firms that do appoint
analysts as board members to isolate the pre- and post-appointment effect on their
behavior (a total of 402 firm-year observations).               In addition, we include year fixed
effects and firm fixed effects, as we want to capture solely the marginal effect of having
the former analyst on the board, within a given firm, and controlling for sample time
trends. We also include a number of firm-level control variables, which given the firm
and year fixed effects, can be interpreted as the effect of these variables after firm
averages and time period trends have been removed.                     The most important control
variable is Total Accruals.24         With total accruals included, the coefficient on After
Appointment can be interpreted as follows: given the same level of actual accruals
before and after appointment, how much more of the accruals are discretionary
(earnings management) after the appointment.
        The positive and significant coefficient on After Appointment (=0.022, t=2.06) in
Column 1 implies that firms have significantly higher discretionary accruals (do
significantly more earnings management), once the former analyst joins the board. To
get an idea of magnitude, the unconditional average of accruals in the sample is -0.01
(with a median of 0), while 0.022 represents a move to the 75th percentile, so the entire
upper-quartile spread. Controlling for the level of Total Accruals has no effect on the
magnitude or significance of After Appointment (Column 3). In the model including all
controls (even current year’s earnings level), the estimated change in behavior even
increases in point-estimate and significance level, with After Appointment having a
coefficient of 0.030 (t=2.51).
        We also compute value-weighted calendar-time portfolio returns in order to
assess the post-appointment performance of our sample of appointing firms. Our goal is
to assess the valuation implications associated with the observed appointment and
potential behavior changes. It could as easily be a signal of a firm characteristic that
causes both the appointment of a former analyst and poor subsequent performance (e.g.
poor governance). This endogeneity will be directly addressed in the next section. In

in receivables plus gross property, plant, and equipment, all scaled by last year’s total assets); each firm
must have a minimum of ten years of data to be included in these regressions
24
   Total Accruals are the total annual amount of accruals of the firm, calculated as in Healy (1985).
                                      Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 21
either case, though, the action of appointing a former analyst (who was optimistic and a
poor relative performer) to the firm’s board of directors may be informative about the
future of the firm itself. To perform our analysis we construct two portfolios (After
Appointment and Non-Appointment), as well as for a spread portfolio (Spread) which
goes long the After Appointment portfolio and short the Non-Appointment portfolio
each month. Firms that appoint analysts to the board enter the After Appointment
portfolio in the month following their appointment, and remain in the portfolio for a
year; all other stocks are placed in the Non-Appointment portfolio. Each month we
compute the value-weighted return on each portfolio.            We require the After
Appointment portfolio to contain at least 3 stocks in any given month, and thus use a
sample period of February 1997 to December 2006. We also compute 3-factor (Fama
and French (1996), 4-factor (Carhart (1997), and 5-factor (Pastor and Stambaugh
(2003)) alphas on each of the portfolios.
       Panel B of Table IX presents the average monthly value-weighted calendar-time
portfolio returns on all three portfolios.    Panel B illustrates that the magnitude of
underperformance by appointing firms is large: the Spread portfolio earns -1.3% per
month in raw returns, and up to almost -2.0% per month in abnormal returns; the 3-
and 5-factor specifications are significant at the 5% level, while the raw and 4-factor
specifications are significant at the 10% level. The entire spread in abnormal returns
between the two portfolios is due to the underperformance of the After Appointment
portfolio, as the Non-Appointment portfolio earns alphas of almost exactly zero. Thus,
the post-appointment performance of our sample of appointing firms is poor.



B. Instrumental Variables Regressions

       To overcome the potential endogeneity of analyst board appointments, and
specifically the possibility that poor anticipated performance might lead to analyst
appointments (and that increases in earnings management might reflect efforts to
mitigate poor stock price performance that would have occurred whether the analyst
appointment took place or not), we also instrument for the appointment of a cheerleader
analyst. To be clear, the regressions in Panel A of Table IX on firm behavior include


                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 22
only firms that appoint analysts, and examine the changes in behavior of solely these
firms pre- and post-appointment.             Thus, the only way that an endogeneity concern
could be driving the effects we document there is through a pure timing explanation. In
other words, a firm could decide to appoint a former friendly analyst to the board at
precisely the time when it foresees a future deterioration in performance and future need
for earnings management. In this interpretation, the change in earnings management
behavior we document is concurrent with, but not a result of, the analyst’s
appointment. As this explanation is plausible, in this section we specifically instrument
for the timing of analyst board member appointments to get around the potential
endogeneity problems regarding the interpretation of the changes in firm behavior in
Table IX Panel A.
        We do so by exploiting the post-Global Settlement time period when analysts
were widely scrutinized and scorned and hence in low demand to serve as potential
directors. We use this exogenous shock to the desirability/availability of analysts in the
pool of potential directors as an instrument for the actual appointment of cheerleader
analysts.25 This shock involved penalties for conflicts of interest stemming from several
brokerage houses’ relationships with, and behavior toward, investment banking clients,
and is thus plausibly exogenous to any given firm’s accounting reporting decision
regarding discretionary accrual behavior.
        Our first-stage regression, shown in Column 1 of Panel A Table X, is a regression
of actual analyst appointment months on a categorical variable Post-Global Settlement
that is equal to 1 for those firm-months after the Global Settlement (April 2003-April
2005) and zero otherwise, plus the same control variables used in Table IX. We run
this predictive regression in the symmetric four year-window pre- and post-Global
Settlement (so April 2001 - April 2005).26              Column 1 confirms that this post-Global
Settlement variable is a negative and significant predictor of analyst appointment dates
(-0.014, (t=2.57)). Note that this regression, like those in Panel A of Table IX, uses

25
   See Guner, Malmendier and Tate (2008) for a similar instrumental variables approach that uses the
banking crisis in the late 1970s and early 1980s to identify times when commercial bankers were perceived
to be less suitable candidates for corporate board directorships.
26
   We have experimented with this window, using six-, eight-, and ten-year windows around the Global
Settlement, and the results are very similar in significance, with slightly smaller, but similar magnitudes.
These results are available on request. We choose to show the four-year window as it isolates the tightest
band of negative sentiment around the Global Settlement.

                                      Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 23
only those firms that appoint an analyst as a board member, since the potential
endogeneity problem, as described above, concerns the timing of cheerleader
appointment; we do address firm selection issues below in a matched sample framework.
We use the predicted values of this first-stage regression as estimates of the probability
that a firm will appoint a cheerleader in any given month; for each firm we then take
the firm-month with the highest predicted probability of appointment, and use this as
our instrumented appointment date. We then define the variable Instrumented After
Appointment as a categorical variable equal to 1 for all firm-years after the firm has its
highest predicted probability of appointment, and 0 otherwise.
       We use these instrumented appointments to examine the pre- and post-
appointment effect on firm behavior, as in Table IX.            Specifically, the second stage
regression in Column 2 of Panel A Table X is a regression of discretionary accruals on
the variable Instrumented After Appointment plus the same control variables used in
Column 1.      Column 2 shows that instrumented appointments are positive and
significant predictors of increases in discretionary accruals.         From Column 2, the
positive and significant coefficient of 0.018 (t=2.71) implies that firms have significantly
higher discretionary accruals (do significantly more earnings management), once a
former analyst is predicted to join the board. This instrumented coefficient is similar in
magnitude, and more precisely estimated than that in Table IX.
       As a falsification test for our instrumentation technique, we look at the exact
same instrumented analyst board appointments, but instead examine their impact on
non-discretionary accruals. Non-discretionary accruals are the portion of accruals that
firms have no ability to manipulate to create a better reflection of current earnings.
Thus, the appointment of an analyst should have no impact on the discretionary
accruals of a firm. If, in contrast, our instrumented analyst appointments are simply
picking up a spurious relationship with firm accruals, we would expect to see this
exhibited in both the discretionary and non-discretionary portions. We therefore run
the exact same regression as in Column 2, but with the dependent variable now being
non-discretionary accruals. In contrast to discretionary accruals (earnings management),
Column 3 illustrates that instrumented appointments do not predict any increases in
non-discretionary accruals.


                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 24
C. Matched Sample Approach

       To address the possibility that the particular types of firms that choose to
appoint former analysts may be the types of firms that would engage in earnings
management regardless of whether or not they appointed a former analyst, we also
employ a matched sample approach. We construct our matched sample by matching
appointing firms to other firms that in the year leading up to the appointments were: i.)
in the same Fama-French 49 industry category, ii.) in the same size quintile, iii.) in the
same book-to-market quintile, and iv.) in the same discretionary accruals quintile as the
appointing firms; but who did not appoint a cheerleader in the year of a cheerleader
appointment. Note that these tests are designed to examine the composition of firms
appointing cheerleader analysts, as opposed to the timing of when appointing firms
choose to appoint cheerleader analysts (which we examined in our IV tests above).
       Column 4 of Table X repeats the same result shown in Column 6 of Panel A
Table IX, which regresses discretionary accruals on the After Appointment variable
described in Table IX for the sample of appointing firms. Column 5 of Table X runs the
identical regression, but this time on our matched sample of non-appointing firms
designed to mimic the characteristics of the appointing firms. Unlike the appointing
firms, which engage in significantly more earnings management post-appointment, the
matched firms with similar characteristics (including engaging in the same level of
earnings management in the period pre-appointment) exhibit no change in their
earnings management following these cheerleader appointments.27




27
  This result is robust to variations in the way we construct our matching sample.   For example,
matching in addition on prior stock return performance gives the same result.

                                  Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 25
 VII. Discussion
        In this section we discuss the interpretation of our results in greater depth. In
particular we focus on the distinction between optimism in general versus sympathy
towards management, as well as the interplay between the supply and demand for
biased analysts.


A. Optimism Versus Sympathy Towards Management

        From a shareholder perspective, there is an important distinction between purely
optimistic analysts versus those analysts that are specifically sympathetic (cheerleaders)
to management, in terms of ability to perform their duty of monitoring management.
Most of our evidence on analyst recommendations to this point is consistent with both
possibilities (although the opportunistic timing of especially positive recommendations
from Table VIII appears less supportive of unconditional optimism, and more supportive
of an analyst sympathetic toward management).                   In addition, our IV evidence on
increased earnings management behavior following appointment appears more consistent
with a cheerleader for management. We provide two additional tests to help further
distinguish between exactly which explanation (optimism toward firm vs. cheerleader
toward management) better describes our appointed analysts.
        The first test has to do with optimism in earnings forecasts. If the analyst were
simply optimistic about the future prospects of the firm, we would expect to see this
expressed in both positive views in recommendations and earnings forecasts. Contrast
this with an analyst who is a cheerleader for management. Here we would expect to
observe positively biased recommendations as these clearly benefit the firm (Womack
(1996)).    By contrast, the direction of the cheerleader’s bias is much less clear with
respect to earnings forecasts. There is some positive effect at the time of increasing a
consensus estimate, however this effect is likely mitigated by the negative effect of
making it more difficult for the firm to beat earnings consensus at the time of earnings
announcement. Consistent with this conjecture, in unreported tests we find no evidence
of appointed analyst optimism on one- and two-year earnings forecasts.28 The fact that

28
  For example, when we employ regressions using the identical specification as in Table IV, but replacing
the dependent variable with one-year earnings forecast optimism (measured as: (forecast-actual)/actual),

                                     Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 26
we find little evidence of optimism in the earnings forecasts of appointed analysts helps
to rule out the possibility that appointed analysts are simply optimistic about firm
prospects, as opposed to behaving in a specific way that benefits the managers of the
firm (i.e., sympathetic to management).
        We provide additional evidence on this distinction between being optimistic per
se versus being sympathetic towards management by exploring post-appointment CEO
compensation. For example, analysts who are purely optimistic about a firm’s prospects
may be especially hard on managers who fail to operate the business at a level that
meets analysts’ expectations (note the poor post-appointment performance in Table IX).
In contrast, cheerleaders for management are, by definition, beholden to the managers of
the firm. Using the instrumental variables framework described in Section VI above, we
test the idea that boards with former analysts behave differently towards the CEO in
the post-appointment period. Specifically, Panel B of Table X repeats the instrumental
variable regressions in Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A, except that the control variable for
total accruals is removed in both stages, and the dependent variable in the second-stage
regression in Column 2 is now total CEO compensation (the variable TDC2 as reported
in the ExecuComp Database).                  Column 2 indicates that firms increase CEO
compensation post-appointment of a former cheerleader analyst. The coefficient of 4554
(t=1.85), represents an increase of roughly one-third of a standard deviation in total
compensation.


B. Supply and Demand for Biased Analysts

        On the firm side, the question remains as to why firms choose to appoint these
particular analysts to serve on their board of directors. Even if the only willing supply
consists of these biased, relatively poor-performing analysts, the firms are still making
an active decision to appoint them. Thus while it is true that an optimistic analyst may
simply be more likely to accept a board seat than an otherwise similar analyst, our
results imply that firms are either appointing the wrong analysts, or that firms should
simply demand zero analysts if the only willing supply consists of biased analysts. One


the coefficient on Appointing Forecast is nearly zero, 0.005 (t=0.13).

                                      Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 27
might still argue that even a biased (and poor performing) analyst may be better than
the next best alternative director for the firm. However, our IV results on the increased
levels of earnings management, our results on the poor performance following the former
analyst appointment, and the fact that these appointments are concentrated in
significantly more poorly governed firms suggest that the board appointments of the
former analysts are not incredibly effective monitoring choices from the view of
shareholder interests.
       On the analyst side, a similar question arises as to why analysts would want to
bias their recommendations given their incentives to produce accurate forecasts (see
Stickel (1992) and Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (1999)). In this case, the poor overall
relative performance of these appointed analysts suggests that these analysts are
unlikely to reap the rewards of good performance, and hence the cost of biasing
recommendations on a single firm is quite low.



VIII. Conclusion


       This paper provides evidence that firms appoint independent directors who are
overly sympathetic to management, while still technically independent according to
regulatory definitions.   We do so by exploiting a unique, hand-collected database of
former sell-side analysts who are appointed to the boards of companies they previously
covered; importantly, our data provides us with information on these directors’ views
regarding the firm prior to being appointed to the board. Our empirical strategy thus
allows us to directly evaluate the objectivity and potential effectiveness of a class of
independent directors based solely on their observable opinions about the firm in
question. We use these analysts’ track records to examine the roles of optimism and
ability in the board appointment process.      In doing so we find evidence that boards
appoint overly optimistic analysts (i.e., cheerleaders for management) who exhibit little
skill in evaluating the firm itself, or in evaluating firms in general. While the literature
has explored measures of director relationships, this paper is the first to empirically
document this phenomenon of firms actively appointing board cheerleaders.


                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 28
      The    magnitude    of    the   optimistic   bias    is    large:   82.0%   of   appointed
recommendations are strong-buy/buy recommendations, compared to 56.9% for all other
analyst recommendations.       At the same time, board-appointed analysts exhibit poor
relative performance on their recommendations on appointing firms.                     They also
demonstrate poor overall relative performance on their stock recommendations and
earnings forecasts across all the firms that they cover. Additionally, these appointed
analysts appear to be especially optimistic at times that are most favorable to the
appointing firms (e.g., prior to stock issuances). Lastly, we examine the behavior and
stock return performance of these appointing firms following the analyst’s appointment,
and find that appointing firms significantly increase their earnings management
activities, increase CEO compensation, and perform poorly in the post-appointment
period.
      We believe that our results, when taken as a whole, shed new light on the views
and characteristics of independent directors, and of the firms who appoint them.
Further, the post-appointment behavior of the appointing firms in our sample suggest
that exploring the past track records and backgrounds of all board members (beyond
simply independent vs. inside) may be a useful way to identify cross-sectional variation
in firm governance quality. Before the question of whether independent boards benefit
shareholders can be adequately addressed, more research is needed to determine the true
nature of "independence" within corporate boards, which begins with an understanding
of the true independence of directors.




                                 Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 29
References

Adams, Renee and Daniel Ferreira, 2007, A theory of friendly boards, Journal of
    Finance 62, 217-250.

Ai, Chunrong, and Edward Norton, 2003, Interaction terms in logit and probit models,
     Economics Letters 80, 123-129.

Berle, Adolph A., and Gardiner C. Means, The Modern Corporation and Private
      Property, New York, NY: The Macmillan Company, 1932.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The effect of
      managers on corporate policy, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 1169-1208.

Bhagat, Sanjai and Bernard S. Black, 2002, The non-correlation between board
     independence and long-term firm performance, Journal of Corporation Law 27,
     231-273.

Brickley, James A., James S. Linck, and Jeffrey L. Coles, 1999, What happens to CEOs
      after they retire? New evidence on career concerns, horizon problems, and CEO
      incentives, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 341-377.

Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of Finance
     52, 57-82.

Coates, John C.., 2000, Takeover defenses in the shadow of the pill: a critique of the
     scientific evidence, Texas Law Review 79, 271-382.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini, and Christopher J. Malloy, 2010, Sell side school ties,
     Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Dahya, Jay, and John J. McConnell, Board composition, corporate performance, and
     the Cadbury Committee Recommendation, Journal of Financial and Quantitative
     Analysis 42, 535-564.

Daines, Robert, and Michael Klausner, 2001, Do IPO charters maximize firm value?
     Antitakeover provisions in IPOs, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization
     17, 83-120.

Dechow, Patricia M., Richard G. Sloan, and Amy P. Sweeney, 1995, Detecting earnings
     management, The Accounting Review 70, 193-226.

DeFond, Mark L., Rebecca N. Hann, and Xuesong Hu, Does the market value financial
    experience on audit committees of boards of directors?, Journal of Accounting
    Research 43, 153-193.

Duchin, Ran, John G. Matsusaka, and Oguzhan Ozbas, 2008, When are outside
     directors effective?, Working paper, University of Southern California.

                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 30
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1996, Multifactor explanations of asset
     pricing anomalies, Journal of Finance 51, 55-84.

Fama, Eugene F., and Michael C. Jensen, 1983, Separation of ownership and control,
     Journal of Law and Economics 26, 301-325.

Fich, Eliezer M., 2005, Are some outside directors better than others? Evidence from
      director appointments by Fortune 1000 firms, Journal of Business 78, 1943-1972.

Fich, Eliezer M., and Anil Shivdasani, 2006, Are busy boards effective monitors?
       Journal of Finance 61, 689-724.

Fields, M. Andrew and Phyllis Y. Keys, 2003, The emergence of corporate governance
      from Wall St. to Main St.: Outside directors, board diversity, earnings
      management, and managerial incentives to bear risk,” The Financial Review 38, 1-
      24.

Gilson, Stuart, 1990, Bankruptcy, boards, banks, and blockholders: Evidence on changes
      in corporate ownership when firms default, Journal of Financial Economics 27,
      355-387.

Gompers, Paul A., Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and
     equity prices, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-155.

Guner, A. Burak, Ulrike Malmendier, and Geoffrey Tate, 2008, Financial expertise of
      directors, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 323-354.

Harris, Milton and Artur Raviv, 2007, A theory of board control and size, Review of
       Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Healy, Paul M., 1985, The effect of bonus schemes on accounting decisions, Journal of
       Accounting and Economics 7, 85-107.

Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998, Endogenously chosen boards of
     directors and their monitoring of the CEO, American Economic Review 88, 96-
     118.

Hermalin, Benjamin E. and Michael S. Weisbach, 2003, Boards of directors as an
     endogenously determined institution: A survey of the economic literature,
     Economic Policy Review (Federal Reserve Board of New York), April 2003, 7-26.

Hong, Harrison, and Jeffrey D. Kubik, 2003, Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns
     and biased forecasts, Journal of Finance 58, 313-351.

Jensen, Michael C., 1993, The modern industrial revolution, exit, and the failure of
      internal control systems, Journal of Finance 48, 831-880.


                                Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 31
Kaplan, S., and D. Reishus, 1990, Outside directorships and corporate performance,
     Journal of Financial Economics 1990, 389-410.

Lee, Changmin, 2007, What’s happened over the past 10 years to the selection of retired
      CEOs as board members?, Working paper, Indiana University.

Lin, Hsiou-wei and Maureen F. McNichols, 1998, Underwriting relationships, analysts’
      earnings forecasts and investment recommendations, Journal of Accounting and
      Economics 25, 101-127.

Lin, Hsiou-wei, Maureen F. McNichols, and Patricia O’Brien, 2005, Analyst impartiality
      and investment banking relationships, Journal of Accounting Research 43, 623-
      650.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, F. Marston and W.J. Wilhelm, 2006, Competing for Securities
     Underwriting Mandates: Banking Relationships and Analyst Recommendations,
     Journal of Finance 61, 301-340.

Ljungqvist, Alexander, F. Marston and W.J. Wilhelm, 2007, Scaling the Hierarchy: How
     and Why Investment Banks Compete for Syndicate Co-Management
     Appointments, Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.

Michaely, Roni, and Kent L. Womack, 1999, Conflict of interest and the credibility of
     underwriter analyst recommendations, Review of Financial Studies 12, 653-686.

Mikhail, Michael B., Beverly R. Walther, and Richard H. Willis, 1990, Does forecast
      accuracy matter to security analysts? Accounting Review 74, 185-200.

Raheja, Charu G., 2005, Determinants of board size and composition: A theory of
      corporate boards, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 40, 283-306.

Romano, Roberta, 2005, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the making of quack corporate
    governance,” Yale Law Review 114, 1521-1611.

Sloan, Richard G., 1996, Do stock prices fully reflect information in accruals and cash
      flows about future earnings?, The Accounting Review 71, 289-315.

Stern, Ithai, and James D. Westphal, 2006, The other pathway to the boardroom:
      Interpersonal influence behavior as a substitute for elite credentials and majority
      status in obtaining board appointments. Administrative Science Quarterly, 51,
      169-204.

Stickel, Scott E., 1992, Reputation and performance among security analysts, Journal of
      Finance 47, 1811-1836.

Womack, Kent, 1996, Do brokerage analysts’ recommendations have investment value?
    Journal of Finance 51, 137-167.


                               Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 32
Yermack, David, 2006, Board members and company value,” Financial Markets and
     Portfolio Management 20, 33-47.




                             Hiring Cheerleaders — Page 33
                                         Table I: Summary Statistics

This table shows summary statistics for the sample of sell side analysts and their covered stocks between 1993 and 2006.
Panel A reports the composition of the sample. Panels B and C report board and firm-level characteristics for the
sample of firms that subsequently appoint an analyst who used to cover them to the board of directors, and for the
sample of all other firms ("Others"). Panel D reports analyst characteristics for the sample of analysts who are
appointed to the board of a firm they previously covered, and for the sample of all other analysts ("Others").
Brokerage Size is the total number of analysts issuing recommendations at the given analyst's brokerage house.
Experience measures an analyst’s history of recommending stocks on I/B/E/S at the time of the recommendation, in
years.




Panel A: Sample Composition

Number of firms covered by appointed analysts                                                   1,163
Number of firms appointing analysts to the board                                                   51
Number of analysts covering appointing firms                                                    1,212
Panel B: Board Characteristics                                          Sample of firms appointing            Others
                                                                          an analyst to their board

Average size of board                                                                            6.34            6.55
Percentage of independent directors on board                                                     0.57            0.49

Panel C: Firm Characteristics                                           Sample of firms appointing            Others
                                                                          an analyst to their board

Number of recommendations                                                                       4,716        416,226
Market value of equity percentile                                                                0.83           0.78
Book-to-market percentile                                                                        0.34           0.39
12-month prior return percentile                                                                 0.56           0.54
Number of analysts covering stock                                                               10.81           9.27

Panel D: Analyst Characteristics                                                Sample of analysts            Others
                                                                        appointed to board of firm
                                                                           they previously covered

Number of stocks covered                                                                         16.9            12.6
Brokerage size                                                                                   60.4            57.5
Experience in years                                                                               4.4             4.3
                          Table II: Firm and Analyst Board Appointments

This table shows the industry distribution of the firms that appoint their former sell side analysts to their
board of directors. The total number is greater than 51 as a number of the firms switch industry
classifications over the 14 year sample.



                                         Industry Distribution
             Industry                                              Frequency       Percent
             Automobiles and Trucks                                     1           1.47
             Banking                                                    3           4.41
             Business Services                                         6            8.82
             Chemicals                                                  2           2.94
             Computer Software                                          3           4.41
             Construction Materials                                    1            1.47
             Electrical Equipment                                      1            1.47
             Electronic Equipment                                      1            1.47
             Entertainment and Theatre                                 3            4.41
             Finance and Trading                                        7           10.29
             Food Products                                             2            2.94
             Healthcare Services                                       1            1.47
             Household and Consumer Goods                              2            2.94
             Insurance                                                 1            1.47
             Iron and Steel Works                                      2            2.94
             Machinery                                                 5            7.35
             Measuring and Control (Laboratory) Equipment               2           2.94
             Medical Equipment                                         1            1.47
             Non-Metallic and Industrial Metal Mining                  1            1.47
             Petroleum and Natural Gas                                  7           10.29
             Pharmaceutical Products                                    2           2.94
             Precious Metals                                           1            1.47
             Printing and Publishing                                   1            1.47
             Recreation and Toys                                       1            1.47
             Restaurants, Hotels, Motels                               2            2.94
             Retail                                                    3            4.41
             Transportation                                            1            1.47
             Utilities                                                 1            1.47
             Wholesale                                                  4           5.88
             Total                                                     68            100
                                                     Table III: Recommendations of Analyst Appointees

This table reports the distribution of recommendations of analysts. There are five distinct levels of recommendations, ranging between Strong Sell and Strong Buy. Panel A
reports the distribution of recommendations issued by analysts who are appointed to the board, on those firms that appoint the analyst to the board. Panel B reports the
distribution of all other recommendations on the I/B/E/S tape. Panel C reports the distribution of recommendations by analysts who are not appointed to the board, on
those firms that appoint an analyst to the board. Panel D reports the distribution of recommendation by analysts who are appointed to the board, on all the stocks they
cover excluding the firm who appoints them to the board. Chi-square tests for equality of distributions between the comparison groups are given in each panel, along with
p-values.




                             Panel A                                 Panel B                                 Panel C                                 Panel D
                         Appointed               All other recommendations                  All recommendations on                   All recommendations by
                    recommendations                                                     firms appointing analysts to                  analysts appointed to a
                                                                                                          the board                                    board
                       %      Cum %                  %       Diff     Cum %                  %       Diff     Cum %                  %       Diff     Cum %
Strong Buy           41.7        41.7             25.2       16.5         25.2            24.8       17.0         24.8            26.6       15.1         26.6
Buy                  40.3        82.0             31.7        8.6         56.9            31.6        8.7         56.4            38.2        2.1         64.8
Hold                 15.8        97.8             37.0      -21.2         93.9            38.0      -22.2         94.4            31.5      -15.6         96.2
Sell                  2.2       100.0              4.0       -1.8         97.9             3.6       -1.5         98.0             2.8       -0.7         99.0
Strong Sell           0.0       100.0              2.1       -2.1        100.0             2.0       -2.0        100.0             1.0       -1.0        100.0

Chi-square                                                   39.2                                    39.8                                    23.6
P-value                                                      0.00                                    0.00                                    0.00
                                    Table IV: Appointed Analyst Recommendations

 The dependent variable in each regression is the level of recommendation, which ranges between 1 and 5, and which we
 reverse-score such that 1=Strong Sell, 2=Sell, 3=Hold, 4=Buy, and 5=Strong Buy. The key variable of interest is in the
 first row: Appointed Rec equals 1 if the analyst recommending the stock in question is subsequently appointed to the board
 of directors of that firm, and 0 otherwise. The other independent variables are as follows: Size measures the log(ME) and
 B/M measures the log(BE/ME), of the firm being recommended. Past Month Return and Past Year Return measure the
 given stock’s return in the prior month, and 11-months prior to that month respectively, from the recommendation date.
 Brokerage Size is the total number of analysts that work at the given analyst’s brokerage house. At the time of each
 recommendation, Experience measures an analyst’s history of recommending stocks on I/B/E/S (in years), while Exper. Rec.
 Firm measures the number of years an analyst has been recommending a given stock. All Star is a categorical variable equal
 to 1 if the analyst was voted an all star analyst in the October issue of Institutional Investor magazine for the given year.
 Connected to Firm is a categorical variable equal to 1 if the analyst attended the same school as one of the senior officers of
 the firm being recommended. Affiliation is a categorical variable that measures whether or not the given firm has an
 underwriting relationship with the analyst’s brokerage. Column 7 and 8 split our sample period to pre- and post-Reg FD
 (October 2000). Column 9 runs an ordered logit regression, where the left hand side variable is the recommendation level
 (1-5). Fixed effects for recommendation month (Time), for industry (Industry) using the Fama-French industry definitions,
 for the firm (Firm), and for the analyst (Analyst), are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for
 clustering at the recommendation month level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses
 below the coefficient estimates. 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

                           (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)          (9)
                                                                                                 Pre-         Post-
                                                                                                                           Logit
                                                                                                Reg FD       Reg FD
Appointed Rec            0.477***    0.420***   0.363***     0.435***    0.435***   0.417***     0.412**     0.465**      1.028***
                          (5.90)      (5.14)      (4.70)      (5.19)      (5.14)      (3.21)      (2.10)      (2.29)       (4.16)


Size                                  0.004     0.039***     0.008***    0.079***   0.092***      0.088      0.120***     0.020**
                                      (1.44)     (12.54)      (3.14)      (8.13)      (7.53)      (4.76)      (6.83)       (2.39)

B/M                                 -0.037***   -0.017***   -0.027***   -0.022***    -0.006      -0.020       0.013      -0.120***
                                      (9.10)      (4.66)      (7.82)      (3.38)      (0.57)      (0.88)      (0.97)       (9.45)

Past Month Return                    0.224***   0.191***     0.221***    0.144***   0.116***     0.162***     0.008       0.283***
                                      (8.60)      (8.50)      (8.72)      (6.50)      (3.06)      (2.83)      (0.16)       (2.65)

Past Year Return                     0.121***   0.106***     0.119***    0.095***   0.082***     0.056***    0.089***     0.283***
                                     (12.69)     (12.77)     (12.67)     (12.29)      (8.51)      (4.03)      (6.36)       (11.25)

Brokerage Size                      -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***     0.000      -0.002***   -0.003***
                                      (6.93)      (4.43)      (6.94)      (6.33)      (8.23)      (0.29)      (8.55)       (8.78)

Experience                           0.004***   -0.024***    0.003***     0.002      0.002       -0.002       0.001       -0.008
                                      (3.25)      (3.22)      (2.84)      (1.63)      (1.04)      (0.40)      (0.51)       (1.60)

Exper. Rec. Firm                    -0.034***   -0.035***   -0.034***   -0.024***   -0.027***   -0.030***    -0.016***   -0.050***
                                     (13.55)     (15.44)     (14.08)      (9.41)      (6.25)      (3.61)      (3.41)       (6.45)

All Star                             -0.013      0.004       -0.012      -0.007      0.003       0.066**     -0.084***    0.220***
                                      (1.08)      (0.33)      (0.94)      (0.52)      (0.14)      (2.22)      (3.03)       (4.44)

Connected to Firm                                                                    -0.015      -0.025       -0.011      -0.001
                                                                                      (1.26)      (1.16)      (0.71)       (0.04)

Affiliation                          0.136***   0.108***     0.129***    0.115***   0.115***     0.098***    0.137***     0.576***
                                      (8.53)      (6.50)      (7.85)      (6.56)      (5.04)      (3.09)      (3.23)       (10.59)

Fixed Effect                          Time       Time         Time        Time       Time         Time        Time
Fixed Effect                                    Analyst     Industry      Firm        Firm        Firm        Firm
                                                  Table V: Wrong Bets

The dependent variable in each regression is Wrong Bet. Wrong Bet measures incorrect calls by analysts, and is a
categorical variable equal to 1 if i.) the analyst recommends a Buy or Strong Buy on the given stock and the price decline
over the following year or ii.) the analyst recommends a Sell or Strong Sell on the given stock and the price rises over the
following year. It is defined equivalently in Columns 5-8 with the addition that the given recommendation is an upgrade or
downgrade from the prevailing consensus recommendation, and then tracking subsequent performance of the stock.
Appointed Rec equals 1 if the analyst recommending the stock in question is subsequently appointed to the board of
directors of that firm, and 0 otherwise. The other independent variables are as follows: Size measures the log(ME) and B/M
measures the log(BE/ME), of the firm being recommended. Past Month Return and Past Year Return measure the given
stock’s return in the prior month, and 11-months prior to that month respectively, from the recommendation date.
Brokerage Size is the total number of analysts that work at the given analyst’s brokerage house. At the time of each
recommendation, Experience measures an analyst’s history of recommending stocks on I/B/E/S (in years), while Exper. Rec.
Firm measures the number of years an analyst has been recommending a given stock. All Star is a categorical variable equal
to 1 if the analyst was voted an all star analyst in the October issue of Institutional Investor magazine for the given year.
Connected to Firm is a categorical variable equal to 1 if the analyst attended the same school as one of the senior managers
or board members of the recommended firm. Affiliation is a categorical variable that measures whether or not the given
firm has an underwriting relationship with the analyst’s brokerage. Fixed effects for recommendation month (Time), for the
firm (Firm), and for the analyst (Analyst), are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at
the recommendation month level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the
coefficient estimates. 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                         (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                                        Rec          Rec          Rec       Up/Down       Up/Down       Up/Down
           Appointed Rec              0.123**     0.172***     0.154***     0.148***       0.170***      0.165***
                                        (2.52)      (3.30)       (2.67)        (2.97)        (3.64)        (3.11)


           Size                                                0.136***                                  0.064***
                                                                 (16.87)                                  (14.40)

           B/M                                                -0.020***                                   -0.002
                                                                 (5.33)                                    (0.51)

           Past Month Return                                     0.018                                   0.029**
                                                                 (0.99)                                    (2.20)

           Past Year Return                                    0.023***                                  0.009***
                                                                 (8.12)                                    (4.30)

           Brokerage Size                                      0.000***                                  0.000***
                                                                 (3.30)                                    (4.72)

           Experience                                           -0.001                                  -0.002***
                                                                 (1.60)                                    (3.92)

           Exper. Rec. Firm                                     -0.002                                    0.002
                                                                 (1.63)                                    (1.64)

           All Star                                            0.014***                                  0.015***
                                                                 (3.18)                                    (2.89)

           Affiliation                                          0.028*                                    0.021*
                                                                 (1.69)                                    (1.78)

           Fixed Effect                Time         Time         Time         Time          Time          Time
           Fixed Effect               Analyst       Firm         Firm        Analyst         Firm          Firm
                            Table VI: Appointed Analyst Recommendation Performance

The dependent variable in each column is the one-year return following a recommendation change (Upgrade or Downgrade).
In columns 1-3, the changes are upgrades from consensus (Upgrade), and in columns 4-6, the changes are downgrades from
consensus (Downgrade). The key variable of interest is the interaction term in the first two rows: Appointed Rec*Upgrade
(Downgrade), which equals 1 if the analyst recommending the stock in question is subsequently appointed to the board of
directors of that firm, and the recommendation in question is an upgrade (or downgrade) from consensus. Dummy variables
for Appointed Rec and Upgrade (Downgrade) are also included. The other independent variables are those used in Table IV,
and are described there. Fixed effects for recommendation year (Time), and for the analyst (Analyst), are included where
indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the recommendation year level, and t-stats using these clustered
standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are
indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                           (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
    Appointed Rec*Upgrade               -0.195**     -0.182**      -0.146**
                                          (2.35)       (2.30)        (2.05)


    Appointed Rec*Downgrade                                                       -0.038          0.050           0.063
                                                                                   (0.50)          (0.57)         (0.67)

    Upgrade                             0.094***     0.073***     0.039***
                                          (3.12)       (3.57)        (2.97)

    Downgrade                                                                      0.013          0.017           0.000
                                                                                   (0.61)          (0.95)         (0.01)

    Appointing Rec                       0.133*       0.127**       0.106*         0.014          0.016           0.017
                                          (1.82)       (2.21)        (1.86)        (0.22)          (0.35)         (0.35)

    Size                                 0.015*        0.011       0.015**       0.017**          0.012*        0.016**
                                          (1.83)       (1.55)        (2.28)        (2.05)          (1.67)         (2.35)

    B/M                                  0.076**     0.074***     0.059***       0.079**        0.076***        0.060***
                                          (2.47)       (3.03)        (2.78)        (2.49)          (3.04)         (2.81)

    Past Month Return                     0.000      -0.001***      0.000          0.000        -0.001***         0.000
                                          (1.33)       (3.75)        (1.32)        (1.43)          (3.77)         (1.32)

    Past Year Return                      -0.001       0.000        -0.011        -0.002          0.000          -0.012*
                                          (0.33)       (0.01)        (1.70)        (0.36)          (0.01)         (1.74)

    Brokerage Size                       0.012*       0.009*        0.006         0.013*          0.010*          0.006
                                          (1.68)       (1.69)        (1.23)        (1.76)          (1.77)         (1.31)

    Experience                           0.135**       0.042        -0.004       0.135**          0.042          -0.004
                                          (1.99)       (0.85)        (0.07)        (1.97)          (0.84)         (0.09)

    Exper. Rec. Firm                      0.011        -0.037       -0.053         0.005          -0.041         -0.055
                                          (0.11)       (0.47)        (0.77)        (0.06)          (0.53)         (0.82)

    All Star                              0.023        0.008        0.004          0.024          0.009           0.005
                                          (1.35)       (0.72)        (0.47)        (1.38)          (0.86)         (0.52)

    Affiliation                         -0.138**     -0.177**      -0.140**      -0.141**       -0.179***       -0.140**
                                          (2.04)       (2.82)        (2.14)        (2.08)          (2.85)         (2.14)

    Recommendation Level                -0.055**     -0.042**       -0.016        -0.016          -0.010          0.000
                                          (2.41)       (2.35)        (1.20)        (1.54)          (1.06)         (0.06)

    Fixed Effect                                      Analyst      Analyst                       Analyst        Analyst
    Fixed Effect                                                    Time                                          Time
                                         Table VII: Analyst Ability Ranking

The dependent variable is a measure of analyst’s rank relative to the rest of her peer analysts. In all columns, this rank is
normalized to between 1-100, with the higher ranks meaning better performance (with 100 being the top performer, 1 being
the poorest). In Columns 1-3, analysts are ranked according to their earnings forecast ability following Hong and Kubik
(2003). In Columns 4-6, analysts are ranked according to the predictive ability of their recommendations (upgrades and
downgrades) for future returns, using the measure Wrong Bets as defined in Table IV. In both measures the rankings are
averaged across all stocks an analyst issues forecasts (or recommendations) on in a given year, giving an analyst level
ranking for that year. Thus, observations are at an analyst-year level, so that every analyst-year will represent one
observation. Firm Level Recommendation (Average Rec) is the average level of an analyst’s recommendations for a given
year, which ranges between 1=Strong Sell and 5=Strong Buy. Affiliation is the average percentage of covered stocks with
which the analyst’s brokerage house has an underwriting relationship. All Star is the percentage of years that the analyst is
an all star out of all the years the analyst is issuing forecasts (recommendations). The independent variables Experience,
Exper Rec. Firm, Brokerage Size, Size, and B/M are described in Table IV, and are average across the analyst’s covered
firms and years in the sample. Fixed effects for year (Time) are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted
for clustering at the ranking year level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below
the coefficient estimates. 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                         (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)              (5)              (6)
                                      Earnings     Earnings     Earnings     Recommend         Recommend        Recommend
 Appointed Analyst                   -5.625***     -5.640***    -3.896***      -5.279***        -5.514***         -3.014**
                                        (4.16)       (4.16)        (3.26)         (3.81)           (4.07)           (2.03)
 Average Rec                                                     3.658***                                          0.153
                                                                   (9.12)                                           (0.17)
 Num Analysts                                                   -1.153***                                        -0.428***
                                                                   (5.50)                                           (5.30)
 All Star                                                       -2.401***                                        -5.745***
                                                                   (3.33)                                          (11.78)
 Affiliation                                                      -5.528                                           7.309
                                                                   (0.86)                                           (1.46)
 Experience                                                     -0.414***                                        -0.741***
                                                                   (3.18)                                           (6.19)
 Exper. Rec. Firm                                               -1.344***                                          -0.099
                                                                   (4.35)                                           (0.39)
 Brokerage Size                                                   0.012*                                          0.008**
                                                                   (1.80)                                           (1.95)
 Size                                                            8.339***                                        -1.315***
                                                                  (12.95)                                           (5.57)
 B/M                                                              1.021                                            0.615*
                                                                   (1.52)                                           (1.69)


 Fixed Effect                                        Time         Time                            Time             Time
                           Table VIII: Timing of Analysts’ Positive Recommendations

This table reports panel regressions of analyst recommendations. The dependent variable in columns 1-3 is the level of
recommendation (Rec), which ranges from 1=Strong Sell to 5=Strong Buy. In columns 4 and 5, the dependent variable is
Downgrade, which is a categorical variable equal to 1 if the recommendation is a downgrade from the current consensus, and
0 otherwise. The independent variable Appointed Rec is a categorical variable that is equal to 1 if the analyst recommending
the given stock is subsequently appointed to the board of directors of the firm, and 0 otherwise. Last Rec. Downgrade is
equal to 1 if the last recommendation on the stock (before the given analyst’s recommendation) was a downgrade, and 0
otherwise. High Short Interest is equal to 1 if short interest in the month prior to the given recommendation was higher
than the median, and 0 otherwise. High Future Issuance is equal to 1 if the firm being recommended has higher than median
issuance over the 6 months following recommendation, and 0 otherwise. Interaction effects are included where shown. Size,
B/M, Past Month Return, Past Year Return, Brokerage Size, Experience, Exper. Rec. Firm, All Star, and Affiliation are
also included as controls in every regression, and are described in Table IV. Fixed effects for recommendation month (Time)
and the firm (Firm) are included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the recommendation
month level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.
1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                               (1)           (2)            (3)                (4)               (5)

                                              Rec            Rec           Rec             Downgrade        Downgrade
   Appointed Rec                            0.378***       0.279**        0.230*            -0.171***          -0.023
                                              (4.22)        (2.51)         (1.73)             (3.06)            (0.31)

   Last Rec. Downgrade                     -0.064***     -0.064***      -0.064***           0.069***          0.069***
                                             (13.50)        (13.49)       (13.49)             (19.24)          (19.25)

   High Short Interest                     -0.083***     -0.083***      -0.083***           0.027***          0.027***
                                             (14.11)        (14.12)       (14.11)             (8.99)            (8.99)

   High Future Issuance                     0.066***      0.066***      0.066***            -0.018***        -0.018***
                                             (15.06)        (15.06)       (15.05)             (7.50)            (7.50)

   High Short*Appointed Rec                                0.326**
                                                            (2.14)

   High Issue*Appointed Rec                                              0.303**
                                                                           (2.10)

   Last Rec Down*Appointed Rec                                                                               -0.259***
                                                                                                                (2.90)

   Fixed Effect                              Time           Time          Time                Time              Time
   Fixed Effect                               Firm          Firm          Firm                Firm              Firm
                         Table IX: Firm Behavior and Performance, Post-Appointment

Panel A reports regressions of discretionary accruals over our sample period, 1993-2006. Discretionary accruals are computed
using the modified Jones model described in Dechow, Sloan, and Sweeney (1995), and are equal to the residuals from firm-
level regressions of total accruals on non-discretionary accruals (which are equal to the change in sales minus the change in
receivables plus gross property, plant, and equipment, all scaled by last year’s total assets). Total Accruals are the total
annual amount of accruals of the firm, estimated as in Healy (1985). These regressions include only those firms that appoint
an analyst as a board member (402 firm-year observations). The independent variable of interest is After Appointment, a
categorical variable equal to 1 for those firm-years after the analyst has been appointed to the board, and zero otherwise.
Size, B/M, Return Volatility, and Past Year Return are defined as in Table VIII. Earnings are measured as the current
year’s net income, before extraordinary items. Firm fixed effects (Firm) and year fixed effects (Time) are included where
indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the year level, and t-stats using these clustered standard errors
are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates. Panel B presents value-weighted calendar-time monthly portfolio
returns for two portfolios (After Appointment and Non-Appointment), as well as for a spread portfolio (Spread) which goes
long the After Appointment portfolio and short the Non-Appointment portfolio each month. Firms that appoint analysts to
the board enter the After Appointment portfolio in the month following their appointment, and remain in the portfolio for a
year; all other stocks are placed in the Non-Appointment portfolio. 3-factor (Fama and French (1996), 4-factor (Carhart
(1997), and 5-factor (Pastor and Stambaugh (2003)) alphas are computed, and 1%, 5%, and 10% statistical significance are
indicated with ***, **, and *, respectively.

                                   Panel A: Discretionary Accruals Post-Appointment
                     Dep Variable:                         Discretionary Accruals
                                            (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)
                  After Appointment       0.022**      0.022**    0.019**     0.021**       0.021**         0.030**
                                            (2.06)       (2.27)    (2.12)      (2.23)            (2.29)       (2.51)

                  Total Accruals                       0.206**    0.202**     0.266**       0.266**         0.265**
                                                         (2.58)    (2.63)      (2.16)            (2.13)       (2.09)

                  Size                                            -0.005      -0.003         -0.003          -0.002
                                                                   (0.91)      (0.53)            (0.50)       (0.28)

                  B/M                                              0.000       0.002         0.002           0. 005
                                                                   (0.02)      (0.26)            (0.33)       (0.68)

                  Return Volatility                                           -0.109*       -0.109*        -0.157***
                                                                               (1.72)            (1.95)       (2.72)

                  Past Year Return                                                           0.000           0.000
                                                                                                 (0.03)       (0.01)

                  Earnings                                                                                   0.000
                                                                                                              (0.30)

                  Fixed Effect             Time         Time       Time        Time          Time            Time
                  Fixed Effect             Firm         Firm       Firm        Firm          Firm            Firm
                          Panel B: Value-Weighted Calendar Time Monthly Portfolio Returns
                                                raw         3-factor    4-factor      5-factor
                                              returns        alpha       Alpha         alpha

                  After Appointment                  -0.0052      -0.0177**        -0.0161*               -0.0198**
                                                      (0.60)         (2.08)             (1.89)              (2.21)

                  Non-Appointment                    0.0079**       0.0000              0.0000             0.0000
                                                      (1.96)         (0.47)             (0.30)              (0.63)

                  Spread                             -0.0130*     -0.0177**        -0.0162*               -0.0198**
                                                      (1.78)         (2.09)             (1.89)              (2.21)
           Table X: Post-Appointment Behavior: Instrumental Variables and Matched Samples

The first three columns of Panel A report results from two-stage least squares regressions that instrument for the
appointment for a cheerleader. These regressions include only those firms that appoint an analyst as a board member. The
first stage of this regression (Column 1) is a regression of actual appointment months (of cheerleader analysts) on a
categorical variable Post-Global Settlement that is equal to 1 for those years directly after the Global Settlement (April
2003-April 2005), and zero otherwise, plus the same control variables used in Table IX. The firm-month with the maximum
predicted value of appointment is then designated as the instrumented appointment date, and the variable Instrumented
After Appointment is then a categorical variable equal to 1 for those firm-years after the instrumented appointment date.
The second stage regression in Column 2 (Column 3) is a regression of discretionary accruals (non-discretionary accruals) on
the variable Instrumented After Appointment plus the same control variables used in Column 1. Columns 4 and 5 of Panel
A compare the results in Table IX to those obtained from a matched sample panel regression of discretionary accruals on the
same After Appointment variable described in Table IX. Column 4 repeats the same result shown in Column 6 Panel A of
Table IX which regresses discretionary accruals on the After Appointment variable described in Table IX for the sample of
appointing firms; Column 5 runs the identical regression, but this time on a matched sample of firms designed to mimic the
characteristics of the appointing firms. The matched sample is constructed by matching appointing firms to firms in the
same Fama-French 49 industry category, same size quintile, same book-to-market quintile, and same discretionary accruals
quintile, but who did *not* appoint a cheerleader in the year of a cheerleader appointment. Panel B repeats the
instrumental variables regressions in Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A, except that the control variable for total accruals is
removed in both stages, and the dependent variable in the second-stage regression in Column 2 is now total CEO
compensation (the variable TDC2 as reported in Execucomp). Firm fixed effects (Firm) and year fixed effects (Time) are
included where indicated. All standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the year level (month level in Column 1), and t-
stats using these clustered standard errors are included in parentheses below the coefficient estimates.



                                  Panel A: IV Accruals Behavior and Matched Sample
                                                 IV Estimation                                      Matched-Sample
                                    1st Stage       2nd Stage          2nd Stage                    Our      Matched
                                                                                                  Sample     Sample
     Dependent Variable:         Appoint Date        Disc Accr          Non-Disc                 Disc Accr Disc Accr
                                        (1)              (2)               (3)                       (4)           (5)
    Post-Global                     -0.014***
    Settlement                        (2.57)


    Instrumented After                                0.018***           -0.028
    Appointment                                         (2.71)            (0.94)


    After                                                                                         0.030**         0.003
    Appointment                                                                                     (2.51)        (0.75)


    Controls                           Yes             Yes                Yes                       Yes           Yes
    Fixed Effect                                       Time               Time                      Time          Time
    Fixed Effect                      Firm             Firm               Firm                      Firm          Firm
Table X: Post-Appointment Behavior: Instrumental Variables and Matched Samples
                                 (Continued)




                         Panel B: IV Compensation Behavior
                                        1st Stage        2nd Stage
             Dependent Variable:      Appoint Date     Compensation
                                           (1)                (2)
            Post-Global
                                        -0.012***
            Settlement                    (2.62)



            Instrumented After
                                                             4554*
            Appointment                                      (1.85)

            Controls                       Yes               Yes


            Fixed Effect                                     Time
            Fixed Effect                  Firm               Firm
