                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE GREENNESS OF CITIES:
              CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                         Matthew E. Kahn

                                        Working Paper 14238
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14238


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for State and Local Government, the Rappaport Institute for Greater
Boston and the Manhattan Institute. Kahn thanks the Richard S. Ziman Center for Real Estate at UCLA.
 Kristina Tobio and Ryan Vaughn provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Edward L. Glaeser and Matthew E. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Greenness of Cities: Carbon Dioxide Emissions and Urban Development
Edward L. Glaeser and Matthew E. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 14238
August 2008
JEL No. Q5

                                             ABSTRACT

Carbon dioxide emissions may create significant social harm because of global warming, yet American
urban development tends to be in low density areas with very hot summers. In this paper, we attempt
to quantify the carbon dioxide emissions associated with new construction in different locations across
the country. We look at emissions from driving, public transit, home heating, and household electricity
usage. We find that the lowest emissions areas are generally in California and that the highest emissions
areas are in Texas and Oklahoma. There is a strong negative association between emissions and land
use regulations. By restricting new development, the cleanest areas of the country would seem to
be pushing new development towards places with higher emissions. Cities generally have significantly
lower emissions than suburban areas, and the city-suburb gap is particularly large in older areas, like
New York.


Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Matthew E. Kahn
UCLA Institute of the Environment
Box 951496
La Kretz Hall, Suite 300
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1496
and NBER
mkahn@ioe.ucla.edu
    I.       Introduction




    While there remains considerable debate about the expected costs of global warming, a
growing scientific consensus believes that greenhouse gas emissions create significant risks of
climate change. A wide range of experts have advocated reducing individual carbon footprints
and investing billions to reduce the risks of a major change in the earth’s environment (Stern,
2008).1 Almost 40 percent of total U.S. carbon dioxide emissions are associated with residences
and cars, so changing patterns of urban development and transportation can significantly impact
emissions.2 How do major cities differ with respect to their per-household emissions levels?

    In Section II of this paper, we review the basic theory of spatial environmental externalities.
If emissions are taxed appropriately, then private individuals will make appropriate decisions
about location choices without any additional location-specific policies. When emissions are not
taxed, then location decisions will be inefficient. The optimal location-specific tax on building
in one place versus another equals the difference in emissions times the gap between the social
cost of emissions and the current tax on these emissions. Even if there was an appropriate
carbon tax, location decisions might still be sub-optimal if governments subsidize development
in high emissions areas or artificially restrict development in low emissions areas.

    In Section III of this paper, we measure household carbon dioxide emissions production in 66
major metropolitan areas within the United States.3 For a standardized household, we predict
this household’s residential emissions and emissions from transportation use. We look at
emissions associated with gasoline consumption, public transportation, home heating (fuel oil
and natural gas) and electricity usage. We use data from the 2001 National Household Travel
Survey to measure gasoline consumption. We use year 2000 household level data from the
Census of Population and Housing to measure household electricity, natural gas and fuel oil

1
  See also the critical reviews in Weitzman (2007) and Nordhaus (2007).
2 See http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/ggrpt/carbon.html for sources of carbon dioxide emissions.
3 Our work parallels the findings of the Vulcan Project at Purdue University

(http://www.purdue.edu/eas/carbon/vulcan/index.php) and the recent Brookings Institution study by Brown and
Logan (2008) fall into this category. Our exercise is slightly different since we look at the impact of a standardized
household and we focus on marginal, rather than average, homes. For an example of international analysis that
disaggregates greenhouse gas emissions variation within a nation, see Auffhammer and Carson’s (2008) study of
China.


                                                          2
consumption. To aggregate gasoline, fuel oil and natural gas into a single carbon dioxide
emissions index, we use conversion factors. To determine the carbon dioxide impact of
electricity consumption in different major cities, we use regional average power plant emissions
factors, which reflect the fact that some regions’ power is generated by dirtier fuels such as coal
while other regions rely more on renewable energy sources. We distinguish between the
emissions of an area’s average house and the emissions of a marginal house by looking
particularly at homes built in the last twenty years.

   Our estimates suggest a range of carbon dioxide emissions from about 19 tons per household
per year in San Diego and Los Angeles to about 32 tons in Oklahoma City and Memphis. The
older cities of the Northeast tend to lie within those extremes. While people in these older cities
drive less, they need large amounts of heating and produce more emissions as a result. For
illustrative purposes, we use a social cost figure of 43 dollars per ton of carbon dioxide, which
implies that the social cost of a new home in Houston is $550 dollars more per year than the
social cost of a new home in San Francisco.

   We also use our methodology to compare the emissions in central cities and suburbs for 48
major metropolitan areas. In general, central city residence is associated with lower levels of
emissions, although there are a few places where that fact is reversed. Carbon dioxide emissions
differences within metropolitan areas are smaller than the differences across metropolitan areas.
The place with the most extreme emissions difference between central cities and suburbs is New
York, where we estimate that suburban development causes more than 300 dollars more damage
in carbon dioxide emissions than central city development.

       Across metropolitan areas, we find a weak positive connection between the level of
emissions and recent growth when we weight by initial population size. We find a strong
negative correlation between emissions and the level of land use controls. Overall, the metro
areas with the lowest per-household carbon dioxide emissions levels are also the most restrictive
towards new development.      This fact suggests that current land use restrictions may be doing
exactly the opposite of what a climate change activist may have hoped. Those restrictions, often
implemented for local environmental reasons (such as to preserve open space or reduce
neighborhood traffic), seem to push new development towards the least environmentally friendly




                                                  3
urban areas (Fischel 1999, Glaeser and Tobio, 2007). We now turn to the basic economics of
environmental externalities and urban development.




   II.     Urban Development and Environmental Externalities




   This theory section makes three simple points. First, if emissions are actually taxed at the
appropriate rate then there is no need for further spatial policy to improve private decisions about
location. Second, if emissions are taxed below the optimal level, then it is appropriate to
subsidize the areas that have less energy usage and tax the areas with more energy usage. Third,
even with an optimal emissions tax, suboptimal public policies, such as zoning or transport
subsidies, may still lead to suboptimal locations.

   We outline a simple model where location choice interacts with environmental externalities.
We assume that there is a fixed population of size N identical individuals that must choose
between I communities. The population of community i is denoted N i . Individuals choose
their communities and their level of energy consumption. We let “E” denote the amount of
energy selected by each individual. This energy choice is meant to include household and
transportation-related energy use.

   Individuals maximize Yi − Pi H − ( Pi E + t ) E + tEˆ + V ( E; Z i ) − C ( NEˆ ) , a quasi-linear utility

function where Y refers to income, Pi H refers to housing costs that are specific to region i, Pi E
refers to energy costs which are specific to region i, t refers to an energy tax which is initially
independent of region, Ê refers to the average energy consumption in the world as a whole, Z i

refers to attributes of the area which individuals treat as exogenous, V(.;.) reflects the region-
specific benefits from energy use and C ( NEˆ ) represents the costs of global energy consumption
that may be associated with climate change. Each individual pays an energy tax of tE, but then
receives a tax refund of tEˆ so that the tax is revenue neutral. The function V(.;.) allows different
area characteristics to influence the benefits from energy use, and is meant to capture the




                                                      4
possibility that air conditioning might be more valuable in hot, humid places. We assume that
V(.;.) is increasing and concave in its first argument.

    Income and housing costs are derived from labor markets and housing markets. Specifically,
each region has QiF identical employers who earn revenues, denoted f(.), that are increasing and

concave in the number of people hired. Each region also has QiB of builders whose costs,
denoted k(.), are increasing and convex in the number of buildings produced. The employers and
builders are owned equally by all of the people in the country. These assumptions enable us to
                                   N 
write that wage income equals f '  Fi  , the marginal product of labor, and the cost of housing
                                    Qi 
           N 
equals k'  Bi  , the marginal cost of supplying housing. Each person receives an equal share of
            Qi 
all business profits throughout the world.

    Equilibrium is then determined by two optimality conditions. First, individuals must be
choosing their private energy consumption to maximize their utility levels which implies that
Pi E + t = V1 ( Ei* ; Z i ) , where Ei* denotes privately optimal energy consumption conditional on

prices and taxes in area i, and V1 ( Ei* ; Z i ) is the derivative of V(.;.) with respect to its first
argument. Individuals must also be indifferent between the different locations, which means that
     N            N     
f '  Fi    − k '  Bi
                   Q      − (t + Pi E ) Ei* + V ( Ei* ; Z i ) must be constant across space.
                           
      Qi           i    

    Since everyone is essentially identical, we focus on an additive social welfare function:


    (1)     ∑Q   i
                  F      N
                      f  Fi
                                         N
                                 − QiB k  Bi
                                         Q
                                                 
                                                       (                                   )
                                                  +N i V ( E i ; Z i ) − Pi E Ei − C ( NEˆ ) .
             i            Qi             i    

This yields first order condition for energy consumption: Pi E + NC ' ( NEˆ ) = V1 ( E i ; Z i ) , which
gives the standard result that the private optimality condition will be equivalent to the social
optimality condition if t = NC ' ( NEˆ ) . The first order condition for social optimality locations is




                                                                   5
          N            N
that f '  Fi  − k '  Bi
                                
                                                    (                  )
                                 + V ( E i ; Z i ) − E i Pi E + NC ' ( NEˆ ) is constant across space. This
                                
           Qi           Qi   

condition is satisfied if t = NC ' ( NEˆ ) . There is no need for any added spatial policies if energy
is properly taxed.

      If t ≠ NC ' ( NEˆ ) , then the spatial equilibrium is not Pareto optimal because people don’t
fully internalize the externalities associated with their energy use when they change locations. If
energy use in an area is independent of the number of people in that area, then a location specific
tax of E i* ( NC ' ( NEˆ ) − t ) transforms the private location decision into a second best social
optimum, where people make the socially optimal location decisions conditional upon their
socially suboptimal energy decisions. In comparing any two areas, the difference in tax payment
for area i versus area j should equal (Ei* − E 2* )( NC ' ( NEˆ ) − t ) , the difference in energy usage
times the difference between the optimal tax and the current tax. Our primary empirical exercise
will be to calculate these quantities for different areas.

    We can use the same model to ask when local environmentalism is good environmentalism.
We model local environmentalism by assuming that a location imposes a location specific tax,
τ i on energy usage in that state, and that revenues from this tax are rebated to the residents of the
state. The first order condition for individual energy consumption is now
Pi E + t + τ i = V1 ( Ei** (τ i ); Z i ) , where Ei** (τ i ) is a function mapping local energy taxes into local

energy use. The concavity of V(.;.) implies that Ei** ' (τ i ) < 0 . Higher taxes will lead to local

energy decisions that are better from a global perspective as long as t + τ i < NC ' ( NEˆ ) , but they
will not necessarily increase welfare because these taxes also impact migration decisions.

    To make this point, we reduce the world to only two regions and assume that there is no
energy tax in region 2. We further assume that t + τ i ≤ NC ' ( NEˆ ) . Differentiating the spatial
equilibrium yields:




                                                             6
                          ′
   (2)
       ∂N 1
            =
                                       (
                     E1** (τ 1 ) V1 ( E1** (τ 1 ); Z 1 ) − (t + P1E ) E1** (τ 1 ) )        < 0,
       ∂τ 1    1    N1  1             N2  1                   N1  1          N 2! 
                 k"      +       k"          −          f "  F  − F f "  F 
              Q1B  Q1B  Q2B  Q2B  Q1F                     Q1  Q2         Q2 

so a tax on energy use in region one reduces the population of region one.                   This effect might be
quite small, especially if the tax is modest, because the tax impacts migration behavior only by
inducing people in area one to consume too little energy relative to the privately optimal level of
energy consumption in the absence of this tax.

   The tax in region one improves overall social welfare if and only if:

              NC ' ( NEˆ ) − t − τ 1            ′                              ∂N 1
        (3)                                                (                )
                                       − N 1 E1** (τ 1 )  > E1** (τ 1 ) − E 2
               NC ' ( NEˆ ) − t                                               ∂τ 1


   The left hand side of the equation is positive; the right hand side is negative if E1** (τ 1 ) > E 2 .
If energy usage in region one is greater than energy usage in region two, then the impact of
added energy taxes in that region must have a positive effect on welfare. In that case, the tax
reduces both energy consumption, and the number of people in region one, which is desirable
since it is the high energy use region.

   If region one is using less energy than region two, then the situation is more ambiguous. If
the migration margin is very large then it is at least conceivable that this tax will make the energy
problem more problematic. A local tax that sets t + τ 1 = NC ' ( NEˆ ) is certainly sub-optimal,
since in that case the gains from reducing the tax on the migration margin will exceed the costs
of reducing the tax in terms of increased energy usage in region one.

   In many cases, this result may be more of an economic curiosity than a real concern. Many
energy taxes seem too small to really impact migration behavior, at least if the taxes are rebated
to residents in some way. However, environmentally inspired land use restrictions seem more
likely to have counterproductive results. To model these interventions, we assume that location
one has imposed a tax on new construction equal to z1 which is meant to refer to a “zoning tax.”
With this tax, the equilibrium first order condition for builders in location one




                                                                7
                          N     
satisfies P1H = z1 + k '  B1    .       We assume that the tax either goes to infra-marginal residents of
                           Q1    
the community or that it is shared across both communities.4

    Unlike the place-specific energy tax, the zoning tax does not impact energy use directly, but
it does reduce the number of people in location one. Specifically:

           ∂N 1                              −1
    (4)         =                                                             < 0.
           ∂z1     1    N1  1       N2  1           N1  1         N2 
                     k"      +   k"      −    f "  F  − F f "  F 
                  Q1B  Q1B  Q2B  Q2B  Q1F       Q1  Q2        Q2 


                                                                (       (
The overall impact of zoning on social welfare is (E 2 − E1 ) NC ′( NEˆ ) − t + z1    ) )
                                                                                   ∂N 1
                                                                                   ∂z1
                                                                                        , which is

                                        (             )
positive as long as (E1 − E 2 ) NC ′( NEˆ ) − t > z1 . If the area with the high zoning tax is also the
high energy user, then the zoning tax will improve welfare, at least until the point where the tax
equals the difference in energy usage times the difference between the social cost of energy use
and the current tax. If the zoning tax is imposed in areas that have particularly low energy use,
then it is counterproductive. This motivates our empirical exercise examining whether areas
with extensive land use restrictions are also areas that have high levels of energy use.




    III.      Greenhouse Gas Emissions Across Metropolitan Areas



    We now turn to estimating the quantity of carbon dioxide emissions that households produce
in 66 major metropolitan areas.5 Our goal is to calculate the marginal impact of an extra
household in location j on the total carbon dioxide emissions of that location. The marginal
household and the average household need not be the same, and we will try to create marginal
estimates by comparing the emissions of an average household and the emissions associated with

4 If the tax is rebated only to new homeowners then the tax will be completely irrelevant.
5 Our sample includes 66 metropolitan areas with at least 250,000 households based on year 2000 Census IPUMS.
In the year 2000, 72% of all metropolitan area residents live in one of these 66 metropolitan areas. We use the
IPUMS definitions of metropolitan areas to assign households to metropolitan areas (see http://usa.ipums.org/usa-
action/variableDescription.do?mnemonic=METAREA). Table Two lists the set of metropolitan areas that we
study.


                                                            8
more recent development. Ideally, we would also be able to address the possibility that marginal
emissions associated with more electricity generation are different from the average emissions,
but we have no way of doing this well. In principle, the marginal resident could foster the
development of a new lower polluting electric power plant, or the marginal megawatt of
electricity could involve more harmful energy uses.6

    We consider four main sources of carbon dioxide emissions: private within-city transport,
public transportation, residential heating (natural gas and fuel oil) and residential electricity
consumption. Car usage and home heating involves a relatively simple translation from energy
use to carbon dioxide emissions. Household electricity use and public rail transit requires us to
convert megawatt hours of usage into carbon dioxide emissions by using information about the
carbon dioxide emissions associated with electricity production in different regions of the
country. We are not considering the impact of shifting people on the energy emissions
associated with moving goods and we are not considering the impact of shifting people on
industrial output. The problem of figuring out how industrial location and the transport network
changes with different urban development patterns is beyond the scope of this paper.7

    One natural concern with our approach is that households in areas that spend more on energy
have less income to spend on other things that also involve greenhouse gas emissions. If people
in Texas are spending a lot on air conditioning and gas at the pump, then perhaps they are
spending less on other things that are equally environmentally harmful. We cannot fully address
this concern, since it would require a complete energy accounting for every form of
consumption, but we do not believe our omissions fatally compromise our empirical exercise.
After all, few forms of consumption involve nearly as much energy use as the direct purchase
and use of energy. Moreover, areas that tend to have high levels of energy use are generally low
cost areas like far flung suburbs or the Sunbelt, where people have more, not less, money
available for other things. One can argue that the high land costs in expensive cities represent a
transfer to earlier property owners who use their property-related revenues to buy more energy,
but tracing through this chain of money and emissions is far too complicated a task for us.

6 To the extent that all regions have a similar relationship between marginal and average usage, then the implications

of this work for inter city comparisons, may not be terribly effected by our inability to measure true marginal
impacts.
7 Since much of modern industry is capital intensive and has low transport costs, we suspect it might not move that

much in response to a population shift.


                                                          9
    Car Usage and Emissions

    We begin with estimating gasoline usage across metropolitan areas. Our primary data source
is the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS). This data source contains
information on household characteristics and reported annual miles driven. The NHTS uses
information on the types of vehicles the household owns to estimate annual gasoline
consumption.8 The survey also reports the population density of the household’s census tract,
and zip code identifiers that enable us to use zip code characteristics to predict gasoline usage.
We use these zip code identifiers to calculate each household’s distance to the metropolitan
area’s Central Business District.

    Our primary approach is to use the NHTS to predict gasoline usage based on individual and
zip code level characteristics. We regress:

        (5)           Gasoline = ∑ j β j Z kj + ∑q γ q X iq +µ k + ε i


where Z kj refers to the value of zip code characteristic j in zip code k, β j reflects the impact of

those variables, X iq refers to the value of individual level q for person i, γ q is the coefficient on

that characteristic and the other two terms are individual level and zip code level error terms.
Since there are a significant number of truly extraordinary outliers, and since we are running this
regression in levels rather than logs, we top code the top one percent of the sample. The results
of this equation are shown in Table 1.

    The overall r-squared of the equation is 30 percent. Family size and income strongly
increase gas consumption, so it is important to control for these characteristics. The area-level
characteristics have the predicted signs. Population density, whether at the tract, zip code or
metropolitan area level, reduces gasoline usage (see Golob and Brownstone 2008). Distance to
the metropolitan’s central business district also increases average gasoline consumption. We also




8For an analysis of how urban form affects vehicle miles traveled based on the 1990 version of this micro data set
Bento et. al. (2005).


                                                        10
interact census tract density with region dummies and find that the density-gas consumption
relationship is weaker in the West.

        We then take these coefficients and predict gasoline usage for a family with an income of
62,500 dollars and 2.62 members for each census tract located within 66 major metropolitan
areas.9 Specifically, our predicted value for a census tract with characteristics Z kj is

∑   j
        β j Z kj + ∑q γ q X Ave
                            q             q
                                , where X Ave denoted the individual characteristics of a standardized

individual. We then form metropolitan area averages by aggregating up from the tract level
using the tract’s household count as the weight.10

        These estimates control for household level income and size, but they are, of course,
imprecise. We are only using two primary characteristics for each tract, its proximity to
downtown and its population density. As such, there will be an almost automatic relationship
between urban sprawl and gasoline usage since gasoline usage decreases with density and
increases with distance from downtown. There is a less automatic connection between gasoline
consumption and metropolitan area population size, which is shown in Figure 1. On average, a
.1 log point increase in MSA population size is associated with a 7.3 gallon reduction in the
consumption of gallons of gas.

        An alternative approach is to run regression (5) using metropolitan area fixed effects instead
of region fixed effects, and then use those metropolitan area fixed effects as our measure of
gasoline usage. In that case, we would have had to restrict our work to the small number of
metropolitan areas with reasonably large data samples. We have estimated metropolitan area
gasoline usage in this alternative manner, and the correlation between our measure and the
measure estimated using metropolitan area fixed effects is high.

        To estimate the gasoline related emissions of a marginal household, we again start with the
gasoline consumption predicted at the tract level using our coefficients shown in Table 1. We
then aggregate census tract gasoline usage up to the metropolitan area, by averaging across
census tracts, weighting not by current population levels, but instead by the amount of housing


9 These demographic statistics are based on the sample means for the 66 metropolitan areas from the year 2000
Census IPUMS.
10 We include all census tracts within thirty miles of the metropolitan area’s CBD.




                                                       11
built between 1980 and 2000. If the location of housing in the near future looks like the location
of housing in the near past, then the location of recent construction gives us some idea about
where new homes will go.

      On average, homes built in the last 20 years are associated with 47 more gallons of gasoline
per household per year than average homes, which reflects the tendency to build on the urban
edge. While we believe that focusing on recent housing patterns adjustment makes sense, it
makes little difference to the cross-metropolitan area rankings. The correlation between
estimated metropolitan area gasoline consumption using the total population of each census tract
and the estimate based on the number of houses built since 1980 is .96.

      To convert gallons of gasoline into carbon dioxide emissions, we multiply first by 19.564,
which is a standard factor used by the Department of Energy.11 This conversion factor includes
only the direct emissions from a gallon of gasoline, not the indirect emissions associated with
refining and delivering gas to the pump, which typically increase the energy use associated with
a gallon of gas by 20 percent. 12 To reflect this, we assume that each gallon of gas is associated
with 23.46 pounds of carbon dioxide emissions.

      Public Transportation

      We now turn to the emissions associated with public transportation. There are no adequate
individual surveys that can inform us about energy usage by bus and train commuters. Instead,
we turn to aggregate data for each of the nation’s public transit systems from the National Transit
Database13. For all of the nation’s public transit systems, this data source provides us with
information about energy used, which takes the form of gasoline in the case of buses and
electricity in the case of rail. The data does not tell us about private forms of public transit, such
as private bus lines or taxis or the Las Vegas monorail.

      For each bus or rail system, the data set provides us with the zip code of their headquarters.
We then assign each zip code to the relevant metropolitan area and sum up all of the gasoline and



11 See http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/factors.html.
12A typical energy efficiency figure for gasoline is 83 percent: http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-
bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=2000_register&docid=00-14446-filed.pdf
13 http://www.ntdprogram.gov/ntdprogram/




                                                          12
electricity used by public transit systems within each metropolitan area. This provides us with
total energy usage by public transit for each metropolitan area.

   To convert energy use into carbon dioxide emissions, we continue to use a factor of 19.546
for gasoline. We again increase that factor by 20 percent to reflect the energy used in refining
and distribution. The conversion for electricity is somewhat more difficult, since electricity is
associated with different levels of emissions in different regions of the country. We will
therefore be using different conversion factors for electricity in different places, and we will
discuss those at length when we get to home electricity usage. By combing emissions from gas
and emissions from electricity, we estimate a total emissions figure within the metropolitan area.
To convert this to a household-level figure, we divide by the number of households in the
metropolitan area.

   There are two reasons why the marginal emissions from a new household might not be the
same as the average emissions for an existing household. First, the marginal household might be
more or less inclined to use public transportation. Second, even if the marginal household uses
public transport, we do not know how much extra energy this will entail. Typically, we think of
some public transit technologies as having large fixed costs, which could mean that the marginal
costs are quite low. However, in some cases, new development may mean that a new bus line is
extended to a newer, lower density area, and in this case, the marginal costs might be quite high.
Since we lack the data to make an effective estimate of the marginal effect, we will use the
average emissions from public transit throughout this paper. Since the emissions from private
automobiles are on average fifty times higher than the emissions from driving, the benefits to our
overall estimates of improving the accuracy of our public transit emissions measures are likely to
be small.




   Household Heating




   We now turn to the emissions from the two primary household heating sources: fuel oil and
natural gas. Fuel oil use is rare in the United States outside of the Northeast, and is an important



                                                 13
source of home heating in only a few metropolitan areas. Natural gas is the more common
source of home heat. In some areas, electricity also provides heat, but we will deal with
electricity separately in the next section.

     For our purposes we need a large representative sample that provides information by
metropolitan area on household heating. The Department of Energy’s Residential Energy
Consumption Survey14 is too small of a data set to address our needs. This data set also does not
provide each survey respondent’s metropolitan area. Instead, we use data from the 2000 Census
five percent sample (IPUMS). This data set provides information for each household on its
expenditure on electricity, natural gas and fuel oil.

     The key problem with the IPUMS data is that we are interested in household energy use, not
energy spending. Conveniently, the Department of Energy provides data on prices for natural
gas15 and fuel oil16 for the year 2000. These prices are at the state level, so we miss variation in
prices within the state. We use these prices to convert household energy expenditure to
household energy consumption.

     One particular problem with the expenditure data is that some renters do not pay for energy
directly, but are charged implicitly through their rents (Levinson and Niemann 2004). These
renters will report zero energy expenditures, when they are indeed using electricity and some
home heating fuel. Indeed, when we look at the frequency of reported zero expenditure in
different metropolitan areas, we find that these tend to be disproportionate among renters and
other residents of multi-family houses. In these cases, it is impossible to know whether a zero
value for expenditure truly indicates that the household does not consume this particular fuel or
whether the household just doesn’t pay directly for that energy. As such, we have the most
confidence in the IPUMS data for measuring actual household energy consumption for owners of
single family homes.

     We use the IPUMS 2000 data to estimate a separate regression for each of the 66
metropolitan areas using the subsample of owners of single family homes:


14 http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/recs/recs2001/publicuse2001.html
15 http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/states/_seds.html
16 http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_sum_mkt_a_EPD2_PRT_cpgal_a.htm




                                                 14
      (6) Energy Use=a*Log(Income)+b*Household Size +c*Age of Head+ MSA Effects.

In the case of natural gas in the New York City area, for example, we estimate:

      (6’) Natural Gas = − 138+ 13 • Log ( Income) + 9.8• Size + .81• Age .
                               ( 2.5 )   (.21)              (.15 )   (.02 )


Standard errors are in parentheses. In this regression, there are 28,757 single owner occupied
housing unit observations and the r-squared is .02. For each metropolitan area, we estimate
similar regressions for fuel oil and electricity consumption.        We then use metropolitan area
specific regression coefficients to predict the natural gas and fuel oil consumption for a
household with an income of 62,500 dollars and 2.62 members.

      We try to correct for individual characteristics, but we do not correct for housing
characteristics. After all, we are not attempting to estimate emissions assuming that people in
Houston live in New York City apartment buildings. The building sizes in an area are a key
component in emissions and we want to include that. Our approach allows for the fact that a
household with a fixed set of demographics is likely to live in a larger, newer home if it lived in
Houston than it would have chosen if it lived in Boston or New York City, since land prices are
higher in the latter cities. Our approach captures the fact that a standardized household will live
its life differently depending on the relative prices that it faces in different cities.

      To estimate energy consumption for renters and owners in multifamily units for each of the
66 metropolitan areas, we adjust our metropolitan area specific predictions that were based on
estimates of equation (6). For example, we will estimate equation (6) using Census IPUMS data
for Los Angeles owners of single family homes. This yields a prediction of average electricity
consumption for Los Angeles home owners of single family homes for a household with
standardized demographics. We still need to impute what this household’s electricity
consumption would have been if it had lived in Los Angeles as a renter of a single family home,
an owner of a unit in a multi-family unit, or as a renter in a multi-family unit. To impute these
last three categories, we use a second micro data set called the 2001 Residential Energy
Consumption Survey (RECS).17 This data set is a national sample with 4,392 households that




17   http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/recs/recs2001/publicuse2001.html


                                                       15
includes actual household energy consumption data. We use this energy consumption data to
estimate national level OLS regressions; of the form:

(6”) Log(Energy Consumption) = Controls + b1*Owner + b2*Multi-Family + U

Using the OLS estimates of b1 and b2 from these regressions, we adjust our metropolitan area
specific predictions of energy consumption. For example, suppose that we estimate using the
national data that b2 equals zero and that b1 equals .1. If based on our Los Angeles regression for
owners of single family homes, we predict that the average home owner (with standardized
demographics) consumes 9 megawatt/hours of electricity per year, then we would impute that the
average renter consumes 8.18 megawatt/hours of electricity per year.18

      This procedure allows us to predict a standardized household’s consumption of energy for
each metropolitan area, if it lived in four different housing categories. We then calculate a
weighted average across these four categories by metropolitan area. The weights, which vary by
metropolitan area, are based on the IPUMS data’s frequency count of each of these four housing
types. This multi-step method allows us to impute the energy consumption for renters and all
residents in multi-family buildings, where we are concerned that reported energy expenditure
does not accurately measure household consumption. Our correction procedure is especially
important in a metropolitan area such as New York City, and is much less important in places
like Houston where most of the households are single family owners.

      Natural gas consumption is driven primarily by climate. Figure 2 shows the correlation
between our estimated natural gas consumption and January temperature. We do not find the
correlation coefficient of -.81surprising, but it does suggest that our results are reasonable.

      For fuel oil and natural gas, there are again conversion factors that enable us to move from
energy use to carbon dioxide emissions. In the case of fuel oil the factor is 22.38 pounds of
carbon dioxide per gallon of fuel oil19. We again increase this number by 20 percent to reflect
the energy used in refining and distributing. According to the same source, there are 120.59
pounds of carbon dioxide emissions per 1,000 cubic feet of natural gas. In this case, there is
much less energy involved in distribution so we use this conversion factor without any

18   The REX regressions are available on request.
19   http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/1605/factors.html


                                                     16
adjustment. We combine the emissions from natural gas and fuel oil to form an estimate of total
home heating emissions.

      To examine the impact of a marginal home, we repeat this procedure using only homes built
between 1980 and 2000. Since older homes are less fuel efficient, the average home will
overstate true energy use, especially in older areas of the country. We use only homes built
within the last 20 years to minimize this effect. In principle, we could have used only homes
built in the last five or ten years, but our sample sizes become too small if we limit our samples
in this way. We will refer to these estimates as our estimates of marginal heating emissions.




      Household Electricity

      In the case of electricity consumption, we begin with the same IPUMS-based procedure used
for fuel oil and natural gas. We use state-wide price data to convert electricity expenditure into
consumption in megawatt hours20. We then regress estimated electricity consumption on
household characteristics by metropolitan area, just as we did for home heating. We also follow
the same imputation procedure for owners of multi-family units and all renters. Following this
strategy, we predict household annual electricity consumption for each metropolitan area for a
standardized household with 2.62 people earning an annual income of $62,500.

      In the case of electricity, consumption rises most sharply with July temperatures, as shown in
Figure 3. The correlation is relatively strong (.61) but there are some significant outliers in the
Pacific Northwest, namely Tacoma and Seattle. These places have particularly high electricity
usage, relative to July temperatures, which reflects, in part, the low costs of electricity in that
region.

      The conversion between electricity usage and carbon dioxide emissions is considerably more
complicated than the conversion between natural gas or petroleum usage and emissions. If we
had a national market for electricity, then it would be appropriate to use a uniform conversion
factor, but since electricity markets are regional, we must allow for different conversion factors
in different areas of the country. There is considerable heterogeneity in the emissions for

20   http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/electricity/epm/table5_6_b.html


                                                  17
megawatt hour of electricity between areas that rely on coal, like the Northeast, and areas that
use more hydroelectric energy, like the West.

   What geographic area should we use to calculate the emissions related to electricity usage?
In principle, one could calculate anything from a national average of emissions per megawatt
hour to a block specific figure. Using smaller levels of geography certainly increases the
accuracy with which emissions are allocated to electricity usage. However, if electricity is
perfectly substitutable between two places, then this precision is somewhat misleading, and
irrelevant for estimating the marginal emissions associated with new construction. The relevant
consideration is not the actual greenness of the particular area’s supplier, but rather the average
emissions of the entire area.

   For example, consider a setting where there is a clean and a dirty electricity producer in a
region, with identical costs of production and plenty of consumers who don’t care about the
source of their electricity. In equilibrium, both producers will generate the same amount of
electricity. A new consumer who buys only from the clean producer will still be associated with
the average level of emissions. Since these two providers are perfect substitutes, if a new resident
buys only from the clean provider, then someone else will be buying from the dirty provider.
For this reason, it makes sense to consider the average emissions within the market not the
individual emissions of one particular place.

   The North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC) has divided the U.S. into eight
electricity markets. While electricity within these regions is not perfectly fungible and there is
some leakage across NERC regions, there is much more substitutability of electricity within
NERC regions than across regions. The difficulties involved in transmitting electricity over long
distances mean that electricity in one region cannot readily substitute for electricity in another
region. We therefore feel comfortable treating these markets as more or less closed systems
(Holland and Mansur 2008).

   We calculate NERC region average emissions data using power plant level data from the
Environmental Protection Agency’s eGRID, or Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated




                                                 18
Database data base21. The eGRID data base contains the emissions characteristics of virtually all
electric power in the United States and includes emissions and resource mix data for virtually
every electricity-generating power plant in the U.S. eGRID uses data from 24 different federal
data sources from three different federal agencies: EPA, the Energy Information Administration
(EIA), and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC). Emissions data from EPA are
integrated with generation data from EIA to create the key conversion factor of pounds of carbon
dioxide emitted per megawatt hour of electricity produced (lbs/MWh).

      Using eGRID, we calculate the emissions for megawatt hour for each of the NERC regions.
There is remarkable heterogeneity across these regions (Holland and Mansur, 2008). For
example, San Francisco is located in a NERC region that generates 1000 pounds of carbon
dioxide for each megawatt hour of electricity. In contrast, Philadelphia is located in a NERC
region where the average power plant in the region generates 1600 pounds of carbon dioxide for
each megawatt hour.

      We then use these conversion factors to turn household electricity usage into carbon dioxide
emissions for each metropolitan area. We use the same conversion factor to handle the
electricity consumption of commuter rails. To consider the impact of the marginal home, as
above, we restrict our IPUMS estimates to homes built only between 1980 and 2000.




      Overall Household Rankings

      We finally turn to an overall ranking of metropolitan areas based on carbon dioxide
emissions. Table 2 lists the 66 largest metropolitan areas for which we have data. The first
column shows carbon dioxide emissions from predicted gasoline consumption within each
metropolitan area.22 There is considerable range in the consumption of gasoline at the
metropolitan area level. The New York metropolitan area is estimated to use the least gasoline,


21   see http://www.epa.gov/cleanenergy/egrid/index.htm
22
  These predictions are based on predicting gasoline consumption in each census tract for a standardized household.
Within a metropolitan area, census tracts differ with respect to their population density and their distance to the City
Center. Across metropolitan areas, census tracts differ with respect to their MSA’s region and overall density. We
exploit this variation as well to predict each tract’s annual gasoline consumption per household. We then use census
data on household counts to weight this tract level data into a metropolitan area level average prediction.



                                                          19
which reflects its high degree of employment and population concentration and its relatively
heavy use of public transportation. Greenville, South Carolina, is estimated to have the most
gasoline consumption. The gasoline-related emissions in Greenville are almost twice as high as
the gasoline-related emissions in the New York area.

     The second column reports our results on per household energy emissions due to public
transportation. This column adds together rail and bus emissions and converts both by
appropriate factors to arrive at carbon dioxide emissions. There is, of course, considerable
heterogeneity. Emissions from public transportation in New York City are more than three tons
of carbon dioxide from public transit per capita.23 However, even in New York, these emissions
are relatively modest relative to the contributions of cars, since public transportation shares
infrastructure, like buses, and uses electricity.

     The third column gives our results on fuel oil and natural gas. Again, the results show a fair
amount of regional disparity. Detroit leads the country in home heating emissions and Boston is
a close second. Much of the West has almost no emissions from home heating. In general,
places that use fuel oil have much higher emissions than places that use only natural gas, which
explains why emissions from this source are much lower in Chicago than in Detroit.

     The fourth column shows electricity consumption and the fifth column shows the NERC-
based conversion factor for converting electricity into emissions. To calculate electricity related
emissions in each area, the fourth and fifth columns need to be multiplied together.24 We show
these columns separately to illustrate the role of electricity usage versus the role of clean
electricity production. New Orleans is the leader in electricity usage, while residents of Buffalo
consume the least electricity. San Francisco has the second lowest electricity usage in our data.



23 We do not have data on energy consumption from public transit in Las Vegas.
24 Households use electricity not only at home but also where they shop and work. In results that are available on
request, we have used the 2003 Commercial Building Energy Survey. This building level data set collects
information on roughly 5000 buildings across the United States. While this data set does not have metropolitan area
identifiers, it does provide information on the heating degree days and cooling degree days at the location of each of
the buildings. We regress building energy consumption per worker on building type dummies and these climate
measures. Using city level data from Burchfield et. al. (2005), we predict commercial building energy consumption
per worker for each metropolitan area. The cross-metropolitan area correlation between commercial energy
consumption prediction and our residential energy consumption measure is .65. On average across the metropolitan
areas, commercial energy consumption per worker is 30% higher than residential consumption per household.



                                                         20
    The sixth column sums together all of the different sources of carbon dioxide emissions. The
table is ordered by the amount of these emissions. California’s cities are blessed with a
temperate climate and they use particularly efficient appliances and produce electricity in
particularly clean ways. Four of the five cities with the lowest emissions levels are all in
California. Providence, Rhode Island ranks in the top five due to its low electricity use.

    The high emissions cities are almost all in the South. These places have large amounts of
driving and very high electricity usage. Their electricity usage is also not particularly clean.
Texas is particularly well represented among the places with the highest levels of emissions.
Memphis has the absolute highest level among our 66 metropolitan areas. Indianapolis and
Minneapolis are the northernmost places among our ten highest emission metropolitan areas.

    New construction in the Northeast is generally between those extremes. These places use
moderate amounts of electricity. They drive less than Californians, but use large amounts of fuel
oil. The Midwest looks generally similar to the Northeast, but larger amounts of driving push
gasoline emissions up.

    In column seven, we multiply total emissions by 43 dollars per ton to find the total
emissions-related externality associated with an average home in each location. The 43 dollar
number is somewhat arbitrary, and we are using it purely for illustrative purposes. It is
conservative relative to the Stern report (2008), which suggests a cost of carbon dioxide that is
twice this amount, but it is considerably more aggressive than the numbers used by Nordhaus
(2007). Tol (2005) is one meta-study that also suggests that this number may be somewhat too
high while our number is in the middle of the range in Metcalf (2007).26 Using this figure, the
range of costs associated with each home goes from $1,148 dollars in San Diego to more than
$2,015 dollars in Memphis. This $867 dollar gap is an annual flow, and at a discount rate of 5
percent, this would suggest a tax of 17,340 dollars on every new home in Memphis relative to
San Diego. The last column gives standard errors for these cost estimates. The procedure for

26 It is relevant to note that carbon tax policy proposals have suggested taxes per ton of carbon dioxide roughly in

this range. Metcalf (2007) proposes a bundled carbon tax and a labor tax decrease. As shown in his Figure Six, he
proposes that the carbon tax start at $15 per ton (in year 2005 dollars) now and rise by 4% a year. Under this
proposal, the carbon tax per ton of carbon dioxide would equal $60 per ton (in year 2005 dollars) by 2050.




                                                         21
estimating these standard errors is detailed in the statistical appendix.27 The standard errors of
the carbon emissions (measured in tons) equal the standard errors of the emissions costs divided
by 43.

         Table 3 shows the 66 Metropolitan Area ranking based on the subset of households who
live in homes built between 1980 and 2000. Table 3’s structure is identical to Table 2 but Table
3 provides an estimate of how average emissions vary across metropolitan areas for a
standardized household who lives in housing built between 1980 and 2000. This is useful
information for determining whether within MSA growth patterns are shrinking the city’s
average footprint.

    The differences between the two tables tend to offset each other. People who live in new
homes consume more gasoline, which reflects the tendency of new growth to be in the suburbs.
However, new homes are more energy efficient and therefore have lower emissions from home
heating. In general, we find that this ranking based on recent growth is highly positively
correlated with the average rankings reported in Table 2.

    The energy use differences between metropolitan areas are quite large. Our estimate is that
a new house in coastal California is associated with two-thirds or less of the emissions associated
with a new house in Houston or Oklahoma City. These differences suggest that changing urban
development patterns can have potentially large impacts on total carbon emissions. Since
residential and personal transportation are associated with about 40 percent of total emissions, a
33 percent reduction in these sources would reduce total U.S. emissions by 13 percent. Of
course, any policy interventions would impact the flow of new housing, rather than the stock, so
changes in urban development patterns would only reduce emissions gradually.

    Our cost estimates suggest optimal location-specific taxes on development, in the absence of
other carbon emission taxes. The six hundred dollar difference in emissions costs between the
coastal California areas and Memphis suggests a flow tax of six hundred dollars per year for each
household in Memphis. This is not a small number. If the tax were paid in a single lump sum
payment, of perhaps $12,000, then this would represent a sizable increase in the cost of living in

27 The standard errors for the predictions are based on the sampling variation in the 2001 NHTS data set as reported

in Table 1. We are assuming that the large sample sizes in the IPUMS data set minimize the sampling error in our
predictions of the other entries in Table 2.


                                                         22
Memphis. The U.S. Census tells us that the median value of a home in Memphis in 2006 was
91,000 dollars. Of course, the model suggests that a direct carbon tax would improve social
welfare more than any location tax, so we believe that the main value of our results is only to
suggest the external costs associated with moving to places like Memphis.

   To study the cross-MSA correlates of greenhouse gas production, we present five separate
OLS regressions in Table 4. In each of these regressions, the explanatory variables include the
logarithm of average city income, the logarithm of city population, average January temperature
and average July temperature. We also include a measure of the share of city centralization: the
share of the population within five miles of the city center. The first column shows the correlates
of private transportation related emissions. Income is uncorrelated with gasoline usage at the
metropolitan level. At the individual level, there is a strong connection between gasoline
consumption and income, but these estimates are supposed to correct for that relationship and
they seem to do that. Larger metropolitan areas have somewhat less driving, which reflects the
fact that these cities are somewhat denser. As the share of population within five miles of the city
center increases by 10 percent, carbon dioxide emissions from driving decreases by 1300
pounds. Finally, places with warm Januarys have less driving, but places with hot Julys have
more driving. These correlations are presumably spurious, and reflect other variables, like the
degree of sprawl, associated with these weather variables.

       The next regression shows the correlates of public transit emissions. In this case, city
population is the only variable that is strongly correlated with emissions. Bigger cities are more
likely to have extensive public transit systems. There is also a weak correlation between this
outcome and the concentration of population within five miles of the city center.

       The third regression looks at the relationship between home heating related emissions and
the area-level variables. There is an extraordinarily strong negative correlation between this
variable and January temperature, which was discussed above (also see Ewing and Rong 2008).
Lower July temperatures also weakly increase home heating emissions. None of the other
variables are strongly correlated with this outcome variable. The power of temperature to
predict home heating emissions explains why the r-squared for this regression is higher than for
any of the other regressions in this table.




                                                23
       The fourth regression correlates electricity related emissions with our independent
variables. Areas that are more geographically concentrated have lower levels of electricity usage
and lower emissions. The strongest determinant of home electricity usage in this regression,
unsurprisingly, is July temperature. Still, the ability of the weather to explain electricity is
weaker than the ability of the weather to explain home heating emissions.

       Finally, the fifth regressions look at the correlates of total emissions. In this case, all of
the variables except for city income are statistically significant. More populous cities have lower
emissions, and this is being driven both by less electricity usage and by less driving. More
decentralized cities have higher emissions, and this reflects less electricity and less driving.
Places with milder Januarys have lower emissions, which is the result of less use of artificial
heat. Places with hotter Julys have higher emissions, reflecting the electricity needed to run air
conditioners.

       As such, these regressions suggest that there are several different variables associated
with lower levels of emissions at the city level. Older dense cities have lower emissions, but not
if they are particularly cold. The temperate Sunbelt uses little electricity, but not the places with
particularly hot summers.

       What is the connection between low greenhouse gas emissions and city growth? Figure 4
shows the correlation between these marginal cost estimates and development in the area since
2000. Our dependent variable is the ratio between average annual housing permits in the area
since the year 2000 and the total stock of housing in these places in the year 2000. This measure
captures the extent to which the area is building new homes.

       The overall relationship is basically flat, which suggests that current development
patterns are neutral towards emissions. Unfortunately, that conclusion may be a bit optimistic
because the correlation becomes significantly positive if we weight by the initial population of
the area. The flat relationship that we see is driven primarily by Las Vegas and Phoenix, two
areas that have high levels of growth and low levels of emissions. Without those areas, the
relationship between growth and emissions becomes more strongly positive.

       If moderate temperatures lower emissions and expenditure, then why aren’t people
moving to places with more temperate climates? One possible reason for the weak relationship


                                                  24
between new construction and per household emissions is land use regulations. As Figure 5
shows, there is a strong negative association between the Wharton Land Use Regulation Index
and carbon dioxide emissions. This Regulatory Index is discussed in detail in Gyourko, Saiz,
and Summers (2008).28 Places with the least emissions tend also to regulate most heavily. This
relationship is strongly statistically significant.

           The negative connection between land use regulation and emissions is ironic but
unsurprising. Environmentalists have fought both to reduce emissions and to restrict new
development. In California, they have been successful in both fights. The result of this
combination of activities is that the places with the lowest emissions in the country are also the
places that have made it most difficult to build. We do not believe that California’s small per-
household footprint is caused by land use regulation. Californians’ heavy reliance on driving
and not using public transit is well documented (Kahn 2006). Instead, as documented in Table 2,
California’s relative greenness reflects a temperate climate and relatively clean electric utilities.
California’s regulatory authorities have been the nation’s leader in enacting anti-pollution
regulation. The state enacted more stringent vehicle emissions and earlier than the rest of the
nation and now is pursuing the ambitious AB32 legislation signed into law by Governor
Schwarzenegger in 2006. California’s current low per-capita electricity consumption levels are
a relatively new trend. In 1968, per-capita electricity consumption in California roughly equaled
the nation’s per-capita electricity consumption. Today, California’s per-capita electricity
consumption is forty percent lower than the nation’s per-capita consumption.




     IV.      Greenhouse Gas Emissions within Metropolitan Areas




28 Gyourko, Saiz and Summers (2008) describe their index; “This aggregate measure is comprised of eleven
subindexes that summarize information on the different aspects of the regulatory environment. Nine pertain to local
characteristics, while two reflect state court and state legislative/executive branch behavior. Each index is designed
so that a low value indicates a less restrictive or more laissez faire approach to regulating the local housing market.
Factor analysis is used to create the aggregate index, which then is standardized so that the sample mean is zero and
the standard deviation equals one.”




                                                          25
   In the previous section, we focused on cross-metropolitan area implications of greenhouse
gas emissions. We now look within metropolitan areas, and focus on energy use differences
between central cities and suburbs. After all, locating in central cities generally involves far less
driving and living in smaller apartments. Since these choices are associated with fewer
greenhouse gas emissions, they should also be seen as having fewer negative externalities.
   Our approach is again to estimate the average energy consumption associated with locating
in different areas, holding an individual’s income and size constant, but not controlling for other
choices like housing characteristics. Living in a larger house is a major part of moving to the
suburbs for many people, and that should be captured in the environmental impact of
suburbanization. We will use the same data sources and the same methodology as above, but
we now focus on the differences between central city and suburban locations.
   To keep definitions constant across data sources, we use the Census definition of Central
City status, which we have for both census tracts and in the IPUMS. We exclude those data
points that do not provide us with a central city identifier. This reduces our set of metropolitan
areas down to 48. Sample sizes are unfortunately too small for us to provide robust estimates of
emissions for the marginal home within metropolitan areas. As a result, we look only at the
emissions associated with an average home.
   To provide estimates of gasoline consumption in central cities and suburbs, we continue to
use the regression results reported in Table 1 based on the 2001 National Household Travel
Survey. This regression enables us to estimate the level of gasoline usage that a standardized
household would purchase in each census tract. We then average all of the predicted gas usage
numbers in census tracts that are in Central City PUMAs to form our estimate of Central City
gasoline consumption. We do the same thing for suburban census tracts to form our estimate of
suburban gasoline consumption. We continue to multiply gasoline usage by 23.47 to get total
emissions.
       As before, we compute gasoline usage for both marginal and average houses. We
calculate average household gas consumption by averaging across census tracts using the total
number of households in each census tract. We calculate marginal household gas consumption
by averaging across census tracts, weighting them by the number of households built in the last
ten years.




                                                 26
       In the case of public transportation, we again calculate the total amount of emissions in
the metropolitan area. We then allocate those emissions on the basis of public transportation
usage. We calculate the total number of households in the central city and suburban commuters
who use public transportation. We divide the total public transit emissions by this quantity to
find the average public emissions per household that commutes using public transportation. We
then multiply this number by the share of households in the suburbs and central city respectively
that commute using public transportation to estimate the amount of public transit emissions
associated with central city and suburban households.
       For fuel oil and natural gas, we continue to use our IPUMS methodology of converting
spending into energy use. In this case, the methodology is very dependent on central city and
suburban residents facing the same fuel prices. We estimate our regressions separately for each
metropolitan area, and in this case we also estimate an indicator variable that takes on a value of
one if the household is in the suburbs. This indicator variable provides us an estimate of how
much extra fuel is being consumed in suburban areas. We continue to multiply fuel and gas
usage by the standard conversion measures to turn them into emissions.
       We use the same procedure for electricity. We regress estimated electricity consumption
on personal characteristics and a dummy variable that indicates a suburban location. We use the
coefficient on that dummy variable as our estimate of the extra electricity associated with
suburban living. We multiply this dummy variable by the NERC electric utility emissions factor
to calculate the total emissions difference associated with electricity in the central cities and the
suburbs. As discussed in the heating section above, we perform a correction using the 2001
RECS data to address the problem that renters and owners in multi-family units may not pay for
their own electricity or home heating.
       The suburban versus center city differentials are reported in Table 5. This table reports
estimates for major metropolitan areas for which the IPUMS reports within metro area
geography such that both center city residents and suburban residents can be identified. This
yields a sample of 48 metropolitan areas. The first column shows the results for gasoline
consumption. The city-suburb gap, in Table 5, ranges from 691 pounds of carbon dioxide (about
30 gallons of gas) in Los Angeles to ten times that amount in Philadelphia. Interestingly, there
are large gaps in gas emissions both in older cities, where people in the central city take public




                                                  27
transportation, and in newer cities, where everyone drives but people in the suburbs drive much
more.
   In the second columns of Table 5, we turn to public transportation related emissions.
Hartford has the largest central city-suburb gap in these emissions (2900 pounds of carbon
dioxide), followed by Chicago, Seattle, then New York. Riverside has almost no gap. While
public transportation made little difference to the metropolitan area figures, it does matter here.
Since the central city populations tend to be the big users of public transportation and those
populations are sometimes much smaller than the overall populations, the emissions that we
credit to those people can be reasonably high. For example, in the case of New York City, more
than one-third of the gains in reducing car-related emissions that are associated with central city
residents are offset by higher emissions from public transit.
        In the third column of Table 5, we turn to heating-related emissions. In this case, there is
considerable heterogeneity across metropolitan areas. In New York, central city residents emit
more than 6000 pounds of carbon dioxide less than suburbanites. In Detroit, central city
residents emit more than 6000 pounds of carbon dioxide more than suburbanites.
        The fourth column in Table 5 shows our result for electricity emissions. This column
multiplies the NERC factor with the electricity usage gap. Almost everywhere, smaller urban
homes mean lower electricity usage. Suburban electricity usage is lower in five cases when we
consider average homes and in eight cases when we look at newer homes. Central city
electricity usage does not always decline when we focus on newer homes, because while those
homes may be more efficient, they are also more likely to have air conditioning.
        The fifth column of Table 5 combines the results to show the total emissions gap between
central cities and suburbs by metropolitan area. The sixth columns multiply this quantity by 43
dollars to find the total emissions cost, which ranges from -77 dollars, in Detroit, to 289 dollars,
in New York. New York has the biggest gap between central city and suburbs. There are only
two areas where suburbs have lower emissions than central cities. The seventh column shows
the standard errors of the difference in costs which are again fairly small.
        Table 6 regresses these differences on the same urban characteristics that we used in
Table 4 to explain cross area differences in total carbon dioxide emissions. The dependent
variable is the difference in emissions between the suburbs and the central city. The first
regression shows that in bigger cities, suburbanites are more likely to drive longer distances



                                                 28
relative to central city residents. The suburb-central city driving gap also gets larger in places
with warm Julys and shorter in places with warm Januarys.
        The second regression shows that the impact of population on emissions is reversed when
we look at public transit. In this case, big city residence is particularly likely to be associated
with high levels of public transit emissions, which is, after all, what we saw in New York City in
Table 5. In richer cities, the gap also increases.
        In the third regression, we see that the heating gap between central cities and suburbs is
larger for bigger, richer and more centralized cities. Interestingly, there is no connection
between temperature and the city-suburb heating gap. The fourth regression shows that
temperature and income, but not city population or centralization, predict the difference in
electricity emissions.
        The fifth regression looks at the correlates of the total suburb-city emissions gap. The
gap is larger in cities with more income and more people. It is also larger when January
temperatures are high and when July temperatures are high.




   V.      Conclusion


   Past research has investigated how greenhouse gas emissions vary as a function of the scale
of population and income. This paper has documented that holding population and income
constant, that the spatial distribution of the population is also an important determinant of
greenhouse gas production. If the urban population lived at higher population density levels
closer to city centers in regions of the country with warmer winters and cooler summers in areas
whose electric utilities used less coal for producing power, then greenhouse gas production
would be lower.
   If carbon dioxide emissions are taxed appropriately, then individuals will make appropriate
decisions about their locations without any further government interventions. However, if we
believe that current carbon taxes, which are essentially zero, do not charge people for the full use
of their energy consumption, then location decisions will fail to internalize environmental costs.
In this paper, we have quantified the greenhouse gas externality that a standardized household




                                                  29
would create if it were located in one of 66 major metropolitan areas and if it were located in the
center city or suburb of 48 major metropolitan areas.
   We estimate that costs per household range from 830 dollars per year in San Diego to almost
1410 dollars per year in Memphis. Across areas, emissions are positively associated with July
temperature, negatively associated with January temperature, and negatively associated with both
city population and centralization. New York has the biggest suburban minus central city gap of
289 dollars while Detroit has a central city minus suburban gap of 77 dollars.
   Our work has many limitations. To translate our quantity estimates into dollar cost estimates,
we have relied on the index weight of $43 of damage per ton of carbon dioxide, and this number
lies within a large confidence interval. Our estimates are based on regressions that can provide
only a very imperfect estimate of gasoline usage or electricity consumption in particular areas.
We restricted ourselves to household energy use.
   That being said, this paper does provide what we consider to be reasonable estimates of the
emissions-related externalities associated with homes built in different areas. However, we
would be skeptical about actually using these numbers as the basis for a tax on development in
Oklahoma or a subsidy for development in San Diego. There are surely much better ways, like a
direct carbon tax, to get people to internalize the social costs of their actions. Perhaps, the
clearest public policy-related conclusion that comes out of this analysis is that current land use
controls seem to operate in a way that increases, rather than decreases, carbon dioxide emissions.




                                                  30
      Statistical Appendix for Calculating Standard Errors



         If we estimate a regression of the form Y = X ' β + ε , then by Slutsky’s Theorem and the
Law of Large Numbers (LLN) the resulting coefficients will converge to a normally distributed
random variable as follows:

                                             βˆ → d N (β , σ 2 β )

      Where σ 2 β is an appropriately defined standard error.

         Note that in general the resulting predicted values may be written as

                                                 Yˆ = X ' β̂

      Where X is any x ∈ Support ( X ) . Therefore by a separate application of Slutsky’s theorem
Yˆ has the following asymptotic distribution:

                                                     (
                                        X ' βˆ → d N Xβ , X 'σ 2 β X   )
      Here we define

                                                       x1 
                                                       
                                                       x2 
                                                       xi 3 
                                                       
                                                X i = . 
                                                      . 
                                                       
                                                      . 
                                                      x 
                                                       ik 

   Further we collapse each estimated Yˆ by MSA. This is equivalent to multiplying each Ŷ by a
                                      1
vector γ ' MSAj where γ MSAj contains    for every observation in MSA “j” , a 0 otherwise, and
                                      nj
n j is the number of observations in MSA “j”.
  j




                                                   31
                                                             1     
                                                                   
                                                             nj    
                                                             .     
                                                                   
                                                             .     
                                                                   
                                                             1     
                                               γ MSAj    :=        
                                                             nj    
                                                                   
                                                            0      
                                                            .      
                                                                   
                                                            .      
                                                            .      
                                                             0     
                                                                   

       Define YMSAj = γ ' MSAj Yˆ . By a third application of Slutsky’s theorem the appropriate
asymptotic distribution of YMSAj can be written as

                             YMSAj → d N (γ ' MSAj Xβ , γ ' MSAj X 'σ 2 β Xγ MSAj )

   Now define

                                         Ω := γ ' MSAj X 'σ 2 β Xγ MSAj

   and further define CYMSAj to be an α confidence interval for YMSAj .


                            CYMSAj = YMSAj − | Ω                                          Z α |
                                                    −1                            −1
                                                         2
                                                             Z α |, YMSAj + | Ω        2
                                                                                              
                            Z α := Φ −1 (0.95)

   Thus if we estimate Ω as

                                            MSAj X ' σ β (γ ' MSAj X ')
                                      ˆ =γ'
                                      Ω               ˆ2

   then we must only replace Z α with its appropriate counterpart from the t-distribution.




                                                    32
References
Auffhammer, M., Carson, R T. 2008. Forecasting the Path of China's CO2 Emissions Using
   Province Level Information, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 55(3),
   229-247.
Bento, A. M., Cropper, M. L., Mobarak, A. M., Vinha, K., 2003. The Impact of Urban Spatial
   Structure on Travel Demand in the United States, World Bank Policy Research Working
   Paper 3007.
Brown, M. A., Logan, E., 2008. The Residential Energy and Carbon Footprints of the 100
   Largest Metropolitan Areas, Georgia Insittute of Technology Scool of Public Policy,
   Working Paper 39.

Brown, M. A., Southworth, F., Stovall, T. K., 2005. Towards a Climate-Friendly Built
   Environment, Pew Center on Global Climate Change.

Burchfield, M., Overman, H. G., Puga, D., Turner, M. A., 2006. The Determinants of Sprawl: A
   Portrait from Space, Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(2), 587–633.
Ewing, R., Rong, F., 2008. The Impact of Urban Form on U.S. Residential Energy Use, Housing
   Policy Debate 19(1).
Fischel, W. A., 1999. Does the American Way of Zoning Cause the Suburbs of Metropolitan
    Areas to Be Too Spread Out? In Governance and Opportunity in Metropolitan America,
    Altschuler, A., Mitchell, F., Morrill, W., Wolman, H., (Eds.), National Academies Press,
    149-191.
Glaeser, E. L., Tobio, K., 2008. The Rise of the Sunbelt, Southern Economic Journal 74(3), 610-
   643.
Glaeser, E. L., Gyourko, J., Saks, R., 2005. Why is Manhattan So Expensive? Regulation and the
   Rise in House Prices, Journal of Law and Economics 48(2), 331-370.
Golob, T. F., Brownstone, D., 2005. The Impact of Residential Density on Vehicle Usage and
   Energy Consumption, University of California Energy Institute, Policy & Economics Paper
   EPE-011
Gyourko, J., Saiz A., Summers A. A., 2008. A New Measure of the Local Regulatory
   Environment for Housing Markets: The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index,
   Urban Studies 45(3), 693-729.
Holland, S. P., Mansur, E T., 2007. Is Real-Time Pricing Green?: The Environmental Impacts of
   Electricity Demand Variance , Review of Economics and Statistics.
Kahn, M. E., 2006 Green Cities: Urban Growth and the Environment, Brookings Institution
   Press, Washington, DC.
Levinson, A,. Niemann, S., 2004. Energy Use by Apartment Tenants When Landlords Pay for
   Utilities , Resource and Energy Economics 26(1), 51-75.


                                               33
Metcalf, G., 2007. A Proposal for a U.S. Carbon Tax Swap. Brookings Institution. Hamilton
   Project Working Paper.


Nordhaus, W. D., 2007. A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change,
   Journal of Economic Literature 45(3), 686–702.

Stern, N., 2008. The Economics of Climate Change, American Economic Review 98(2), 1-37.
Tol, R., 2005. The Marginal Damage Costs of Carbon Dioxide Emissions: An Assessment of the
   Uncertainties of Energy Policy.
Weitzman, M. L., 2007. A Review of the Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change,
  Journal of Economic Literature 45(3), 703–724.




                                             34
                                                             Figure 1:
                                      Relationship Between Gasoline Consumption and MSA Size
                1400




                                                 Greenville-Sp~
                                                   Birmingham, AL
                                                        Nashville, TN
                                                         Greensboro-Wi~o
                                                     Oklahoma     City~K
                                                              Charlotte-Gas~C
                          1300




                                              Tulsa, OK
                                           Akron, OHRaleigh-Durha~C
                                                   Grand        Indianapolis,~N
                                                          Rapids,~I
                                                    Louisville, K~NKansas City, ~S Atlanta, GA
                                             Scranton-Wilk~A
                                                       Austin,  TX          St. Louis, MO~L
                                                      Memphis,
                                                   Richmond-Pete~A
                                                  Dayton-Spring~H TN/A~S
                                                                Columbus,
                                                               Cincinnati   OH
                                                                           OH~N            Detroit, MI
                                                                        Cleveland, OH
                                                                               Minneapo..  Pa~N
      Gallons of Gasoline




                                       Sarasota, FL         Orlando,
                                                               San     FL Tampa-St.
                                                                    Antonio,  TX       Pet~L
                                                Albany-Schene~Y
                  1200




                                                                            Baltimore,  MDHouston-Brazo~X
                                                                                   Dallas-Fort W~X
                                                              Milwaukee,
                                                      West Palm         Pittsburgh-Be~A
                                                                    Bea~a   WI
                                         Syracuse, NY         Norfolk-VA Be~V              Washington, D~A
                                               Tucson,
                                           Tacoma,      AZ
                                                      Hartford-Bris~B
                                                    Rochester,
                                                    WA            NY
                                                       Buffalo-Niaga~Y            Riverside-San~A
                                                                    Portland-Vanc~R
                                                          Salt Orleans,
                                                                Lake Cit~T       Phoenix, AZ
          1100




                                                         New    Fort      LA
                                                                          Denver-Boulde~O
                                                                      Lauderda~n                          Chicago-Gary-~L
                                                                                                  Boston, MA
                                      Albuquerque, NMCA
                                                  Providence-Fa~,         Seattle-Evere~A
                                                                 Sacramento,   CA
                                              Fresno,                                        Philadelphia,~J
                                                                               San Diego, CA
                                                                         Miami-Hialeah~L
                                                           Las Vegas, NV                San Francisco~C
                                                                  San Jose, CA
   1000




                                                                                                            Los Angeles-L~A
                900




                                                                                                                         New York-Nort~J

                                 13                  14                   15                         16                       17
                                                                   Log of Population


Notes: Gasoline consumption was estimated using the 2001 National Household Transportation
Survey. Population is from the U.S. Census




                                                                             35
                                                      Figure 2:
                       Relationship Between Natural Gas Consumption and January Temperature
            150




                                                 Detroit, MI
   Natural Gas Consumption




                                               Grand Rapids,~I
                   100




                                                       Salt Lake Cit~T
                                    Minneapo..Chicago-Gary-~L
                                               Pa~N
                                                 Buffalo-Niaga~YAlbuquerque, NM
                                                       Denver-Boulde~O
                                                  Cleveland,   OH
                                                  Akron, OH
                                                Rochester,
                                                    Kansas  Philadelphia,~J
                                                              NY ~S
                                                         WI City, OH
                                                   Indianapolis,~N
                                           Milwaukee, Columbus,
                                                     Pittsburgh-Be~A      Atlanta, GA
                                               Syracuse,  NY Oklahoma Memphis,    TN/A~S
                                                           New   Tulsa,  OK City~K
                                                                 York-Nort~J
                                              Albany-Schene~Y
                                                        St. Louis,
                                                   Dayton-Spring~H MO~L  Seattle-Evere~A
                                                                                Las Vegas,
                                                                              Fresno,  CA NV
                                                   Cincinnati     Nashville,
                                                             Louisville,
                                                               OH~N      K~NTN
                                                                      Portland-Vanc~R
                                                                               Sacramento, CA Riverside-San~A
                                                      Providence-Fa~,
       50




                                                                         Tacoma,
                                                   Scranton-Wilk~A Birmingham,San  WA       Jose,
                                                                                              San CA
                                                                                                  Diego, CA
                                                                                        AL Francisco~C
                                                                      Norfolk-VA      San
                                                                                   Be~V
                                                       Boston,Washington,
                                                  Hartford-Bris~B
                                                                 MA Raleigh-Durha~C
                                                                         Charlotte-Gas~C
                                                                           Dallas-Fort  W~X Angeles-L~A
                                                                                             Los
                                                                              D~A Houston-Brazo~X
                                                                   Greensboro-Wi~o  Austin,
                                                                       Greenville-Sp~Tucson,TX AZ
                                                                 Richmond-Pete~A
                                                            Baltimore, MD             New Orleans, LA
                                                                                    San Antonio, TX
                                                                                         Phoenix, AZ

                                                                                               Tampa-St.
                                                                                               Orlando,
                                                                                               Sarasota,
                                                                                                     West Pet~L
                                                                                                       Miami-Hialeah~L
                                                                                                        FL
                                                                                                         FLPalm Bea~a
                                                                                                       Fort Lauderda~n
            0




                             0           20                   40                          60                    80
                                                     January Temperature


Notes: Natural Gas Consumption was estimated using the Integrated Public Use Microdata
Series from the 2000 Census, the Department of Energy prices for natural gas, and the
Department of Energy’s Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS) for 2001. January
Temperature is from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.




                                                               36
                                                              Figure 3:
                                 Relationship Between Electricity Consumption and July Temperature
                30000




                                                                                        New  Orleans, LA
                                                                                          Houston-Brazo~X
                                                                                       Memphis,   TN/A~SW~X
                                                                                             Dallas-Fort
                                                                                     Oklahoma City~K
                                                                          Richmond-Pete~A
                                                                                       West Palm FLBea~a
                                                                       Baltimore, MDOrlando,
   10000 15000 20000 25000




                                                                                            SanLauderda~n
                                                                                          Fort   Antonio,
                                                                                           Austin, TX
                                                                                          Miami-Hialeah~L
                                                                                Birmingham,    AL         TX
                                                                             Nashville,Tampa-St.
                                                                                         TN        Pet~L
                                                                             Norfolk-VA
                                                                            Louisville, K~NBe~V
                                                                                       Sarasota,
                                                                              Washington, D~A     FL
       Electricity Consumption




                                                                         Philadelphia,~J
                                                                             Greenville-Sp~
                                                                               Atlanta, GA
                                                                 Cincinnati Kansas
                                                                 Dayton-Spring~H
                                                                    Indianapolis,~N
                                                                             OH~N    City,Tulsa,
                                                                          Greensboro-Wi~o  ~S OK
                                                                             Raleigh-Durha~C
                                                                                St. Louis, MO~L
                                                                                Charlotte-Gas~C
                                                            Cleveland, OH
                                                            Scranton-Wilk~A
                                                               Minneapo..
                                                            Akron, OH      Pa~N
                                               Tacoma, WA            Columbus, OH
                                                               Pittsburgh-Be~A                                 Phoenix, AZ
                                                                 Chicago-Gary-~L
                                                                 Detroit, MI
                                               Seattle-Evere~AMilwaukee,  WI

                                                            Grand Rapids,~I
                                                    Portland-Vanc~R                          Tucson, AZLas Vegas, NV
                                                                   New York-Nort~J
                                                                     NY Salt
                                                                 Boston,  MA Lake Cit~T
                                                                Denver-Boulde~O
                                                                 Hartford-Bris~B
                                                           Syracuse,
                                                           Albany-Schene~Y        Fresno, CA
                                                                     Sacramento,
                                                                Providence-Fa~,
                                                                  Riverside-San~A
                                                          Buffalo-Niaga~Y
                                                          Rochester, NY          CA
                                                                            Albuquerque, NM
                                                      Los Angeles-L~A
                                      San Jose, CA
                                      San Francisco~C      San Diego, CA
                5000




                                 60                   70                  80                        90                       100
                                                                   July Temperature


Notes: Electricity Consumption was estimated using the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series
from the 2000 Census, the Department of Energy prices for electricity, and the Department of
Energy’s Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS) for 2001. Electricity Consumption
was estimated using July Temperature is from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration.




                                                                             37
                                                                         Figure 4:
                                                           City Growth and Total Emissions Costs
                                                                                                       Atlanta, GA
                               60000




                                                                        New York-Nort~J
   Permits Per Year: 2000-2006




                                                                                                              Houston-Brazo~X
                                                              Phoenix, AZ                   Chicago-Gary-~L
                   40000




                                                      Riverside-San~A
                                                                                                          Dallas-Fort W~X
                                                            Las Vegas, NV                            Washington, D~A

                                                                                      Tampa-St. Pet~L
                                                                                            Orlando,  FL
     20000




                                                                   Denver-Boulde~O             Charlotte-Gas~C
                                                                                                Minneapo.. Pa~N
                                             Los Angeles-L~A                 Boston, MA                Austin, MI
                                                                                                      Detroit,  TX
                                                     Sacramento, CA                     Miami-Hialeah~L
                                                                                     Seattle-Evere~A
                                                                                             Raleigh-Durha~CPhiladelphia,~J
                                                                                                        Indianapolis,~N
                                             San
                                               SanDiego, CA
                                                   Francisco~C      Portland-Vanc~RColumbus,San    OHAntonio,
                                                                                                         Kansas TXCity, ~S TN
                                                                                                               Nashville,
                                                                                       West   PalmSt. Louis,
                                                                                                    Bea~a
                                                                                            Greensboro-Wi~o
                                                                                                              MO~L
                                                                           Salt Lake  Cit~T
                                                                                   Sarasota,   FL  Baltimore, MD
                                                           Tucson, AZ           Fort Lauderda~n Cincinnati OH~N
                                                                                               Norfolk-VA   Be~V         Memphis, TN/A~S
                                                                                                 Greenville-Sp~
                                                                                                      Richmond-Pete~A
                                                                                                                   OHK~NOklahoma
                                                                                                          Louisville,
                                                                                                      Cleveland,                  City~K
                                               San Jose, CA   Albuquerque,
                                                          Fresno, CA      Tacoma,
                                                                            NM     WA       Grand
                                                                                   Milwaukee,   WI  Rapids,~I  Birmingham,   AL
                                                                                          Pittsburgh-Be~A
                                                                                                    New   Orleans,
                                                                                                      Tulsa,  OK LA
                                                                Rochester,  Hartford-Bris~B
                                                                         Albany-Schene~Y
                                                                            NY
                                                                  Buffalo-Niaga~Y                   Scranton-Wilk~A
                                                                                                 Dayton-Spring~H
                                                                                                  Akron, OH
                                                                    Providence-Fa~,
                                                                     Syracuse, NY
                   0




                                       800                 1000                 1200            1400                              1600
                                                                  Total Cost from Marginal Home


Notes: Housing permit data is from the U.S. Census. Total Cost from Marginal Home was
estimated using data from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series from the 2000 Census, the
2001 National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS), the Department of Energy, the
National Transit Database, the 2001 Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS), and the
Environmental Protection Agency’s Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database
(eGRID).




                                                                                    38
                                                            Figure 5:
                                       Wharton Regulation Index and Total Emissions Costs
              10




                                    Los Angeles-L~A




                                     San Francisco~C                      Seattle-Evere~A
   Wharton Regulation Index




                                     San
                                    San   Jose,CA
                                        Diego,  CA
                       5




                                                                Salt Lake Cit~T
                                                                     Fort Lauderda~nCincinnati OH~N
                                                                                          Tulsa, OK
                                                                                   Charlotte-Gas~C Birmingham,
                                                                                                   Nashville, TNAL
                                           Sacramento, CAPortland-Vanc~R
                                                                  Boston, MA
                                                           New York-Nort~J
                                                                            Miami-Hialeah~L
                                                          Syracuse, NY
                                                                                      Akron, OHPhiladelphia,~J
                                                                              Pittsburgh-Be~A               Memphis, TN/A~S
                                                                                                     Houston-Brazo~X
                                                                       Milwaukee, WI Baltimore, MD
          0




                                                         Providence-Fa~,            Minneapo..
                                                                                        New
                                                                                Orlando, FL      Pa~N
                                                                                             Orleans,  LA
                                                                           Columbus,
                                                                Hartford-Bris~B        OH
                                                                           Tampa-St. Pet~L
                                                              Albany-Schene~Y              Washington,
                                                                                             Atlanta, GAD~A
                                                    Rochester,
                                                 Phoenix,  AZ NY                Greensboro-Wi~o
                                                                                          Detroit, MI K~N
                                                                                Grand Rapids,~I
                                                                                             Louisville,
                                                                                           Indianapolis,~N
                                                                                            Kansas City, ~S
                                                                                          Cleveland, OH Oklahoma City~K
                                                        Denver-Boulde~O              San
                                                                                      St. Antonio,  TX
                                                                                          Louis, MO~L
              -5




                                                                                  Chicago-Gary-~L
                                                                                      Dayton-Spring~H
                                                                                                   Dallas-Fort W~X

                                                        Buffalo-Niaga~Y                 Richmond-Pete~A

                              800               1000                 1200            1400                            1600
                                                       Total Cost from Marginal Home


Notes: The Wharton Regulation Index is discussed in detail in Gyourko, Saiz, and Summers
(2008). Total Cost from Marginal Home was estimated using data from the Integrated Public Use
Microdata Series from the 2000 Census, the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey
(NHTS), the Department of Energy, the National Transit Database, the 2001 Residential Energy
Consumption Survey (RECS), and the Environmental Protection Agency’s Emissions &
Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID).




                                                                          39
                    Table 1:
     Gallons of Gasoline Consumed Per Year
                                                  Household's Annual
                                                    Total Gasoline
                                                    Consumption
                                                      (Gallons)

Midwest                                                    78.998
                                                            (0.41)
South Dummy                                                31.799
                                                            (0.2)
West Dummy                                                -417.605
                                                            (4.32)
Log(Zip Code Distance to CBD)                              64.118
                                                            (5.28)
Log(Census Tract Density)                                 -116.851
                                                           (17.25)
Log(Metropolitan Area Density)                              -38.4
                                                            (2.12)
Log(Census Tract Density)*Midwest                            3.67
                                                            (0.17)
Log(Census Tract Density)*South                            10.215
                                                            (0.53)
Log(Census Tract Density)*West                             59.899
                                                            (5.37)
Log(household income)                                      299.264
                                                            (16.4)
household size                                             163.704
                                                            (28.8)
household head age                                          3.127
                                                            (6.44)
Constant                                                  -1731.832
                                                            (6.92)


Observations                                                11728
R2                                                           0.30

Notes:
(1) Data is from the 2001 National Highway Travel Survey (NTHS).
(2) The unit of analysis is a household.
(3) A dummy variable indicating that the head of household's age is missing
is included.
(4) Top 1% set as topcode
(5) Standard errors are clustered by metropolitan area and are reported
below the regression coefficient estimate.
(6) The omitted category is a household in the Northeast region.



                                     40
                                                                                     Table 2:
                                                                   Annual Standardized Household CO 2 Emissions
                                                                                                                                                                             Carbon
                                                                            Emissions from            Emissions                                    NERC Power                Dioxide
                                                               Emissions        Public               from Home                                    Plant Emissions           Emissions          Standard
MSA                                                          from Driving   Transportation             Heating               Electricity               Factor                 Cost               Error
                                                                                                                                                  (Lbs of CO2 per
                                                             (Lbs of CO2)     (Lbs of CO2)          (Lbs of CO2)         (Megawatt Hrs)            Megawatt Hrs)           ($ per Year)      ($ per Year)

San Diego, CA                                                     24,774            689                  5,994                   7.18                    1,007                 1,148             14.87
San Francisco, CA                                                 23,970           1,675                 6,784                   7.03                    1,007                 1,152             17.17
San Jose, CA                                                      23,649           2,058                 7,030                   7.75                    1,007                 1,175             16.03
Providence, RI                                                    22,562           1,273                12,965                   7.35                    1,185                 1,177             13.24
Los Angeles, CA                                                   23,553           1,062                 6,439                   8.43                    1,007                 1,188             17.91
Sacramento, CA                                                    25,534            458                  6,875                   9.07                    1,007                 1,237             13.96
Hartford, CT                                                      23,092           1,539                13,752                   8.09                    1,185                 1,239             17.71
Riverside, CA                                                     26,380             42                  6,461                   9.27                    1,007                 1,246             13.64
Boston, MA                                                        22,870           2,276                14,019                   7.92                    1,185                 1,253             11.91
Tucson, AZ                                                        26,363            616                  4,535                  12.25                    1,007                 1,270             14.65
Buffalo, NY                                                       24,400           1,124                11,481                   6.97                    1,185                 1,277             14.04
Las Vegas, NV                                                     24,257              0                  6,714                  13.25                    1,007                 1,280             15.05
Albuquerque, NM                                                   25,229            648                 10,741                   8.92                    1,007                 1,296             14.83
Fresno, CA                                                        25,662            951                  7,634                  10.48                    1,007                 1,304             14.62
Rochester, NY                                                     25,732            902                 11,377                   7.27                    1,185                 1,306             16.64
Phoenix, AZ                                                       25,543             75                 2,627                   16.39                    1,007                 1,307             13.71
Denver, CO                                                        25,159           1,374                10,494                  10.10                    1,007                 1,336             13.76
Portland, OR                                                      25,915           2,098                 5,854                  13.58                    1,007                 1,347             13.90
Syracuse, NY                                                      26,744            574                 11,588                   8.07                    1,185                 1,347             17.78
Albany, NY                                                        26,277           1,054                11,653                   8.05                    1,185                 1,352             17.21
New York, NY                                                      18,081           6,386                12,503                   7.83                    1,400                 1,379              6.33
Salt Lake City, UT                                                25,491           3,104                11,146                  10.15                    1,007                 1,406             13.90
Tacoma, WA                                                        26,169            430                  5,942                  18.36                    1,007                 1,422             14.48
Seattle, WA                                                       25,234           5,948                 6,762                  15.50                    1,007                 1,477             13.79
Pittsburgh, PA                                                    25,591           2,093                12,313                   9.67                    1,614                 1,600             15.88
Cleveland, OH                                                     26,784           1,733                10,980                  10.90                    1,614                 1,633             13.00
Akron, OH                                                         28,604            768                 10,652                  10.91                    1,614                 1,644             16.94
Scranton, PA                                                      27,611            282                 13,173                  10.19                    1,614                 1,651             18.64
Fort Lauderdale, FL                                               25,392           1,124                  539                   17.47                    1,427                 1,695             18.26
Philadelphia, PA                                                  22,784           3,993                13,688                  12.30                    1,614                 1,698              9.59
Sarasota, FL                                                      28,155            510                   532                   16.29                    1,427                 1,701             14.55
Milwaukee, WI                                                     26,315           1,291                10,117                   9.35                    1,614                 1,726             12.73
Columbus, OH                                                      27,997            278                  9,291                  10.14                    1,614                 1,727             14.94
St. Louis, MO                                                     28,105           1,267                 8,749                  13.54                    1,472                 1,737             13.98
West Palm Beach, FL                                               27,233            616                   677                   17.82                    1,427                 1,738             15.40
Tampa, FL                                                         28,034            742                   673                   17.36                    1,427                 1,743             14.88
Cincinnati, OH                                                    27,537            770                  8,784                  12.83                    1,543                 1,764             12.09
Miami, FL                                                         24,187           4,689                  896                   17.92                    1,427                 1,768             21.69
Chicago, IL                                                       24,278           5,221                10,374                   9.83                    1,614                 1,781             15.21
Orlando, FL                                                       28,174           1,361                  734                   18.48                    1,427                 1,789             14.44
Norfolk, VA                                                       27,091           1,078                 5,561                  16.01                    1,472                 1,792             15.43
New Orleans, LA                                                   24,899            663                  4,964                  19.05                    1,472                 1,795             19.18
Raleigh-Durham, NC                                                29,922            495                  5,797                  14.55                    1,472                 1,798             13.96
Greensboro, NC                                                    31,300            216                  4,747                  14.53                    1,472                 1,799             15.09
Grand Rapids, MI                                                  29,248            572                 14,362                   8.23                    1,614                 1,811             18.57
Charlotte, NC                                                     30,820           1,084                 5,963                  14.25                    1,472                 1,825             14.58
Kansas City, MO                                                   28,763            644                 10,319                  13.50                    1,561                 1,830             16.51
San Antonio, TX                                                   27,694           1,929                 4,110                  15.74                    1,555                 1,832             15.24
Washington, DC                                                    25,918           4,729                 5,674                  13.72                    1,543                 1,832             18.46
Baltimore, MD                                                     26,540           2,135                 5,405                  13.78                    1,614                 1,835             17.57
Richmond, VA                                                      29,459            771                  4,101                  16.87                    1,472                 1,835             15.23
Louisville, KY                                                    27,880            884                  8,538                  14.92                    1,543                 1,837             13.19
Greenville, SC                                                    32,169            130                  4,964                  15.25                    1,472                 1,841             16.90
Dayton, OH                                                        28,888            986                  9,027                  12.69                    1,614                 1,847             17.89
Tulsa, OK                                                         29,091            353                  8,729                  13.69                    1,561                 1,855             14.80
Detroit, MI                                                       27,403            889                 16,511                   9.23                    1,614                 1,862             13.22
Atlanta, GA                                                       29,425           1,121                 8,851                  14.63                    1,472                 1,866             13.96
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN                                          27,427            143                 10,990                  10.12                    1,819                 1,866             13.51
Indianapolis, IN                                                  29,222            534                 10,665                  12.80                    1,614                 1,888             16.62
Austin, TX                                                        29,134           1,595                 4,613                  16.58                    1,555                 1,892             15.02
Dallas, TX                                                        27,323           1,723                 6,100                  17.81                    1,555                 1,926             16.30
Houston, TX                                                       27,333           1,447                 5,344                  18.74                    1,555                 1,932             15.98
Birmingham, AL                                                    30,041            227                  7,759                  16.64                    1,472                 1,937             14.82
Nashville, TN                                                     30,495            473                  6,699                  17.21                    1,472                 1,954             14.71
Oklahoma City, OK                                                 28,953            332                  8,710                  16.41                    1,649                 2,005             14.73
Memphis, TN                                                       28,440           1,073                 8,438                  18.70                    1,472                 2,015             14.43


Notes:
(1) Data is from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series from the 2000 Census, the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS), the Department of Energy, the National Transit Database, the
2001 Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS), and the Environmental Protection Agency’s Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID).
(2) See text for detailed descriptions of the data calculations




                                                                                                   41
                                                        Table 3:
          Annual Standardized Household CO2 Emissions for Households Living in Homes Less Than Twenty Years Old
                                                                                                                                                   NERC                Carbon
                                                                            Emissions from            Emissions                                  Power Plant           Dioxide
                                                               Emissions        Public               from Home                                    Emissions           Emissions         Standard
MSA                                                          from Driving   Transportation             Heating              Electricity            Factor               Cost              Error
                                                                                                                                                 (Lbs of CO2
                                                                                                                                                     per
                                                                                                                                                  Megawatt
                                                             (Lbs of CO2)     (Lbs of CO2)          (Lbs of CO2)         (Megawatt Hrs)             Hrs)            ($ per Year) ($ per Year)

Los Angeles, CA                                                   23,766          1,062                  5,558                   8.60                 1,007               840             17.88
San Diego, CA                                                     25,183           689                   5,975                   7.34                 1,007               844             16.20
San Franciso, CA                                                  24,777          1,675                  5,765                   7.62                 1,007               858             17.13
San Jose, CA                                                      24,004          2,058                  6,055                   7.85                 1,007               860             19.96
Sacramento, CA                                                    25,827           458                   6,636                   9.50                 1,007               913             13.93
Riverside, CA                                                     26,761            42                   6,413                   9.34                 1,007               916             13.65
Fresno, CA                                                        25,587           951                   7,126                  10.60                 1,007               953             14.46
Tucson, AZ                                                        27,062           616                   4,106                  13.02                 1,007               965             14.65
Las Vegas, NV                                                     24,667             0                   7,347                  12.97                 1,007               969             15.08
Phoenix, AZ                                                       26,339            75                   2,168                  17.04                 1,007               983             14.68
Albuquerque, NM                                                   25,764           648                  10,500                   9.03                 1,007               989             34.98
Rochester, NY                                                     26,920           902                  10,084                   7.67                 1,185              1,011            16.73
Buffalo, NY                                                       26,539          1,124                 10,866                   7.84                 1,185              1,028            14.05
Denver, CO                                                        26,147          1,374                 10,152                  10.47                 1,007              1,037            13.82
Portland-Vancouver, OR                                            26,520          2,098                  6,665                  13.16                 1,007              1,044            14.11
Providence, RI                                                    25,648          1,273                 12,213                   8.00                 1,185              1,045            14.64
Syracuse, NY                                                      27,637           574                  10,441                   8.82                 1,185              1,056            17.80
New York, NY                                                      20,480          6,386                 10,258                   8.78                 1,400              1,062             6.34
Albany, NY                                                        28,618          1,054                 10,462                   8.78                 1,185              1,087            17.24
Tacoma, WA                                                        26,877           430                   6,120                  17.05                 1,007              1,088            14.48
Salt Lake City, UT                                                26,282          3,104                 10,870                  10.84                 1,007              1,100            13.46
Hartford, CT                                                      27,047          1,539                 12,245                   8.89                 1,185              1,105            17.71
Boston, MA                                                        26,062          2,276                 13,023                   9.18                 1,185              1,123            11.75
Fort Lauderdale, FL                                               25,992          1,124                   354                   17.97                 1,427              1,142            18.14
Milwaukee, WI                                                     28,020          1,291                  8,957                   9.71                 1,614              1,160            12.93
Sarasota, FL                                                      29,037           510                    584                   16.94                 1,427              1,168            14.92
Seattle, WA                                                       25,838          5,948                 7,425                   15.45                 1,007              1,177            13.88
Columbus, OH                                                      29,515           278                   8,602                  10.43                 1,614              1,187            14.15
Tampa, FL                                                         28,885           742                    707                   17.48                 1,427              1,189            14.79
West Palm Beach, FL                                               27,963           616                    583                   18.58                 1,427              1,197            16.08
Miami, FL                                                         25,056          4,689                   697                   17.86                 1,427              1,203            21.58
Pittsburgh, PA                                                    28,075          2,093                 9,713                   10.40                 1,614              1,219            15.89
Orlando, FL                                                       28,838          1,361                   665                   18.50                 1,427              1,231            14.36
Greensboro, NC                                                    31,442           216                   4,169                  14.58                 1,472              1,232            14.74
Grand Rapids, MI                                                  30,236           572                  13,141                   8.36                 1,614              1,235            17.96
Raleigh, NC                                                       30,433           495                   5,446                  14.56                 1,472              1,243            14.54
Chicago, IL                                                       26,088          5,221                 10,113                  10.17                 1,614              1,243            15.53
Norfolk, VA                                                       27,606          1,078                  5,587                  16.47                 1,472              1,258            15.40
Charlotte, SC                                                     31,159          1,084                  5,439                  14.19                 1,472              1,259            14.40
Cincinnati, OH                                                    29,407           770                   6,742                  14.09                 1,543              1,261            11.50
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN                                          29,151           143                  10,513                  10.45                 1,819              1,264            13.63
San Antonio, TX                                                   28,810          1,929                  2,638                  16.49                 1,555              1,269            15.26
Greenville, SC                                                    32,568           130                  4,104                   15.28                 1,472              1,275            19.71
Dayton-Springfield, OH                                            29,463           986                   7,155                  13.47                 1,614              1,276            17.09
Akron, OH                                                         30,454           768                   9,662                  11.47                 1,614              1,277            15.22
St. Louis, MO-IL                                                  29,811          1,267                 7,366                   14.39                 1,472              1,282            12.68
Baltimore, MD                                                     28,347          2,135                 3,391                   16.07                 1,614              1,286            17.64
New Orleans, LA                                                   26,164           663                   3,129                  20.45                 1,472              1,291            19.25
Scranton, PA                                                      30,117           282                  10,117                  12.24                 1,614              1,296            18.71
Cleveland, OH                                                     29,298          1,733                 10,032                  12.27                 1,614              1,309            13.28
Richmond, VA                                                      29,521           771                  3,790                   18.23                 1,472              1,310            14.69
Tulsa, OK                                                         30,841           353                   7,805                  14.12                 1,561              1,312            14.85
Detroit, MI                                                       29,473           889                  14,957                   9.75                 1,614              1,313            13.05
Washington, DC                                                    27,511          4,729                 5,228                   15.48                 1,543              1,319            18.65
Austin, TX                                                        29,717          1,595                 4,419                   16.49                 1,555              1,320            15.07
Indianapolis, IN                                                  30,299           534                   8,949                  13.48                 1,614              1,323            26.66
Kansas City, MO                                                   30,235           644                   9,042                  14.01                 1,561              1,328            17.23
Louisville, KY                                                    30,231           884                  6,965                   15.63                 1,543              1,337            18.52
Atlanta, GA                                                       30,192          1,121                  8,555                  15.20                 1,472              1,338            14.01
Philadelphia, PA                                                  25,426          3,993                 10,831                  14.16                 1,614              1,357             9.66
Dallas, TX                                                        28,155          1,723                  5,253                  18.53                 1,555              1,375            16.31
Birmingham, AL                                                    32,491           227                   5,920                  17.21                 1,472              1,376            15.96
Nashville, TN                                                     31,959           473                  7,006                   16.69                 1,472              1,376            15.65
Houston, TX                                                       28,216          1,447                  5,148                  19.30                 1,555              1,394            16.54
Oklahoma City, OK                                                 31,312           332                   8,058                  16.94                 1,649              1,454            15.12
Memphis, TN                                                       29,547          1,073                  8,166                  19.63                 1,472              1,455            14.41


Notes:


(1) Data is from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series from the 2000 Census, the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS), the Department of Energy, the National Transit Database,
the 2001 Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS), and the Environmental Protection Agency’s Emissions & Generation Resource Integrated Database (eGRID).
(2) See text for detailed descriptions of the data calculations




                                                                                               42
                                                                      Table 4:
                                                                  Regression Table

                                                                               (1)                (2)              (3)            (4)             (5)

                                                                                      Emissions from Emissions Emissions
                                                                           Emissions      Public     from Home   from                          Total
                                                                         from Driving Transportation Heating Electricity                      Emissions


Log(Income)                                                                   1373               1123            -1901           3745             4340
                                                                             (1945)             (1351)           (2215)         (6452)           (7051)
Log(Population)                                                              -2514               1193             1084          -2337            -2573
                                                                              (411)              (285)            (468)         (1362)           (1489)
Share of MSA Employment within 5 Miles of the City Center                   -13079               2587             4215         -21618           -27896
                                                                             (2432)             (1690)           (2770)         (8068)           (8817)
January Mean Temperature                                                        -71                 -4             -191            -15             -280
                                                                               (17)               (12)             (19)           (56)             (62)
July Mean Temperature                                                          107                 -11              -92           612              615
                                                                               (39)               (27)             (44)          (128)            (140)
Constant                                                                     46439             -27651            25966         -30688            14066
                                                                            (20068)            (13940)          (22857)        (66569)          (72749)

Observations                                                                   66                 66               66             66               66
R-squared                                                                     0.56               0.38             0.73           0.41             0.41

Notes:
(1) Dependent variables are the total pounds of CO2 emissions from the listed source.
(2) The dependent variables are the marginal emissions, that is, emissions calculated for housing built between 1980 and 2000. See Table 3.
(3) The unit of analysis is a metropolitan area.
(4) Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
(5) Data is from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series from the 2000 Census, the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS), the Department of
Energy, the National Transit Database, the 2001 Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS), the Environmental Protection Agency’s Emissions & Generation
Resource Integrated Database (eGRID), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.




                                                                            43
                                                                   Table 5:
                                               Suburb-City Differences in CO2 Output Emissions

                                                                                                                                           Suburb-
                                                                             Suburb-City          Suburb-City                                City
                                                            Suburb-City      Difference in        Difference in                           Difference       Suburb-
                                                            Difference in   Emissions from         Emissions           Suburb-City        in Carbon           City
                                                              Emissions         Public            from Home            Difference in       Dioxide         Standard
MSA                                                         from Driving    Transportation          Heating             Electricity       Emissions          Error
                                                                                                                                                             ($ per
                                                             (Lbs of CO2)    (Lbs of CO2)         (Lbs of CO2)         (Lbs of CO2) ($ per Year)             Year)

New York, NY                                                      6,150          -2,367                 5,650               4,015            289.16            9.68
Nashville, TN                                                     7,880           -649                   986                3,911            260.74           25.15
Atlanta, GA                                                       6,593          -1,242                  958                5,676            257.69           23.37
Boston, MA                                                        6,691          -1,091                 4,460               1,837            255.82           17.73
Philadelphia, PA                                                  6,884          -2,286                  838                4,926            222.78           13.96
Washington, DC                                                    5,436          -2,280                  140                5,757            194.64           29.18
Hartford, CT                                                      5,392          -2,905                 3,926               1,689            174.21           25.76
San Francisco, CA                                                 4,246           -939                  2,678               2,078            173.35           25.66
Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN                                          5,314           -105                  -225               2,960             170.77           21.11
Houston, TX                                                       2,794           -561                   676                4,726            164.13           23.33
Raleigh-Durham, NC                                                3,011           -182                 -1,839              5,996             150.19           21.48
Memphis, TN                                                       3,559           -423                   252                3,529            148.72           21.91
Tulsa, OK                                                         4,959           -161                  -771                2,755            145.80           23.13
Milwaukee, WI                                                     4,624           -860                   140                2,466            136.96           20.18
Baltimore, MD                                                     6,248          -1,647                -3,674               5,417            136.40           28.36
Dallas, TX                                                        4,040           -986                  -884                4,009            132.86           23.96
Providence, RI                                                    4,427           -982                  1,615               1,067            131.74           20.89
Portland, OR                                                      2,965           -553                   169                3,362            127.76           20.46
Richmond, VA                                                      4,475           -995                 -3,478               5,873            126.29           22.04
Cincinnati, OH                                                    2,848           -383                 -2,281              5,424             120.58           17.40
Syracuse, NY                                                      2,043           -204                  1,335               2,091            113.18           25.27
Cleveland, OH                                                     4,396          -1,002                -2,113               3,864            110.60           19.62
Buffalo, NY                                                       4,245           -813                   124                1,558            109.95           20.10
Seattle, WA                                                       2,894          -2,608                 1,282               3,309            104.87           20.58
Norfolk, VA                                                       2,997           -295                   -83                2,226            104.17           22.48
Charlotte, SC                                                     2,937           -604                  -248                2,671            102.26           21.27
San Antonio, TX                                                   3,589           -388                  -911                2,331             99.34           23.54
Austin, TX                                                        4,106           -784                  -293                1,415             95.53           23.92
St. Louis, MO                                                     4,296          -1,378                -1,377               2,742             92.06           19.39
Akron, OH                                                         3,661           -369                 -1,022               1,707             85.51           23.20
Sacramento, CA                                                    2,185           -101                   201                1,681             85.27           20.56
Phoenix, AZ                                                       3,675            -94                 -1,497               1,835             84.25           21.34
Chicago, IL                                                       5,577          -2,624                 -219                1,102             82.48           24.03
Greensboro, NC                                                    2,199            -60                 -3,340               4,220             64.91           21.06
Denver, CO                                                        2,503           -641                   150                 934              63.34           20.65
Oklahoma City, OK                                                 1,086           -115                  -192                1,726             53.86           21.02
Fresno, CA                                                        1,438            -92                   267                 785              51.55           20.56
Kansas City, MO                                                   2,705           -542                 -1,625               1,743             49.03           25.54
Rochester, NY                                                     2,662           -554                 -1,001               1,162             48.80           23.85
Grand Rapids, MI                                                  1,528           -183                 -1,172               1,870             43.94           25.65
New Orleans, LA                                                   3,391           -474                 -1,507                407              39.06           27.77
Riverside, CA                                                     1,176             -8                   685                -695              24.88           19.49
Dayton, OH                                                        2,918           -527                 -2,893               1,534             22.20           24.05
Pittsburgh, PA                                                    5,824          -1,819                -3,744                318              12.43           23.14
Tampa, FL                                                         2,931           -560                  -873               -1,239              5.57           22.52
Tacoma, WA                                                        3,043           -134                  -365               -2,428             2.49            21.51
Los Angeles, CA                                                    691            -229                  -119               -2,455            -45.42           25.36
Detroit, MI                                                       4,475          -1,214                -6,800                -48             -77.12           19.62


Notes:
(1) Data is from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series from the 2000 Census, the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS), the Department of Energy,
the National Transit Database, the 2001 Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS), and the Environmental Protection Agency’s Emissions & Generation Resource
Integrated Database (eGRID).
(2) See text for detailed descriptions of the data calculations




                                                                                 44
                                                                         Table 6:
                                                                     Regression Table

                                                                               (1)                 (2)                (3)             (4)              (5)
                                                                                              City-Suburb        City-Suburb
                                                                          City-Suburb         Difference in      Difference in                  City-Suburb
                                                                          Difference in      Emissions from       Emissions      City-Suburb    Difference in
                                                                         Emissions from          Public          from Home       Difference in Carbon Dioxide
                                                                            Driving          Transportation        Heating        Electricity Total Emissions


Log(Income)                                                                    4190              -1894               4641             9532           16468
                                                                              (2098)              (924)             (2732)          (2547)           (4557)
Log(Population)                                                                 665                -478              1070             -876             381
                                                                               (394)              (174)              (514)           (479)            (857)
Share of MSA Employment within 5 Miles of the City Center                      3068              -1911              12772            -2792           11137
                                                                              (2623)             (1155)             (3415)          (3184)           (5697)
January Mean Temperature                                                         -59                17                 53              -61             -50
                                                                                (20)                (9)               (26)            (24)             (43)
July Mean Temperature                                                            93                  -7                -22             158             222
                                                                                (38)               (17)               (50)            (47)             (83)
Constant                                                                     -57430              27215             -69873           -98891          -198979
                                                                             (21624)             (9526)            (28159)         (26251)          (46972)

Number of Observations                                                          48                  48                48              48               48
R2                                                                             0.37                0.44              0.36            0.39             0.37


Notes:
(1) Dependent variables are the suburb-city difference of total pounds of CO2 emissions from the listed source. See Table 5.
(2) The unit of analysis is a metropolitan area.
(3) Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
(4) Data is from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series from the 2000 Census, the 2001 National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS), the Department of
Energy, the National Transit Database, the 2001 Residential Energy Consumption Survey (RECS), the Environmental Protection Agency’s Emissions & Generation
Resource Integrated Database (eGRID), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.




                                                                              45
