NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CREATING A BIGGER PIE? THE EFFECTS OF EMPLOYEE OWNERSHIP, PROFIT
SHARING, AND STOCK OPTIONS ON WORKPLACE PERFORMANCE
Joseph R. Blasi
Richard B. Freeman
Chris Mackin
Douglas L. Kruse
Working Paper 14230
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14230

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

This paper was presented at the Russell Sage/NBER conference in New York City, October 2006,
and benefited from comments by Casey Ichniowski and other participants. An earlier version was
presented at the Labor and Employment Relations conference, Boston, Massachusetts, January 5-8,
2006. This research is supported by a grant from the Russell Sage Foundation and the Rockefeller
Foundation. The National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago provided valuable
assistance with the U. S. General Social Survey segment that forms the basis for some of the analysis.
Refen Koh, Rhokeun Park, Michelle Pinheiro, and Patricia Berhau provided excellent assistance in
survey scanning, entry, and verification. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Joseph R. Blasi, Richard B. Freeman, Chris Mackin, and Douglas L. Kruse. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Creating a Bigger Pie? The Effects of Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Stock Options
on Workplace Performance
Joseph R. Blasi, Richard B. Freeman, Chris Mackin, and Douglas L. Kruse
NBER Working Paper No. 14230
August 2008
JEL No. J33,J54,L23,L25
ABSTRACT
This paper uses data from NBER surveys of over 40,000 employees in hundreds of facilities in 14
firms and from employees on the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys to explore how shared compensation
affects turnover, absenteeism, loyalty, worker effort, and other outcomes affecting workplace performance.
The empirical analysis shows that shared capitalism has beneficial effects on all outcomes save for
absenteeism and that it has its strongest effects on turnover, loyalty, and worker effort when it is combined
with: a) high-performance work policies (employee involvement, training, and job security), b) low
levels of supervision, and c) fixed wages that are at or above market level. Most workers report that
cash incentives, stock options, ESOP stock, and ESPP participation motivate them to work harder.
The interaction of the effects of shared capitalism with other corporate policies suggests that the various
shared capitalist and other policies may operate through a latent variable, "corporate culture".

Joseph R. Blasi
Rutgers University
School of management and Labor Relations
Levin Building
New Brunswick, NJ 08544
and NBER
jrbru@hotmail.com
Richard B. Freeman
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
freeman@nber.org

Chris Mackin
Ownership Associates
cm@ownershipassociates.com
Douglas L. Kruse
School of Management and Labor Relations
Rutgers University
94 Rockafeller Road
Piscataway, NJ 08854
and NBER
dkruse@rci.rutgers.edu

Cooperation aims to increase the margin from which the increment of gain is to be drawn. It
makes industry more productive; it gives the employer somewhat more, and to the laborer
much more than they now receive…All the workmen with their employers constitute
collectively an exceptionally good entrepreneur... The survival of full cooperation in the
long rivalry of systems depends on its power to excel other systems …If in the comparison
with other systems, it is shown that it ought to survive, it will do so, and that regardless of
initial failures -- John Bates Clark, The Philosophy of Wealth 1886

One hundred twenty years ago John Bates Clark, one of the founders of the American
Economic Association, developer of marginal productivity theory, and the person for whom the
prestigious Bates Clark Award is named, developed a vision of shared capitalism – the cooperative
plan -- and laid out a key test for this form of capitalist enterprise, its ability to survive in
competition with other forms. In his 1886 book The Philosophy of Wealth, Clark said that he
wanted “to take the workman permanently out of the position in which his gain is his employer’s
loss” through profit sharing and stock ownership by the workers. His solution to workers’ risk
aversion and lack of credit and personal funds to invest in capital was that the firm would pay profit
shares to workers in the form of stock, which would make profit sharing a gradual vehicle for
employee ownership.1 Clark underlined the need for skilled management and committed investors
and stressed that access to new capital investment was critical to the success of such enterprises. He
also noted the need for a cooperative management culture in these corporations. Clark’s views
suggest that forms of shared capitalism that combine profit sharing and employee ownership
without personal worker financing in a cooperative corporate setting would positively affect
workplace performance and company success. Clark’s interest in shared capitalism was mirrored in

1

Adam Smith (1776 ) credited the incentive of shared capitalism with improved economic performance for the French
Metayers or sharecroppers where the owner of the land and the sharecropper divided the produce equally after capital
investments: “Such tenants, being freemen, are capable of acquiring property, and having a certain proportion of the
produce of the land, they have a plain interest that the whole produce should be as great as possible, in order that their
own proportion may be so” (quoted in Laffont and Martimort 2002: 10). He stressed that sharecroppers would not risk
their own capital to improve the proprietor’s land without offering any resolution to this problem.

1

the first volume of the American Economic Review, which contained extensive articles on
cooperative economic relations in New England and Minneapolis in issues 4 and 5.2
This paper analyzes the relationship of various forms of shared capitalist compensation to
six workplace outcomes—turnover, absenteeism, perceived effort of co-workers, loyalty to the firm,
willingness to work hard, and frequency of worker suggestions to improve productivity—from the
perspective of the “John Bates Clark vision” of shared capitalism. We also examine employee
responses to questions about their response to shared capitalist incentives. Our analysis uses two
datasets: one from the 2002 and 2006 General Social Surveys (GSS), which cover 2430 persons in
for-profit firms from a nationally representative sample; and an NBER sponsored firm based survey
of 41,206 employees at 320 worksites in 14 companies for whom profit/gain sharing, a wide variety
of employee ownership vehicles, and broad-based stock options are a key part of their compensation
systems. We conducted the NBER survey over the 2001-2006 period, adding firms as they agreed
to participate. We began our survey by selecting companies that varied in size, industry, and type
of shared capitalism program, but our final sample is non-representative. Many firms refused our
requests to run the survey; and we lost two large firms, which had agreed to participate, when other
firms bought them and decided against conducting the planned survey. Once a firm agreed to have
our research group administer the survey, we either ran the survey on all or a random sample of
employees, with an average response rate of 53% across the 14 companies. Thus, the survey can be
2

Issue 4 included a 100-page article “Cooperation in a Western City” by Albert Shaw about such enterprises in
Minneapolis, which examined profit sharing by Charles Pillsbury in his mills and included an interview with Pillsbury.
Issue 5 had a 129 page article “Cooperation in the Northeast” by Edward Bemis on Massachusetts companies. In the
1880s a group of doctoral students was assembled at Johns Hopkins University who divided up the United States into
regions and studied forms of profit sharing and employee ownership in these regions. The University published these
studies as a book (Adams 1888). John Bates Clark worked closely with this group of researchers, several of whose
articles appeared in the new journal of the American Economic Association. Clark's views were similar to those of
another prominent 19th century economist, John Stuart Mill, who said “The form of association which if mankind
continues to improve must be expected in the end to predominate is not that which can exist between a capitalist as
chief and workpeople without a voice in the management but the association of the labourers themselves on terms of
equality, collectively owning the capital with which they carry on their operations, and working under managers elected
and removable by themselves” (John Stuart Mill, Principles of Political Economy, Books III-V and Appendices [1848],
in J.M. Robson, ed., Collective Works of John Stuart Mill, Vol. 3. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1965, p. 775).

2

viewed as a random sample of workers from a non-random sample of firms. The survey included
core questions common across all companies, and some questions of special interest or relevance to
that company. Six company surveys were conducted entirely by web, seven company surveys were
done on paper, and one survey was done using both the web and paper surveys. A total of 41,206
respondents provided usable surveys. Appendix A describes the variables used in this analysis.

The Clark vision in modern eyes
Modern theorists concerned with shared capitalism highlight the potential of corporate
culture in helping unify ownership and control with minimal agency costs and enabling shared
capitalism to fulfill its potential. In his 2000 address to the Industrial Relations Research
Association, Joseph Stiglitz defined the goal of shared capitalism as “to increase each worker’s
involvement in and identification with the firm so that there will be some unification of agent and
principal and a resulting tendency for higher effort… (in the belief that) a system of high
involvement, high rewards, and high levels of skill and information, integrated with a corporate
strategy that relies on front-line employees’ ideas and creativity, is capable of impressive
improvements in organizational performance.” Analogously, in their book on incentives, Laffont
and Martimort focus on “how the owners of firms succeed in aligning the objectives of various
members, such as workers, supervisors, and managers, with profit maximization” (2002, p. 2).
They emphasize that the decentralized nature of information and the cluster of transactions between
the principal and the agent require an interaction of cultural norms and incentives to obtain the best
economic institutions. Presaging our analyses of the importance of worker co-monitoring in shared
capitalism (Freeman, Kruse, Blasi, 2007), they stress that the multitude of tasks performed by the
worker means that “a worker is not only involved in productive tasks but also must sometimes

3

monitor his peers.” In both cases, as well as in the analyses of others3, the implication is that shared
capitalist compensation needs an appropriate corporate culture to reduce free rider and moral hazard
problems and that low intensity incentives that substitute for wages and increase worker risk would
have problematic effects on performance.
The other issue that theorists have identified as critical to the working of shared capitalism is
the allocation of the risk of ownership and the problem of credit barriers keeping workers from
becoming real capitalists. Echoing back to Adam Smith, Stiglitz (1974) argued that the key issue in
the use of sharecropping, as opposed to having employees renting capital, is the balance between its
incentive effects and risk-sharing features. Though the rental system “has greater incentive effects,
it forces the worker to bear all the risks, and although the wage system allows the landlord, if he is
risk neutral, to absorb all the risk, it may force heavy supervision costs on him.” He asserted that
the end of sharecropping was best explained by the development of capital markets that allow
diversification of risk, capital intensity in production, and a faster rate of technological change.
These analyses highlight the other distinct aspect of the John Bates Clark solution to the problem:
share ownership arising from profit sharing as a way to allow workers to obtain ownership without
taking on risk beyond their means. Akerlof’s concept of a gift exchange carries this line of thinking
a step further, with the exchange of ownership or profit-sharing above fixed pay for reciprocating
effort serving as the risk-reducing mechanism for shared capitalism. In the U.S. today, ESOPs,
stock options, and company stock matches for contributions to retirement savings plans offer
workers ways to get equity in their company without buying it with their savings (though there is a
small but growing number of cases in which employees use 401(k) assets to create ESOPs).

3

Barnard (1938) defined incentives as involving a package of monetary and non-monetary items saying material
incentives were too weak unless enforced by other incentives. Even the bete noir of employee empowerment, Frederick
Taylor, argued for paying fair wages along with generous performance-based pay and careful training to keep workers
committed to maximum effort, although consultants selling Taylorism dropped this component (Kanigel 1997).

4

Existing research on shared capitalism has generally found better workplace performance for
firms with profit sharing and employee ownership.4 However, many of these studies were based on
large administrative datasets and shed little light on the mechanisms through which shared
capitalism functioned “inside the black box.” Here we use new data to go inside the black box.

Measures of Shared Capitalism
Were Clark to return to the U.S. in 2006, the first question he would ask about shared
capitalism is the extent to which enterprises based on financial sharing and decision-making are
found in the market—their “survival … in comparison with other systems.” The GSS provide the
best evidence for answering this question. The overall prevalence of shared capitalist compensation
is presented in Table A-1, with fuller presentation in the companion paper by Kruse, Blasi, and Park
(2008). For our purposes here the most important result is that 45% of the for-profit private sector
employees in the GSS sample report participating in some kind of shared capitalism program (36%
in profit sharing, 25% in gainsharing, 19% in employee ownership, and 11% in stock options),
which gives us good variation for examining the relation of these programs to worker outcomes.
The prevalence is of course higher in the NBER sample, since these firms were selected on the basis
of having these programs.
As a first step in assessing the relation of shared capitalism to employee outcomes, we
constructed a thermometer-style index of shared capitalism, which assigns points based on coverage
by shared capitalism programs and the size of the financial stakes. This index is described in

4

Evidence from over 60 studies indicates a positive association on average between shared capitalism programs and
company performance, but with substantial dispersion in results (see Doucouliagos, 1995, Kruse and Blasi, 1997, and
Kruse, 2002, for reviews; also see Black and Lynch, 2001, Boning, Ichniowski, and Shaw, 2001, Core and Guay, 2001,
Ittner et al., 2001, Lee, 2003, Robinson and Wilson, 2006, and Sesil et al., 2002). The average estimated increase in
productivity associated with employee ownership and profit sharing is about 4.5%, and is maintained when using
pre/post comparisons and attempts to control for selection bias.

5

Appendix B. We also present results breaking out the different forms of shared capitalism types
and intensities using the NBER data.

Workplace Outcomes
We measure six workplace outcomes: 1) turnover (looking for another job vs. staying with
the company), 2) absenteeism, 3) workers’ perception of the discretionary effort of co-workers; 4)
worker loyalty to the firm, 5) workers’ willingness to work hard for the firm 6) the frequency of
suggestions to improve efficiency. These outcomes are related to each other—e.g. looking for
another job predicts increased absenteeism, as does reduced willingness to provide discretionary
effort to the company, and lower loyalty. Reduced willingness to provide discretionary effort to the
company and lower loyalty relate to looking harder for another job. Increased absenteeism, looking
hard for another job, and lower loyalty are linked to less discretionary effort. Because there are
large literatures studying most of these outcomes separately, we decided against forming an index
of these variables and instead look at each by itself. The summary statistics in Appendix A show
variation in the measures among respondents in our surveys in the form of large standard
deviations. The absenteeism variable is the only one with a “peculiar” distribution since many
people report zero absences while there is a long tail of persons absent for different time periods.
We use basic multivariate statistics to assess the link between shared capitalist compensation
and the outcomes. We estimate OLS models of the impact of shared capitalist compensation on the
workplace outcomes where appropriate, and ordered probit models when the outcomes have several
values with a natural ordering (e.g., "not at all true, not very true, somewhat true, and very true").
Because more than half of the values of absenteeism are zero, we use the tobit model to analyze that
outcome. We run the regressions with the same independent variables for the national and NBER
data sets and then probe our results in the NBER data set by adding measures of other human
6

resource policies that may independently affect the workplace outcomes, such as participation in an
employee involvement team, training, and job security.
We interpret the results from the two surveys differently in light of the difference in their
sample designs. Since the GSS is a nationally representative survey, it will have few if any workers
in the same firm, so that it provides information on workers across firms. The variation in shared
capitalist incentives and behavior reflects differences in firm policies. By contrast, the NBER
survey covers a representative sample of workers in a non-representative sample of firms. To deal
with the non-representative firm problem, we include company fixed effects in most calculations.
This focuses on the effect of variation in shared capitalist incentives on attitudes and behavior
within companies. However, we analyze some ESOP variables across companies as well as within
companies because ERISA rules require virtually all workers in a firm to be covered, so that the
cross-firm variation in the data is potentially more informative than within-firm variation, which
may reflect peculiarities between groups of workers within the firm.
Table 1 summarizes the empirical results of regression analyses of the relationship between
the shared capitalism index and outcomes in our data sets. It shows that in both the NBER and GSS
surveys, the likelihood of searching for another job is lower the higher is the shared capitalism
index. When the controls in the national survey and in the NBER survey are the same, the
coefficient on the index is the same. Addition of measures of other human resource policies reduces
the coefficient in the shared capitalism variable in the NBER data, but it still remains significant
(line 2b). In addition, the NBER asked workers if they would turn down a higher-paying job to stay
with their firm. The shared capitalist index raises the likelihood that workers would do so (line 3),
which implies that they value these policies either for the additional income they are likely to bring
or for the stake they give workers in the company.

7

The NBER survey asked workers how many days they were absent in the previous six
months – a question that was not included on the GSS. Here, the estimate in line 4 of Table 1
shows that the shared capitalism index alone—without looking at the impact of the firm’s corporate
culture—raises absences. This is the only outcome variable that is adversely associated with the
index. Why? Reviewing absenteeism and turnover research, Johns (2002) emphasizes that
persistent absenteeism signals a break in the psychological contract of trust and deeper problems in
the corporate culture. This perspective sees absenteeism as part of a withdrawal continuum
involving lateness-absenteeism-lack of loyalty-intended turnover-ultimate withdrawal of
membership in the firm. Thus, the finding that shared capitalism has a different effect on
absenteeism than on prospective turnover, loyalty and other factors runs against the basic analysis
of absenteeism. Studies of the relation between unionism, which also reduces turnover, however,
often also find a positive association with absences. It may be that a greater sense of job security
underlies both results. Another possibility is that absenteeism is a form of free riding that avoids
co-worker scrutiny and criticism. Yet another possibility, which we explore later, is that the result
is related to interactions with other firm policies and corporate culture.
Both the GSS and the NBER surveys ask workers how hard they believe their co-workers
work. The estimates show that perceptions of co-worker effort are significantly positively related to
the shared capitalism index, though the NBER result is no longer significant after controlling for
several human resource policies (lines 5, 7). The NBER survey has two other measures that reflect
perceptions of the extent to which co-workers are committed to the firm: the extent to which coworkers have enough interest in company issues to get involved in the firm, and whether coworkers generally encourage each other to make extra efforts. Again, the results show that shared
capitalist programs raise the likelihood that workers report positively on these outcomes, both
before and after controlling for human resource policies (lines 8-9).
8

Interpretation of the positive coefficients of a worker's receipt of shared capitalist
compensation in predicting their perceptions of the work attitudes of co-workers is not, however,
simple in the presence of the company dummy variables. The regressions reflect how workers paid
with shared capitalist compensation view their fellow workers (with a glow) rather than how shared
capitalism affects the workplace. Since we have many establishments or facilities within firms,
they could also be telling us that facilities with greater shared capitalist compensation have workers
who are willing to do more for the firm. One way to deal with this issue is to eliminate the
company dummies from the regressions. This strengthens the estimated effects. Another way to
deal with the problem is to aggregate the data by facilities so that we relate the average shared
capitalism index at a workplace to the average perception of co-worker effort within that worksite.
This asks the question most relevant to our analysis: whether respondents perceive greater effort in
worksites with more shared capitalism, rather than whether workers with greater personal shared
capitalist compensation perceive greater effort in their fellow workers. Figures 1 to 3 display the
scatter plot of observations for the site averages and the regression line for them. They show that
the shared capitalist index at a worksite is positively associated with workers saying that co-workers
give greater effort to the firm.
Finally, we turn from perceptions of how co-workers behave to questions in which workers
report on their own attitudes and behavior and relate these responses to the workers’ own shared
capitalist compensation. Both surveys asked questions relating to worker loyalty. The GSS asked if
workers were proud to be working for their employer: shared capitalism raises positive responses on
this item (line 6). The NBER asked about loyalty to the firm: this measure is positively related to
the shared capitalism index before and after controlling for high-performance policies in the NBER
survey (line 10). The NBER survey also asked how willing workers would be to work harder to
help the company, and the frequency with which they make suggestions about improving the
9

workplace. The higher the shared capitalist index the more likely are workers to say that they
themselves would work hard for the firm (line 11), and the more likely are workers to say that they
make many suggestions (line 12).
Particular programs
The NBER survey contains sufficiently detailed information and a large enough sample to
allow us to disaggregate the shared capitalist index into its component parts to see which policies or
programs contribute more/less to the estimated effects in Table 1. Table 2 gives the results of these
calculations for variables in which the individual reports on their own behavior or attitudes. Column
1 shows that the likelihood of not searching for a new job is strongly related to profit sharing and
gain sharing eligibility, employee ownership, and having a larger stock option grant last year, and
that workers who receive individual bonuses are also less likely to look for another job.
Column 2 shows that the aberrant finding that shared capitalism increases absenteeism is
higher among those who are eligible for profit sharing and who hold stock options. This goes
against the findings of lower absenteeism in profit sharing companies in UK and French firms
(Wilson and Peel, 1991; Brown et al., 1999) and with a study of U.S. firms that found employee
ownership alone did not affect absenteeism (Hammer, Landau, and Stern 1981) though it is
consistent with the finding by Brown et al. that absenteeism increased slightly when profit sharing
was introduced after employee ownership. The regression finding that absenteeism is lower among
those who are eligible for individual bonuses lends some support to the possibility that higher
absenteeism among those paid by group incentives reflects free rider behavior.
The next two columns show that loyalty and willingness to work hard are positively related
to the size of the profit-sharing and gain sharing bonuses, and to holding employer stock purchased
through a 401(k) plan or on the open market (cols. 3-4). Loyalty is also positively linked to
receiving a stock option grant last year, while willingness to work hard is linked to the size of one's
10

ESOP stake. The frequency with which workers report making suggestions is, by contrast,
significantly related only to employee ownership (col. 5).
Overall, the forms of shared capitalism that appear to have the strongest effects on outcomes
are profit sharing and employee ownership.
The bottom panels in Table 2 disaggregate the ownership variable and report coefficients
when the company dummy is removed from the regression. The results for the disaggregation of
the shared capitalism index show that the largest ownership impacts come with 401k plans and
when workers buy shares on the open market. The sizable 401k effect compared to the ESOP
ownership effect may reflect the greater individual ownership of the 401k (although the company
stock match for which workers do not pay with their savings in 401k plans is comparable to an
ESOP) while the impact of buying shares on the open market may reflect individual’s positive
assessment of the future of the firm. Finally, the regressions that exclude company dummies to pick
up differences in shared capitalist compensation across companies as well as across facilities and
individuals within facilities find stronger ESOP effects than the regressions that include the
company dummy variables.
ComplementaritiesÆ Corporate Culture?
A critical issue in analysing a distinct organizational or institutional form is whether its
impact on behavior and outcomes operates independently of other practices or policies or whether
its impact depends interactively on them. The thrust of theoretical analysis of shared capitalist
compensation, from Clark to the present, is that changing the monetary incentives by itself is
unlikely to occur or work well independent of other policies. Firms that introduce profit sharing or
employee ownership must give workers the authority to make decisions that increase performance

11

to change their behavior in ways that raise output and profits.5 Research on “high performance
work systems” have found that they work best as a package of complementary policies regarding
recruitment, training/information, performance management/sharing, and work redesign, and so on.6
Based on these considerations and evidence we expect that shared capitalist incentives should also
work better when combined with other firm policies.
To examine the interaction or complementarity of shared capitalist compensation with highperformance workplace policies, we constructed an index of high-performance work policies that
gives one point each for being in an employee involvement team, receiving formal training in the
past 12 months, and having high job security.7 We interacted this index with the shared capitalism
index in regressions for the likelihood of searching for a new job, absenteeism, loyalty to the firm,
willingness to work harder, and frequency of suggestions. In addition, we examined the interaction
between shared capitalism and a measure of employer supervision of employees. Evidence
presented in our companion paper (Kruse, Freeman, and Blasi, 2008) shows that workers covered
by more shared capitalist policies are less closely supervised than others, suggesting that shared
capitalism substitutes for supervision in motivating workers. Combining shared capitalism with
5

Research often finds an interaction between participation and ownership on output but most data sets contain little
information on the mechanisms for this. The General Accounting Office study (1987), which matched survey data with
records on company finances, found an interaction between employee participation in management and employee
ownership on productivity, as did the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health study (Rosen, Klein, and Young 1986)
and its follow up study (Rosen and Quarry 1987). Freeman and Dube (2002) found that employee involvement had a
larger impact on indicators of worker productivity, job satisfaction, and attitudes toward the firm than did participation
in financial rewards, but that the highest outcomes occurred when firms combined pay for company/group performance,
ownership stake in the firm, and employee involvement committees. Analyzing UK establishments, Conyon and
Freeman (2001) found that the companies that adopted profit sharing, employee ownership, and broad stock option
schemes had higher productivity and more information and decision sharing practices. Studies of ESOPs and other
forms of employee ownership generally find a positive relationship between ownership and performance (Levine 1995:
81) that is strongest with worker participation.
6
Ichniowski et al. 1996; Ichniowski and Shaw 1997; Huselid, Jackson, and Schuler 1997; Becker and Huselid 1998;
and Becker, Huselid, and Ulrich 2001. Cappelli and Neumark found that high performance work practices such as selfdirected work teams only significantly predicted increased productivity when combined with profit/gain sharing
(1999:34).
7
We experimented with indices that also included measures of information sharing, job rotation, and rigorous
selection and obtained similar results. We focus on the index based on employee involvement, training, and job
security since the sample sizes are smaller for job rotation and rigorous selection, and the grade of the company on
sharing information reflects an employee evaluation of the policy's success rather than the existence of a policy.

12

close supervision may reduce the effect of shared capitalism by sending a mixed message to
employees: "We want you to work harder and be more committed to the company because of your
(profit share/employer stock/stock options), but we're still going to keep a close eye on you."
Finally, we also examine whether the extent to which shared capitalism substitutes for fixed
wages may also be an important determinant of its effects. We expect that employees will react
better to shared capitalist compensation when it is a gift-exchange add-on to existing compensation,
rather than a substitute for which they sacrifice certain income flows for greater risk in
compensation. While we do not have measures of alternative wages available to employees, the
NBER survey asked how employees’ fixed wages compare to market levels, from which we
constructed a dummy variable indicating that the worker feels s/he is paid at or above market levels.
We interact this variable with the shared capitalist index as well.
Table 3 summarizes the results of these calculations. The regression coefficients on the
interaction terms show that other firm policies measured by the high performance practice index
affects the impact of shared capitalism—representing possible complementarities on most outcome
variables—and that supervision intensity and wage relative to market wage also have some
interactive effects. Column 1 shows that the positive effect of shared capitalism on not searching
for a new job exists only for those who are covered by the high performance policies and reveals a
strong negative interaction of shared capitalism with close supervision. While column 2 finds no
significant interactions for any of the three new variables with the shared capitalism index in
affecting absenteeism, the high performance indicator reduces absences while close supervision
raises them. With these variables and interactions the strong positive relation between shared
capitalism and absenteeism is weakened and no longer significantly different from zero, suggesting
that the effect found in Table 1 may be masking that of high performance, supervision, and pay

13

relative to market. Columns 3 and 4 show substantial shared capitalism interactions on loyalty and
willingness to work hard. These outcomes are enhanced when shared capitalism is combined with
high performance policies and fixed pay at or above the market level, and are hurt when shared
capitalism is combined with close supervision.
Finally, column 5 shows that shared capitalism has a negative interaction with high
performance policies and a positive link to supervision in affecting frequency of suggestions. The
positive effect of shared capitalist policies among workers who are not covered by high
performance policies might reflect the fact that those in high performance work places already have
the means and motivation to provide suggestions. One interpretation of the positive interaction with
supervision is that shared capitalism provides motivation to closely supervised workers to try to
make changes in their work environment to relieve supervisory intensity. Whether these or other
explanations account for the observed interactions, the important point is that the interactions are
substantial, implying that analyses that treat shared capitalist compensation as a single innovation
will invariably miss some of the ways in which it works and the conditions for it to work
successfully.
As a graphic demonstration of the importance of the interactions, we show in Figure 4 the
relation between workers’ likelihood of looking to leave the firm with the shared capitalist index
contingent on different values of the interacting variables.8 Each line shows how the potential
leaving variable changes with shared capitalism given the specified interaction. What is striking is
the fanning out of the lines. Shared capitalism increases likely turnover when workers are very
closely supervised and are not covered by any high performance policies (top line)—this may

8

To enable a more straightforward interpretation, Figure 1 is based not on an ordered probit but on a linear probability
regression with the same independent variables as in col. 1 of Table 5 , with the dummy dependent variable taking the
value of 1 if a worker said s/he is very likely to look for a new job with another organization or is already looking, and 0
otherwise. This regression closely reflected the pattern of results in Table 5.

14

reflect workers becoming cynical and wanting to leave when they learn that management espouses a
shared capitalism philosophy but still treats them like ordinary employees. In contrast, shared
capitalism decreases likely turnover when workers have average or low levels of supervision, or are
covered by high performance policies. The strongest effects of shared capitalism are when it is
combined with high performance policies and low levels of supervision, causing likely turnover to
be cut from 12.8% to 2.4% as the shared capitalism index goes from 0 to 10 (bottom line of Figure
4). The average results shown in Table 2 reflect these diverse effects, weighted by the proportion of
workers in the various interactive categories.
Finally, we view the interactions shown in Table 3 and Figure 4 as suggesting that the
concept of “corporate culture” may provide a useful way to understand the relation between shared
capitalism and the workplace outcomes. Analysts sometimes use the corporate culture term loosely
without any operational measurement/definition that risks making it a catch-all phrase to describe
residuals or puzzles. But when interaction or complementarity effects are demonstrably important,
it seems natural to think that some underlying latent variable – corporate culture – may more
usefully describe reality than analyses of separate interacting variables.
Worker views
As an alternative way to assess the impacts of shared capitalist incentives and of their
interrelation with other aspects of corporate policy/culture, we asked workers the following
hypothetical question on the NBER survey:
To what extent would each of the following affect your motivation to improve the business
success of the company? 9
You receive a cash incentive
The company grants you stock options
You receive some stock in the company ESOP
You can buy some company shares in the ESPP
9

Employees were asked the stock options, ESOP, and ESPP questions only if the company provided these programs,
and were asked the open market purchase questions only if they worked in a public company.

15

You buy some company shares in the open market
The upper panel of Table 4 reports the responses to these questions. Close to three-fourths
of workers said that their motivation would be improved to a "great" or "very great" extent by
receiving a cash incentive (78%) or stock options (77%), while about two-thirds of workers said the
same about receiving ESOP stock (69%) or buying shares through an ESPP (63%), and less than
one-third said this about buying company stock on the open market (30%). This pattern fits well in
an analysis of risk in employee response to shared capitalism, with the cash incentive and options
being the least risky forms of compensation, and buying shares in the open market placing the
workers’ capital at greatest risk. The small response to buying shares in the open market conflicts,
however, with the significant impacts of that activity on some of the outcome variables in Table 2.
To see whether worker responses to the hypothetical are influenced by other aspects of
company policy/practice, we estimated ordered probit regressions using the variables found to have
important interactions with the shared capitalism index in Table 3. The results of these regressions,
summarized at the bottom of Table 4, show positive effects of the high performance policy index in
four of the five questions (cols. 2-5), supporting the notion of a major complementarity between
high performance policies and shared capitalist compensation. Three of the regressions show
positive effects of having fixed pay at or above market levels (cols. 2, 4, and 5), likewise supporting
a complementarity, but only one regression shows a negative effect of closer supervision (col. 2).
The regression that shows a different pattern from all others is the one assessing the effects of
receiving a cash incentive (col. 1). In this case, close supervision and perceiving one's pay as below
market raises its impact. The positive supervision interaction may be because workers believe that
they are more likely to receive the incentive if their supervisor pays close attention to their effort.
The stronger effect among those with below-market pay may reflect the view that cash incentives
can help make up the perceived pay gap more quickly than by receiving company stock. Finally,
16

we note that the ease of seeing how well co-workers work positively affects each response,
supporting the idea that an environment of worker co-monitoring is a component in the
effectiveness of shared capitalism plans.
Additional issues
Our analysis cannot rule out some potentially different interpretations of the results. The
first is that the findings reflect the selectivity of workers into shared capitalist enterprises rather than
or in addition to their response to the way those firms operate. Selectivity could affect the analyses
of workers in shared capitalist firms versus others in the GSS survey and would limit generalizing
the NBER results to workers who do not work in such firms. Even within a firm, moreover, there
may be something special about those who choose greater participation in shared capitalism—for
instance, by buying stock through an ESPP or 401(k)—or who management places in positions with
more shared capitalist incentives. To get some notion of the possible effects of worker selectivity
on our results, we examined the sensitivity of the results to two possible factors that might be
associated with self-selection of workers into shared capitalism: a measure of self-rated risk
aversion, and family wealth. Neither of these variables made noticeable changes in the relationship
of the shared capitalism index either alone or with interactions to the outcomes in Tables 2 and 3.
A second problem relates to the selectivity of firms into our NBER sample and the
endogeneity of the decision to offer shared capitalist compensation in both the NBER and GSS
samples. Since our NBER results hold constant firm policies and characteristics by comparing
workers with greater and lesser shared capitalism in the same firm, we doubt that they are seriously
affected by selectivity of firms, but there is the selectivity or endogeneity of the specific policies
that the firms have chosen, which still makes causal interpretations of the type we have offered open
to criticism. In addition, because the NBER sample does not include firms with no shared capitalist

17

arrangements and is based on firms’ willingness to participate, we cannot rule out serious selectivity
problems along the firm dimension that might interact with other factors.
Even substantial selectivity among workers or firms, however, does not gainsay the
importance of shared capitalist compensation, for it is presumably the interaction between shared
capitalist incentives and mode of operating and worker characteristics that underlies the selectivity
of workers, and the interaction between other firm policies and their choice of shared capitalist
compensation that underlies the selectivity of firms. What selectivity does is weaken our ability to
infer what might happen if additional firms adopted shared capitalist arrangements from the
successes of existing firms with those practices.

Conclusion
The principal finding of this paper is that shared capitalism affects workplace performance.
The robustness of the finding is increased by the fact that the results from the NBER sample are
broadly similar to the results from the nationally-representative GSS. Shared capitalism is linked to
lower turnover and greater loyalty and willingness to work hard, particularly when combined with
high-performance policies, low levels of supervision, and fixed pay at or above market levels.
Workplaces where workers average more shared capitalist compensation report greater employee
effort along several dimensions. The only outcome with which shared capitalist compensation is
adversely related is absenteeism, but this result largely disappears when controlling for interactions
with high performance policies and closeness of supervision.
Looking at particular programs, the strongest effects of shared capitalism are for profit
sharing and gain sharing. The largely positive results are corroborated by worker views: most
workers report that cash incentives, stock options, ESOP stock, and ESPP participation motivate
them to work harder. The less risky forms of shared capitalist programs– profit sharing, gain
18

sharing, stock options, and ESOPs – have greater effects than the riskier programs in line with
concerns about workers being averse to risking their own capital. (For a closer look at the role of
objective and subjective risk in shared capitalism program, see the companion paper by Blasi,
Kruse, and Markowitz, 2008.)
Finally, we find important interactions between shared capitalist programs and other aspects
of company policies that affect workplace performance. High performance policies are positively
linked to good workplace outcomes, and are driven by certain types of shared capitalism. This
evidence, combined with our companion paper that finds that shared capitalism increases worker
monitoring (Freeman, Kruse, and Blasi 2008), challenges the critique that the motivations of the
average worker interfere with the introduction of basic shared capitalism principles. The interaction
of the effects of shared capitalism with other corporate policies suggests that the various shared
capitalist and other policies may operate through a latent variable, “corporate culture.” Practically
speaking, the most important implication of this paper is that shared capitalism and high
performance policies appear to work together, with greater impacts when they are combined than
when they are used separately.

19

APPENDIX A: Variable definitions and descriptive statistics
COMPENSATION
Shared capitalism index (GSS): 8-point index with one point each for profit sharing
eligibility, gain sharing eligibility, owning any company stock, holding any stock options,
receiving a profit sharing bonus in the past year, receiving a gain sharing bonus in the past
year, having an above-median profit- and gain sharing bonus as a percent of pay, and having
an above-median company stock holding as a percent of pay. Mean=1.48, s.d.=2.14,
n=1919
Shared capitalism index (NBER): 10-point index with all items in GS index, plus one
point each for receiving a stock option grant in the past year, and having above-median
stock option holdings as a percent of pay. Mean=3.60, s.d.=2.65, n=40522
Profit sharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-sharing?
What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on? Company profits or
performance" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.372, n=2184, NBER mean=.713, n=41018
Profit sharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to profit sharing, answer to "What
was the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent
year of bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. GSS mean=.024, s.d.=.066,
n=1944, NBER mean=.068, s.d.=.124, n=40485
Gainsharing (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of performancebased pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-sharing? What does
the size of these performance-based payments depend on? Workgroup or department
performance" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.257, n=2184, NBER mean=.207, n=41023
Gainsharing as % of pay (GSS and NBER): If "yes" to gainsharing, answer to "What was
the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent year of
bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. GSS mean=.017, s.d.=.061, n=2013,
NBER mean=.033, s.d.=.106, n=40767
Individual bonus (GSS and NBER): "In your job are you eligible for any type of
performance-based pay, such as individual or group bonuses, or any type of profit-sharing?
What does the size of these performance-based payments depend on? Individual
performance" (0=no, 1=yes). GSS mean=.290, n=2184, NBER mean=.290, n=41019
Individual bonus as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to individual bonus, answer to "What was
the approximate total dollar value of the payment(s) you received [in the most recent year of
bonuses]?" divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. Mean=.050, s.d.=.125, n=40547
Hold employer stock (GSS): "Do you own any shares of stock in the company where you
now work, either directly or through some type of retirement or stock plan?" (0=no, 1=yes),
mean=.212, n=2202
20

Employer stock as % of pay (GSS): If "yes" to "hold employer stock," answer to "Please
give a general estimate of how much cash you would get if all this stock were sold today?"
divided by annual earnings, otherwise 0, mean=.111, s.d.=.977, n=2186
Hold employer stock (NBER): Any employer stock held through ESOP, Employee Stock
Purchase Plan, 401(k), exercised stock options, or open market purchases (0=no, 1=yes),
mean=.640, n=41206
Employer stock as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold employer stock," the sum of
answers to questions about value of stock held in different plans, divided by
basepay+overtime, otherwise 0. NBER mean=.398, s.d.=.808, n=40367
Hold stock options (GSS and NBER): "Do you currently hold any stock options in your
company (vested or unvested)?" (0=no, 1=yes), GSS mean=.123, n=2188, NBER
mean=.219, n=41166.
Stock options as % of pay (NBER): If "yes" to "Hold stock options," the sum of answers
to questions about value of vested and unvested stock, divided by basepay+overtime,
otherwise 0. NBER mean=.395, s.d.=1.490, n=40922
ESOP (NBER): Participant in ESOP (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.081, n=41109
ESOP stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held in ESOP, divided by
basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.067, s.d.=.417, n=41002
ESPP (NBER): Hold stock purchased through Employee Stock Purchase Plan (0=no,
1=yes), mean=.176, n=41169
ESPP stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held in Employee Stock Purchase Plan,
divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.078, s.d.=.304, n=41168
401(k) stock (NBER): Hold employer stock in 401(k) plan (0=no, 1=yes), mean=.335,
n=40885
401(k) stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held in 401(k) plan, divided by
basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.189, s.d.=.525, n=40730
Stock from exercised options as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock held from exercised
options, divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.052, s.d.=.396, n=40956
Stock from exercised options (NBER): Hold employer stock from exercised options
(0=no, 1=yes), mean=.050, n=41032
Open mkt. stock as % of pay (NBER): Employer stock purchased on open market,
divided by basepay+overtime, otherwise 0, mean=.019, s.d.=.165, n=41144
Open mkt. stock (NBER): Hold stock purchased on open market (0=no, 1=yes),
mean=.073, n=41145
21

WORKPLACE PERFORMANCE
Not likely to search for new job (GSS): "How likely is it that you will decide to look hard
for a job with another organization within the next twelve months?" (1-3 scale, Very
likely/Somewhat likely/ Not at all likely), mean=2.37, s.d.=.79, n=2400.
Not likely to search for new job (NBER): "How likely is it that you will decide to look
hard for a job with another organization within the next twelve months?" (1-4 scale, Already
looking/Very likely/Somewhat likely/ Not at all likely), mean=3.42, s.d.=.83, n=40722
Would turn down another job for more pay to stay with this company (NBER): “To
what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement? ‘I would turn down another job for
more pay in order to stay with this company.’” (1-5 scale, 1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly
agree), mean=1.75, s.d.=1.14, n=1175.
Absenteeism (NBER): "About how many days have you been absent from work in the last
6 months (not counting vacation)?" mean=1.77, s.d.=7.66, n=39582
Co-workers work hard (GSS and NBER): “At your workplace, how hard would you say
that people work?” (0-10 scale, 0=not at all hard, 10=very hard), GSS mean=6.93, s.d.=2.42,
n=2386, NBER mean=7.07, s.d.=2.10, n=40738.
Proud to be working for employer (GSS): “I am proud to be working for my employer.”
(1-4 scale, 1=strongly disagree, 4=strongly agree), mean=3.19, s.d.=.69, n=2401.
Co-workers have enough interest in company issues to get involved (NBER): “People at
[company] have too little interest in company-wide issues to get involved in them.” (1-7
scale, 1=strongly agree, 7=strongly disagree), mean=4.22, s.d.=1.60, n=40563.
Co-workers generally encourage each other to make extra effort (NBER): “At your
workplace, would you say employees generally ENCOURAGE each other to make an extra
effort on the job, DISCOURAGE each other from making an extra effort, or would you say
they DON'T CARE how hard other employees work? (-1=discourage, 0=don't care,
1=encourage), mean=.74, s.d.=.48, n=13314.
Loyalty to company (NBER): "How much loyalty would you say you feel toward the
company you work for as a whole?" (1-4 scale, No loyalty at all/ Only a little/Some/ A lot),
mean=3.34, s.d.=.80, n=40091
Willing to work harder to help company (NBER): "To what extent do you agree or
disagree with this statement? 'I am willing to work harder than I have to in order to help the
company I work for succeed?'" (1-5 scale, 1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree),
mean=4.02, s.d.=.90, n=40712
Frequency of suggestions (NBER): "How often have you taken such ideas [for making
your department or company more effective] to someone in the company in the past?"
(1=never, 2=occasionally, 3=monthly, 4=weekly, 5=daily), mean=2.21, s.d.=.83, n=31141
22

OTHER VARIABLES
High performance policy index (NBER)(index mean=1.77, s.d.=.86, n=37125): Additive
index of:
a) Employee involvement team: "Some companies have organized workplace decisionmaking in ways to get more employee input and involvement. Are you personally
involved in any team, committee or task force that addresses issues such as product
quality, cost cutting, productivity, health and safety, or other workplace issues?"
(0=no, 1=yes), mean=.347, n=40122
b) Formal training: "In the last 12 months have you received any formal training from
your current employer, such as in classes or seminars sponsored by the employer?"
(0=no, 1=yes), mean=.564, n=40460
c) Job security: "Thinking about the next twelve months, how likely do you think it is
that you will lose your job or be laid off?" (coded for scale as 0=very likely or fairly
likely, 1=not too likely or not at all likely), mean=.843, n=38510
How closely supervised (NBER): "Are you closely supervised, or do you work fairly
independently of close supervision?" (0-10 scale, 0=independent of close supervision, 10=
closely supervised), mean=3.35, s.d.=2.63, n=40845
Fixed pay at or above market (NBER): "Do you believe your fixed annual wages in
calendar year 2002 were higher or lower than those of employees with similar experience
and job descriptions in other companies in your region?" (rated on scale of 1=lower to
5=higher, recoded for this variable as 0=less than 3, 1=3 or greater), mean=594, n=35860
Ease of seeing how well coworker is working (NBER): "In your job how easy is it for you
to see whether your co-workers are working well or poorly? Please rate on a scale of 0 to
10" (0=not at all easy, 10=very easy), mean=6.81, s.d.=2.73, n=40791

23

APPENDIX B: The shared capitalist thermometer index
As a first step in assessing the relation of shared capitalism to employee outcomes, we
constructed a thermometer-style index of shared capitalism. This index assigns one point each
when the worker was covered by any of the shared capitalist forms of compensation about which
the survey asked, with additional points for recent bonuses or grants, and for large bonuses or stock
holdings. For questions with a continuous numeric answer, we gave the item a value of 1 if the
respondent had a value greater than the median value. Because there is no natural ordering of
shared capitalist systems in the sense that a firm first introduces profit-sharing, then adds employee
ownership, and then gain-sharing, the index is not a Guttman scale. It is a simple summated rating
(Bartholomew et al, 2002; Bartholomew, 1996), using dichotomous scoring.
In the GSS, there are eight variables in the index: profit sharing eligibility, gain sharing
eligibility, owning any company stock, holding stock options, receiving a profit sharing bonus in the
past year, receiving a gain sharing bonus in the past year, having an above-median profit- and gain
sharing bonus as a percent of pay, and having an above-median company stock holding as a percent
of pay. In the NBER data there are ten variables in the index: all of the above items plus one point
each for receiving a stock option grant in the past year, and having above-median stock option
holdings (including unvested options if they could be exercised today) as a percent of pay.
Indices of this style have both advantages and disadvantages. On the plus side, they provide
a quick and ready measure of the extent of shared capitalist arrangements that makes it easy to
compare results across surveys and to summarize the broad thrust of findings. Since our firm
surveys covered only firms with some shared capitalist arrangements, the index allows us to
differentiate workers with differing degrees of incentive to their firm’s programs. On the negative
side, the index treats different programs the same even though they potentially have different effects
on particular outcomes. It postulates a single scale with equal weights rather than using factor
24

analysis or other statistical modelling to obtain weights for given factors. To deal with these
problems, in Table 2 we also estimated the relationship of the outcomes to the different types of
shared capitalism, introduced as dummy or continuous variables in regressions.10 By comparing the
results using the shared capitalism index to the results using the disaggregated measures, we can
assess the loss of information due to the amalgamation of the measures into a single index.
Figure B1 shows the distribution of our shared capitalism index in the GSS. This survey
estimates that 40% of US workers have some form of shared capitalist program. This estimate is
close to that obtained by Dube and Freeman in the WRPS. The mean score of the index is 1.48 – a
figure greatly affected by the substantial number of workers without shared capitalism systems.
Conditional on having a program, most workers report scores in the range of 2 to 5, with 6%
reporting scores of 6 or greater. Figure B2 gives the distribution of the index in the NBER survey
data. It also shows a non-normal distribution, with the most common scores as 2 to 4 but a sizeable
number of workers scoring 7 or above. There is sufficient variation in the index to differentiate the
extent of the shared capitalist “treatment” on workers.

10

There are statistical techniques to deal with the formation of latent variable indices from questions of the sort that we
are amalgamating into a single summated rating. See Bartholomew et al. (2002) and Spector (1992).

25

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, Henry B. 1888. History of Cooperation in the United States. Baltimore: Hopkins Hopkins
University and N. Murray.
Bartholomew, David. 1996. The Statistical Approach to Social Measurement. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Bartholomew, David, J. Galbraith, Irini Moustkaki, Fionay Steele. 2002. The Analysis and
Interpretation of Multivariate Data for Social Scientists. Chapman and Hall/CRC.
Becker, Brian E. and Mark A. Huselid. 1998. “High Performance Work Systems and Firm
Performance: A Synthesis of Research and Managerial Implications,” in Research in
Personnel and Human Resources, G. Ferris, Ed, Vol 16, Greenwich, Connecticut.: JAI Press.
Becker, Brian E., and Mark A. Huselid, and Dave Ulrich. 2001. The HR Scorecard: Linking
People, Strategy, and Performance. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press,
Bemis, Edward W. 1886. "Cooperation in The Northeast," Publications of the American
Economic Association, Vol. 1, No. 5. (November, 1886), pp. 7-136.
Black, Sandra E., and Lisa N. Lynch. 2000. “What’s Driving the New Economy: The Benefits of
Workplace Innovation.” Cambridge, Mass.: NBER Working Paper No. W7479, January.
Blasi, Joseph, Michael Conte and Douglas Kruse. 1996. “Employee Ownership and Corporate
Performance Among Public Corporations,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 50,
No. 1, October, pp. 60-79.
Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Aaron Bernstein. 2003. In the Company of Owners. New York:
Basic Books.
Blasi, Joseph, Douglas Kruse, and Harry M. Markowitz. 2008. “Risk and Lack of Diversification
under Employee Ownership and Shared Capitalism. ” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage
Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Blinder, A.S. ed. Paying for Productivity: A Look at the Evidence. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution.
Bonin, J.P., and Louis Putterman. 1987. Economics of Cooperation and the Labor-Managed
Economy. New York: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Boning, Brent, Casey Ichniowski, and Kathryn Shaw. 2001. "Opportunity Counts: Teams and the
Effectiveness of Production Incentives," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 8306.

26

Buchele, Robert, Douglas Kruse, Loren Rodgers, and Adria Scharf. 2008. “Show Me the Money:
The Wealth Impact of Shared Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation
conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Budd, John. 2008. “Does Employee Ignorance Undermine Shared Capitalism” Presented at
NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Cappelli, Peter, and David Neumark. 2001. “Do "High-Performance" Work Practices Improve
Establishment-Level Outcomes?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Volume 54,
Number 4, July.
Carberry, Edward. 2008. “An Analysis of Social Stratification in Companies with Shared
Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY,
October 2006.
Clark, John Bates. 1886. The Philosophy of Wealth. Boston: Ginn & Company.
Conyon, Martin and R. Freeman. 2001. "Shared Modes of Compensation and Firm Performance:
UK Evidence." Working Paper Number 8488. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Core, John E., and Wayne R. Guay. 2001. “Stock Option Plans for Non-executive Employees,”
Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 61, pps. 2532-287.
Craig B. and J. Pencavel. 1992. "The Behavior of Worker Cooperatives: The Plywood Companies
of The Pacific Northwest," American Economic Review, 82, 1083-1105.
-----. 1993. "The Objectives of Worker Cooperatives," Journal of Comparative Economics, Vol.
17(2), June, pp. 288-308.
-----. 1995. "Participation and Productivity: A Comparison of Worker Cooperatives and
Conventional Firms in The Plywood Industry," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
212-160.
Doucouliagos, Chris. 1995. “Worker Participation and Productivity in Labor-managed and
Participatorry Capitalist Firms: A Meta-analysis,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 49, No. 1, October, pp. 58-77.
Eliot, Charles W. 1917. “The Road to Industrial Peace,” The Nation’s Business, August, p. 17.
Estrin, Saul, and Derek C. Jones. 1992. "The Viability of Employee-Owned Firms: Evidence from
France," Industrial & Labor Relations Review, Vol. 45 (2). p 323-38, January.
FitzRoy, Felix R., and Kornelius Kraft. 1987. "Cooperation, Productivity, and Profit Sharing."
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 102, No. 1 (February), pp. 23-35.
Fudenberg, Drew, Eric Maskin. 1986. "The Folk Theorem in Repeated Games with Discounting or
with Incomplete Information." Econometrica, Vol. 54, No. 3 (May), pp. 533-54.
27

Freeman, Richard, and Arindrajit Dube. 2000. “Shared Compensation and Decision-making in the
U.S. Job Market.” Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Department of
Economics and National Bureau of Economic Research.
Freeman, R and Joel Rogers. 1999. What Workers Want. New York: Russell Sage and Cornell
University Press.
Freeman, Richard, Douglas Kruse and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Worker Responses to Shirking Under
Shared Capitalism.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York,
NY, October 2006.
Hammer, T. H., Landau, J., and Stern, R. N. 1981. “Absenteeism When Workers Have a Voice:
The Case of Employee Ownership,” Journal of Applied Psychology, 1981, 66, pp. 561-573.
Heneman, Robert L, and Charles R. Fay, and Zhong-Ming Wang. 2002. “Compensation Systems in
the Global Context,” in Handbook of Industrial, Work, and Organizational Psychology, ed
Neil Anderson, Deniz S. Ones, Handan Kepir Sinnangil. Thousand Oaks, Ca.: Sage.
Huselid, Mark, and Susan Jackson, and Randall Schuler. 1997. “Technical and Strategic Human
Resource Management Effectiveness as Determinants of Firm Performance,” Academy of
Management Journal, Volume 40, Number 1, pps. 171-188.
Ichniowski, Casey, Thomas Kochan, David Levine, Craig Olson, and George Strauss. 1996. "What
Works at Work: Overview and Assessment," Industrial Relations, 35(3) 299-333.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1997. "The Effects of Human
Resource Management Practices on Productivity: A Study of Steel Finishing Lines,"
American Economic Review, 87 (3), pp. 291-313.
Johns, Gary, 2002. “The Psychology of Lateness, Absenteeism, and Turnover.” In Neil Anderson,
Deniz S. Ones, and Handan Kepir Sinnangil, eds., Handbook of Industrial, Work, and
Organizational Psychology. Thousand Oaks, Ca.: Sage.
Judge, Timothy A., Sharon K. Parker, Amy E. Colbert, Daniel Heller, and Remus Ilies. “Job
Satisfaction: A Cross-cultural Review.” In Neil Anderson, Deniz S. Ones, and Handan
Kepir Sinnangi, Handbook of Industrial, Work, and Organizational Psychology. Thousand
Oaks, Ca.: Sage.
Kandel, Eugene, and Edward P. Lazear. 1992. "Peer Pressure and Partnerships." Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 100, No. 4 (August), pp. 801-17.
Kanigel, Robert. 1997. The One Best Way: Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of
Efficiency. NY: Viking.
Kruse, Douglas. 1993. Profit Sharing: Does It Make A Difference? Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
Institute for Employment Research.

28

-----. 2002. “Research Evidence on Prevalence and Effects of Employee Ownership,” Testimony
before the Subcommittee on Employer-Employee Relations, Committee on Education and the
Workforce, U.S. House of Representatives, February 13.
-----, and Joseph Blasi. 1997. "Employee Ownership, Employee Attitudes, and Firm Performance:
A Review of the Evidence." In David Lewin, Daniel J.B. Mitchell, and Mahmood A. Zaidi,
eds., Human Resources Management Handbook, Part 1. Greenwich, CT.: JAI Press.
Kruse, Douglas, Joseph Blasi, and Rhokeun Park. 2008. “Shared Capitalism in the U.S. Economy:
Prevalence, Characteristics, and Employee Views of Financial Participation in Enterprises.”
Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY, October 2006.
Kruse, Douglas, Richard Freeman, and Joseph Blasi. 2008. “Do Workers Gain by Sharing?
Employee Outcomes Under Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Broad-based Stock
Options.” Presented at NBER/Russell Sage Foundation conference, New York, NY, October
2006.
Laffont, Jean-Jacques, and David Martimort. 2002. The Theory of Incentives: The Principal-Agent
Model. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Ittner, Christopher, and Richard Lambert, and David Larcker. The Structure and Performance
Consequences Of Equity Grants To Employees Of New Economy Companies.
Philadelphia, Pa. : University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School of Business, January 2001
Lee, Ya-Ting. 2003. “The Productivity Effects of Employee Stock Ownership Plans: Evidence
from Panel Data of Taiwan Electronic Companies,” International Journal of Management,
Vol. 20, No. 4, December, pp. 279-289.
Levine, David I. 1995. Reinventing the Workplace: How Business and Employees Can Both
Win. Washington, D.C.: Brooking Institution
Quarrey, M., & Rosen, C. 1993. Employee Ownership and Corporate Performance. Oakland, CA:
National Center for Employee Ownership.
Robinson, Andrew, and Nicholas Wilson. 2006. “Employee Financial Participation and
Productivity: An Empirical Reappraisal,” British Journal of Industrial Relations, Vol. 44,
No. 1, March, pp. 31-50.
Rosen, Corey, and Michael Quarrey. 1987. “How Well Is Employee Ownership Working,”
Harvard Business Review, Volume 65, September-October, pps. 126-130.
Rosen, Corey, and Katherine Klein, and Karen M. Young., 1986. Employee Ownership in
America: The Equity Solution. Lexington, Ma.: D.C. Heath, Lexington Books.
Sesil, James, and Maya Kroumova, and Joseph Blasi, and Douglas Kruse. 2002. “Broad-based
Employee Stock Options in U.S. New Economy Firms,” British Journal of Industrial
Relations, Volume 4, Number 2, June, pps. 273-294
29

Shaw, Albert. 1886. “Cooperation in a Western City,” Publications of the American Economic
Association, Vol. 1, No. 4. (September), pp. 7-106.
Smith, A. 1776. The Wealth of Nations. New York: The Modern Library.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2002. “Democratic Developments As The Fruits of Labor.” Keynote Address,
Industrial Relations Research Association, Boston.
-----.

1974. “Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping,” The Review of Economic Studies.
Volume 4, Issue 2, April, pps. 219-255.

U.S. General Accounting Office (GAO). 1987. Employee Stock Ownership Plans. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Office, October, GAO/PEMD-88-1.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1984. The Share Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
-----, and Douglas Kruse. 1990. “Profit Sharing and Productivity,” in Alan Blinder, ed., Paying For
Productivity: A Look at the Evidence. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

30

Average perception of co-worker effort at work site

Figure 1: Shared Capitalism and Worker Ef f ort
10

9

8

7

6

5
0

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
Average shared capitalism index at w orksite

9

10

Co-workers work hard (1-10 scale) = 6.765 + 0.087 (shared capitalist index)
(.125) (.043)

Average perception of co-worker interest in company

Figure 2: Shared Capitalism and Co-Worker Interest in Company
7

6

5

4

3

2
0

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
Average shared capitalism index at w orksite

9

10

Co-workers work interest in firm (1-10 scale) = 3.580 + 0.173 (shared capitalist index)
(.082) (.028)

31

Average perception of co-worker encouragement at work site

Figure 3: Shared Capitalism and Worker Encouragement
1

0
0

1

2

3
4
5
6
7
8
Average shared capitalism index at w orksite

9

10

Co-workers encourage others (1-10 scale) = 0.572 + 0.043 (shared capitalist index)
(.073) (.020)

32

Figure 4: Contingent Effects of Shared Capitalism on Likely Turnover
25%

Probability of being very likely to search hard
for new job in next 12 mos.

Very closely supervised,
no HRM policies
20%
Avg. supervision,
no HRM policies
15%

Closely supervised,
covered by HRM
li i
10%

Not closely supervised,
no HRM policies

Avg. supervision,
covered by HRM policies

Not closely supervised,
covered by HRM policies

5%

0%
0

10
Shared Capitalism Index

33

Figure B1: Distribution of Shared Capitalism Index in GSS
70.0%

60.0%

59.5%

Percent of employees

50.0%

40.0%

30.0%

20.0%

8.8%

10.0%

6.9%

6.8%

7.0%

4.8%
2.6%

2.6%

6

7

1.1%

0.0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

8

Score on 8-point shared capitalism index

Figure B2: Distribution of Shared Capitalism Index in NBER Companies
18.0%
16.6%

16.5%

16.0%
14.3%

14.2%

14.0%

Percent of employees

12.0%
10.0%
10.0%

8.0%
6.0%
6.0%

5.5%

5.4%
4.3%

4.0%

3.5%

3.7%

9

10

2.0%

0.0%
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Score on 10-point shared capitalism index

34

7

8

TABLE 1: Relation of Shared Capitalism to Workplace Outcomes
Each row represents results of separate regression.
Coeff. (s.e.) of
shared capitalism
index
Dependent variables
TURNOVER
National data
1
Not likely to search for new job
(1-3 scale, ordered probit)

2a
2b
3a
3b

NBER company data
Not likely to search for new job
(1-4 scale, ordered probit)
Would turn down another job for more pay to
stay with this co. (1-5 scale, ordered probit)

ABSENTEEISM
NBER company data
4a
Number of days absent in past 6 mos. (tobit)
4b
JOB EFFORT AND LOYALTY
National data
5
Co-workers work hard
(1-10 scale, OLS)
6
Proud to be working for employer
(1-4 scale, ordered probit)

7a
7b
8a
8b
(cont.)

NBER company data
Co-workers work hard
(1-10 scale, OLS)
Co-workers have enough interest in company
Issues to get involved (1-7 scale, OLS)

35

Controls
Job and
demog.

EI team

Training

Job
security

N

0.039

**

(0.017)

x

1743

0.039
0.018
0.059
0.062

***
***
**
**

(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.027)
(0.028)

x
x
x
x

0.152
0.161

***
***

(0.056)
(0.057)

x
x

0.116

***

(0.026)

x

1741

0.056

***

(0.014)

x

1745

0.018
0.006

**

(0.007)
(0.008)

x
x

x

x

x

39252
35653

0.027
0.014

***
**

(0.005)
(0.006)

x
x

x

x

x

38980
35518

x

x

x

x

x

x

39132
35644
1086
1079

x

38069
34834

x

x

9a
9b

Co-workers generally encourage each other to
make extra effort (0-1, OLS)

0.038
0.029

***
***

(0.008)
(0.009)

x
x

x

x

x

12799
12537

10a
10b

Loyalty toward co.
(1-4 scale, ordered probit)

0.041
0.021

***
***

(0.004)
(0.005)

x
x

x

x

x

38514
35082

11a
11b

Willing to work harder to help co.
(1-5 scale, ordered probit)

0.023
0.015

***
***

(0.004)
(0.004)

x
x

x

x

x

39159
35595

12a
12b

Frequency of suggestions
(1-5 scale, ordered probit)

0.035
0.027

***
***

(0.005)
(0.005)

x
x

x

x

x

29965
26860

* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 Coefficients in bold are significant at p<.05
See Appendix A for variable definitions and descriptive statistics.
Job and demographic controls include age, sex, race, tenure, occupation, education, full-time status, and ease of seeing co-workers for all regressions for all
regressions. The national data regressions also include work in a team and ln(yearly earnings), and the NBER regressions also include management level (3
dummies), supervisory status, union membership, disability status, payment on an hourly rate, country effects (21 dummies), closeness of supervision,
ln(base pay), and company fixed effects.

36

Table 2: Workplace Outcomes Related to Type of Shared Capitalism Plan
Dep var.:

Bonuses
Profit sharing
Profit sharing bonus as % of base
pay
Gainsharing
Gainsharing bonus as % of base pay
Individual bonus
Indiv. bonus as % of base pay
Stock options
Stock option holding
Stock option value as % of base pay
Rec'd stock option grant last year
Stock option grant as % of avg. grant
Employee ownership
Any employee ownership
Employee-owned stock as % of pay
n
(pseudo) R-sq.
Cut point 1
Cut point 2
Cut point 3
Cut point 4
Breakdowns by type of employee
ownership^
ESOP
ESOP stock as % of pay

Not likely to
search for new job
(ordered
probit)
(1)

Absenteeism
(Tobit)
(2)

0.096

(0.021)

***

0.929

(0.268)

0.175
0.085
0.095
0.082
0.012

(0.100)
(0.028)
(0.114)
(0.027)
(0.117)

*
***

0.529
0.489
-4.117
-0.975
-0.364

(1.346)
(0.360)
(1.559)
(0.342)
(1.602)

0.111
0.010
-0.074
0.037

(0.059)
(0.006)
(0.058)
(0.014)

*
*

1.583
0.085
-0.633
0.175

(0.715)
(0.077)
(0.699)
(0.165)

0.072
0.001

(0.020)
(0.010)

0.347
-0.171

(0.248)
(0.127)

37796
0.035
-0.826
-0.318
0.640

(0.239)
(0.239)
(0.239)

0.097
-0.022

(0.057)
(0.022)

***

***
***

36769
0.018

37

*

-0.539
0.105

(0.679)
(0.265)

Willing to
work harder
(ordered
probit)
(4)

Loyalty
(ordered
probit)
(3)
***

***
***

**

0.011

(0.021)

0.546
0.015
0.203
0.143
-0.100

(0.107)
(0.028)
(0.123)
(0.027)
(0.124)

-0.140
0.003
0.187
0.016

(0.058)
(0.006)
(0.057)
(0.014)

**

0.065
0.051

(0.019)
(0.010)

***
***

37192
0.060
-0.578
0.226
1.381

(0.246)
(0.246)
(0.246)

-0.041
0.018

(0.055)
(0.022)

***

***

***

Suggestion
frequency
(ordered
probit)
(5)

0.039

(0.019)

**

0.034

(0.023)

0.436
0.034
0.266
0.063
0.128

(0.095)
(0.026)
(0.109)
(0.025)
(0.111)

***

-0.091
0.021
-0.114
0.004
0.152

(0.132)
(0.034)
(0.199)
(0.032)
(0.188)

-0.085
0.002
0.034
0.009

(0.053)
(0.006)
(0.052)
(0.012)

-0.021
-0.037
0.028
-0.032

(0.070)
(0.032)
(0.071)
(0.020)

0.015
0.008

(0.018)
(0.009)

0.166
0.024

(0.021)
(0.014)

37817
0.042
-0.858
-0.318
0.627
1.864

(0.226)
(0.226)
(0.226)
(0.226)

29292
0.074
1.327
3.560
4.117
4.826

(0.313)
(0.313)
(0.313)
(0.314)

-0.091
0.053

(0.052)
(0.020)

0.304
0.034

(0.064)
(0.024)

**
***

*
***

***
*

***

ESPP
-0.013 (0.042)
0.780 (0.518)
0.047 (0.043)
0.058 (0.039)
-0.039 (0.068)
ESPP stock as % of pay
0.063 (0.035) *
-0.519 (0.441)
0.053 (0.036)
0.029 (0.031)
-0.094 (0.114)
401(k) stock
0.105 (0.019) ***
0.118 (0.230)
0.111 (0.018) ***
0.072 (0.017) ***
0.115 (0.020)
401(k) stock as % of pay
0.031 (0.017) *
-0.180 (0.213)
0.087 (0.016) *** -0.011 (0.015)
-0.003 (0.021)
Stock from options
-0.032 (0.040)
0.810 (0.503)
0.061 (0.043)
-0.002 (0.038)
-0.012 (0.069)
Stock from options as % of pay
-0.040 (0.021) *
-0.176 (0.286)
0.019 (0.024)
-0.001 (0.021)
0.047 (0.073)
Open mkt. stock
-0.018 (0.029)
-1.146 (0.399) ***
0.089 (0.031) ***
0.072 (0.028) **
0.160 (0.052)
Open mkt. stock as % of pay
0.010 (0.049)
0.300 (0.625)
-0.031 (0.052)
0.035 (0.048)
-0.515 (0.255)
ESOP coefficients without fixed effects^
ESOP
0.168 (0.035) *** -0.190 (0.422)
0.186 (0.034) *** -0.001 (0.032)
-0.080 (0.038)
ESOP stock as % of pay
-0.021 (0.020)
-0.170 (0.242)
0.017 (0.020)
0.051 (0.018) ***
0.037 (0.023)
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
See Appendix A for variable definitions and descriptive statistics.
All regressions include controls for occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3 dummies), hourly pay status, supervisory status, tenure in years, hours worked per
week, union status, age, gender, marital status (2 dummies), family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids, race (4 dummies), disability
status, ln(fixed pay), closeness of supervision, ability to observe co-workers, country effects (21 dummies), and company fixed effects.
^ The sections labelled "Breakdown by type of employee ownership" and "ESOP coefficients without fixed effects" represent separate regressions which
contain all of the bonus and stock option variables listed above, along with the control variables listed below.

38

***

***
**
**

Table 3: Interactions between Company Policies and Workplace Outcomes
Dep var.:

Shared capitalism index

Not likely to
search for new job
(ordered
probit)
(1)
0.002 (0.009)

Absenteeism
(Tobit)
(2)
0.064

(0.116)

Loyalty
(ordered
probit)
(3)
-0.024 (0.009)

***

Willing to
work harder
(ordered
probit)
(4)
0.017 (0.008)

**

Suggestion
frequency
(ordered
probit)
(5)
0.035 (0.012)

***

High performance policy index
* shared capitalism index

0.058
0.013

(0.016)
(0.003)

***
***

-0.642
0.069

(0.201)
(0.042)

***

0.135
0.027

(0.016)
(0.003)

***
***

0.131
0.008

(0.015)
(0.003)

***
**

0.253
-0.015

(0.018)
(0.005)

***
***

How closely supervised
* shared capitalism index

0.001
-0.004

(0.005)
(0.001)

0.117
-0.001

(0.059)
(0.014)

**

***

0.001
-0.005

(0.004)
(0.001)

***

0.004
-0.007

(0.004)
(0.001)

***

-0.017
0.003

(0.005)
(0.002)

***
**

Fixed pay at or above market
* shared capitalism index

0.373
0.003

(0.024)
(0.005)

***

-0.268
-0.028

(0.311)
(0.069)

0.259
0.016

(0.024)
(0.005)

***
***

0.147
0.011

(0.023)
(0.005)

***
**

-0.073
0.006

(0.028)
(0.008)

***

0.087
-0.001

(0.020)
(0.003)

***

-0.782
0.023

(0.252)
(0.033)

0.083
0.017

(0.020)
(0.003)

***
***

0.104
0.031

(0.018)
(0.002)

***
***

-0.009
0.031

(0.022)
(0.003)

Selected controls^
Individual bonuses (dummy)
Ease of seeing how well

***

co-worker is working
n
31411
30706
30920
31364
24936
(pseudo) R-sq.
0.103
0.017
0.101
0.054
0.081
Cut point 1
0.031 (0.269)
-0.286 (0.275)
-0.817 (0.254)
1.293 (0.291)
Cut point 2
0.595 (0.269)
0.575 (0.275)
-0.267 (0.254)
3.579 (0.291)
Cut point 3
1.682 (0.269)
1.790 (0.275)
0.683 (0.254)
4.167 (0.291)
Cut point 4
1.948 (0.254)
4.917 (0.292)
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
See Appendix A for variable definitions and descriptive statistics.
All regressions include controls for occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3 dummies), hourly pay status, supervisory status, tenure in years, hours worked per
week, union status, age, gender, marital status (2 dummies), family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids, race (4 dummies), disability
status, ln(fixed pay), closeness of supervision, ability to observe co-workers, country effects (21 dummies), and company fixed effects.

39

***

Table 4: Employee Views of the Impact of Shared Capitalist
Incentives on their behavior
To what extent would each of the following affect your motivation to improve the
business success of the company?
You receive
You receive a
The co. grants
some
You buy some
cash incentive
you some
stock in the co.
co. shares
from the co.
stock options
ESOP
in the ESPP
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

You buy some
co. shares on
the open mkt.
(5)

Tabulation of responses
To a very little extent
2.2%
2.3%
4.4%
5.3%
20.1%
To a little extent
3.0%
3.6%
5.2%
6.7%
17.8%
To some extent
17.2%
17.2%
20.9%
25.2%
32.4%
To a great extent
32.5%
31.7%
28.8%
33.8%
17.5%
To a very great extent
45.1%
45.2%
40.8%
29.0%
12.2%
n
10389
8187
3155
8151
8135
Ordered probit coeffs.
High performance policy
index
0.022 (0.015)
0.222 (0.018) *** 0.130 (0.028) *** 0.173 (0.017) ***
0.129
(0.017)
How closely supervised
0.011 (0.006) ** -0.028 (0.006) *** 0.010 (0.009)
-0.004 (0.006)
-0.002
(0.006)
Fixed pay at or above
market
-0.147 (0.025) *** 0.094 (0.028) *** 0.045 (0.044)
0.093 (0.027) ***
0.077
(0.026)
Ease of seeing how well
0.019 (0.004) *** 0.028 (0.005) *** 0.035 (0.008) *** 0.023 (0.005) ***
0.013
(0.005)
co-worker is working
n
9749
7832
2816
7798
7787
(pseudo) R-sq.
0.015
0.060
0.053
0.038
0.022
Cut point 1
-2.834 (0.428)
1.859 (0.469)
-0.209 (0.710)
-0.057 (0.422)
-0.201
(0.441)
Cut point 2
-2.436 (0.428)
2.337 (0.468)
0.246 (0.710)
0.428 (0.422)
0.349
(0.441)
Cut point 3
-1.544 (0.428)
3.251 (0.469)
1.106 (0.710)
1.343 (0.422)
1.225
(0.441)
Cut point 4
-0.641 (0.428)
4.196 (0.469)
1.929 (0.711)
2.279 (0.423)
1.881
(0.441)
* p<.10 ** p<.05 *** p<.01 (s.e. in parentheses)
^ All regressions include controls for occupation (5 dummies), mgt. level (3 dummies), hourly pay status, supervisory status, tenure in years,
hours worked per week, union status, age, gender, marital status (2 dummies), family size, college graduate, graduate degree, number of kids,
country (21 dummies), race (4 dummies), disability status, ln(fixed pay), and company fixed effects.

40

***

***
***

Table A-1: Prevalence of Shared Capitalism Programs
General
Social
Survey
2002-2006
Bonus eligibility
Profit sharing
Gainsharing
Size of most recent bonus, if eligible for any
Mean dollar value
Median dollar value
Mean % of pay
Median % of pay
Employee ownership
Own employer stock in any form
Own employer stock through:
Employee Stock Ownership Plan
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
401(k) plan
Exercising options and keeping stock
Open market purchase
Value of employer stock, if own stock
Dollar value: Mean
Median
% of pay: Mean
Median
% of wealth: Mean
Median

NBER
company
dataset

Sample sizes
GSS

35.9%
24.9%

71.3%
20.7%

2386
2386

41018
41023

$6,265
$1,500
8.9%
4.6%

$11,329
$2,000
12.1%
5.7%

693
693
645
645

26113
26113
22019
22019

19.4%

64.0%

2406

41206

8.1%
17.6%
33.5%
5.0%
7.3%

Stock options
Currently hold stock options
Ever granted stock options
Granted stock options last year
Value of stock options, if hold options:
Mean dollar value of unvested options
Mean dollar value of vested options
Total dollar value: Mean
Median
% of pay:
Mean
Median
% of wealth:
Mean
Median

NBER

41109
40990
40885
41032
41145

$63,130
$10,000
81.7%
23.0%

$60,078
$14,375
65.0%
30.6%
19.6%
10.0%

318
318
302
302

25447
25447
22715
22715
23141
23141

11.3%

21.9%
22.3%
20.4%

2392

41166
41166
41158

$112,882
$143,117
$249,901
$75,000
183.7%
100.0%
60.3%
28.6%

8390
8497
8656
8656
8403
8403
8104
8104

Any of above programs
44.9%
85.7%
2430
41206
Source: Tabulated from GSS and NBER surveys. The GSS sample is limited to private for-profit employees.

1

