                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         DOES EMPLOYEE IGNORANCE UNDERMINE SHARED CAPITALISM?

                                            John W. Budd

                                        Working Paper 14236
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14236


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




I am grateful to Richard Freeman, Doug Kruse, and Joseph Blasi for giving me the opportunity to
write this paper, to Doug for his help with the data, and to Doug, Joseph, Brigitte Madrian, and seminar
participants at the University of Minnesota and Iowa State University for helpful comments. An earlier
version of this paper was presented at the NBER Shared Capitalism Research Conference in October
2006. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by John W. Budd. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Does Employee Ignorance Undermine Shared Capitalism?
John W. Budd
NBER Working Paper No. 14236
August 2008
JEL No. J33

                                             ABSTRACT

The potential of shared capitalism to improve individual and organizational performance through financial
incentives depends on employees knowing about and participating in compensation plans that link
rewards to performance. This paper therefore analyzes a survey of employees from multiple companies
to assess the extent to which employees are ignorant about company, group, and individual-based
incentive pay plans and ESOPs. The findings reveal significant amounts of employee ignorance in
both under- and overstating the extent to which such plans apply to them individually.


John W. Budd
Ctr for Human Resources & Labor Studies
University of Minnesota
3-300 Carlson School of Management
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455-0438
jbudd@umn.edu
       Since the birth of the modern employment relationship a few centuries ago, employers

have struggled with how to reward and motivate employees. Contemporary information

technologies, global competitive pressures, and demographic changes have heightened these

struggles as the employment relationship is increasingly characterized by contingencies rather

than stability (Cappelli, 1999). Against this backdrop, shared capitalism compensation plans seek

to motivate employees by tying their pay to various measures of organizational and employee

performance (Gates, 1998; Freeman, 2001; Conyon and Freeman, 2004; Kruse, Freeman, and

Blasi, 2006). But shared capitalism will likely only be successful in motivating employees if

employees know about and understand such plans, especially the extent to which they are

individually covered by forms of shared capitalism. In other words, incentives that are unknown

to employees are unlikely to affect their behavior.

       We know that in general, knowledge is often imperfect. Various Gallup polls leave little

doubt of this fact.1 In a 2005 poll, 29 percent of Americans indicated that they believe that both

evolution and creationism are probably true, in spite of the contradictory nature of these two

theories. On the 60th anniversary of D-Day, 35 percent could not identify Germany as the Allied

forces’ D-Day enemy. More than 50 percent of Americans cannot identify the first 10

amendments to the Constitution as the “Bill of Rights.” A large majority of American admit that

they know very little about the European Union, including 80 percent who don’t know that it has

a larger population than the United States. And 18 percent incorrectly believe the sun revolves

around the earth. With respect to economic knowledge, only 34 percent of adults managed to get




1
 The polls cited here are dated August 5-7, 2005, May 21-23, 2004, August 28-September 15,
2003, and June 25-27, 1999.


                                                 1
an “A” or “B” on a basic economics quiz done by the National Council on Economic Education

in 2005 (Markow and Bagnaschi, 2005).

       As will be shown in the next section, previous research has also uncovered significant

amounts of ignorance in the employment relationship, specifically pertaining to employees’

imperfect understanding of privately- and publicly-provided benefits. As such, it is reasonable to

hypothesize that some employees are ignorant about shared capitalism compensation programs.

To test this hypothesis, this paper analyzes over 20,000 employee surveys linked to employer-

provided shared capitalism coverage information from 10-14 private sector companies collected

under the NBER Shared Capitalism research project. Consistent with the literature on other

aspects of the employment relationship, significant levels of misunderstanding and inaccuracy

are uncovered. Employee ignorance might very well undermine shared capitalism.

                               Research on Employee Ignorance

       Previous research shows that employee ignorance of privately- and publicly-provided

employee benefits is not a trivial concern. For example, the 1998 British Workplace Employee

Relations Survey (WERS98) contains manager-provided indications regarding whether several

family-friendly benefits are available in the workplace along with individual-provided responses

on whether the employee thinks these benefits are available to him or her. Among workplaces

with a family-friendly benefit (according to the manager), large fractions of employees do not

indicate that this benefit is personally available to them. For example, even after trying to control

for imperfect workplace coverage, only one-quarter of employees in workplaces with parental

leave benefits correctly perceive that they are entitled to parental leave. The analogous fractions

for job sharing arrangements and employer-subsidized child care benefits are one-quarter and




                                                 2
one-fifth, respectively. In other words, there appears to be a significant discrepancy between

availability and awareness (Budd and Mumford, 2004, 2006).

       Several studies of retirement benefits provide additional documentation of employee

ignorance of privately-provided benefits. Mitchell (1988: 35) matched survey responses for over

600 workers to administrative pension plan data and found that “pension misinformation and

missing information are quite widespread.” Luchak and Gunderson (2000) surveyed employees

of a large public utility and found moderate levels of pension knowledge—employees responded

correctly to seven questions about their pensions about half of the time. Only 28 percent of the

employees accurately knew the formula used to calculate benefit amounts and only 36 percent

could identify one of the eligibility requirements for retiring early. Analyses of individuals in the

University of Michigan Health and Retirement Study also uncover significant levels of pension

ignorance (Chan and Stevens, 2004; Gustman and Steinmeier, 2005). For example, one-third of

the respondents are not able to provide enough information to construct any estimate of their

pension’s present value; among those providing enough information, only half estimate their

pension’s present value within a factor of two (Chan and Stevens, 2004). An imperfect

understanding of how 401(k) retirement plans work is illustrated by Choi, Laibson, and

Madrian’s (2005) finding that half of vested employees aged 59½ years and older at seven firms

with employer matching policies fail to take advantage of this match even though this is

essentially giving up free income because there are no tax penalties for these workers to

immediately cash out these contributions. With respect to health insurance, Reschovsky,

Hargraves, and Smith (2002) find that 25 percent of respondents cannot correctly identify

whether they are covered by an HMO or non-HMO plan.




                                                 3
       Turning to publicly-provided benefits, a phone survey in 1995 and another in 2000

revealed that 40 percent of U.S. workers had not heard of the Family and Medical Leave Act

(FMLA) which was enacted by the U.S. Congress in 1993; moreover, among those who had

heard of the law, 50 percent were unsure as to whether they were personally eligible to use it

(Budd and Brey, 2003; Waldfogel, 2001). Though not a publicly-provided benefit per se, there

are also serious shortcomings in workers’ knowledge of the employment-at-will legal doctrine.

For example, in the United States is it legal to fire someone to make room for another employee

to do the same job at a lower wage, and also to fire someone who is mistakenly believed to have

stolen money. But Kim (1997) documents that less than 20 percent of surveyed employees can

correctly identify these scenarios as being legal. In separate surveys, Rudy (2002) and Freeman

and Rogers (2006) similarly document extensive employee ignorance about the general lack of

legal restrictions on firing workers. In two surveys of low-income workers in New York City,

less than 20 percent could correctly identify the value of the minimum wage (Brennan Center for

Justice, 2006).

       The imperfect use of publicly-provided social insurance programs is also partially

attributed to imperfect knowledge of these programs. Twenty-five to forty percent of

unemployed individuals eligible for unemployment insurance do not receive it (McCall, 1995).

Budd and McCall (1997, 2004) find a significantly higher take-up rate among blue collar

unionized workers relative to comparable nonunion workers and ascribe this, in part, to the role

that unions provide in providing information and combating uncertainty and ignorance. Hirsch,

Macpherson, and DuMond (1997) similarly attribute greater levels of workers’ compensation

receipt among unionized workers, compared to similar nonunion individuals, at least partially to




                                               4
union-provided information on workers’ compensation systems. That unions can play such a role

indicates that employees are not fully aware of these types of employee benefits.

       In fact, issues of employee knowledge, ignorance, and usage of privately- and publicly-

provided benefits are important enough for Budd (2004) and Budd and Mumford (2004) to add a

union facilitation face to Freeman and Medoff’s (1984) famous monopoly and voice faces of

labor unions and for others to devote significant attention to how to make labor policies effective

(e.g., Weil, 1996, 2005). A lack of perfect knowledge is also consistent with theories of bounded

rationality in which time constraints and cognitive limitations prevent individuals from gathering

and processing complete information (March and Simon, 1958; Simon, 1982). So employee

ignorance of privately- and publicly-provided employee benefits is a meaningful concern and it

is reasonable to hypothesize that similar issues apply to shared capitalism compensation plans.

       With that said, an important issue in much of this research is measuring employee

coverage or eligibility. Typically, researchers have only an imperfect indicator of this key

variable. Studies of publicly-provided benefits typically must impute eligibility from

administrative eligibility criteria. Budd and Mumford’s (2004, 2006) studies of privately-

provided family-friendly benefits rely on matching employer information about whether a

specific benefit is available for any employees in a workplace to employee responses about

whether they personally could use this benefit. Similar issues are present in the analyses below in

that the employer-provided information on coverage of shared capitalism programs might not be

perfectly accurate for each individual employee. So while the previous literature supports the

need to empirically examine the extent of employee ignorance of shared capitalism programs, it

also reminds us to be careful as to how ignorance is measured.




                                                5
                   Measuring Ignorance of Shared Capitalism Programs

       To analyze employees’ accurate knowledge or ignorance of their employers’ policies and

programs requires two levels of data: company-provided reports pertaining to coverage or

applicability and employee indications of awareness. As summarized in Figure 1, with these two

sources of information, four outcomes are possible: the employee accurately responds that they

are not covered by a policy, the employee accurately responds that they are covered by a policy,

the employee indicates that they are not covered by or aware of a policy for which the company

indicated that they are (employee ignorance), and the employee indicates that they are covered

by a policy for which the company indicated that the policy is not offered by the employer

generally or to that employee specifically (false positive). Frequently-analyzed surveys like the

Current Population Survey that only contain individual-level data can only be used to measure

employee awareness while organizational surveys just capture coverage rates. Linked employer-

employee data are required to assess employee accuracy and ignorance.

       The NBER Shared Capitalism data set contains linked employer-employee information

on several shared capitalism programs and can therefore be used to analyze the accuracy and

shortfalls of employees’ understanding of these programs. The NBER Shared Capitalism data set

was collected by a research team directed by Joseph Blasi, Richard Freeman, and Doug Kruse

that administered surveys to over 100,000 employees across 14 companies. The goal of this data

collection effort was to allow the research team to analyze the effect of shared capitalism

programs on workers and companies (e.g., Kruse, Freeman, and Blasi, 2006). Surveys were

completed by 46,907 employees for an overall response rate of 45 percent, although the presence

of missing values reduces the sample sizes used in the analyses below. The survey dates range

from 2001 to 2006 with most of the surveys completed in 2005; 78 percent were completed by




                                               6
employees working in the United States. Forty-four percent of the surveys were completed via

the internet; the remainder were completed via a paper survey instrument. The organizations are

all private sector manufacturing, services, technology, or finance-related companies that range in

size from roughly 200 to 50,000 employees. The sample sizes and response rates across these

organizations range from 200 to 32,000 and from 10 to 80 percent, respectively.

       While the companies represent different industries and sizes, they were targeted for

inclusion because of their use of various shared capitalism programs. For example, nine of the

companies have employee stock ownership plans. The companies are therefore not representative

of the entire population of U.S. companies, but this is not a major concern for the analyses below

because the focus here is on measuring employee ignorance in shared capitalism firms rather

than on estimating coverage rates across the population. If anything, the results might be biased

against employee ignorance to the extent that information about the plans of interest might be

disseminated more widely in firms in which shared capitalism programs are prominent (as in the

sampled firms) compared to companies in which they are not.

       The employee surveys ask questions pertaining to the respondent employee’s job,

supervision, relations with co-workers, attitudes, and demographic characteristics. Of particular

interest for this paper are a number of questions pertaining to participation in, and sometimes

awareness of, various shared capitalism programs—performance-related pay, employee stock

ownership, 401(k)s, deferred profit-sharing, stock options, and employee stock purchase plans.

The applicability of these programs to sets of employees was determined through interviews with

managers and from the companies’ Form 5500 filings with the Internal Revenue Service. In a

majority of cases, the shared capitalism programs include or exclude all employees uniformly,

but the performance-related pay plans sometimes vary across different groups of workers. For




                                                7
example, one company reports that a profit-sharing plan only applies to managerial employees

while another company reports that an individual bonus program excludes unionized employees.

These types of variations in coverage are matched to the employee surveys using the employees’

self-reported job characteristics. Four of the smaller companies are omitted from some of the

analyses below because employees were not directly asked about their perceived eligibility for

performance-related pay.

       As shown in Figure 1, whenever an individual’s response to whether or not a specific

shared capitalism program applies to them personally does not match the company-provided

information for that employee, it is characterized here as an employee inaccuracy—either in the

form of ignorance or a false positive. This assumes that the company-provided information is

accurate for each individual employee. While the company responses are matched to each

employee based on any job characteristics that the managers indicate determine coverage, it is

useful to explicitly note that this falls short of the ideal situation in which employee-by-employee

administrative data are available. As such, one cannot rule out the possibility that some

employees have better information on the applicability of specific programs than are contained in

these data. For example, a relatively new employee might be excluded from a program until after

completing a probationary period. The multivariate analyses below will try to control for some of

these possibilities by using job and demographic characteristics as control variables (see

Appendix Table 1 for variable definitions and summary statistics), but ultimately the measures of

employee inaccuracy may overstate the true extent of inaccuracy.

                        Aggregate Shared Capitalism Ignorance Rates

       Table 1 presents aggregate coverage, perceived coverage, and ignorance rates for several

shared capitalism programs. Profit-sharing plans are those in which pay or bonuses depend on




                                                 8
company profits or performance. Seven of the companies indicate that a profit-sharing plan

applies to all employees, six have plans that apply to some employees, and one reported no such

plan.2 As shown in column 1 of Table 1, this means that according to their employer, 85 percent

of employees are covered by a profit-sharing plan. Employees were separately asked if they were

eligible for performance-related pay in which the size of the payments depended on company

profits or performance; 70 percent of the employees perceived that they are covered by such a

plan. Comparing this to the company-reported 85 percent coverage rate reveals a significant

discrepancy. Moreover, this aggregate comparison understates the extent of mismatch because

false positives can be offsetting ignorance (recall Figure 1). In fact, for profit-sharing plans, 25

percent of the employee responses fail to match the company-reported response (see column 3 of

Table 1). Columns 4 and 5 decompose these mismatches. Among the 38,829 employees that the

companies say are covered by profit-sharing plans, 8,960 employees (23 percent) report that they

are not covered. While there are other explanations, this is interpreted here as employee

ignorance; approaching this from the other direction, column 4 implies that the remaining 77

percent of employees are correctly aware that they are covered by a profit-sharing plan. Turning

to column 5, among the 32,164 employees who perceive that they are covered by a profit-sharing

plan, 2,295 of them are not covered according to their employer. In other words, seven percent of

perceived coverage stems from false positives.




2
  Three of the companies with universal applicability and the one company with no coverage are
dropped from the analyses because employee-level coverage was imputed rather than asked
directly. The next three measures in Table 1 were also imputed at the employee level for these
same four companies so they are again dropped from the analyses. For gainsharing plans, all four
reported no coverage. For individual-level performance pay, one reported uniform coverage, one
no coverage, and two partial coverage. For all forms of performance pay, three of the dropped
organizations have uniform coverage and one has no coverage.


                                                 9
       The remaining rows of Table 1 repeat this exercise for other measures of shared

capitalism. Only three percent of the employees are covered by gainsharing plans (pay-for-

performance based on team or group performance) according to the companies, but 21 percent of

the employees believe their pay depends on team or group performance. Only half of the

employees covered by such plans accurately report this coverage, and more than 90 percent of

the employees’ affirmative responses are incorrect. A similar qualitative pattern is apparent for

individual-based performance pay. Twenty percent of the observations are mismatched while

more than one-third of individuals covered by an individual-based performance pay plan are

unaware of this and one-third of the affirmative responses are false positives. These levels of

misunderstanding might stem from explicit versus implicit views of performance-based pay such

that companies report a lack of formal gainsharing or individual-based programs while

employees nonetheless believe that their pay ultimately reflects team, group, or individual

performance even in the absence of a formal, formulaic incentive program.

       The performance-based pay variable in the fourth row of Table 1 is coded as a yes if any

of the previous three plans—profit-sharing, gainsharing, or individual-based plans—are coded as

a yes. The level of ignorance and the rate of false positives are lower for this broader measure.

So there is less disagreement between companies and their employees about performance-based

pay generally. But if the specific nature of the a performance incentive is important, then one

needs to remember that the first three rows in Table 1 reveal greater discrepancies between

employees’ understanding of specific performance-based pay programs and their employers’

descriptions of these same programs. Moreover, the first two rows of Table 2 reveal other

dimensions of employee ignorance about pay-for-performance programs. Twenty percent of the

9,295 employees who did not indicate that they are eligible for performance-based pay actually




                                               10
do not know if they are eligible. Of those who did not state that they earned performance-based

pay last year, 8 percent do not know if they did so.

       Returning to Table 1, the fifth row presents the summary results for eight of the

companies that have employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs).3 As shown in column 1, these

ESOPs apply uniformly to all employees in these organizations. Among the employees in these

eight companies, 82 percent indicate that they participate in the ESOP while 18 percent indicate

that they do not. Even though the question is worded as participation rather than coverage or

eligibility, this 18 percent non-participation rate likely reflects a significant amount of ignorance.

ESOPs rarely exclude large groups of employees except, in some cases, unionized employees

and probationary employees. So setting these exclusions aside momentarily, lack of reported

participation equates to lack of awareness. But what about these potential exclusions? None of

the companies indicated that unionized employees are excluded and re-calculating the statistics

in row 5 of Table 1 for nonunion employees only reduces the mismatch rate by less than one

percentage point. Turning to probationary exclusions, the mismatch rate falls to 16 percent when

employees with less than 6 months of tenure are excluded, and to 13 percent when those with

less than one year of tenure are omitted. So perhaps the rate of ignorance for ESOPs is around 15

percent (roughly). Also, row 3 of Table 2 shows that of the 798 self-reported non-participants, 32

percent indicate that they don’t know if they participate in the ESOP.

       The Shared Capitalism data set contains several other measures of shared capitalism

programs, but an analysis as in Table 1 is not appropriate because participation is voluntary and




3
 A ninth ESOP company is excluded from the analyses because employees in this company
were not asked if they participate in the ESOP.


                                                 11
employees were generally not asked about eligibility in the surveys. For example, of the

employees eligible for 401(k) plans according to their employer, 16 percent indicate that they do

not participate in a 401(k) plan. But this might reflect a choice not to participate rather than

ignorance. There are, however, some questions about these programs that reveal a certain amount

of employee ignorance (see Table 2). For example, among employees who fail to say that they

participate in a 401(k) plan, 18 percent of them indicate that they do not know if they participate.

Of those who did not indicate that they have ever received stock options, 14 percent responded

that they do not know if they have ever received stock options. Uncertainty about exercising

stock options, currently holding stock options, and buying company stock, however, is

negligible.

                       Predicting and Explaining Employee Ignorance

       Multivariate estimation can be used to assess the extent to which demographic, job, and

company characteristics predict mismatches between employer and employee beliefs about the

coverage of shared capitalism pay programs. Characteristics that are strong predictors of these

mismatches might hold important clues to explaining the sources of inaccuracy and mismatch.

To this end, Tables 3, 4, and 6 present probit results in which the indicators from columns 3-5 of

Table 1 are the dependent variables: overall mismatches, employee ignorance, and false positives

for each of the shared capitalism plans. The estimates reported in these tables are marginal

effects, rather than probit coefficients, calculated using the standard algorithm: all of the

variables are set to their sample mean values, and the marginal effects for continuous

independent variables are calculated as the change in probability for a small change in the

variable while the marginal effects for dummy variables are calculated as the change in

probability associated with changing the dummy variable from zero to one. The standard errors




                                                12
are robust to arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity. The sample sizes are smaller than in Table 1

because of missing observations for the independent variables, especially educational attainment.

Sample means of the independent variables are reported in Appendix Table 1.

       Table 3 reports probit results for overall mismatches.4 More specifically, the sample for

each model includes all non-missing observations and the dependent variable equals one if the

employer and employee responses for the particular shared capitalism do not agree. In terms of

Figure 1, all four interior cells are used and the dependent variable indicates observations that

fall into the two inaccurate cells. These models therefore pool both ignorance and false positives.

Column 1 reports the results for profit-sharing plans. Recall from Table 1 that 24.6 percent of the

responses are mismatches. Compared to high school dropouts, employees who graduated from

high school or attended college are significantly less likely to erroneously report profit-sharing

coverage. Women, married individuals, higher-paid employees, employees who expect to work

at the employer for a long time, and U.S. employees are also less likely to be mismatched. Age

and tenure both exhibit a quadratic relationship with the probability of mismatch; increases in

each of these measures reduces the predicted probability of a mismatch up to 33 years of age and

19 years of tenure. Sales employees are much more likely to erroneously report whether they are

covered by a profit-sharing plan as are unionized employees.

       Turning to gainsharing plans (column 2), women and U.S. employees are again less

likely to have a mismatch with their employers’ responses and tenure has a similar quadratic

relationship. Higher paid employees, those who expect to work at their employer for a long time,




4
  Tables 3 and 6 do not include results for ESOPs because there are no false positives; as such,
the overall mismatch results reduce to the employee ignorance results reported in Table 4.


                                                13
sales occupations, and non-white individuals are predicted to have a higher a likelihood of an

erroneous response; as will be shown in Table 6 these results apparently stem from these

employees overstating the frequency of gainsharing plans. With respect to individually-based

performance pay plans (column 3), those who are estimated as being associated with a lower

probability of a mismatched report are non-white, higher-paid, and U.S. employees and those

who work in larger companies. In contrast to the other types of performance-based plans,

increases in tenure are associated with a greater likelihood of a mismatched response. But

looking at performance-based pay overall (column 4), age and tenure both reduce the likelihood

of erroneous responses (at least up to the inflection points of 44 and 18 years, respectively).

Higher paid, sales, and U.S. employees are less likely to improperly assess whether or not they

are covered by any type of performance-based pay whereas the opposite is true of hourly and

unionized workers.

       The results for company size and unionization merit a special note. These two variables

are included in the results here because one would expect that unionization and company size

can affect the quality and quantity of employee information. But recall that the NBER Shared

Capitalism data set consists of employees from 14 companies, and four of these are not used here

because the eligibility questions for performance-related pay were imputed. As such, the results

are based on only 10 companies. All of the unionized employees are concentrated in three of

these companies. And the variable on total employment only takes on 10 distinct values (one

value for each company). As such, it is difficult to distinguish these variables from company-

specific effects and unlike for the other variables in these models, the results for unionization and

company size are not robust to the inclusion of company-specific effects. So the results for these

two variables are presented here with caution.




                                                 14
       Table 4 presents the probit results for employee ignorance. In these models, the samples

are restricted to individuals for which the company indicates they are covered by the relevant

shared capitalism program. The dependent variable equals one if the employee does not perceive

him or herself as being covered. In other words, the dependent variable indicates those

individuals I am labeling as ignorant or unaware. In terms of Figure 1, these models are limited

to the second column and estimate the probability of being in the top cell (employee ignorance)

in this column. Negative coefficients indicate a reduced likelihood of ignorance or lack of

awareness. None of the predictors are consistent across all of the shared capitalism plans, but

some patterns appear to hold across two or three plans. Greater educational attainment generally

reduces employee ignorance as do higher earnings and expectations of working at the employer

for a long time. Hourly employees are more likely to fail to recognize coverage by a

performance-based pay plan relative to salaried employees as are unionized employees except

for the case of gainsharing plans. Sales employees are more likely to be unaware of company-

level profit-sharing plans but, not surprisingly, are less likely to be ignorant of individual-based

incentives. Age and tenure exhibit quadratic relationships with the probability of ignorance,

though increasing the quantities increases rather than decreases ignorance pertaining to

individual-level performance pay plans. The overall results for ignorance about ESOPs appear

generally similar as for the performance-based pay plans.

       As the results for each variable tend to vary from program to program, an alternative way

to approach these results is to ask what each model as a whole implies for the predicted

probability of employee ignorance across different profiles of employees. For example, the

results in column 1 of Table 4 predict that the probability of being ignorant about the existence

of a profit-sharing plan is 62 percent for a single, 21 year-old, non-white, high school dropout




                                                15
father of two making $25,000 per year with no expectation of working for a long time for his 200

employee company of one year in a union-represented, non-sales, hourly job in the United

States. In contrast to this less-educated, low-paid, young worker profile, consider a better-

educated, salaried, experienced worker profile: a married, 45 year-old, white, college-educated,

childless woman making $75,000 per year with expectations of working for a long time in her

200 person company of 15 years in a nonunion, non-sales, salaried job in the United States only

has a 4 percent chance of failing to correctly realize that she is covered by a profit-sharing plan.

Table 5 summarizes these predictions for the various shared capitalism plans. The pattern of

results are quite similar with the exception of the gainsharing results—younger, inexperienced,

low-educated, and low-paid employees are significantly more likely to be unaware of shared

capitalism programs than their middle-aged, higher paid, better educated, salaried counterparts.

       Besides ignorance or lack of awareness, the second dimension of employer-employee

mismatches consists of false positive responses—situations in which employees’ perception that

they are covered by a shared capitalism program contradicts their employers’ statements that

they are not. Table 6 presents the probit results for false positives. In these models, the samples

are restricted to individuals who indicated that they are covered by the relevant shared capitalism

program and the dependent variable equals one if the company did not indicate that this

employee was covered. In terms of Figure 1, these models are limited to the second row and

estimate the probability of being in the left-most cell (false positives) in this row. The results are

mixed and job characteristics seem more consistently important than demographic characteristics

for explaining false positives. This suggests that variations in false positive responses stem more

from variations in employer offerings of shared capitalism plans than from variations in

employee beliefs about their prevalence. In other words, employees in jobs that are less likely to




                                                 16
have a pay-for-performance plan are more likely to make a false positive error. Except for the

case of gainsharing programs, higher paid employees are less likely to make a false positive error

whereas hourly and unionized employees are more likely to make this mistake. Table 7 repeats

the exercise of Table 5 in presenting the predicted probabilities of a false positive for two

different employee profiles. Younger, inexperienced, low-educated, and low-paid employees are

significantly more likely to misunderstand the applicability of company and individual-based

performance pay plans than their middle-aged, higher paid, better educated, salaried co-workers.

                       Other Measures of Shared Capitalism Ignorance

       The primary focus of this paper is trying to assess the extent of employee ignorance about

shared capitalism programs by analyzing mismatches between employer and employee

statements pertaining to the applicability of three pay-for-performance plans plus ESOP plans.

However, there are several other questions in the NBER Shared Capitalism data set that can be

used to examine the importance of employee ignorance for potentially undermining employee

involvement in decision-making. The responses to six relevant questions are summarized in

Table 8. Nearly 30 percent of employees at three companies believe that their company only

occasionally or never reaches out to them to provide them with information about company goals

and workplace changes; nearly 45 percent at two companies report that they personally seek out

such information on their own only occasionally or never. A quarter of employees at one large

company failed to agreed with the statement that they have the information needed to their job;

around 40 percent failed to agree with the statements that they are kept abreast of important

issues in the organization and in their jobs. And 15 percent of employees across seven companies

believe that they understand their company’s plan for being successful only a little or not at all.




                                                 17
       To the extent that shared capitalism programs aim to provide workers with incentives for

making better decisions, these questions are relevant to the understanding of such programs.

More specifically, the responses to these six questions reveal non-trivial numbers of employees

who believe that they have insufficient information and are not kept up-to-date on important

changes. As nearly all of these questions were asked in only one or two companies, additional

research needs to assess generalizability of the responses, but the pattern of results is suggestive

of employee ignorance that can undermine shared capitalism programs by creating roadblocks to

informed decision making. This is another dimension of employee ignorance that should not be

overlooked.

                                    The Impact of Ignorance

       Space considerations prevent a comprehensive analysis in this paper of the effect of

ignorance on the operation of shared capitalism programs. But the employee mismatches

documented here are a form of a measurement error that can affect econometric estimates of the

effect of shared capitalism on various outcomes. The NBER Shared Capitalism data do not

contain performance measures per se, but consider two questions that are perhaps related to

individual employee performance: willingness to work hard and loyalty. For the former,

employees were asked to respond on a 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree scale to the

statement “I am willing to work harder than I have to in order to help the company I work for

succeed.” There is widespread agreement with this statement with a mean response of 4.02 and a

standard deviation of 0.899. For the latter, employees were asked “How much loyalty would you

say you feel toward the company you work for as a whole?” with response choices of 1=no




                                                18
loyalty at all, 2=only a little, 3=some, 4=a lot.5 The average response to this question is 3.33 with

a standard deviation of 0.798.

       One might expect that if shared capitalism programs are effective that they would

improve workers’ willingness to work hard and their loyalty toward their employers. Columns 1

and 3 of Table 9 show that in regressions with and without additional control variables similar to

those in the probit models, employees who believe they are covered by any performance-based

pay plan have higher levels of willingness to work hard and loyalty. These are the type of

regression models that one might estimate in these data ignoring issues of mismatch and

ignorance. But again, these effects might be biased because of measurement error associated

with mismatch and ignorance. Columns 2 and 4 therefore include separate indicators for three

cells of Figure 1: accurate yeses, employee ignorance, and false positives; accurate no’s are the

omitted reference category. With the exception of the loyalty model with control variables, the

effect size for accurate yes is always larger than the estimates in columns 1 and 2. In most of the

cases, the employee ignorance estimate is smaller than the accurate yes estimate, though

surprisingly individuals who are labeled as ignorant about performance-based pay are estimated

to have higher levels of willingness to work hard and loyalty than individuals in the accurate no

category. The false positive employees have the largest effects in many cases which is consistent

with them acting as if they were covered by performance-based pay plans even though they may

or may not be in reality. In sum, the overall pattern of results in Table 9 is consistent with

information being important, including the existence of measurement error in the econometric




5
  In actuality, the response scales of both of these questions in the original data collection were
the opposite of what are presented here, but I have reverse-coded them so that higher numerical
responses indicate higher levels of willingness to work hard and loyalty.


                                                 19
models and also with the potential for shared capitalism programs to be more effective when

employees and employers have good information.

                                          Conclusions

       An analysis of the NBER Shared Capitalism data set of thousands of employee responses

linked to company-provided information from 10-14 private-sector organizations reveals

significant fractions of employees whose perceptions of whether or not they are covered by

various shared capitalism programs do not match their employers’ policies. In fact, between 18

and 25 percent of the employee responses on the perceived coverage of company, group, and

individual-level incentive pay plans and of ESOPs disagree with the employer-provided

coverage information. There is a particularly large discrepancy between employee and employer

understandings of group or team-level gainsharing plans, but non-trivial levels of ignorance and

false positive responses are observed for all of the plans. Probit analyses allow a comparison of

middle-aged, highly-paid, well-educated, salaried workers to those that are younger,

inexperienced, low-educated, and low-paid; the latter are significantly more likely to be unaware

of or misunderstand the coverage of company and individual-based performance pay plans.

       Such shared capitalism programs seek to tie employee pay to performance. If this is

intended simply as a risk-sharing mechanism between employers and their employees, then

ignorance of shared capitalism plans is detrimental to employees, but is probably not a

significant concern with respect to corporate performance. In contrast, if a goal of shared

capitalism programs is to provide incentives for employee performance, then employee

ignorance has the potential to undermine this goal. Put simply, how can incentives work if

employees are not aware of their existence? For example, 37 percent of employees that their

employers say are covered by individual-based incentives fail to perceive that they are in fact




                                               20
covered by such an incentive plan. Other research shows that employees act upon their own

imperfect information—Chan and Stevens (2004) found that misinformed individuals based their

retirement decisions on their own, misinformed views of their pension wealth. These regression

results for employee attitudes regarding their willingness to work hard and their loyalty to their

employer are consistent with other research and further suggest that ignorance can undermine

both the practice of shared capitalism programs, and the econometric estimation of their effects.

       With that said, the previous literature on employee ignorance reminds us that some

caution is warranted. The figures reported here assume that the company-reported information is

completely accurate for each individual employee. In some cases employees may have better

information than their employers. But it’s difficult to imagine that this can explain away

ignorance rates as large as 37 percent. Moreover, if employees are excluded from various

compensation programs, this is most likely on the basis of tenure (if probationary employees are

excluded) and job characteristics (such as certain occupations or unionized workers being

excluded). But the probit results show that inaccuracies are also correlated with demographic

characteristics and with whether an employee expects to work for the organization for a long

time. The possibility exists that these characteristics are substituting for incomplete job-level

controls in the econometric models, but to the extent that this is only partially true, these

multivariate results suggest that at least some of the observed inaccuracies are due to

misunderstandings and ignorance. The results on the fraction of negative responses that are

explicitly “don’t know” (Table 2) and employee perceptions of imperfect levels of job-related

information (Table 8) are also consistent with non-trivial amounts of employee ignorance.

       In addition to employee ignorance, the analyses document significant numbers of false

positive responses—that is, employees that believe they are covered by a shared capitalism




                                                21
program when their employer states that they are not. This aspect of overall inaccuracy might not

undermine the incentive intentions of shared capitalism if perception becomes reality: workers

that believe they are covered by an incentive-based plan might act as if there are incentives, at

least until they find out they were wrong. In fact, the results on false positives suggests that

rhetoric has perhaps outpaced reality. False positive responses occur when employees

overestimate the presence of pay-for-performance plans. The probit results show that workers

who are lower paid, paid hourly, or unionized are particularly likely to overestimate the presence

of pay-for-performance plans. In other words, these workers believe that they are covered by an

incentive-based plan—perhaps based on contemporary rhetoric on the contingent employment

relationship—even when they are not (at least not formally according to their employers). As

such, there might be an opening for companies to increase the presence or formalization of pay-

for-performance plans among these workers. On the other hand, the false positive results are

similar to the results on the lack of awareness of shared capitalism programs in revealing the

complexity of informational issues for shared capitalism programs—significant numbers of

employees differ from their employers in their understandings of critical issues pertaining to pay

determination and, especially in the case of gainsharing plans, are covered by programs

administered by local managers that the corporate-level human resources staff has difficulty

monitoring.

       The results of this paper are also important for researchers. The mismatches between

employer and employee reports of shared capitalism programs represent a form of measurement

error which can have the usual econometric problem: regression estimates of the effects of these

programs on, for example, organizational performance, are likely biased toward zero and

therefore underestimate the true potential of shared capitalism programs with perfect




                                               22
information. Finally, not only can employee ignorance undermine both research on and the

practice of shared capitalism, but it should also give pause to economists and others that continue

to assume that workers have perfect information. Contemporary theories as well as private and

public policies must reflect the complexities of imperfect labor markets with information gaps.




                                                23
                                     REFERENCES

Brennan Center for Justice. 2006. “Do New Yorkers Know the Minimum Results from a Spot
      Survey of Employers and Workers in New York City.” Economic Policy Brief No. 4,
      NYU              School           of          Law,           accessed          at
      http://www.brennancenter.org/dynamic/subpages/download_file_34916.pdf         on
      November 26, 2006.

Budd, John W. 2004. “Non-Wage Forms of Compensation.” Journal of Labor Research, vol. 25,
       pp. 597-622.

Budd, John W., and Angela Brey. 2003. “Unions and Family Leave: Early Experience under the
       Family and Medical Act.” Labor Studies Journal, vol. 28, pp. 85-105.

Budd, John W., and Brian P. McCall. 1997. “The Effect of Unions on the Receipt of
      Unemployment Insurance Benefits.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 50, pp.
      478-492.

Budd, John W., and Brian P. McCall. 2004. “Unions and Unemployment Insurance Benefits
      Receipt: Evidence from the CPS.” Industrial Relations, vol. 43, pp. 339-355.

Budd, John W., and Karen Mumford. 2004. “Trade Unions and Family-Friendly Policies in
      Britain.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, vol. 57, pp. 204-222.

Budd, John W., and Karen Mumford. 2006. “Family-Friendly Work Practices in Britain:
      Availability and Perceived Accessibility.” Human Resource Management Journal, vol.
      45, pp. 23-42.

Cappelli, Peter. 1999. The New Deal at Work: Managing the Market-Driven Workforce. Boston:
       Harvard Business School Press.

Chan, Sewin, and Ann Huff Stevens. 2004. “What You Don’t Know Can’t Help You: Pension
       Knowledge and Retirement Decision Making.” Unpublished working paper, University
       of California, Davis.

Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2005. $100 Bills on the Sidewalk:
       Suboptimal Saving in 401(k) Plans.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
       Paper 11554.

Conyon, Martin J., and Richard B. Freeman. 2004. “Shared Modes of Compensation and Firm
      Performance: UK Evidence,” in David Card, Richard Blundell, and Richard B. Freeman,
      eds. Seeking a Premier Economy: The Economic Effects of British Economic Reforms,
      1980-2000. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 109-146.

Freeman, Richard B. 2001. “The Shared Capitalist Model of Work and Compensation.” Reflets
      et Perspectives de la vie Economique, vol. XL, pp. 169-181.



                                            24
Freeman, Richard B., and James L. Medoff. 1984. What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic
      Books.

Freeman, Richard B., and Joel Rogers. 2006. What Workers Want, updated edition. Ithaca, NY:
      Cornell University Press.

Gates, Jeffrey R. 1998. The Ownership Solution: Toward a Shared Capitalism for the Twenty-
       First Century. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Gustman, Alan L., and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2005. “Imperfect Knowledge of Social Security
      and Pensions.” Industrial Relations, vol. 44, pp. 373-395.

Hirsch, Barry T., David A. Macpherson, and J. Michael DuMond. 1997. “Workers’
       Compensation Recipiency in Union and Nonunion Workplaces.” Industrial and Labor
       Relations Review, vol. 50, pp. 213-236.

Kim, Pauline T. 1997. “Bargaining with Imperfect Information: A Study of Worker Perceptions
      of Legal Protection in an At-Will World.” Cornell Law Review, vol. 83, pp. 105-160.

Kruse, Douglas, Richard B. Freeman, and Joseph Blasi. 2006. “Do Workers Gain by Sharing?
       Employee Outcomes under Employee Ownership, Profit Sharing, and Broad-based Stock
       Options.” Unpublished paper, Rutgers University.

Luchak, Andrew A., and Morley Gunderson. 2000. “What Do Employees Know About Their
      Pension Plan?” Industrial Relations, vol. 39, pp. 646-670.

March, James G., and Herbert A. Simon. 1958. Organizations. New York: Wiley.

Markow, Dana, and Kelly Bagnaschi. 2005. “What American Teens and Adults Know About
     Economics.” Rochester, NY: Harris Interactive, accessed at http://www.ncee.net/cel/ on
     September 24, 2006.

McCall, Brian P. 1995. “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance Benefit Levels on
      Recipiency.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, vol. 13, pp. 189-198.

Mitchell, Olivia S. 1988. “Worker Knowledge of Pension Provisions.” Journal of Labor
       Economics, vol. 6, pp. 21-39.

Reschovsky, James D., J. Lee Hargraves, and Albert F. Smith. 2002. “Consumer Beliefs and
      Health Plan Performance: It’s Not Whether You Are in an HMO but Whether You Think
      You Are.” Journal of Health Policy, Politics and Law, vol. 27, pp. 353-377.

Rudy, Jesse. 2002. “What They Don’t Know Won’t Hurt Them: Defending Employment-at-Will
       in Light of Findings That Employees Believe They Possess Just Cause Protection.”
       Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor Law, vol. 23, pp. 307-367.



                                            25
Simon, Herbert A. 1982. Models of Bounded Rationality. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Waldfogel, Jane. 2001. “Family and Medical Leave: Evidence from the 2000 Surveys.” Monthly
      Labor Review, vol. 124, pp. 17-23.

Weil, David. 1996. “Regulating the Workplace: The Vexing Problem of Implementation,” in
       David Lewin, Bruce E. Kaufman, and Donna Sockell, eds. Advances in Industrial and
       Labor Relations, Volume 7. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, pp. 247-286.

Weil, David. 2005. “Individual Rights and Collective Agents: The Role of Old and New
      Workplace Institutions in the Regulation of Labor Markets,” in Richard B. Freeman, Joni
      Hersch, and Lawrence Mishel, eds. Emerging Labor Market Institutions for the Twenty-
      First Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 13-44.




                                             26
                                       Figure 1
                      Measuring Employee Knowledge and Ignorance

                                                    Coverage
                                                (Company Reported)

                                           No                      Yes
(Employee Reported)
 Perceived Coverage




                                        Accurate               Employee
                          No
                                          No                   Ignorance



                                         False                 Accurate
                         Yes
                                        Positive                 Yes




                                         27
                                                         Table 1
               Employee-Level Coverage, Perceived Coverage, and Ignorance Rates of Shared Capitalism Programsa

                                                                     Perceived                       Mismatches
                                                 Coverage             Coverage
                                                 (company            (employee                                          False
                                                                                                                 b
                                                 reported)            reported)       Overall        Ignorance         Positivec
Shared Capitalism Plan                              (1)                  (2)           (3)               (4)             (5)
Profit-Sharing Plan (company-based                 0.849              0.703           0.246            0.231            0.071
performance pay)                                  [45,759]           [45,759]        [45,759]         [38,829]         [32,164]

Gainsharing Plans (workgroup or                    0.028              0.211           0.210            0.484            0.933
departmental-based performance pay)               [45,759]           [45,759]        [45,759]         [1,261]          [9,645]

                                                   0.291              0.282           0.209            0.374            0.354
Individual-Based Performance Pay
                                                  [45,759]           [45,759]        [45,759]         [13,319]         [12,908]

Performance-Based Pay (any of the above            0.860              0.797           0.186            0.145            0.077
three plans)                                      [45,759]           [45,759]        [45,759]         [39,365]         [36,464]

                                                   1.000d              0.817           0.183           0.183            0.000
Employee Stock Ownership Plan (ESOP)
                                                   [4,362]            [4,362]         [4,362]         [4,362]          [3,564]
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.
Notes: a Sample sizes are in brackets.
       b
         Employees who do not perceive that they are covered when their employer says they are; sample limited to covered
          employees.
       c
         Employees who perceive that they are covered when their employer says they are not; sample limited to employees reporting
          that they are covered.
       d
         The results in this row are limited to ESOP companies because individual-level questions were only asked in these
          companies.




                                                                28
                                         Table 2
                Employees that Don’t Know about Shared Capitalism Programs
                                                                 Fraction of Negative
                                                                  Responses that are
                                                                    “Don’t Know”
Eligible for Performance-Based Pay                                    19.77 %
                                                                   (1,838 / 9,295)
Received Performance-Based Bonuses Last Year                           7.83 %
                                                                   (1,219 / 15,560)
Participate in the ESOP                                               32.33 %
                                                                     (258 / 798)
Participate in a 401(k) Plan                                          17.55 %
                                                                   (1,506 / 8,583)
Ever Received Stock Options                                            14.02 %
                                                                      (89 / 635)
Ever Exercised Stock Options, Currently Hold Stock Options,           All < 1 %
Participate in an Employee Stock Purchase Plan, or Bought
Company Stock on the Open Market
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.




                                            29
                                         Table 3
                    Probit Analyses of Employer-Employee Mismatchesa
                                                         Individual-        Any
                                Profit-       Gain-          Based     Performance-
                               Sharing       sharing      Incentives    Based Pay
                                  (1)            (2)          (3)            (4)
High school graduateb          -0.047*        -0.027         0.010        -0.022*
                               (0.014)       (0.022)        (0.021)       (0.010)
                  b
Attended college               -0.034*        -0.039         0.038         -0.004
                               (0.017)       (0.023)        (0.019)       (0.011)
Employee age                   -0.037*        -0.003         0.020        -0.052*
(years÷10)                     (0.019)       (0.024)        (0.022)       (0.013)
Age squared (÷1,000)           0.056*         -0.008        -0.021        0.059*
                               (0.022)       (0.029)        (0.026)       (0.016)
Female                         -0.029*       -0.031*         0.001        -0.0002
                               (0.005)       (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.004)
Nonwhite                        0.011         0.032*       -0.021*        0.013*
                               (0.006)       (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.005)
Currently married              -0.012*         0.002         0.006        -0.012*
                               (0.006)       (0.007)        (0.007)       (0.004)
Number of children             0.008*         -0.002         0.004         0.003
under age 18                   (0.002)       (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.002)
Tenure at current              -0.074*       -0.092*        0.059*        -0.042*
employer (years÷10)            (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.010)       (0.007)
Tenure squared (÷1,000)        0.195*         0.191*        -0.046        0.117*
                               (0.027)       (0.033)        (0.030)       (0.020)
Expects to work for            -0.021*        0.032*        0.015*         -0.009
employer for a long time       (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.005)
Last year’s total non-         -0.066*        0.149*       -0.017*        -0.062*
contingent pay (log)           (0.005)       (0.007)        (0.005)       (0.004)
Paid by the hour                0.010        -0.124*       -0.108*        0.043*
                               (0.007)       (0.008)        (0.007)       (0.005)
Sales occupation               0.377*         0.126*         0.015        -0.030*
                               (0.013)       (0.012)        (0.011)       (0.007)
Unionized                      0. 073*        -0.011         0.004        0.082*
                               (0.013)       (0.014)        (0.013)       (0.010)
Works in the United            -0.106*       -0.081*       -0.048*        -0.043*
States                         (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.010)       (0.008)
Total company                   0.022        -0.408*        0.332*        0.109*
employees (÷100,000)           (0.016)       (0.018)        (0.017)       (0.011)
                                                                            continued



                                           30
                                   Table 3 (continued)
Dep. Var. Mean                 0.171          0.253            0.220            0.104
Model χ2 test p-value         <0.0001        <0.0001          <0.0001          <0.0001
Sample Size                   23,478          23,478           23,478          23,478
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.
Notes: a Each entry contains the marginal effect and robust standard error (in parentheses)
        from a probit model where the dependent variable indicates employer-employee
        mismatches about the shared capitalism plan denoted in each column heading.
        b
          High school dropout is the omitted category for the two educational attainment
        variables.
       *Statistically significant at the 0.05 level.




                                               31
                                           Table 4
                           Probit Analyses of Employee Ignorancea
                                                     Individual-       Any
                             Profit-       Gain-         Based    Performance
                            Sharing       sharing     Incentives   -Based Pay   ESOPs
                               (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)        (5)
High school graduateb       -0.058*                      -0.031      -0.029*     0.042
                                             ---
                            (0.013)                     (0.055)      (0.008)    (0.036)
Attended collegeb           -0.066*        -0.034        -0.097      -0.034*     0.030
                            (0.018)       (0.045)       (0.057)      (0.012)    (0.030)
Employee age                -0.043*        0.169        0.157*       -0.050*     -0.038
(years÷10)                  (0.019)       (0.212)       (0.051)      (0.012)    (0.037)
Age squared (÷1,000)         0.067*        -0.175      -0.146*       0.059*      0.042
                            (0.022)       (0.248)       (0.060)      (0.014)    (0.045)
Female                      -0.029*       0.090*         0.011        -0.002    -0.033*
                            (0.006)       (0.045)       (0.013)      (0.004)    (0.012)
Nonwhite                     0.023*        0.117       -0.085*       0.017*      0.003
                            (0.007)       (0.098)       (0.012)      (0.005)    (0.017)
Currently married           -0.016*        0.061         -0.008      -0.011*     -0.023
                            (0.006)       (0.054)       (0.014)      (0.004)    (0.013)
Number of children           0.009*        -0.024        0.007        0.003      0.006
under age 18                (0.002)       (0.018)       (0.005)      (0.002)    (0.005)
Tenure at current           -0.087*        -0.082       0.115*       -0.054*    -0.402*
employer (years÷10)         (0.009)       (0.073)       (0.018)      (0.006)    (0.027)
Tenure squared (÷1,000)      0.228*        0.203         -0.015      0.146*     1.160*
                            (0.027)       (0.202)       (0.062)      (0.018)    (0.095)
Expects to work for         -0.025*        -0.012      -0.037*       -0.012*     -0.006
employer for a long time    (0.007)       (0.051)       (0.016)      (0.005)    (0.015)
Last year’s total non-      -0.074*       -0.126*      -0.213*       -0.059*    -0.080*
contingent pay (log)        (0.005)       (0.053)       (0.013)      (0.003)    (0.017)
Paid by the hour             -0.004        0.101        0.256*       0.020*      0.022
                            (0.007)       (0.091)       (0.032)      (0.005)    (0.015)
Sales occupation             0.412*        -0.296      -0.117*        -0.013     -0.046
                            (0.014)       (0.187)       (0.013)      (0.007)    (0.019)
Unionized                    0.207*       -0.259*       0.204*       0.124*     0.223*
                            (0.032)       (0.090)       (0.080)      (0.023)    (0.085)
Works in the United         -0.069*        -0.014        0.015        -0.005
                                                                                  ---
States                      (0.010)       (0.329)       (0.015)      (0.007)
Total company                0.066*       -8.738*       0.530*       0.025*     -1.309*
employees (÷100,000)        (0.019)       (3.389)       (0.044)      (0.012)    (0.412)
                                                                                 continued



                                           32
                                          Table 4 (continued)
Dep. Var. Mean                  0.164           0.495         0.312        0.084          0.151
Model χ test p-value
          2
                               <0.0001        <0.0001       <0.0001       <0.0001       <0.0001
Sample Size                     21,325           827          9,435       21,569          2,827
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.
Notes: a Each entry contains the marginal effect and robust standard error (in parentheses) from
        a probit model where the dependent variable indicates employee ignorance about the
        shared capitalism plan denoted in each column heading.
        b
           High school dropout is the omitted category for the two educational attainment
        variables, except in column 2.
        *Statistically significant at the 0.05 level.




                                              33
                                                               Table 5
                                      Predicted Ignorance Rates for Different Employee Profiles
                                                 (standard deviations in parentheses)
                                                                                            Individual-       Any
                                                                    Profit-       Gain-       Based       Performance
                                                                   Sharing       sharing    Incentives     -Based Pay   ESOPs
Employee Profile                                                      (1)           (2)         (3)            (4)       (5)

A single, 21 year-old, non-white, high school dropout father of
two making $25,000 per year with no expectation of working
                                                                    0.624        0.719         0.697         0.615       0.809
for this company for a long time and one year of tenure
                                                                   (0.117)      (0.458)       (0.274)       (0.122)     (0.266)
working in a union-represented, non-sales, hourly job in the
United States for a company with 200 employees


                                                                    0.164        0.495         0.313         0.084       0.152
Average over the relevant estimation sample
                                                                   (0.129)      (0.127)       (0.176)       (0.072)     (0.150)


A married, 45 year-old, white, college-educated, childless
woman making $75,000 per year with expectations of working
                                                                    0.040        0.813         0.261         0.019       0.003
for this company for a long time with 15 years of tenure in a
                                                                   (0.043)      (0.262)       (0.055)       (0.049)     (0.121)
nonunion, non-sales, salaried job in the United States for a
company with 200 employees

Source: Calculated from Table 4.




                                                                  34
                                        Table 6
                           Probit Analyses of False Positivesa
                                                           Individual-        Any
                               Profit-       Gain-            Based      Performance-
                             Sharing        sharing        Incentives     Based Pay
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)           (4)
High school graduateb          0.004                         -0.162*         0.006
                                               ---
                              (0.006)                         (0.053)       (0.007)
Attended collegeb             0.007*         0.020*          -0.193*        0.009*
                              (0.002)       (0.011)           (0.097        (0.002)
Employee age                  -0.008*        -0.029           -0.042        -0.007*
(years÷10)                    (0.003)       (0.018)          (0.067)        (0.003)
Age squared (÷1,000)          0.009*         0.040*            0.118        0.008*
                              (0.003)       (0.022)          (0.078)        (0.003)
Female                        0.003*         -0.003          -0.054*         0.004
                              (0.001)       (0.004)          (0.015)        (0.001)
Nonwhite                       -0.001        0.022*          -0.108*         0.002
                              (0.001)       (0.006)          (0.014)        (0.001)
Currently married              -0.002        -0.001           -0.033        -0.002*
                              (0.001)       (0.004)          (0.018)        (0.001)
Number of children             0.001        -0.002*           0.0001        0.0003
under age 18                 (0.0003)       (0.001)          (0.006)       (0.0003)
Tenure at current              0.001        -0.035*           0.135*        0.005*
employer (years÷10)           (0.002)       (0.008)          (0.025)        (0.002)
Tenure squared (÷1,000)       -0.013*        0.041*           -0.142        -0.022*
                              (0.005)       (0.015)          (0.085)        (0.006)
Expects to work for            -0.001         0.008            0.012       0.00001
employer for a long time      (0.001)       (0.005)          (0.020)        (0.001)
Last year’s total non-        -0.004*        0.008*          -0.356*        -0.005*
contingent pay (log)          (0.001)       (0.003)          (0.020)        (0.001)
Paid by the hour              0.002*         0.023*           0.582*        0.009*
                              (0.001)       (0.005)          (0.024)        (0.001)
Sales occupation              0.009*         0.015*
                                                                ---          ---
                              (0.003)       (0.003)
Unionized                     0. 253*       -0.812*           0.519*       0.164*
                              (0.026)       (0.033)          (0.069)       (0.020)
Works in the United           -0.023*       -0.032*           0.167*       -0.022*
States                        (0.003)       (0.004)          (0.017)       (0.003)
Total company                 -0.036*                        -0.109*       -0.049*
                                               ---
employees (÷100,000)          (0.003)                        (0.048)       (0.004)
                                                                              continued



                                             35
                                   Table 6 (continued)
Dep. Var. Mean                 0.028          0.930            0.297            0.034
Model χ2 test p-value         <0.0001        <0.0001          <0.0001          <0.0001
Sample Size                   18,343          5,949            7,470           18,790
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.
Notes: a Each entry contains the marginal effect and robust standard error (in parentheses)
        from a probit model where the dependent variable indicates an employee-reported
        false positive about the shared capitalism plan denoted in each column heading.
        b
          High school dropout is the omitted category for the two educational attainment
        variables, except in column 2 where high school dropouts are excluded from the
        sample.
       *Statistically significant at the 0.05 level.




                                               36
                                                              Table 7
                                   Predicted False Positive Rates for Different Employee Profiles
                                                (standard deviations in parentheses)
                                                                                                    Individual-       Any
                                                                         Profit-          Gain-        Based      Performance-
                                                                         Sharing         sharing     Incentives    Based Pay
Employee Profile                                                           (1)             (2)          (3)            (4)

A single, 21 year-old, non-white, high school dropout father of two
making $25,000 per year with no expectation of working for this
                                                                          0.660           0.090       0.999          0.609
company for a long time and one year of tenure working in a union-
                                                                         (0.342)         (0.469)     (0.419)        (0.290)
represented, non-sales, hourly job in the United States for a
company with 200 employees


                                                                          0.028           0.929       0.294          0.033
Average over the relevant estimation sample
                                                                         (0.094)         (0.221)     (0.335)        (0.096)


A married, 45 year-old, white, college-educated, childless woman
making $75,000 per year with expectations of working for this
                                                                          0.038           0.121       0.265          0.060
company for a long time with 15 years of tenure in a nonunion, non-
                                                                         (0.083)         (0.181)     (0.066)        (0.075)
sales, salaried job in the United States for a company with 200
employees

Source: Calculated from Table 6.




                                                                 37
                                                             Table 8
                                               Other Measures of Employee Ignorance
                                                                                              Response                 Frequency of
                                                                                         Categories of Interest          Response
Question [survey pool]                                                                            (1)                       (2)
How frequently do you feel that the Company is reaching out to you to inform you              Occasionally               28.54 %
(through meetings, newsletters, email or Internet) about the goals of the company,              or never               (735 / 2,575)
overall workplace performance, changes to workplace organization, or
implementation of new technology? [3 companies]


How frequently do you reach out to inform yourself (through meetings you set up or            Occasionally               43.97 %
conversations that you initiate or material you read, or use of the Internet or other           or never               (747 / 1,699)
means) about the goals of the company, overall workplace performance, changes to
workplace organization, or implementation of new technology? [2 companies]


I get the information I need to do my job. [1 company]                                     Strongly disagree,            26.94 %
                                                                                        disagree, or do not know     (7,999 / 29,689)


We are kept informed of important issues in the organization. [1 company]                  Strongly disagree,             45.46%
                                                                                        disagree, or do not know     (13,528 / 29,757)


I am kept informed about changes affecting my work. [1 company]                            Strongly disagree,            43.40 %
                                                                                        disagree, or do not know     (12,881 / 29,678)


To what extent do you understand your company’s overall plan for being successful?       Not at all or very little       14.76 %
[7 companies]                                                                                                        (4,981 / 33,747)
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.


                                                                  38
                                         Table 9
     Regression Analysis of the Effect of Performance-Based Pay on Work Attitudes
                                            (1)         (2)            (3)     (4)

                       Dependent Variable: Willingness to Work Harda
Employee believes covered by any          0.183*         ---      0.083*       ---
performance-based pay plan                (0.011)                 (0.018)
Employer-Employee Matched Responses for any performance-based pay plan
(Accurate No is omitted category)
Accurate Yes                                ---       0.282*           ---   0.142*
                                                      (0.016)                (0.029)
Employee Ignorance                          ---       0.149*           ---   0.100*
                                                      (0.019)                (0.034)
False Positive                              ---       0.175*           ---   0.206*
                                                      (0.023)                (0.042)
Additional Controlsb                        No          No          Yes        Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.007        0.009       0.058      0.058
Sample Size                               44,799      44,799       23,507    23,507


                               Dependent Variable: Loyaltyc
Employee believes covered by any          0.207*         ---      0.072*       ---
performance-based pay plan                (0.010)                 (0.016)
Employer-Employee Matched Responses
(Accurate No is omitted category)
Accurate Yes                                ---       0.251*           ---    0.037
                                                      (0.015)                (0.025)
Employee Ignorance                          ---       0.071*           ---   -0.021
                                                      (0.018)                (0.030)
False Positive                              ---       0.226*           ---   0.275*
                                                      (0.021)                (0.037)
Additional Controlsb                        No          No          Yes        Yes
Adjusted R2                               0.011        0.011       0.077      0.079
Sample Size                               41,278      41,278       23,197    23,197




                                              39
                                     Notes to Table 9
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.
Notes: a To what extent do you agree or disagree with this statement? “I am willing to
        work harder than I have to in order to help the company I work for succeed.”
        1=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree (mean=4.02, standard deviation=0.899).
        b
          Controls for education, age, gender, marital status, children, tenure, fixed pay,
        hourly occupation, sales occupation, union status, and U.S. employee.
        c
          How much loyalty would you say you feel toward the company you work for as a
        whole? 1=no loyalty at all, 2=only a little, 3=some, 4=a lot (mean=3.33, standard
        deviation=0.798).
       *Statistically significant at the 0.05 level.




                                              40
                                      Appendix Table 1
                    Independent Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics
                                                                               Mean
                                                                        (standard deviation)
1 if employee is a high school graduate but did not attend any                  0.193
college                                                                        (0.394)
1 if employee attended college (includes college graduates and                  0.785
non-graduates)                                                                 (0.411)
Age of employee (years)                                                        41.451
                                                                               (9.980)
1 if employee is female                                                         0.296
                                                                               (0.456)
1 if employee’s race is nonwhite                                                0.189
                                                                               (0.392)
1 if employee is currently married or living as married                         0.746
                                                                               (0.435)
Number of children under age 18                                                 0.987
                                                                               (1.167)
Years worked for current employer                                               9.226
                                                                               (8.661)
1 if employee expects to work at the current employer for a long                0.844
time                                                                           (0.363)
Log of last year’s total non-contingent pay (base pay and                      10.838
overtime)                                                                      (0.646)
1 if employee is paid by the hour                                               0.411
                                                                               (0.492)
1 if employee is in a sales occupation                                          0.072
                                                                               (0.259)
1 if employee is unionized                                                      0.053
                                                                               (0.223)
1 if employee works in the United States                                        0.890
                                                                               (0.312)
Total number of employees for the company                                    35,848.998
                                                                            (16,345.097)
Source: NBER Shared Capitalism data set.
Note: The sample statistics presented here are for the 23,478 observations that have complete
information for the probit models in Table 3.


                                                41
