NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MONETARY AGGREGATES AND LIQUIDITY IN A NEO-WICKSELLIAN FRAMEWORK
Matthew Canzoneri
Robert E. Cumby
Behzad Diba
David Lopez-Salido
Working Paper 14244
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14244

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We would like to thank Aleksander Berentsen, Dale Henderson, Steve Meyer, conference participants,
seminar participants at the Bundesbank, and an anonymous referee for their helpful comments; however,
the usual disclaimer applies. The opinions expressed here are solely those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the Board of Governors, nor of anyone else associated with the Federal
Reserve System, nor of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Matthew Canzoneri, Robert E. Cumby, Behzad Diba, and David Lopez-Salido. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Monetary Aggregates and Liquidity in a Neo-Wicksellian Framework
Matthew Canzoneri, Robert E. Cumby, Behzad Diba, and David Lopez-Salido
NBER Working Paper No. 14244
August 2008
JEL No. E40,E50
ABSTRACT
Woodford (2003) describes a popular class of neo-Wicksellian models in which monetary policy is
characterized by an interest-rate rule, and the money market and financial institutions are typically
not even modeled. Critics contend that these models are incomplete and unsuitable for monetary-policy
evaluation. Our Banks and Bonds model starts with a standard neo-Wicksellian model and then adds
banks and a role for bonds in the liquidity management of households and banks. The Banks and Bonds
model gives a more complete description of the economy, but the neo-Wicksellian model has the virtue
of simplicity. Our purpose here is to see if the neo-Wicksellian model gives a reasonably accurate
account of macroeconomic behavior in the more complete Banks and Bonds model. We do this by
comparing the models' second moments, variance decompositions and impulse response functions.
We also study the role of monetary aggregates and velocity in predicting inflation in the two models.

Matthew Canzoneri
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
canzonem@georgetown.edu

Behzad Diba
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
Washington, DC 20057
dibab@georgetown.edu

Robert E. Cumby
Georgetown University
School of Foreign Service
Washington, DC 20057-1045
and NBER
cumbyr@georgetown.edu

David Lopez-Salido
Federal Reserve Board
Mail Stop 71
20th and C Streets, N.W.
Washington, DC 20551
David.J.Lopez-Salido@frb.gov

1. Introduction
Woodford (2003) describes a class of New Keynesian models that has become the favored
paradigm for macroeconomic analysis, and especially for monetary policy evaluation. Woodford
himself likes to call these models “neo-Wicksellian” to draw attention to fact that interest rates
transmit directly to intertemporal spending decisions, and that monetary policy need not be framed
in terms of monetary aggregates.1 Indeed, monetary policy is generally specified as an interest-rate
rule in these neo-Wicksellian models, and the modeling of monetary aggregates is often viewed as
a needless complication.
While these neo-Wicksellian models have been remarkably successful, there are reasons to
be uneasy about the lack of modeling of money markets and financial institutions. Some central
banks use monetary aggregates in forecasting inflation, and some economists are uncomfortable
performing monetary policy analyses in a neo-Wicksellian framework. Goodfriend and McCallum
(2006) say, “Prominent among these [reasons for unease] are the absence from the standard
framework of any significant role for money aggregates, financial intermediation, or distinctions
among various short-term rates that play different roles in the transmission mechanism”.2 And
Woodford (2006) discusses the concern of some that neo-Wicksellian models “are coherent as far
as they go, but that they are incomplete”.3

1

Footnote 7 of Woodford (2006) gives a concise statement of this.

2

Goodfriend and McCallum develop a model with money and banks, a variety of interest
rates, and bonds and capital that serve as collateral; they use their model to illustrate potential
pitfalls of ignoring money and banking when formulating monetary policy. While our modeling
of banks is different than theirs, their analysis is in many ways complementary to our own.
3

Woodford’s wide ranging discussion of this and related issues gives other references to
economists who have expressed concern. His paper was presented at the 4th ECB Central
Banking Conference, The Role of Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty First Century,
November, 2006; many of the conference papers discuss related issues.

2
In this paper, we develop a model in which banks create deposits and make loans. Both of
these activities are costly, creating financial frictions that make monetary aggregates “matter” for
economic activity. Moreover, bank deposits offer an alternative way for households to do their
transacting, and the bank loans may affect aggregate supply and demand in a variety of ways,
depending upon how they are modeled (and we have considered alternative approaches). We also
assume that government bonds are used by banks and (indirectly) by households in managing their
liquidity. This creates a spread between the CCAPM rate (in the consumption Euler equation) and
the government bond rate, since government bonds can command a liquidity premium. This spread
offers one view of the disconnect between money market rates and the rate of return that affects
aggregate demand. And in theory, this spread can buffer the liquidity crunch created by a
contractionary open-market operation; this has implications for interest-rate surprises and for the
systematic component of the interest-rate rule governing monetary policy.
A standard neo-Wicksellian model is embedded within our model. It is obtained by stripping
out the banks and assuming that only cash is useful to households in transacting. There is a money
(or cash) demand equation in the neo-Wicksellian model, but it is decoupled from the rest of the
model; its sole purpose is to determine the open-market operations required to implement the central
bank’s interest-rate rule. There are no financial frictions, other than the seigniorage tax. The money
demand equation could be dropped from the neo-Wicksellian model for most applications.
Our model with banks and liquid bonds offers a more complete description of the economy
than the neo-Wicksellian model, but the neo-Wicksellian model has the virtue of simplicity. And
it is quite possible that this simpler model gives an adequate account of macroeconomic behavior
for both the business-cycle analyst and the monetary-policy analyst. To investigate this possibility,

3
we calibrate the two models and compare their implications for the variables that they share. We
compare unconditional moments generated by the models. We use impulse response functions to
compare how various shocks pass through our model economies. And finally, we ask if the neoWicksellian model undervalues the usefulness of various monetary aggregates in forecasting
inflation. Here, we generate artificial data sets from the two models, and we test the predictive
power of various aggregates in bivariate relationships between inflation and nominal growth of the
aggregate in question; this appears to be the primary (formal) way in which monetary aggregates
are used at the ECB.4 We also test the predictive power of velocity, since that variable played a
prominent role in traditional monetarist discussions of inflation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines the two models and explores
some of their theoretical differences. Section 3 describes the models’ steady-state solution, and
Section 4 explains how we calibrated the models.

Section 5 investigates the quantitative

significance of the differences between the two models, and whether the neo-Wicksellian model
offers an adequate view of the economy for business-cycle analysts and monetary-policy analysts
alike. Section 6 summarizes our results, and puts several of them – including the use of monetary
aggregates – into a more general perspective.

2. Two Models
In this section, we outline two models. The neo-Wicksellian (NW) model, which belongs

4

Fischer et al. (2006) report that “...simple bivariate forecasting models have increased in
prominence over time at the expense of forecasts that were produced on the basis of money
demand equations. ... Indeed, the rising prominence of the bivariate approach can be interpreted
as one practical response to a situation from 2001 onwards where growing questions emerged
about the stability of money demand equations used in the Quarterly Monetary Assessment.”

4
to a class of models described by Woodford (2003), features Calvo price setting, flexible wage rates,
fixed firm specific capital, and an interest-rate rule that governs monetary policy. We have included
a money-demand equation in the NW model, as does Woodford (2006), but money plays no
independent role in the transmission of monetary policy to inflation or real economic activity.
Moreover, the model is Ricardian; so, the government’s debt management policy plays no important
role either.
Our Banks and Liquid Bonds (BB) model adds several features to the standard NW model:
new monetary aggregates, financial frictions, and a non-Ricardian element that gives fiscal policy
a direct role in creating transactions balances. The cost of creating bank deposits and loans provide
the financial frictions, and our assumption that government bonds provide transactions services
makes the model non-Ricardian. We begin our discussion with the BB model, since the NW model
is embedded within it.
2.A. The Banks and Liquid Bonds Model
Households –
In the BB model, each household goes to the bank every period (which we take to be a
quarter) to make a deposit and to refinance its loan for a fixed durable good, which we might think
of as a house. In our benchmark model, bank loans do not feed back into real economic activity, as
say a loan to a firm might; we will return to this issue later in the paper.
A representative household maximizes
(1) Ut = Et34j =t$j-t{log(ct - 0ct-1) + Nm,tlog(mh,t) + Nd,tlog(dh,t) + Nblog(bh,t)
- Nn(1+P)-1[:nt1+P +(1-:)nb,t1+P]}
where ct is consumption of a CES aggregate of goods, 0ct-1 reflects habit in consumption pre-

5
ferences, mh,t are real cash balances, dh,t are real deposits at the bank, and bh,t are real government
bond holdings. The household has a continuum of workers of measure one. It supplies 1-: workers
to the banking sector and : workers to firms producing consumer goods; nt and nb,t are the hours
worked in these two sectors. We assume each household works at all of the firms and all of the
banks; with this convenient assumption, the households will be identical in equilibrium despite the
dispersion of work effort across firms (due to Calvo price setting), and we can take the shortcut of
discussing a representative agent. Since the continuum of households has measure one, aggregate
values will also be per capita values.
The household uses cash and bank deposits to do its transacting; this is why these variables
appear in (1). We interpret bank deposits broadly, so the sum of household cash balances and
deposits is equal to M2; in real terms, m2t = mh,t + dh,t. In reality, government bonds provide
liquidity in a number of ways; banks, money-market funds, mutual funds, pension funds and
insurance companies all use them to manage their liquidity. We model banks directly, but we do
not model these other financial institutions. We put government bonds into household utility to
reflect their value in providing liquidity services outside the banking sector. The parameters Nm,t,
Nd,t and Nb measure the relative usefulness of these aggregates to the household; we make the

parameters Nm,t and Nd,t time dependent to allow for an m2 demand shock.
(2) log(Nm,t) = (1 - Dm2)ln( NG m) + Dm2ln(Nm,t-1) + em2,t
log(Nd,t) = (1 - Dm2)ln( NG d) + Dm2ln(Nd,t-1) + em2,t
where 0 < Dm2 < 1, NG m and NG d are the steady-state values of these parameters, and em2,t is the shock.

6
The household’s budget constraint is
(3) ct + mh,t + dh,t + bh,t + ah,t + (Il,t-1/At)lh,t-1 + Jt < :wtnt + (1- :)wb,tnb,t
+ (1/At)mh,t-1 + (Id,t-1/At)dh,t-1 + (Ig,t-1/At)bh,t-1 + (Ic,t-1/At)ah,t-1 + lh,t + St
where Il, Id, and Ig are gross nominal interest rates on loans, deposits and government bonds. The
household can also purchase a risk-free bond, ah,t, that does not provide liquidity services; its gross
nominal return is Ic,t. Wages are flexible; wt and wb,t are the wage rates in manufacturing and
banking. St are dividends from the firms; banks are competitive and earn no profits. At = Pt/Pt-1,
where Pt is the implicit price deflator for the CES aggregate of consumption goods, ct. Finally, Jt
is a lump sum tax. Another constraint is that the household must also get a loan each period to
finance its fixed durable good, R; so,
(4) lh,t > R > 0
The household maximizes (1) subject to (3) and (4). Its first-order conditions are
(5) 8t = (ct - 0ct-1)-1 - Et[$0(ct+1 - 0ct)-1]
(6) 8t = NnntP/wt = Nnnb,tP/wb,t
(7) Ic,t-1 = $Et[(8t+1/8t)/At+1]
(8) Nm,t/mh,t = 8t(Ic,t - 1)/Ic,t
(9) Nd,t /dh,t = 8t(Ic,t - Id,t)/Ic,t
(10) Nb/bh,t = 8t(Ic,t - Ig,t)/Ic,t
(11) lh,t = R (if Il,t > Ic,t)
where 8t is the marginal value of wealth (or the Lagrange multiplier for (3)). (6) is a labor supply
equation. (7) is the standard consumption Euler equation, and Ic is the CCAPM interest rate. The
LHS of (8) is the marginal utility of holding one more mh,t, and the RHS is the marginal disutility

7
of holding the extra mh,t instead of an ah,t. Equations (9) and (10) have similar interpretations for the
household’s demand for deposits and government bonds.
All of the interest-rate spreads will be positive in equilibrium. The spread between the
CCAPM rate and the government bond rate – Ic,t - Ig,t – will play a large role in what follows; it is
positive because government bonds provide liquidity services, and therefore they command a
liquidity premium. This spread is the BB model’s interpretation of the disconnect between money
market rates and the rates that affect aggregate demand via the consumption Euler equation.
Banks –
In the BB model, competitive banks issue deposits and make loans. These activities are not
costless. The representative bank uses labor in making loans,
(12) lb,t = Zlnb,t
and the bank holds cash and government bonds to manage the liquidity of its deposits,
(13) db,t = Zdmb,t*bb,t1-*
where Zl and Zd are productivity parameters, and * , (0, 1). Unlike Goodfriend and McCallum
(2006), we do not model the federal funds market directly. In the U.S., banks have to meet reserve
requirements over a two-week reserve maintenance period. A bank with a reserve shortage can
borrow federal funds, sell T-bills or use RPs to meet its reserve requirements. This keeps the T-bill
yield closely tied to the federal funds rate. In our quarterly model, we simply assume that the central
bank targets the T-bill rate, and this is the money market rate that appears in its interest-rate rule.
The bank raises funds by issuing deposits and by borrowing at the CCAPM rate; its balancesheet constraint is
(14) lb,t + mb,t + bb,t = db,t + ab,t

8
The bank maximizes the present discounted value of its profits,
(15) Et34s=t$s-t8s[(Il,s/As+1)lb,s + (1/As+1)mb,s + (Ig,s/As+1)bb,s - (Ic,s/As+1)ab,s - (Id,s/As+1)db,s - wsnb,s]
subject to (12), (13) and (14). Its first order conditions are
(16) Id,t + 6t = Ic,t
(17) 1 + 6t*(db,t/mb,t) = Ic,t
(18) Ig,t +6t(1-*)(db,t/bb,t) = Ic,t
(19) (Il,t - Ic,t)/Ic,t = wb,t/Zl,t
where 6t = (Ic,t - 1)*(Ic,t - Ig,t)1-*/Zb*s(1-*)1-*.
These equations have straightforward interpretations. Ic,t - 1 is the opportunity cost of holding an mb,t instead of an ab,t, while Ic,t - Ig,t is the opportunity cost of holding a bb,t instead of an ab,t.
So, 6t is the marginal cost of creating a db,t via (13). The bank can raise funds by creating deposits
or by borrowing at the CCAPM rate. Equation (16) says that the bank will raise funds by creating
deposits up the point where marginal cost of doing so is equal to the marginal cost of borrowing at
the CCAPM rate; equations (17) and (18) have similar interpretations. Equation (19) says that the
marginal cost of making a loan must equal the marginal revenue from that loan, implying that the
loan rate must be higher than the CCAPM rate.5
Firms –
Our discussion of firms can be quite brief since our treatment of it is now standard.6 A

This implies, from (11), that lh,t = R. Households don’t want to borrow any more than
necessary at this high rate.
5

6

The details can be found in many places; Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2006) is one.
The real purpose of our writing down some of these equations is to identify parameters that will
be important in the model’s calibration.

9
continuum of firms, indexed by f on the unit interval, produces a continuum of differentiated
consumer goods. Household preferences for these goods are represented by a CES aggregator,
(20) ct = [I10ct(f)(F-1)/Fdf]F/(F-1)
where F > 1, and the implicit price deflator is
(21) Pt = [I10Pt(f)1-Fdf]1/(1-F)
Firm-f’s production function is
(22) yt(f) = Zy,tk6 1-T[:nt(f)]T
where k6 is the fixed capital stock, and Zy,t is total factor productivity; Zy,t follows a process that is
common to all firms,
(23) ln(Zy,t) = (1 - Dy)ln(zG y) + Dyln(Zy,t-1) + ey,t
where 0 < Dy < 1 and zG is the steady-state value of Zy,t. As noted earlier, we assume Calvo pricing.
With probability 1- ", firm f gets to reset it price Pt(f); otherwise, its price is simply scaled up by the
steady-state rate of inflation. Aggregate output is given by
(24) yt = Zy,tk6 1-T(:nt)T/[I10(Pt /Pt(f))F/Tdf]T
where the integral is a price dispersion term that measures the inefficiency due to the Calvo pricing.
This composite good is consumed by households and by the government; that is, the goods
market equilibrium condition is: yt = ct + gt. We also note that the New-Keynesian Phillips Curve
stemming from these models is a difference equation in inflation with the firms’ marginal cost as
an innovation; a rise in marginal cost – wt/Zy,t – will increase inflation. Many of our results depend
heavily on this.

10
Monetary and Fiscal Policy –
The government’s flow budget constraint is
(25) Ig,,t-1bt-1/At = Jt - gt + bt + mt - mt-1/At
where gt is government spending, and mt and bt are the real cash and bond holdings of households
and banks (mh,t + mb,t and bh,t + bb,t) . Letting liabt = mt + bt be total government liabilities, the budget
constraint becomes
(26) liabt = liabt-1/At + deft
where deft = (Ig,t-1 - 1)bt-1/At + gt - Jt is the total fiscal deficit, inclusive of interest payments.
Both mt and bt provide transactions services in the BB model, though these services are not
of equal value. The fiscal deficit determines liabt, which we will call the “liquidity provision” effect
of fiscal policy. Then, the central bank’s open-market operations determine the composition of
liabt, and the “effective transactions balances” of households and banks; effective transactions
balances are the Cobb-Douglas aggregators defined by (13) for banks, and by the utility function for
households. So, both monetary and fiscal policy have liquidity effects, and this will be important
in what follows.
There are many potential ways to write a fiscal policy rule. The discussion above might for
example suggest a rule in which deficits respond to total liabilities. However, we will follow most
of the literature in letting the taxes respond to the level of government debt. In particular, we let
government spending follow an exogenous process
G
(27) ln(gt) = (1 - Dg)ln(g)
+ Dgln(gt-1) + eg,t

and we let the rule for taxes be
G
(28) Jt = (1 - DJ)JG + DJJt-1 + (1 - DJ)Nf(bt-1 -b)

11
We will always assume that Nf is greater than the steady-state value of the real CCAPM rate, which
in turn is greater than the steady-state value of the real government bond rate. Our BB model is nonRicardian since government bonds provide liquidity, but our fiscal policies will be Ricardian in the
sense of Woodford (1995) and passive in the sense of Leeper (1991): primary surpluses move to
stabilize the debt, and guarantee that the government’s present value budget constraint is satisfied
for any price path.
Monetary policy will follow a standard interest-rate rule
G
(29) ig,t = Diig,t-1 + (1-Di)[Gig + 2B(Bt - BG ) + 2y(log(yt - log(y))]
+ ei,t

Note that the gap term incorporates steady-state output, and not the flexible-price level of output.7
2.B. The neo-Wicksellian Model
The NW model is embedded in the BB model. There are no banks in the NW model; so,
we take out all the equations and variables having to do with banks.

We set Nd,t = 0 in the

household utility function, but we retain Nm,t. The money demand equation, (8), remains and so does
the money demand shock; however, now money is just household cash balances. Finally,
government bonds do not provide liquidity services in the NW model; so, we set Nb = 0 in the utility
function. These bonds no longer command a liquidity premium, and equation (9) implies that the
spread – Ic,t - Ig,t – collapses. In the NW model, Ic,t appears in the interest-rate rule, (29), and there
is no disconnect between money-market rates and the CCAPM rate that affects aggregate demand.

2.C. Theoretical Implications of Banks and Liquid Bonds with Transactions Services

7

Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2006) argue that this specification makes their model fit
the data better. As is well known, using a gap term with flexible-price output would raise
welfare in this kind of model.

12
As stated earlier, the BB model adds three basic features to the NW model: new financial
assets, financial frictions, and a non-Ricardian element that gives fiscal policy a liquidity effect on
inflation. In this section, we discuss some theoretical implications of these modifications of the NW
model. In later sections, we calibrate the two models, and we study the quantitative significance of
these theoretical implications.
Implications for Monetary Policy of the Transactions Services of Bonds
Government bonds provide liquidity in the BB model, and this has two implications for
monetary policy: one is the “liquidity provision” effect, and the other is a “liquidity buffering”
effect. We have already discussed the liquidity provision effect: government deficits determine the
level of mt + bt, each of which provides transactions services. So, fiscal policy plays a new, and
obvious, role in inflation policy. The liquidity buffering effect is somewhat more subtle, and it has
to do with what we have called effective transactions balances.
When the central bank conducts a contractionary open-market operation (OMO), it sells
government bonds for cash, thereby creating a liquidity crunch. In the NW model, the OMO
replaces assets (m) that have transactions value with assets (b) that do not. In the BB model, the
transactions services of bonds buffer the effect on liquidity. The buffering effect manifests itself
in the spread – Ic,t - Ig,t – between money market rates and the rates that affect aggregate demand, and
this has implications for both monetary- policy surprises (interest-rate shocks) and the systematic
component of monetary policy (the inflation term in (23)).
To see this buffering effect, note that equations (17) and (18) imply
(30) bb,t/mb,t = [(1-*)/*][(Ic,t - 1)/(Ic,t - Ig,t)]
(Ic,t - Ig,t )/Ic,t is the opportunity cost to the bank of holding a bb,t instead of an ab,t; similarly, (Ict - 1)/Ic,t

13
is the cost of holding an mb,t instead of an ab,t. So, (Ic,t - 1)/(Ict - Ig,t) is the cost of holding cash
relative to the cost of holding government bonds; when it rises, banks substitute bonds for cash in
their liquidity management of deposits. Households face the same relative costs, and their ratio of
bonds to cash is proportional to that of the banks,
(31) bh,t/mh,t = {[*/(1-*)]/[Nm,t/Nb]}(bb,t/mb,t)
When the relative cost of holding money rises, both households and banks substitute bonds for cash.
A contractionary OMO raises the ratio of government bonds to cash. The relative cost of
money rises to make households and banks accept the new ratio, decreasing the spread, Ic,t - Ig,t. This
can be seen directly in equation (30), and it can also be understood in term of the liquidity premium
on government bonds.

The increase in government bonds decreases their marginal value in

effective transactions balances, and this decreases the liquidity premium that bonds can command.
Now consider the implications for an interest-rate surprise of say 6 basis points (or 24 basis
points in annual terms). The central bank must conduct a contractionary OMO to raise Ig,t by 6 basis
points. But in the BB model, a contractionary OMO decreases the spread, and the effect on Ic,t is less
than 6 basis points. The liquidity services of government bonds buffers the effect of this OMO on
the CCAPM rate and aggregate demand. In the NW model, there is of course no spread, and the
shock goes straight through to the consumption Euler equation and aggregate demand.
Consider next the implications for the systematic component of monetary policy. When
inflation rises by say 1%, (29) requires Ig,t to increase by 2B. This is or course accomplished by a
contractionary OMO. In the BB model, the effect on liquidity is buffered, and Ic,t rises less than 2B.
So, for a given value of 2B, the systematic component of monetary policy is less aggressive in the
BB model than it is in the NW model.

14
Implications of Banks and Financial Frictions
Banks modify the NW model in two theoretically important ways: they provide deposits
(which may reduce the need for cash), and they provide loans (which may affect aggregate supply
or demand in a variety of ways, depending on how loans are modeled). Moreover, the provision of
these deposits and loans is costly: the banks need money and bonds to manage the liquidity of their
deposits, and they use labor to create loans. These financial frictions may inhibit economic activity
in the BB model. These new elements should affect the way in which shocks pass through our two
model economies.
Monetary Aggregates as Indicators of Inflation
In the NW model, the money demand equation is a decoupled equation whose only role is
to determine the OMOs necessary to implement the central banks interest-rate rule. The central
bank simply accommodates any increase in money demand, leaving interest rates and everything
else unchanged. But in the BB model, the money demand equation is part of a nexus of equations
determining household and bank demands for a variety of assets. For this reason alone, one might
expect monetary aggregates to play a more important role in forecasting inflation.
Banks also provide an aggregate – M2 – which has been used by some central banks in forecasting inflation, and M2 velocity has played an historical role in monetarist thought. Moreover,
in the BB model, the liquidity provision effect of fiscal policy leads one to expect that government
liabilities will be useful in forecasting inflation. We will investigate these issues in Section 5.

3. Steady-State Equilibrium of the BB Model
In this section, we show that the BB model has a unique steady-state equilibrium for suitable

15
specifications of monetary and fiscal policy.

As we shall see, the steady-state values of

consumption, output and work do not depend on monetary policy or on steady-state inflation; in this
sense, the model has a recursive structure and satisfies the proposition of the superneutrality of
money. However, the steady-state relationship between inflation and the instrument of monetary
policy, Ig, is more complicated in the BB model than in the more conventional NW model, and this
is a matter of some independent interest. (For notational simplicity, we will drop “t” subscripts to
denote steady-state values in this section.)
In the steady states of both models, the real CCAPM rate is tied to consumer preferences:
Ic/A = 1/$. So, the familiar Fisher equation links the nominal CCAPM rate and inflation. The
instrument of monetary policy is however Ig, and the steady-state relationship between Ig and
inflation depends on an interest-rate spread: Ig = A/$ - (Ic - Ig). In the NW model, the spread
vanishes, and the steady-state monetary policy can be specified as an inflation target or equivalently
as a value of the instrument, Ig. Monetary policy clearly determines steady-state inflation in the NW
model independently of fiscal policy. In the BB model, government bonds have non-pecuniary
returns, and the spread is positive. Moreover, the spread is endogenous, and it depends on fiscal
policy. So, one question we will address is whether, for a given fiscal policy, we can work from an
inflation target back to a setting of Ig. This will generally be the case; however, there is one simple
specification of fiscal policy that determines steady-state inflation all by itself.
On the spending side, we will always assume that the fiscal authority sets a target for g/y (=
(g), the steady-state ratio of government spending to output. To solve for the steady-state level of

employment, we use the labor-demand equilibrium condition linking the real wage to the marginal

16
product of labor.8 The Cobb-Douglas production function (24) implies :
(32)

w=

(σ − 1)ω y
σμn

We next solve for the steady-state work effort. Using (32), the household’s first-order conditions
(5) and (6), and the market clearing condition, c = (1 - (g)y:
(33)

φ n n1+ χ =

(σ − 1)(1 − β η )ω
σ (1 − η )(1 − γ g )μ

Given the work effort, n, the production function determines output, the market clearing condition
pins down consumption, and (32) determines the real wage. So, other than setting (g, monetary and
fiscal policy play no role in the determination of n, y, c, and w.
To solve for the other variables, we have to specify tax policy. In our benchmark tax policy,
the fiscal authority uses its instrument to meet a target for b/y, the steady-state ratio of debt to
output. Later in the section, we will consider tax policies that target a deficit or a ratio of public
sector liabilities to output.
First, we derive an expression that relates the CCAPM rate, Ic, to the instrument of monetary
policy, Ig. To do this, we use a steady-state version of equation (16),
(34)

Id = Ic −

(I c − 1) δ (I c − I g ) 1− δ
Z b d δ (1 − d) 1− δ

,

and (9) to get an expression linking the demand for deposits and the CCAPM rate. Then, using (13),
(17), and (18), we solve for the bank’s demand for bonds:

8

firms.

The actual derivation of the following equation would use the pricing equations of

17
(35)

⎡ (1 − δ )φ d (1 − η )c ⎤ ⎛ I c ⎞
bb = ⎢
⎥ ⎜⎜ I − I ⎟⎟
1− βη
⎣
⎦⎝ c
g⎠

In equilibrium, the household’s demand for bonds (10) and the bank’s demand (35) must add up to
the supply, which is pinned down by the fiscal target for b/y, and we get:
(35)

Ic =

Ig
⎛ 1 − γ g ⎞ ⎛ [φ b + (1 − δ )φ d ](1 − η ) ⎞
⎟⎜
1− ⎜
⎟
(1 − β η )
⎠
⎝ b/ y ⎠⎝

Since A = $Ic, this is the expression we need to relate steady-state inflation to the monetary
policy instrument, Ig. For a given fiscal policy – characterized by (g and the target for b/y – the
central bank can calculate the instrument setting it needs to achieve a given inflation target. (Of
course, we can also read (35) the other way around: if the central bank is already committed to a
particular value for Ig, the fiscal authority can achieve, say, a lower steady-state inflation by
choosing either a higher (g or a higher target for b/y.)
Note that (35) places a constraint on the fiscal authority’s choice of b/y: the target must be
high enough, given (g, for the denominator to be positive; otherwise, an equilibrium with positive
interest rates will not exist. However, this constraint is (at least in part) an artifice of our choice of
functional forms. Our Cobb-Douglas specifications of “effective transactions balances” make it
essential for households and banks to hold bonds, even if the gross interest rate on those bonds goes
to zero. The denominator of (35) will be positive if the target for b/y makes b larger than what
would be demanded when Ig = 0.
Finally, we turn to the money and bond markets. Under our benchmark policies, the money
stock is endogenous. Using (8), (9), (10), (17), (18), and the market clearing conditions for money
and bonds, we obtain

18
m
=
b

(36)

⎡ φm + δ φd ⎤ ⎛ Ic − Ig ⎞
⎟
⎢
⎥⎜
⎣ φ b + (1 − δ )φ d ⎦ ⎝ I c − 1 ⎠

which determines the composition of public sector liabilities in the steady state. Note that our
benchmark policies also make total public sector liabilities (cash plus bonds) endogenous.9
We now turn to alternative specifications of the steady-state tax policy. Suppose the fiscal
authority sets a target for the broader aggregate of total liabilities; that is, it sets a target for (m+b)/y
(which includes bonds monetized by the central bank). For a given monetary policy, (36) pins down
the composition of liabilities, and our steady-state results remain basically unchanged.10 For a given
fiscal policy, a higher value of Ig corresponds to setting a higher inflation target; and given an Ig, a
higher fiscal target for m+b leads to a lower inflation rate.
Tax policy might also target the deficit. If the target is set equal to zero, however, then it
follows from (26) that the steady-state inflation rate is zero, regardless of monetary policy.11 In this
rather peculiar case, monetary policy determines the real value of the public debt.

Setting

aside this special case, all the policy specifications we have considered suggest that monetary policy
can set and implement an inflation target, even though the “right” value of its instrument, Ig, depends
on the fiscal policy. Given the solution for inflation and Ic, the rest of our steady-state calculations
are straightforward.

9

(36) illustrates another way we could characterize monetary policy in the steady-state.
Open-market operations determine the ratio m/b, and then (36) determines the interest-rate
spread. We don’t pursue this here, other than to note that a permanent open-market operation (or
choice of a new target for m/b), will change the non-pecuniary returns on bonds, and (for a given
fiscal policy) bring a new steady-state rate of inflation.
10

For a unique equilibrium to exist, fiscal policy must still incur enough liabilities to
satisfy the demand for bonds at some positive interest rate.
11

Note that we are abstracting from growth in the steady state.

19
4. Calibration of the BB Model
The NW model is now standard in the literature, and for that part of the model, we can take
parameter values that are familiar.12 We set the Calvo parameter, ", equal to 0.75, so that prices
change once a year on average; we set the elasticity of demand, F, equal to 7, so that the gross
markup is 1.17 in the steady state; we set the Frisch elasticity of labor supply, 1/P, equal to 1; we
set the elasticity of output with respect to labor, T, equal to 0.67; and finally, we set the habit
persistence parameter, 0, equal to 0.7. We set the persistence parameters, D, in the autoregressive
processes for all of the shocks at 0.9. We assume the standard deviations of the shocks are: 0.008
for the productivity shock, 0.01 for the government purchases shock and money demand shock, and
0.00245 for the interest-rate shock (in the central bank’s interest-rate rule). Since we don’t have
investment in our model, we set the share of government purchases in output to 0.25.
For our benchmark monetary and fiscal policies, we rely on estimates discussed in earlier
papers.13 We set the benchmark parameters in the central bank’s interest-rate rule at: 2B = 2.0, 2y
= 0.2 and Di = 0.8. And we set the benchmark parameters in the fiscal policy rule at: 2f = 0.018
(which is three times the real government bond rate and is also larger than the CCAPM rate), and
Dg = DJ = 0.9.

For the financial sector, we calibrated (using the steady-state equations) the parameters NG m,
NG d, Nb, Zl, Zb, and * to match key averages of monetary and fiscal variables in the U.S. data from

1990 to 2005. In the data, government bonds held by the banking sector are about 25 percent of
(quarterly) consumption, and bank reserves (vault cash and deposits at the Fed) are about 5 percent
12

See, for instance, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005).

See Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2006). For 2f, we relied on work by Henning Bohn;
see Canzoneri, Cumby, Diba and Lopez-Salido (2006).
13

20
of consumption. The banking sector employs about 1.5 percent of the labor force. Bank loans
(including securities held by banks) are 4.25 times consumption. Deposits (including checking
accounts as well as small-scale saving and time deposits) are about 3.15 times quarterly
consumption, but deposits issued to households are only about 2.45 times consumption. In our
model, we make deposits 2.45 times consumption and scale all the banking sector data above by the
ratio 2.45/3.15. Cash held outside banks is about 30 percent of consumption, and we attribute it all
to household cash balances. We also attribute government bonds held by individuals, insurance
companies and pension funds, which amounts to 80 percent of consumption, to households.
Finally, we set the steady-state inflation and federal funds rates at their quarterly averages
for this period: 0.7 and 1.1 percent per quarter. And, we set the value of : so that hours and wages
in the steady state are equal across the banking and production sectors.

5. A Quantitative Comparison of the Two Models
In Section 2, we identified a number of theoretical differences between the BB and NW
models. In this section, we examine the quantitative significance of these differences. Even if the
BB model is thought to be a more complete modeling of the true economy, the much simpler NW
model may give a reasonably good account of the way the economy behaves, and its implications
for monetary policy may not be too misleading. We begin by comparing time series statistics and
impulse response functions generated by the two models. Then, we turn to the potential role of
monetary aggregates in inflation forecasting.

21
5.A. Comparing Time Series Statistics in the Two Models
Tables 1, 2 and 3 present a number of statistics generated by the two models. All variables
except interest rates and the inflation rate are in logarithms. The benchmark monetary and fiscal
policies were used in the simulations that generated these statistics. The means and standard
deviations in Table 1 show a remarkable similarity between the two models. The models were
calibrated to have very similar steady states for the variables they share, and the means of those
variables bear this out. What is remarkable is the similarity of the standard deviations of inflation,
output, and the CCAPM rate. Real monetary aggregates are quite volatile in both models.
An interesting difference does emerge in the variance decompositions reported in Table 2.
Productivity shocks play a dominant role in explaining real economic activity in both models, and
especially in the NW model. This is typical of models of in this class; indeed, it is difficult to get
demand side shocks to do very much in this so called “New-Keynesian” paradigm. Government
spending shocks explain less than 1% of the variation in inflation in the NW model, and only 7%
of the variation in consumption. By contrast, government spending shocks explain 18% of the
variation in inflation in the BB model. This is due, at least in part, to the fact that deficits are
financed with bonds that provide transactions services in that model. In addition, government
spending shocks explain the lion’s share of the variation in m2, deposits and household bond
holdings; deficits increase the supply of government bonds, requiring households and banks to
substitute among their various liquid assets.
The variance decompositions in Table 2, along with the unconditional correlations in Table
3, give some indication of the role that monetary aggregates may play in the two models. The
productivity shocks and government spending shocks that explain almost 95% of the variation

22
inflation in the BB model only explain a little more that 10% of the variation in dM (growth in
nominal base money) and dM2 (growth in nominal M2); moreover, the correlation between the
growth in these aggregates and inflation is essentially zero. By contrast, these two shocks explain
and about 90% of the variation in dLIAB (growth in nominal m + b). So, it is not surprising that the
correlation between inflation and dLIAB is strong (0.38). This suggests that dLIAB may be good
indicator of inflation in the BB model, but dM and dM2 may not. In the NW model, dM (the growth
in nominal cash balances) shares the same fate as dM in the BB model; it will probably not be a
good indicator of inflation. In the NW model, government spending shocks explain 87% of the
variation in dLIAB, but here government shocks do virtually nothing to inflation. The correlation
between inflation and dLIAB is weaker (0.12). This suggests that monetary aggregates may not be
good indicators of inflation in the NW model.
5.B. Comparing Impulse Response Functions in the Two Models
Impulse response functions show how shocks pass through our model economies. In Section
2, we noted that, in the BB model, government bonds buffer the liquidity effects of open-market
operations, and government deficits provide liquidity. Here, we use impulse response functions to
see if these facts significantly alter the way the economy responds to shocks. Once again, we use
the benchmark policy rules for monetary and fiscal policy.
Interest-rate Shocks :
Figure 1 shows how an unanticipated increase in Ig,t passes through our two model
economies; there is, of course, no spread between Ig,t and Ic,t in the NW model. The NW model, in
the top panel, illustrates a conventional story. The Ig,t shock is implemented with an OMO that
increases the supply of bonds relative to cash. The real CCAPM rate (Rc) rises, lowering

23
consumption demand via the Euler equation. Output and labor demand fall, decreasing the real
wage and marginal cost; and a lower marginal cost means less inflation. The original OMO
produces a negative dM, but the systematic part of monetary policy then works in the other way, and
dM becomes positive in the next period. So, dM does not appear to be a very good indicator of
inflation for interest-rate shocks; we return to this issue in Section 5.C.
This conventional story repeats itself in the BB model, but the “buffering effect” of government bonds is evident: the spread – Ic - Ig – narrows (not pictured), and this cushions the effect on
inflation and economic activity. Rc rises less (by about 14%); inflation falls less (by about 19%)
and returns to steady state sooner; and consumption falls less (by about 11% at its trough). The
general patterns of the impulse response functions are the same as in the NW model, but
quantitative differences range from about 10 to 20% and this would seem to be of some
importance.14
The financial markets story is of course richer in the BB model. The contractionary OMO
forces banks and households to substitute bonds for cash. Bank deposits also fall, and m2 falls. dM
and dM2 fall on impact but are positive thereafter. Moreover, the rise in the real government bond
rate increases the deficit, and government liabilities rise (recall equation (26)); so, dM, dM2 and
dLIAB are all positive from the second period on. None of the monetary aggregates appear to be
very good indicators of inflation for interest-rate shocks.
The credit tightening passes to the loans market as well. In fact, the real loan rate, Rl, (not
pictured) increases more than the CCAPM rate. However, this does not affect household behavior
since the amount of loans is effectively fixed in our benchmark model. Following Christiano et al

14

The differences are larger for lower values of 2B.

24
(2007) and others, we also tried making firms borrow from the bank to meet their wage bill. This
modification did not change our results in a quantitatively significant way, and therefore we have
presented the simpler model. Apparently, the demand for loans will have to be modeled in a
different way if the loans channel is to have a significant effect on aggregate supply or demand; we
return to this issue in the conclusion.
Productivity Shocks:
Figure 2 shows how an unanticipated increase in total factor productivity of firms passes
through our two models. In the NW model, a positive productivity shock leads to higher
consumption. However, aggregate demand does not increase enough to accommodate the increase
in productivity; so, labor demand and the real wage fall. Marginal cost, wt/Zy,t, and inflation fall.
The central bank responds to the shock by lowering the nominal CCAPM rate (as evidenced by the
rise in the ratio of cash to bonds); m rises and dM is positive. For productivity shocks, dM is not
a good indicator of inflation, and as noted earlier, productivity shocks explain most of the variation
in inflation in both models.
Moving on to the BB model, the “liquidity buffering effect” of government bonds dampens
the systematic component of monetary policy, and this enhances the effect of the productivity shock
as it passes through the economy. Real wages and inflation fall more, though consumption rises
less. Once again, the general pattern of the responses is the same in the two models, but here the
quantitative difference are not as large (generally on the order of 5 to 10%).
The more interesting story may be in the monetary aggregates. As in the NW model, the
central bank responds to the shock by lowering Ig (as can be seen in the rise in the ratio of cash to
bonds). Both dM and dM2 rise, suggesting that they will not be good indicators of inflation.

25
However, dLIAB is consistently negative; dLIAB may be a good indicator of inflation for
productivity shocks. And once again, productivity shocks explain about 75% of the variation in
inflation in the BB model.
Government Spending Shocks:
Figure 3 shows how an unanticipated increase in government spending passes through the
model economies, and here the differences are dramatic. The NW model gives the conventional
results. Households want to work more, and consume less, to pay the expected future taxes. However, total aggregate demand rises, and the demand for labor is greater than the increased supply;
so, the real wage rises, increasing marginal cost. Inflation and output go up. The central bank raises
the CCAPM rate, killing off the inflation very quickly. The rise in the CCAPM rate, along with the
decline in consumption, lowers the demand for cash. dM is negative, at least initially, making it a
rather poor indicator of inflation in the case of government spending shocks.
Much more is happening in the BB model. The initial increase in inflation is four times the
increase in the NW model, and it is much longer lasting.15 Why is this? First note that the Rc
actually falls in the BB model, and its subsequent rise is less than in the NW model. The central
bank’s interest rule is active, and the real government bond rate, Rg, rises (not pictured). However,
the “buffering effect” of government bonds allows Rc to fall. The lower real CCAPM rate makes
consumption fall less. More importantly, the fiscal deficits implied by the government spending
shock increase total transactions balances, as can be seen by the rise in dLIAB. But this is only part
of the story.
The non-Ricardian behavior of households really accounts for the differences with the NW

15

This presumably accounts for differences in the variance decompositions in Table 2.

26
model. The future tax liability grows at the rate Rg, but it is discounted at the higher rate Rc. So,
the negative wealth effect is smaller than in the NW model, and labor supply does not increase as
much. So, the real wage goes up 50% more than in the NW model, increasing marginal cost and
inflation. Consumption also falls less than in the NW model (by about 9% at the troughs).
Household demand for cash balances, mh, goes down for the same reasons as in the NW
model. But, households substitute toward deposits as well as government bonds. And deposits go
up enough to make m2 rise; dM2 is positive for a sustained period. Both dM2 and dLIAB seem to
be good indicators of inflation for government spending shocks. And government spending shocks
explain almost 20% of the variation in inflation.
Money Demand Shocks:
Figure 4 shows how an unanticipated increase money demand – a cash shock in the NW
model, and an m2 shock in the BB model – passes through our model economies. In the NW model,
the money demand equation is a decoupled equation whose only role is to determine the OMOs
necessary to implement the central bank’s interest-rate rule. Figure 4 shows all that there is to be
seen. In the BB model, an increase in the m2 demand is a contractionary shock that affects inflation
and real economic activity. However, the effects are small: the effects on inflation and consumption
are two orders of magnitude smaller than the size of the shock itself. The central bank’s use of an
interest-rate rule insulates the real economy from financial shocks.
In summary, the “buffering effect” of government bonds is apparent in the BB model: it
cushions the economy from a contractionary open market operation, and it implies that the
systematic part of monetary policy provides less stabilization in response to the other shocks. For
interest-rate shocks and productivity shocks, the impulse response functions from the two models

27
show similar patterns, but the quantitative differences range from 5 to 20%. Moreover, money
demand shocks have little effect in the BB model. Government spending shocks are a different
story; they have a much larger, and a much more prolonged, impact on inflation in the BB model.
5.C. The Role of Monetary Aggregates (and Velocity) in Forecasting Inflation
Some central banks use monetary aggregates in forecasting inflation, and most central banks
use some measure of the output gap. The NW model generates only one aggregate, cash balances
held by households. The BB model actually generates three additional aggregates: m2 (mh +
deposits), liquidity (m2 + bh), and government liabilities (m + b). If the BB model is the more
complete description of the true economy, does the NW model give a misleading view of the
usefulness of monetary aggregates in forecasting inflation? To answer this question, we imagine
a central-bank economist using data generated by one or the other of our models to estimate small
unrestricted VARs. The question the staff economist asks is if any of the monetary aggregates is
useful in predicting inflation.16
For each of our models, we generate 1,000 data sets, each consisting of 40 years of quarterly
data. Then, for each data set, we estimate a series of VARs. For each monetary aggregate, we
estimate a bivariate VAR with inflation and the rate of growth of the nominal aggregate in question;
then, we estimate a VAR that adds either the output gap or the nominal interest rate on government
bonds.17 Finally, for each of these VARs, we generate the impulse response function for inflation
to an innovation in the aggregate, and we plot the median along with a confidence interval
constructed using the 33th and 67th percentiles (corresponding to one standard deviation).
16

As explained in footnote 4, this appears to be consistent with the way the ECB uses
monetary aggregates.
17

Here, the output gap is defined as the log of output minus its steady-state value.

28
Figures 5 and 6 illustrate the basic results for our two models. Figure 5 shows the plots for
shocks to dM, dM2, dL and dLIAB in the BB model. We also test the predictive power of M2
velocity, since that variable played a prominent role in traditional monetarist discussions of
inflation.18 dM is clearly of little or no use in forecasting inflation, either in the bivariate VAR or in
the VAR with the output gap added. But, the impulse response functions for dM2 are marginally
significant, and innovations in M2 velocity do seem to contain information that is useful in
predicting inflation. dL and (especially) dLIAB would also to be useful predictors of inflation.
These financial market variables may not be particularly helpful in forecasting inflation a
few quarters out, but they do seem to have predictive power in the medium run, when inflation
reaches its peak. That is, they would seem to serve as a medium-run “reality check” for central
banks, even when information contained in the output gap is taken into account.19, 20
Figure 6 shows the corresponding plots for the NW model; there is of course no m2 in that
model. Neither dM nor dLIAB produces anything of interest. Similarly, base velocity is of no use
in predicting inflation.
In summary, growth in nominal cash balances is not useful in forecasting inflation in either
the BB model or the NW model. But dM2, M2 velocity, dL and dLIAB do seem to have predictive

18

The impulse response function for velocity was generated in the same manner as the
impulse response functions for the monetary aggregates.
19

This appears to be the purpose of the ECB’s Monetary Pillar. If we interpret the output
gap as containing the information gleaned from the Economics Pillar, then the three variable
VARs suggest that (in our model, anyway) the Monetary Pillar provides useful additional
information about the course of inflation.
20

Plots for the VARs in inflation, the nominal interest rate and the monetary aggregate
look much like those for output, inflation and the monetary aggregate. This is not surprising
since our data are generated with an interest-rate rule that responds to inflation and the output
gap.

29
power in the BB model. dLIAB is not, however, useful in the NW model. Why the difference? Not
surprisingly, government spending shocks explain more than 75% of the variation in dLIAB in both
of the models. But, for reasons that were given in Section 5.B, government spending shocks explain
almost 20% of the variation in inflation in the BB model, and less that 1% in the NW model.
In any case, the implication of these results would seem to be clear. The NW model may
give a misleading view of the usefulness of monetary aggregates in predicting inflation in a more
complete model.
5.D. Monetary Aggregates: A Reality Check for Inactive Policy Rules?
Inflation seems well in check in many countries whose central banks no longer pay much
attention to monetary aggregates. Lucas (2006) worries that this recent success may “lead monetary
policy analysis back to the muddled eclecticism that brought us the 1970s inflation.” Estimates of
the interest-rate rule during the pre-Volcker period usually place 2B at about 0.8,21 and this weak
response to inflation is thought by some to have been responsible for the high rates of inflation of
the 1970s. Would paying more attention to monetary aggregates have alerted the Fed to the
problem?
The BB model differs from the NW model in an important way that we have not touched
upon yet. Interest-rate rules that violate the Taylor principle (2B > 1) cause a well known
indeterminacy problem in the NW model. Not so in the BB model. Canzoneri and Diba (2005)
showed that nominal indeterminacy is intimately associated with the Ricardian nature of the models
that exhibit it. In the BB model, the liquidity of government bonds provides the non-Ricardian
element that is needed to eliminate the problem. Elsewhere, we have analyzed the coordination of

21

See for example Lubik and Schorfheide (2004).

30
monetary and fiscal policies that is needed to eliminate the nominal indeterminacy in a model similar
to our BB model.22
Figure 7 shows how a government spending shock passes though the BB model with an
inactive monetary policy rule (2B = 0.8). Inflation and output rise, and the interest-rate rule calls for
an increase in Ig. But, the response is too weak to raise the real rate, Rg. dM2 falls, but dLIAB is
consistently positive; it should be a useful indicator of the impending inflation. In this sense,
monitoring the right aggregate would serve as a kind of reality check.

6. Summary and Directions for Further Work
Our BB model adds banks and liquid government bonds to an otherwise standard neoWicksellian model. In this sense, the BB model is a more complete modeling of the economy than
is the NW model. The extra modeling brings a role for government bonds in household and bank
liquidity management problems, financial frictions in the provision of deposits and loans, an
endogenous spread between the money market rate in the central bank’s interest-rate rule and the
rate of return in the consumption Euler equation, bank loans that may affect aggregate supply and
demand, and bank deposits that can substitute for cash.
We identified two theoretically important implications of the extra modeling for monetary
policy and inflation: the “liquidity provision” effect and the “liquidity buffering” effect. Both are
due to the transactions services of government bonds, which is absent in the NW model. Fiscal
deficits increase total liabilities (m + b), and this has an effect on inflation. And the liquidity crunch

22

See Canzoneri, Cumby, Diba and Lopez-Salido (2006). Note that this is not the Fiscal
Theory of the Price Level. Fiscal policy is still Ricardian in the sense of Woodford (1995), or
passive in the sense of Leeper (1991).

31
created by a contractionary open market operation is buffered by the liquidity of government bonds;
this reduces the spread between the CCAPM rate in the consumption Euler equation and the moneymarket rate in the central bank’s interest-rate rule. Interest-rate surprises have less effect on
inflation. And more importantly, the elastic interest-rate spread makes the systematic component
of monetary policy respond less aggressively to inflation; so, all shocks pass though the economy
with less monetary stabilization.
The NW model provides a less complete modeling of the economy. But it has the virtue of
simplicity, and some have suggested that it gives an adequate account of macroeconomic behavior
for the business-cycle analyst and the monetary-policy analyst alike. To investigate this possibility,
we calibrated the models to see if the theoretical differences between the BB and NW models were
quantitatively significant. We found that the liquidity buffering effect is readily apparent, and that
it makes a difference in the way interest-rate shocks and productivity shocks pass through the
economy. These differences range from about 5 to 20%, depending on the shock and the impulse
response function in question. The liquidity provision effect (and the associated non-Ricardian
behavior of consumers) makes a big difference with respect to fiscal shocks. Impulse response
functions show that a bond-financed increase in government spending has a much bigger effect on
inflation in the BB model, and the effect is much more persistent, than in the NW model.
We also found that monetary indicators – M2 velocity and the growth rates of M2, L, and
public sector liabilities – are useful in forecasting inflation in the BB model; however, household
cash balances are not. The two monetary aggregates in the NW model – household cash balances
and public sector liabilities – are not useful in forecasting inflation in that model. So, the NW model
seems to give a misleading view about the usefulness of monetary aggregates (and M2 velocity) in

32
a more complete model.
We have not studied how central banks should use monetary aggregates in their policy
process. However, one point should be made clear: our work does not support strict targeting of,
say, M2 growth. The standard deviation of inflation in the BB model is 0.004 (per quarter) under
our benchmark interest-rate rule; if we replace the benchmark policy with a rule that leans against
fluctuations in dM2, and does so strongly enough to virtually eliminate them, then the standard
deviation of inflation rises to 0.017. The market for money does “matter” in the BB model. Figure
3 shows that an increase in m2 demand raises the real CCAPM rate, lowers consumption demand,
and decreases inflation; however, these effects are very small.

Moreover, the variance

decompositions in Table 2 show that 95% of the variation in inflation is explained by the shocks to
productivity and government spending. Innovations in dM2 predict inflation because they contain
information about these underlying shocks, and not because money growth is the driving force in
inflation.
Woodford (2006) addresses a number of theoretical concerns that have been raised about
neo-Wicksellian models.23 Our BB model offers an interesting new perspective on some of the issues
involved. First, Woodford argues that the central bank’s interest-rate policy pins down the steadystate rate of inflation without any need to set a long-run target for money growth. Essentially, the
intercept term in the interest-rate rule specifies the steady-state CCAPM rate, and then the Fisher
equation gives the inflation rate. There is no need to set a long-run target for money growth in the
BB model either, but there is a spread between the steady-state CCAPM rate and the money-market
rate in the central bank’s interest-rate rule. And as shown in Section 3, that spread is endogenous
23

Woodford (2006) discusses the related implications of the neo-Wicksellian model,
mainly in response to the criticisms of Alvarez, Lucas, and Weber (2001) and Nelson (2003).

33
and depends upon the fiscal target for the ratio of government bonds to GDP (among other things).
This suggests that some coordination of monetary and fiscal policy is needed to control inflation in
the long run.
Second, Woodford invokes historical conditions to pin down the initial price level in neoWicksellian models. There is no need to do this in the BB model: it determines the price level at
each point in time. As Canzoneri and Diba (2005) show, price level determinacy is a generic
implication of the government’s flow budget constraint in any model that determines real bond
balances; real bond balances are determined in the BB model because they provide transactions
services and Ricardian Equivalence does not hold.
We view the present modeling as very much a work in progress. So far, we have focused
mostly on the liabilities side of the banks’ balance sheet. And even here there is much to be done.
We have, for example, just postulated a unitary elasticity of substitution between the assets in what
we have called effective transactions balances. These elasticities could be estimated, and different
elasticities may affect the results we have reported.
In this paper, we have interpreted the quantitative differences in our models as having come
form the “liquidity provision” effect or the “liquidity buffering” effect; this seemed natural since the
differences appear to be consistent with those interpretations. However, the BB model also has
financial frictions and a bank loans mechanism that are absent in the NW model. And these factors
probably deserve more attention. In our benchmark model, households refinance their loan for a
fixed durable (which we have likened to a house) each period, and the fluctuating loan rates do not
affect household behavior. We also tried making the firms borrow from the bank to meet their wage
bill. But the impulse response functions looked virtually the same as those for the benchmark

34
model.
It may of course be that the financial frictions of creating bank loans and deposits are not
very costly, and that this extra modeling is not necessary for most macroeconomic applications. We
think, however, that it is much too soon to be reaching such a conclusion. For example, bank loans
could fund entrepreneurs, as in the financial-accelerator literature discussed by Bernanke, Gertler,
and Gilchrist (1999).
Those who are more interested in the implications for monetary policy will probably want
to model features that bring more persistence to the inflation process. This would make a clearer
distinction between short-run and the medium-run inflation dynamics. Those who advocate the use
of monetary aggregates in forecasting inflation generally admit that their value is limited in the short
run; they would argue, however, that monetary aggregates can provide a medium-run reality check.
For example, Fischer et al (2006) describe the ECB’s policy process as drawing upon both
“economic analysis” and “monetary analysis”, saying: “The former attempts to identify the
economic shocks driving the business cycle and thus embodies a thorough assessment of the cyclical
dynamics of inflation. The latter analyses the monetary trends associated with price developments
over the medium to longer term”. Issing (2006) claims that two-to-three years is the horizon “that
is typically considered relevant for monetary policy decisions, given the lags in monetary-policy
transmission”, and this is consistent with empirical analysis. The impulse response function for the
interest-rate shock in Section 5 peaks too soon. Moreover, our analysis suggests that it is the
broader measures of liquidity – L and total government liabilities – that are the more reliable
indicators of medium term inflation. This is a controversial result that probably deserves more
scrutiny.

35
This leads us to our final caveat. The current calibration of the NW and BB models has
produced interesting comparisons of how the two models work. But, in addition to adding new
structural features, future research should focus on estimation or making the BB model more
coherent with the data.

36
Table 1: Theoretical Means and Standard Deviations in the Benchmark Models
BB Model
Variable

Mean
0.0070
0.9044
0.0101
-0.5873
0.9044
1.6283
1.5128

A
y
Rc
mh
liab
m2
deposits

NW Model
Variable

Std D
0.0038
0.0099
0.0035
0.2854
0.1974
0.1431
0.1598

Mean
0.0076
0.9019
0.0101
-0.6267
0.4089

A
y
Rc
m
liab

Std D
0.0033
0.0104
0.0039
0.2711
0.3598

Table 2: Variance Decompositions (infinite horizon) in the Benchmark Models
BB Model

A
Rc
y
c
n
mh
dM
dLIAB
dM2
m2
deposits
bh
Rc - Rg
Rl - Rc

NW Model

ep

ei

77.35
17.52
80.13
86.60
88.89
52.90
11.23
14.06
11.12
15.43
5.65
3.90
5.76
35.50

5.06
81.16
6.20
6.70
3.47
32.52
87.55
11.02
83.23
10.29
6.75
9.31
10.15
62.32

eg
17.58
1.30
13.67
6.70
7.64
13.99
0.80
74.92
1.80
73.09
86.73
86.63
83.95
2.15

em

ep

0.01
0.02
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.59
0.42
0.01
3.85
1.19
0.86
0.15
0.14
0.03

A

91.08
Rc
14.44
y
82.47
c
85.92
n
88.58
m
58.12
dM
10.11
dLIAB 6.49

ei

eg

8.84
83.98
6.81
7.10
4.75
40.08
89.08
6.60

0.08
1.58
10.72
6.98
6.67
1.09
0.33
86.90

Table 3: Correlations in the Benchmark Models
BB Model
Variable

A
dM
dLIAB
dM2

A
1.00
-0.07
0.38
-0.01

y
-0.50
-0.05
-0.10
-0.07

NW Model
Variable

A
dM
dLIAB

A
1.00
-0.07
0.12

y
-0.64
-0.04
-0.00

em
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.72
0.48
0.01

37
Figure 1: Interest-rate (Ig) Shock
-4

5

x 10

NW Model
dM

inflation

3

0

2

-0.05

1

-0.1

0

0
-5
-10

5
-3

3

x 10

10
Rc

15

20

-3

0.05

-0.15

5
-3

1

2

x 10

10
c

15

20

x 10

-1

5
-3

0

0

-1

-1

-2

x 10

dLIAB

10
n

15

20

10
15
M_B_ratio

20

1
0
-1

5
-3

5

x 10

10
w

15

20

-2

-10

5

-4

2

x 10

10

15

20

10
m

15

20

-3

0.05

0

0

-0.05

-0.05

-0.1

-0.1

-0.15

0
-5

5

-0.15

5

10

15

20

-0.2

BB Model
dM2

inflation

0

5

5

-3

0.02

2

0

1

-0.02

0

x 10

10

15

20

dLIAB

-2
-4
-6

5
-3

3

x 10

10
Rc

15

20

-0.04

5
-3

1

2

x 10

10
c

15

20

-1

5
-3

5

0

0

-1

-5

x 10

10
w

15

20

10
15
M_B_ratio

20

1
0
-1

5

10
m2

15

20

0.01
0

-2

5

10
15
deposits

20

-10

0.01

0

0

-0.02

-0.01

-0.04

5

-0.01
-0.02
-0.03

5

10

15

20

-0.02

5

10

15

20

-0.06

5

10

15

20

38
Figure 2: Productivity Shock in Manufacturing
-3

0

x 10

NW Model
dM

inflation

-4

0.04

-0.5

5

dLIAB

0

0.02

-1

-5
0

-1.5
-2

5
-4

10

x 10

x 10

10
Rc

15

20

-10

-0.02

5
-3

4

x 10

10
c

15

20

5

10
n

15

20

10
15
M_B_ratio

20

0

3

5

-15

-0.005

2
0
-5

5
-3

5

-0.01

1

x 10

10
w

15

20

0

5

10
m

15

20

0.08

5

0.06

0.06

0

-0.015

0.04

0.04
-5
-10

5

-3

0

0.02

0.02

x 10

10

15

20

0

5

-3

inflation
10

-0.5

x 10

10

15

20

BB Model
dM2

5

-4

5

x 10

10

15

20

15

20

10
15
M_B_ratio

20

dLIAB

0

5

-1

-5
0

-1.5
-2

5
-4

10

0

x 10

10
Rc

15

20

-10

-5

5
-3

4

x 10

10
c

15

20

5
-3

5

3

5

-15
x 10

10
w

0

2
0
-5

-5

1
5

10
m2

15

20

0.02

0

5

10
15
deposits

20

0.015

0.015

5

0.04
0.03

0.01

0.01

0.02
0.005

0.005
0

-10

5

10

15

20

0

0.01
5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

39
Figure 3: Government Spending Shock
-5

5

x 10

-3

inflation
5

x 10

NW Model
dM

-3

6

0

4

-5

2

x 10

dLIAB

0

-5

5
-4

2

x 10

10
Rc

15

20

-10

5
-3

0

1.5

x 10

10
c

15

20

5
-3

4

x 10

10
n

15

20

10
15
M_B_ratio

20

3

-0.5

1

2
-1

0.5
0

5
-4

10

0

x 10

10
w

15

20

1

-1.5

5

10
m

15

20

0

5

-0.005

0

-0.01

0

5

0
-0.01
-0.02

-5

5

-4

4

x 10

10

15

20

-0.03

-0.015

5

-3

inflation
2

x 10

10

15

20

-0.04

BB Model
dM2

5

-3

3

1

2

0

1

x 10

10

15

20

dLIAB

2

0

5
-4

x 10

10
Rc

15

20

0

0
5
-3

x 10

10
m2

5
-3

2

15

-1

15

20

x 10

10
c

15

20

0

-0.5

1

-1

0

-1.5

5

10
15
deposits

20

-1

0.02

0

10

0.015

-0.005

5

0.01

-0.01

0

0.005

-0.015

-5

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

5
-3

2

15

20

-0.02

x 10

5

5

10
w

15

20

10
15
M_B_ratio

20

10

15

20

40
Figure 4: Money Demand Shock
NW Model
-3

10

-5

dM

x 10

2

dLIAB

x 10

8
0
6
4

-2

2
-4
0
-2

5

10

15

-6

20

5

m
0.01

0.008

0.008

0.006

0.006

0.004

0.004

0.002

0.002

5

-5

0

x 10

10

15

0

20

-3

inflation
10

-0.5

x 10

5

10

BB Model
dM2

-5

1

-2

5
-5

20

x 10

dLIAB

x 10

10
Rc

15

20

-2

-5

5
-5

0

x 10

10
c

15

20

-3
0

-1

-0.5

2

-2

-1

1

-3

-1.5

0

5
-3

x 10

10
m2

15

20

-4

5
-3

8

x 10

10
15
deposits

20

4
3

4

4

2

2

2

1

15

20

0

5

10

15

5
-3

6

10

x 10

-2

6

5

5
-4

3

0

15

-1
0

-1.5

8

20

0

5

-1

4

15

M_B_ratio

0.01

0

10

20

0

x 10

5

10
w

15

20

10
15
M_B_ratio

20

10

15

20

41
Figure 5: Response of Inflation to a Shock to Nominal Growth in Monetary Aggregates
in the BB Model
A. Shock to Growth of Monetary Base (dM)

B. Shock to Growth of M2 (dM2)

C. Shock to Growth of Liquidity (dLIQ)

42

D. Shock to Growth of Liabilities (dLIAB)

E. Shock to m2 Velocity

43
Figure 6: Response of Inflation to a Shock to Growth in Monetary Aggregates
in the Neo-Wicksellian Model
A. Response of Inflation to Money Growth (dMh)

B. Response of Inflation to Liabilities Growth (dLIAB)

C. Response of Inflation to Velocity

44
Figure 7: Government Spending Shock; Inactive Monetary Policy (2B = 0.8, 2f = 0.012)
BB Model
-3

4

-3

inflation

x 10

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

5
-3

3

x 10

10
Ig

15

20

y

x 10

0

5

10
Rg

15

20

5

10
dLIAB

15

20

15

20

-3

1

x 10

0

2

-1
1

-2

0

5
-3

5

x 10

10
dM2

15

20

-3
-3

4

x 10

3
0

2
1

-5

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

45
References:
Alvarez, Fernando, Robert E. Lucas, Jr., and Warren Weber (2001), “Interest Rates and Inflation,"
American Economic Review, (papers and proceedings) 91(2): 219-225.
Bernanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist (1999) “The Financial Accelerator in a
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework,” in John Taylor and Michael Woodford (eds),
Handbook of Macroeconomics, (Elsevier Science, North-Holland).
Canzoneri, Matthew and Behzad Diba (2005),“Interest Rate Rules and Price Determinacy: the Role
of Transactions Services of Bonds,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, Issue 2, 329-343.
Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby, Behzad Diba , (2006) “The Cost of Nominal Rigidity in NNS
Models,” Journal of Money Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby, Behzad Diba and David Lopez-Salido, 2006, “Monetary and
Fiscal Policy Coordination when Bonds Provide Transactions Services” , mimeo.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, Charles Evans, 2005, Nominal Rigidities and the
Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy, Journal of Political Economy 13, no. 1,
February, 1-45.
Christiano, Lawrence, Cosmin Ilut, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno, (2007) “Monetary
Policy and Stock Market Boom-Bust Cycles”, mimeo.
Fischer, B., M. Lenza, H. Pill, and L. Reichlin (2006), “Money and Monetary Policy: The ECB
Experience 1999-2006,” an ECB staff paper prepared for the 4th ECB Central Banking
Conference, The Role of Money and Monetary Policy in the Twenty First Century,
November, 2006
Goodfriend, Marvin and Bennett McCallum (2006), “Banking and Interest Rates in Monetary Policy
Analysis: A Quantitative Exploration,” paper prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series.
Issing, Otmar, (2006), speech at the ECB Watchers Conference, Frankfurt, May 5th..

46
Leeper, Eric (1991), “Equilibria Under Active and Passive Monetary and Fiscal Policies,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 29, 129 -147.
Lubik, Thomas and Frank Schorfheide (2004), “Testing for Indeterminacy: An Application to U.S.
Monetary Policy,’ American Economic Review, Vol. 94, No. 1, 190 - 216.
Lucas, Robert (2006), “Panel Discussion: Colloquium on Honor of Otmar Issing,” remarks
presented at an ECB Colloquium, Frankfurt, March.
Nelson, Edward (2003), “The Future of Monetary Aggregates in Monetary Policy Analysis," Journal
of Monetary Economics, 50: 1029-59.
Weil, Philippe (1989), “The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-free Rate Puzzle,” Journal of
Monetary Economics 24, no. 3, November, 401-421.
Woodford, Michael (1995), "Price Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,"
Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1-46.
_____________ (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
____________ (2006), “How Important is Money in the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” mimeo.

