                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MONETARY POLICY UIDER
                      DUAL EXCHARGE RATES


                        Robert E. Cumby

                     Working   Paper No. iJ424




             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                          August l98L




Helpful comments from Rudiger Dornbusch, Stanley Fischer, Robert
Flood, Gene Grossman, Maurice Obstfeld, Kenneth Rogoff, John
Williamson, and the referees on earlier drafts of this paper are
acknowledged with thanks. The research reported here is part of
the NBER's research program in International Studies and project in
Productivity (World Economy). Any opinions expressed are those of
the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper p1424
                                              August 1984




                  Monetary Policy Under Dual Exchange Rates




                                  ABS TRACT




 This paper finds that the introduction of dual exchange rates gives the
monetary authority greater independence from external constraints than it
would otherwise enjoy. The monetary authority is able to influence the level
of aggregate demand in the short run and to sterilize the effects of temporary

foreign distrubances.   In addition, the paper finds that dual rates insulate
the domestic economy fully from foreign interest rate changes but do not
provide insulation from speculative disturbances.




Robert E. Cumby
Graduate School of Business Administration
New York University
100 Trinity Place
New York, NY 10006

(212) 285—6159
    In the past decade widespread use has been made of dual exchange rates, a

policy regime in which separate exchange rates are maintained for current and

capital account transactions. In many cases this regime has taken the form of

a fixed current-account rate and a floating capital-account rate.1         In

general, dual rates have been used to provide temporary relief from balance-

of—payments pressures, especially those arising from speculative capital

flows.



    Several industrialized countries implemented dual rates during the first

half of the 1970s to insulate their economies from the sizable capital

movements occurring during that period as the Bretton Woods system was

breaking down.      Protection was sought both from capital inflows and from

capital outflows.     France (1971-1973) and the Netherlands (197119714) are

examples of countries adopting dual rates for the first reason, while the

United Kingdom (1917_1979) adopted dual rates (applied to domestic residents

only) for the second reason.



    Dual rates have also been employed recently in a number of Latin American

countries. Among these are Argentina (1981), Bolivia (1982), Mexico (1982),

and most recently, Venezuela (1983). In these cases dual rates may be useful

in providing protection from capital outflows while a viable stabilization

program is implemented and made credible.



    This paper extends the early work of Argy and Porter (1972) on the effects
                                      2



of macroeconomic policies under alternative exchange—rate regimes. Argy and

Porter use a model with demand-determined output and capital mobility that

incorporates a forward exchange market.     The results obtained by Argy and

Porter concerning the short-run effectiveness of monetary policy under dual

exchange rates are consIstent wIth those obtained here However, we extend

their analysis in several ways.           Here, expectations are determined

endogenously, domestic prices are allowed to vary, and the role of

accumulation through the current account is highlighted. We are thereby able

to analyze both the short—run and long-run effects of various disturbances as

well as the economy's dynamic adjustment path. In addition, unlike Argy and

Porter, we emphasize the wealth effects of changes in the financial foreign

exchange rate as an important channel through which disturbances affect the

domestic economy.



    Flood and Marion (1982) have also extended the Argy—Porter analysis,

though in different directions than those pursued here. They focus on the

role of optimal indexing in the determination of the aggregate supply function

under alternative exchange rate regimes.        Strong results are obtained

concerning the effects of the choice of exchange-rate regime on the variation

in domestic output around Its desired level when the home country Is small in

all markets. Dual exchange rates are found to insulate the domestic economy

fully from foreign disturbances. However, they find that these conclusions do

not carry over to the case, analyzed here, in which the exports of the home
                                       3


country depend on the relative price of domestic output.



   The plan of the paper is as follows. Section I describes the model and

analyzes the economy's stationary equilibrium.      As is the case in Flood

(1977,1978), in the absence of anticipated disturbances the adjustment of the

economy to a stationary equilibrium is characterized by a current-account

surplus (deficit) and a depreciating (appreciating) capital-account exchange

rate. Open-market policy is analyzed in Section II, where it is demonstrated

that the authorities are able to exert long-run control over the money supply

and the domestic interest rate (though not the domestic price level) even in a

world of perfect capital mobility. This non—neutrality of open—market policy

is then contrasted to the long-run neutrality results obtained in Flood (1977)

and Argy and Porter (1972).     In addition, Section II demonstrates that dual

exchange markets do not successfully insulate the economy from speculative

disturbances and that the relationship between the current account and the

capital—account exchange rate described above is           reversed when future

disturbances are anticipated.


    Section III examines the effects of foreign demand disturbances.         An

increase in foreign demand for home output is found to be expansionary, even

in the long run, and to result in a permanent appreciation of the current

account exchange rate. This result is similar in spirit to the findings of

Argy and Porter although they focus on output effects rather than price level
effects.    The feasibility of sterilization policy is then explored. While

authorities are able temporarily to neutralize the price level effects of

external demand disturbances even in a world of perfect capital mobility, as

in Swoboda (197Z) it is found that no long-run policy of neutralization is

possible. SectIon IV offers some concluding remarks.



      I. The Model



      We now proceed to develop a simple model of a small, open economy under a

regime of dual exchange rates.      The country is assumed to adopt a fixed

exchange rate, e, for all current-account transactions.        Capital-account

transactions are assumed to be successfully segregated from current-account

transactions and occur at a freely-floating rate, .2 Both e and c are

domestic currency prices of foreign exchange.


      Agents are assumed to allocate their financial wealth between domestic

money and interest-bearing assets according to the Metzler portfolio balance

rule,




(1)        M/qk      L(r,y),    L1'zO, L2>O,


where M is the nominal money stock, r is the domestic nominal interest rate

and y is real domestic product.3 Domestic residents hold k units of the long-

lived, interest-bearing asset that has a market price of q. Equation (1)
                                         5


states that agents raise their holdings of cash balances relative to their

holdings of interest-bearing assets whenever real output rises or nominal

interest rates fall)1



      All perfectly substitutable assets are assumed to be denominated in terms

of the foreIgn currency whether issued at home or abroad and pay a continuous

dividend stream of one unit of the foreign currency per unit time.          The

purchase and sale of these claims occur at the financial rate, c .    Interest
payments, on the other hand, occur at the commercial rate, e, since they are

current (service) account transactions. The possibility of arbitrage assures

us that all claims command the same price whether sold at home or abroad,




(2)       qcq*

where q*1/r* is the foreign-currency price of the security. This condition

is then used to give us a relationship between the domestic and foreign

yields,


(3)       r   (e÷4e)/q   (e+q*?)/cq* =   (e/)r*   +



where a superscript e denotes an expected value, a dot denotes a time

derivative, and an asterisk denotes a foreign variable. In obtaining (3) we

have written the domestic interest rate as the sum of dividends and expected

capital gains.5
                                          6



      We abstract from the banking system so that the money stock, consisting

entirely of high-powered money, is the sum of domestic credit, D, and the

domestic currency value of reserves, eR,


(1) M:D+eR.

Equilibrium in the assets market, which we assume to obtain continuously, may

then be characterized by,




(5) (D+eR)/cq*k     L((e/€)r* +




      Next, we consider the goods market. Wages and prices are assumed to be

fully flexible, guaranteeing that domestic output is continuously at its full-

employment level. Real aggregate spending by domestic residents (expressed in

terms of domestic output) is assumed to depend on real domestic income and on

real financial wealth,


(6)     A   A(yd, w/P),     A1>O, A2>O,


where W     D÷eR+cq*k denotes the nominal domestic-currency value of financial

wealth, P denotes the price of domestic goods, and d denotes the real

disposable income of domestic residents.      Disposable income is given by the

sum of domestic product and the service account.
                                      7



    yd y + er*q*k/P

Domestic residents consume both goods produced domestically and goods produced

abroad. Domestic and foreign output are imperfect substitutes In consumption

so that purchasing power parity does not hold. The fraction, e, of domestic

expenditure falling on domestic goods depends on their relative price.        We

assume the home country to be small in the market for foreign output and takes

foreign prices as given (ee(e/P), 8?>O).6 However the home country is

assumed to be large in the market for its output so that home country exports

depend on their relative price (XX(e/P), X'>O).     Equilibrium in the market

for domestic goods is given by the equality of aggregate demand for domestic

output and its fixed, full-employment supply,




(8) y = e(e/P)A(y+er*q*k/P, WI?) + X(e/P).


Domestic prices are fully flexible and adjust so that the goods-market

equilibrium (8) holds at each moment. This implies that the equilibrium price

level can be written as a function of the determinants of aggregate demand,




(9) P =   P(c,R;D,e,r*,k),      P1>O, P2>O.


An increase In either        or R will raise the domestic currency value of

financial wealth, thereby raising demand for domestic output. An increase in

prices is required to restore goods-market equilibrium by switching
                                           8


expenditure away from domestic goods and by reducing the real value of both

wealth and service account income.



       Short-run equilibrium In the economy is characterized by the simultaneous

clearing of the goods market and the assets market. Long-run equilibrium also

requires balance-of-payments equilibrium.       The combination of dual exchange

rates and a floating capital—account rate imply that the capital account is

always zero. Therefore, reserves change over time at the rate of the current-

account imbalance as the central bank intervenes to keep the commercial rate,

e, fixed,


(10) R (P/e)((e(e/P)_1)A(y+er*q*k/P, W/P)+X(e/P))+r*q*k.


By noting that the equilibrium price level depends on the determinants of

aggregate demand, we can combine (9) and (10) to describe the rate of reserve

growth as,



(11)    R    g(e,R;D,e,r*,k),     g1<O, g2<O.


An increase in either           or R raises wealth and therefore raises domestic

spending and worsens the current account. On the other hand, an increase in

domestic prices also results from increases in e and H. The expenditure-

switching effect of the price increase tends to worsen the current account

while the reduction in the real value of interest income and financial wealth
                                       9


tends to improve the current account. It is possible to demonstrate, however,

that the direct wealth effect dominates the indirect, price level effect.



   Equation (11) is one of the equations of motion that we will use to

analyze the dynamic behavior of the economy. In order to complete the model

we need to describe the behavior of' the financial rate, E.      We   do so by

making the strong assumption that agents posses perfect foresight so that,




(12) e

Next we use the money market equilibrium condition, (5), together with the

perfect foresight assumption, (12), to describe the movement of the financial

rate consistent with equilibrium in the assets market,




(13)     h(€,R;D,e,r*,k)              h1>O, h2<O.


An increase in the financial rate generates an excess demand for money through

two channels.     First, it raises the domestic—currency value of interest

bearing assets.    Second, it reduces the yield domestic investors receive.

Money-market equilibrium then requires an increase in the rate of depreciation

of the financial rate, which raises the domestic interest rate and therefore

reduces money demand.      Similarly an increase in reserves creates an excess

supply of' money and must be associated with a decrease in the rate of

depreciation of the financial rate to insure that money markets clear.
                                            10



      Taken together (11) and (13) describe the dynamic path followed by the

economy, given the stock of domestic credit, the commercial rate, the foreign

interest rate, and stock of interest-bearing assets held by the private

sector.       We now proceed to analyze the local stability properties of the

economy      in   the neIghborhood of a statIonary state. In the course of doing so

we    will    develop the system's phase diagram, which will prove useful in

analyzing the economy's adjustment to various shocks. Linearizing the system,

(11) and (13), around a steady state,                we obtain,




      r1                   h2(E,R rc-
(14)1 I                            II
      LRJ                  g2C,)J IR_R

The system's determinant, h1g2 — g1h2,           is negative implying that the system
has   one positive and one negative characteristic root. The system therefore

exhibits saddle-point stability, a property common in rational-expectations

and perfect-foresight models.


                        Figure 1


The phase diagram of the linearized dynamic system, (14), is found in figure

1.     The 0 locus depicts the values of reserves and the financial rate

consistent with assets market equilibrium and a stationary financial rate. It

Is positively sloped since, as was noted above, increases in reserves generate

an excess supply of money while increases in the financial rate generate an
        J       E=Q

                      V




                S
    L

S


                    FO
        r
            I
            R             R
                                     11



excess demand for money.7 The R=O locus depicts the values of reserves and the

financial rate consistent with equilibrium in the goods market and with a

balanced current account.   It slopes downward since, as was discussed above,

increases in reserves and the financial rate both tend to worsen the current

account through their effect on domestic wealth.8 The stable arm of the

saddle-point equilibrium is labelled SS in figure 1.      We follow standard

practice and assume that in the absence of anticipated disturbances adjustment

occurs along the convergent path, SS. Consider the adjustment from a point

like C on 35 to the steady-state equilibrium, E. As reserves decline the

resulting contraction of' the monetary base creates an incipient excess supply

of foreign exchange and therefore a fully-anticipated appreciation of the

financial rate.   Both the decline in reserves and the appreciation of the

financial rate reduce spending over time and therefore reduce the size of' the

current—account deficit. The adjustment path is characterized by a current-

account deficit and an appreciating capital—account exchange rate.   It is of

interest to note that this is the opposite relationship from that obtained by

Kouri (1976) and by Dornbusch and Fischer (1980) for the case of flexible

rates.   This difference is due to the fact that, under flexible rates, as

agents rebalance their portfolios in response to current-account surpluses an

excess demand for money results since the accumulation occurs in the form of

foreign assets.   Here, accumulation of wealth occurs in the form of cash

balances, resulting in an excess supply of money.9
                                     12



   II. Open-Market Policy and Monetary Disturbances



    In this section we analyze the short-run and long-run effects of an

unanticipated open-market purchase of securities by the central bank. We then

turn to the effects of a "speculative attack" on the home currency.       The

effect of an open-market purchase is depicted in figure 2. Suppose a long-run

equilibrium, such as E, is disturbed by a central bank purchase of interest-

bearing assets.1° Since the value of the increase in the stock of domestic

credit is equal to the value of securities purchased, private financial wealth

is unchanged at the initial equilibrium.        The current account therefore

remains balanced at all points along R     0.11 However, due to the change in

relative asset supplies there is now an excess supply of money at all points

on the -O locus. At each level of' reserves a higher value of the capital-

account rate is needed to restore money—market equilibrium. The c 0 locus

therefore shifts up and to the left to '   O.

                Figure 2


At the time of the purchase the incipient excess demand for foreign exchange

at E causes an immediate depreciation of the financial rate and short—run

equilibrium is reached at E' on 5'S'. There is no immediate change in R as

dual exchange markets prevent a net outflow of private capital and the

financial rate overshoots its new long—run value.     The wealth effect of the

depreciation raises aggregate demand and moves the current account into
E

                     I=o



                    / /   /E0
                /
        / / /
    /
                                R
                                      13



deficit. Over time, reserves decline and the financial rate appreciates.12



   The   increase in aggregate demand resulting from the monetary expansion
results in an immediate increase in domestic prices.       This price increase

serves to dampen the real wealth effect of the depreciation of the financial

rate and to switch demand away from domestic goods.     Adjustment to the new

long—run equilibrium occurs with a falling stock of reserves and an

appreciating capital-account rate. The associated decline in wealth reduces

absorption and therefore reduces domestic prices over time.   The price decline

continues until the original domestic price level is restored at E". Monetary

policy is therefore able to influence domestic prices in the short run but not

in the long run.



    The inability of the central bank to influence the price level in the long

run is not due to an inability to control the money stock.    As can be seen in

figure 2, the new long-run equilibrium, E", is characterized by a higher value

of the financial rate. The higher financial rate implies that the domestic

interest rate must be lower at E" than at E. With real output unchanged,

assets-market equilibrium requires that a lower domestic interest rate be

accompanied by a larger monetary base. The long-run reserve loss following an

open-market purchase is therefore less than one for one.



    The nonzero long-run effect of a monetary expansion on the domestic
interest rate and money stock differs from that obtained in models adopting

the monetary approach to the balance of payments.13 In these models a monetary

expansion results In a current—account deficit that offsets the expansion over

time. In the long run the offset is complete. This difference is due to the

assumption in monetary approach models that agents hold only one asset,

money. All monetary operations are therefore of Metzler's second type,

changes in the money supply "...without any offsetting changes in private

holdings of other assets."15 The results also stand in contrast to the long-

run neutrality of money with dual exchange rates found in Flood (1977) and

Argy and Porter (1972). The reason for the difference is that these authors

look at type II money supply changes while here we analyze the effect of open-

market operations in which money Is exchanged for financial assets of equal

value. As is well known, neutrality propositions derived from the analysis of

type II monetary operations do not carry over to the analysis of type I (open

                      16
market) operations.


    In the current context of endogenously—determined expectations it is

inappropriate to model a speculative disturbance as an exogenous change in

expectations about the financial rate. Instead, we model a speculative attack

as a change in agents' expectations concerning future policy to be pursued by

the domestic monetary authority.   In particular, we suppose that at time t0

the economy is disturbed by agents' expectation that, at some time t1 in the

future, the domestic monetary authority will engage in an open-market
                                      15



expansion of the money stock.



    The effect of this speculative disturbance is found in figure 3. At t1

agents expect the economy will be on S'S', the stable arm associated with a

higher stock of domestic credit. Adjustment from t1 will proceed exactly as

analyzed in the case of an unantcpated open-market purchase. Furthermore,

all discrete jumps in the financial rate must be unanticipated.           Any

anticipated discrete jumps would imply anticipated capital gains on foreign

assets at an infinite instantaneous rate that would be bid away.    At t0 the

economy jumps to a point, E', as the expected future monetary ease creates an

incipient excess demand for foreign exchange and results in an immediate

depreciation of the financial rate.    The wealth effect of the depreciation

raises aggregate demand and results in an increase in domestic prices. The

increase in spending also results in a current- account deficit and a loss of

reserves.    A current-account deficit is associated with a depreciating

financial rate and rising prices as the economy responds to the expected

future monetary expansion.


              Figure 3


 If the monetary authority does indeed engage in an open-market expansion of

 the money stock at t1, adjustment continues with a continuing current-account

deficit and an appreciating financial rate until the new long-run equilibrium

 is reached at E".   If, however, expectations are not fulfilled and no change
          U)




U)




     \

     U'        (1w)
                           'I
     0                     0
                      U,

                      0
                                       16



in the money stock occurs agents must revise their expectations. Suppose that

this revision occurs sometime prior to t1 and that agents now correctly

perceive that the monetary authority plans to keep the stock of domestic

credit unchanged.   The financial rate must immediately appreciate and the

economy jumps vertically to a point on 88, the stable branch associated with

the original stock of domestic credit. The capital loss that results from the

appreciation reduces absorption and prices. A current-account surplus results

as the economy begins to accumulate reserves and the financial rate

depreciates until the initial long-run equilibrium, E, is restored.



    Dual exchange markets are therefore not successful in insulating either

the current account or domestic prices from speculative disturbances.17 The

connection between the speculative disturbance and the current account and

prices is through the wealth effect of the financial rate on spending.



    Before turning to the effects of demand disturbances we briefly analyze

the effect of an increase in the foreign interest rate. 18 First consider the

assets market.   An increase in the foreign interest rate creates an excess

supply of money at the initial equilibrium both by raising the domestic

interest rate and by reducing the value of financial wealth (recall q*1Ir*).

The financial rate is therefore bid up as agents attempt to raise their

holdings of interest-bearing assets.        A depreciation of the financial rate

proportional to the increase in the foreign interest rate will restore
                                        17



equilibrium in the assets market since both the initial domestic interest rate

and the initial value of wealth will be restored. A proportional depreciation

of the financial rate will also bring about current-account balance since both

wealth and the service account will then be unchanged. Dual rates therefore

completely insulate the domestic price level and the current account from

changes in foreign Interest rates.19



    III. Demand Disturbances and Internal Balance



    In this section we examine the effects of an unanticipated exogenous

increase in export demand and   then   examine the feasibility of using monetary

policy to pursue an internal balance goal in the face of this external

disturbance.2° It will be seen that an external demand disturbance will

permanently alter domestic prices and that the domestic monetary authority may

temporarily neutralize the price             level effects of external demand

disturbances, even in world of perfect capital mobility. An attempt to use

monetary policy to maintain an internal-balance goal in the face of permanent

external disturbance is ultimately self-defeating.



    The effect of an unanticipated increase in export demand is found in

figure 14 The increase in export demand creates a current-account surplus at

the Initial equilibrium and a higher financial rate or a higher stock of

reserves is needed to raise wealth and, therefore, increase aggregate demand

and domestic prices to restore external balance.        The R=O locus therefore
                                      18



shifts up and to the right.    The increase in foreign demand has no direct

effect on assets markets so that all points on the original -O locus remain

consistent with assets—market equilibrium and a stationary financial rate.


             Figure


Following the foreign demand shock the current account moves into surplus.

The resulting growth in reserves raises the domestic money stock, requiring a

depreciating financial rate to clear the assets market. The expectation of a

depreciating financial rate raises the domestic       interest rate.     Since

initially the domestic money supply is unchanged, the rise in the domestic

interest rate creates an incipient excess supply of money (excess demand for

foreign exchange) that must be removed by an initial upward jump in the

financial rate.    The combination of accumulating reserves and a rising

exchange rate imply that domestic prices are rising along the adjustment path,

reducing the current-account surplus over time.   The new long-run equilibrium

is characterized by a permanently higher price level and an appreciated real

commercial exchange rate that serves to switch expenditure away from domestic

goods.



    Suppose the monetary authority attempts       to resist the inflationary

 pressure resulting from the foreign demand shock.    By adopting an internal

 balance goal of price stability the monetary authority, in effect, makes the

 domestic price level exogenous and the stock of domestic credit endogenous.
E
    E::O



      51




      F'O




           R
                                       19



To aid in the analysis we introduce an internal balance locus, labelled P0P0

in figure 5. If prices are held at their initial level, absorption becomes a

function of the level of wealth only.       For a given level of export demand

internal balance therefore requires that wealth be constant. The slope of the

internal balance schedule is then,




(15) d            -   -e
        dR P0P0        q*k


At the initial equilibrium, E, the expansionary effect of the increase in

export demand raises prices above P0. A decrease in c or in R is required to

reduce domestic spending and restore internal balance. The internal balance

schedule shifts down and to the left to P0'P0'. Since prices are now higher

than P0 the monetary authority must engage in an open-market sale of

securities. This contraction in the money stock leads to an appreciation of

the financial rate and the economy jumps to A, the only point on the saddle

path S'S' associated with the newly reduced money supply that also satisfies

the internal balance condition. The expenditure—reducing impact of the open-

market sale increases the current-account surplus above that resulting from

the export expansion alone.      The central bank must sterilize these inflows

through further open-market sales to maintain internal balance.     During the

sterilization process the economy moves down and to the right along P0P0'.


                      Figure 5
E            EO
             •1




E




                  F'O




        P0

    R              R
                                      20




Two questions naturally arise.     First, is sterilization more or less than

complete? Second, is the use of monetary policy to maintain internal balance

a feasible long-run policy? Since open-market sales are being used to keep

wealth constant, movement along P01P0' is characterized by a constant rate of

appreciation



(16)           _(e/q*k)R


and the domestic interest rate must therefore be rising as c falls. A rising

domestic interest rate is consistent with money-market equilibrium only if the

money stock is falling. Sterilization must therefore be more than complete

and the rate of decline in the stock of domestic credit must exceed the rate

of reserve accumulation.



       The question of the long-run feasibility of the internal-balance target

depends on whether the current account surplus can be eliminated over time and

a new long-run equilibrium established with P=P0.     So long as the monetary

authority maintains its internal balance goal,         the rate of reserve

accumulation is given by,




 (17) R


 The viability of the internal balance goal Is determined by,
                                     21




(18) dR                       0
          (e(e/P0)—1)A2w/P0
     dt


Since wealth is being held constant, the inflow of reserves is unabated by

sterilization and the central bank will eventually deplete its holdings of

interestbearing assets.21 WhIle successful In sustaInIng P0 as a temporary

equilibrium, the central bank only changes the composition of its balance

sheet in the long run.   Monetary policy alone Is incapable of achieving an

Internal-balance goal In the face of an external demand disturbance.    The

contribution of dual exchange markets is to allow short-run internal-balance

goals to be achieved in a world of perfect capital mobility.22



    IV. Concluding Remarks



    The adoption of a two—tier exchange-rate regime gives the monetary

authority greater independence from external constraints than it would

otherwise enjoy.   If the authorities are successful in forcing only and all

capital-account transactions through the financial exchange market, the

capital account is zero in the absence of intervention in that market. When

the current-account rate is pegged reserve losses are limited to those

resulting from current-account Imbalances.   The possibility of central bank

control over the money stock then arises.      This control may be used to

influence the level of aggregate demand in the short run and to sterilize
                                      22


temporarily the effects of foreign disturbances.    It should noted, however,

that these results are derived in an idealized setting that abstracts from

important practical problems such as incomplete segmentation        that are

frequently encountered in implementing dual exchange rates.



    By lImItIng reserve losses to current—account imbalances a dual exchange

rate regime is in some respects similar to a fixed exchange rate regime in the

absence of capital mobility. In another Important respect, however, the two

regimes are very different. The financial foreign exchange rate provides an

important link between the domestic economy and foreign disturbances that is

absent when capital is immobile.
                                           23


                                       References



Argy, Victor and Michael G. Porter, "The Forward Exchange Market

and the Effects of Domestic and Foreign Disturbances under

Alternative Exchange-Rate Regimes," International Monetary Fund

Staff Papers, November 1972, 19: 503-528.



Bhandari, Jagdeep, S., "Two-Tier Exchange Markets with Incomplete

Segmentation: Some   Analytical    Results," Miineo, March 1982.



Cuniby, Robert E., "Trade Credit, Exchange Controls and

Monetary Independence: Evidence from the United Kingdom,"

Journal of International Economics, February 1983, 14: 53-67.



Dornbusch, Rudiger ,   "Real and Monetary Aspects of Exchange

Rate Changes," in RZ. Aliber (ed) National Monetary Policies and

the International Financial System, Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 19711, pp.611—8l.



________    "The Theory of Flexible Exchange Rate Regimes and

Macroeconomic Policy," Scandinavian Journal of Economics,

no. 2 1976, 78: 255—275.



           and Stanley Fischer, "Exchange Rates and the
                                         2L




Current Account," American Economic Review, December 1980,

70: 961—971.



Fleming, J. Marcus, "Dual Exchange Markets and Other

Remedies for Disruptive Capital Flows," International Monetary

Fund Staff Papers, March 1gT4, 21: 1-17.



Flood, Robert P., "Essays on a Monetary Approach to Real and

Financial Aspects of Various Exchange Rate Systems," unpublished

Ph.D. dissertation, University of Rochester, 1977.



____________   "Exchange Rate Expectations in Dual Exchange

Markets," Journal of International Economics,

February 1978, 8: 65-77.



___________    "Capital   Mobility and the Choice of Exchange Rate

System," International Economic Review, June 1979, 20: LO5-16.



__________ and Nancy P. Marion, "The Transmission of

Disturbances Under Alternative Exchange Rate Regimes with Optimal

Indexing," Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1982,

97: 13_66.
                                      25


Kouri, Pentti J.K., "The Exchange Rate and the Balance of

Payments in the Short Run and the Long Run," Scandinavian

Journal of Economics, no. 2 1976, 78: 28O3OLL



Lanyi, Anthony, "Separate Exchange Markets for Capital and

Current Transactions," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers,

November 1975, 22: 711_7149.



Macedo, Jorge Braga de, "Exchange Rate Behavior with

Currency Inconvertibility," Journal of International Economics,

February 1982, 12: 65-81.



Marion, Nancy P., "Insulation Properties of a Two-Tier

Exchange Market in a Portfolio Balance Model," Economica,

February 1981, 148: 61-70.



Meade, James E., The Balance of Payments, London: Oxford

University Press, 1951.



Metzler, Lloyd A., "Wealth, Saving, and the Rate of Interest",

Journal of Political Economy, April 1951, 59: 93—116.



Obstfeld, Maurice, "Imperfect Asset Substitutability and

Monetary Policy under Fixed Exchange Rates," Journal of
                                          26




International Economics, November 1980, 10: 177-200.



________   "Capital   Mobility and Devaluation in an Optimizing

Model with Rational Expectations," American Economic Review,

Papers and Proceedings of'   the   Ninety—Third Annual Meeting,


March 1981, 71: 217—221.



________   "The Capitalization of Income Streams and the

Effects of Open-Market Policy under Fixed Exchange Rates,"

Journal of Monetary Economics, January 1982, 9:      87-98.


Swoboda, Alexander K., "The Dual Exchange-Rate System and

Monetary Independence," in Robert Z. Aliber (ed.) National

Monetary Policies and the International Financial System,

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 258-270.
                                      27


     Graduate School of Business Administration, New York University. Helpful

comments from Rudiger Dornbusch, Stanley Fischer, Robert Flood, Gene Grossman,

Maurice Obstfeld, Kenneth Rogoff, John Williamson, and the referees on earlier

drafts of this paper are acknowledged with thanks.



    11n several instances some current account transactions (especially

imports deemed to be nonessential) are channelled through the floating-rate

market.   See the International Monetary Fund's Annual Report on Exchange

Restrictions.



    2Fleming(19714) and Lanyl(1975) discuss the difficulties that arise in

implementing controls that are effective in segregating the two markets. One

source of incomplete segmentation is movements in trade credit, commonly

referred to as leads and lags.    Cuniby (1983) examines data from the United

Kingdom and finds that trade credit movements are sensitive to changes in

interest rate differentials but that extremely large differentials are

required to induce movements comprising a large fraction of reserves.

Bhandarl (1982) and Macedo (1982) examine models assuming incomplete

segmentation.   It should also be pointed out that we abstract from the

important issue of the credibility of the fixed commercial exchange rate.   In

particular, we do not allow for the possibility that increases in the premium

on financial foreign exchange may lead to speculation concerning a future

devaluation of the commercial rate.
                                     28



    3We use domestic product rather than domestic income to simplify the

analysis and therefore ignore the effects of the service account on the

transactions demand for money.


    Employing the Metzler rule is equivalent to assuming that the fraction of

real financial wealth that agents allocate to holdIngs of real cash balances

and interest—bearing assets depends on the nominal interest rate and on real

output.     The Metzler rule enables us, however, to simplify the analysis

somewhat.


    5me foreign-currency price of the security is assumed to be constant.



    6The foreign price level will be normalized to one throughout.



    7



   dc            h2      e/g*k
   dR c=O        h1    L_L1(e/c)r*


    8



   dc       :—   g2       e
   dR R=O        g1      q*k



     9Flood (1978) obtains this result in a model where the home country is

 small in all markets and the domestic price level linked to the exogenous

 foreign price level by purchasing power parity.
                                       29


    10mroughout the paper we will assume that domestic credit policy may be

implemented without regard to fiscal policy and without any direct effects on

the structure of production.    This assumption is clearly not valid for all

countries and institutional arrangements.



    11The open—market purchase will reduce the interest income of the private

sector.   We assume that the interest payments the central bank gains by the

purchase are redistributed to the private sector as lump-sum transfer payments

so disposable income is unchanged.



    l2 is interesting to note that since the expected appreciation of the

financial rate reduces the domestic interest rate a smaller initial

depreciation (and, therefore, a smaller degree of overshooting) is needed to

restore short-run equilibrium than would be the case if expectations were

static.   In the case of static expectations the economy jumps to a point on

=O vertically above E.


    13See for example Dornbusch (197Lt).



    1The importance of the one-asset assumption in monetary-approach models

of the effects of devaluation is examined in Obstfeld (1981).



    5See Metzler (1951,p.97).



    6The distinction between the two types of monetary operations depends on
                                      30


the assumptions made about the public's treatment of income streams resulting

from the central bank's holdings of interest-bearing assets.     See Obstfeld

(1982) for a discussion of this point.


    7This result differs from the conclusions reached in Swoboda (1974) and

Dornbusch (1976) due to their assumptIon that changes In the financial rate

have no effect on absorption. Here wealth effects play a central role.


    l8Since the foreign price level is being held constant while the foreign

interest rate is rising, the shock we are analyzing must be due to a

combination of disturbances to the foreign goods market and the foreign assets

market that leaves aggregate demand for foreign goods, and therefore the

                                   An advantage of the extended small country
foreign price level, unchanged.

analysis employed by Flood (1979) and Flood and Marion (1982) is that the

analysis focuses directly on the source of disturbances.



     9Argy and Porter (197k) and Marion (1981) also find that dual rates

insulate the domestic economy from changes in the foreign interest rate. As

is apparent from the discussion above, Marion's assumption that domestic and

foreign assets are imperfect substitutes is not essential to her results.

However, as Marion points out, the assumption that domestic residents hold

 consuls rather that short term foreign assets is crucial to the result. Flood

 and Marion (1982) use an extended small country analysis and therefore do not

 analyze the effects of foreign interest rate disturbances.      Instead, they
                                      31


focus on shocks to foreign productivity and to the foreign money supply.



   20The internal balance goal is assumed to be a domestic price level

target.   This use of' the term differs from Meade's (1951,p.lO) use of the

term to refer to a domestic employment target.


          similar approach Is followed by Obstfeld (1980) who examines the

behavior of dR/dR.



    22Swoboda (19V4) reaches similar conclusions concerning the long-run

viability of sterilization.
