NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMATING TRENDS IN US INCOME INEQUALITY USING THE CURRENT POPULATION SURVEY:
THE IMPORTANCE OF CONTROLLING FOR CENSORING
Richard V. Burkhauser
Shuaizhang Feng
Stephen P. Jenkins
Jeff Larrimore
Working Paper 14247
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14247

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008
The research in this paper was conducted while Burkhauser, Feng and Larrimore were Special Sworn
Status researchers of the U.S. Census Bureau at the New York Census Research Data Center at Cornell
University. Conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the U.S. Census Bureau. This paper has been screened to ensure that no confidential data are disclosed.
Supports for this research from the National Science Foundation (award nos. SES-0427889 SES-0322902,
and SES-0339191) and the National Institute for Disability and Rehabilitation Research (H133B040013
and H133B031111) are cordially acknowledged. Jenkins's research was supported by core funding
from the University of Essex and the UK Economic and Social Research Council for the Research
Centre on Micro-Social Change and the United Kingdom Longitudinal Studies Centre. We thank Lisa
Marie Dragoset, Arnie Reznek, Laura Zayatz, the Cornell Census RDC Administrators, and all their
U.S. Census Bureau colleagues who have helped with this project. This paper has also benefited from
comments made by Peter Gottschalk, Bruce Meyer, and other participants at the Empirical Economics
Workshop of Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, May 2008. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Estimating Trends in US Income Inequality Using the Current Population Survey: ¸˛The Importance
of Controlling for Censoring
Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng, Stephen P. Jenkins, and Jeff Larrimore
NBER Working Paper No. 14247
August 2008
JEL No. C81,D31
ABSTRACT
Using internal and public use March Current Population Survey (CPS) data, we analyze trends in US
income inequality (1975-2004). We find that the upward trend in income inequality prior to 1993 significantly
slowed thereafter once we control for top coding in the public use data and censoring in the internal
data. Because both series do not capture trends at the very top of the income distribution, we use a
multiple imputation approach in which values for censored observations are imputed using draws from
a Generalized Beta distribution of the Second Kind (GB2) fitted to internal data. Doing so, we find
income inequality trends similar to those derived from unadjusted internal data. Our trend results are
generally robust to the choice of inequality index, whether Gini coefficient or other commonly-used
indices. When we compare our best estimates of the income shares held by the richest tenth with those
reported by Piketty and Saez (2003), our trends fairly closely match their trends, except for the top
1 percent of the distribution. Thus, we argue that if United States income inequality has been substantially
increasing since 1993, such increases are confined to this very high income group.

Richard V. Burkhauser
Department of Policy Analysis Management
Cornell University
125 MVR Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-4401
and NBER
rvb1@cornell.edu

Stephen P. Jenkins
Department of Economics
University of Essex
Colchester, ENGLAND CO4 35Q
stephenj@essex.ac.uk

Jeff Larrimore
Department of Economics
Shuaizhang Feng
Cornell University
Department of Economics
404 Uris Hall
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics Ithaca NY, 14853
Shanghai China
jhl42@cornell.edu
shuaizhang.feng@gmail.com

Introduction
The public use version of the March Current Population Survey (CPS) is the primary data
source used by public policy researchers and administrators to investigate trends in average
income and its distribution in the United States as well as in cross-national comparisons of
income inequality with other countries. (For systematic reviews of the cross-national income
inequality literature, see Atkinson, Rainwater and Smeeding, 1995, Gottschalk and Smeeding,
1997, Atkinson and Brandolini, 2001. For more recent examples of the use of the public use CPS
in measuring income inequality trends in the United States see: Burkhauser, Couch, Houtenville
and Rovba 2003-2004, Gottschalk and Danziger, 2005 and Kruger and Perri, 2006.) The
consensus of this research, based on public use CPS data is that income inequality in the United
States increased substantially in the 1970s and 1980s and also increased relative to other OECD
countries.
Despite the widely held view that income inequality has increased substantially since the
1980s, most of the evidence of a large increase in income inequality since 1993 has come from
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) administrative record data based on personal adjusted gross
income that the IRS has made available to the research community in tabular form (Piketty and
Saez, 2003). In contrast, we argue that yearly income inequality increases are small, and
significantly smaller than the increases over the nearly two decades of CPS data available to us
prior to 1993.
We compare our CPS-based estimates of inequality trends with those of Piketty and Saez
(2003) based on IRS data. When, like Piketty and Saez, we focus on the share of reported income
held by subgroups within the richest tenth of the distribution, our trends fairly closely match their
trends, except for the top 1 percent of the distribution over the period 1975–2004. On the basis of

1

these findings, we argue that if income inequality has been substantially increasing since 1993 in
the USA, such increases have been confined to the very upper tail of the income distribution.
Our analysis derives from unprecedented access to internal CPS data. To protect the
confidentiality of its respondents, the Census Bureau censors each source of income of
individuals above specified topcoded levels in the public use data made available to the research
community. However, for its official work, researchers at the Census Bureau have access to the
internal March CPS that is less severely censored. For instance, the yearly income and income
inequality values reported in U.S. Census Bureau (various years) are based on the internal March
CPS data. We use these data too.
We analyze trends in the inequality of size-adjusted pre-tax post-transfer household
income in the USA between 1975 and 2004. Estimates of inequality levels and trends derived
from CPS internal data are compared with estimates from several series derived from public use
data. In particular, using the internal data, we derive a cell mean series in which topcoded
incomes in the public use data, for each year back to 1975, are replaced by the mean of all
income values above the topcode for any income source of any individual in the public use that
has been topcoded.1 This cell mean series can be used in conjunction with cell means provided
by the Census Bureau for later years to create a complete set of cell means for topcoded
observations. See Larrimore, Burkhauser, Feng, and Zayatz (forthcoming) for a detailed
discussion of the creation of this cell mean series and all cell mean values.
When we use the public use data augmented with imputations for topcoded observations
from the extended cell mean series, we closely match yearly mean income and income inequality
levels and trends in the United States population derived from internal data.2 Internal data are
themselves censored albeit to a substantially smaller extent than the public use data, and there are

2

time-inconsistencies in censoring practices in the internal data. However, we show using
consistent censoring methods that the trends in inequality derived from our public use extended
cell mean series are not significantly affected by time-inconsistent censoring levels. The
exception is between 1992 and 1993, when the public use extended cell mean series overstates
the rise in inequality because it does not take full account of the significant increases in internal
censoring levels that took effect in 1993, and other CPS redesign aspects.
Because consistently topcoded public use and internal data do not contain information
about the very highest incomes, they understate the level of income inequality. However, once
the break between 1992 and 1993 is controlled for, income inequality based on all these data
series yield the same trends, namely a rise in inequality between 1975 and 1992 followed by a
significantly smaller increase in inequality after 1993. Our key findings are generally robust to
whether income inequality is summarized using the Gini coefficient or three other widely-used
indices.
Because of the censoring in the internal CPS data, even our extended cell mean series
does not incorporate information about the very highest incomes. To address this issue, we use a
multiple imputation approach in which, for each year, values for top-coded observations in the
internal data are imputed using draws from a Generalized Beta distribution of the Second Kind
(GB2) fitted to internal data. Using the augmented internal data, we investigate the extent to
which the systematic exclusion of the top part of the distribution affects estimates of the level
and trends in inequality. Unsurprisingly, we find that compared to estimates derived from the
multiple imputation approach, the unadjusted internal data as well as the consistently censored
public use and internal data all understate the level of inequality in all years. However, all the

3

series reveal the same trends: an increase in inequality over the entire period 1975–2004, but
with a rate of increase noticeably lower after 1993 compared to before 1993.
Finally, we compare our CPS-based estimates of trends in top income shares based on
distributions of size-adjusted pre-tax post-transfer household income distributions to the
estimates of top income shares derived by Piketty and Saez (2003) from IRS administrative data
on adjusted personal gross tax unit income. Both our and their estimates of the income share of
the 90th–95th percentile group have a relatively flat trend during the period 1975–2004, although
the Piketty and Saez (2003) values are slightly higher in level. Similarly, for the shares of the
95th–99th percentile group, despite slight differences in levels, the two series exhibit remarkably
similar trends over the 30 year period. In contrast, while the share of income held by the richest 1
percent increased substantially over this period according to both our CPS-based and the IRSbased Piketty and Saez (2003) estimates, their estimates of the size of the income shares and of
the magnitude of the increase over time are much larger than ours.
In the next section, we explain the nature of censoring in the CPS public use and internal
data, and explain the several methods by which we address this issue. In particular, we explain
how we derive a public use data series augmented by cell mean imputations for topcoded
observations based on the censored internal data. We also explain how we derive other data
series in which public use and internal data are augmented by imputations for censored
observations using draws from a parametric income distribution model fitted to the data. And we
explain our method of ‘consistent’ top coding. At the heart of the paper are comparisons of
estimates derived from the various CPS data series of income inequality levels and trends for the
period 1975–2004. The fourth section provides a comparison of CPS-based estimate of trends in

4

top income shares with the trends reported by Piketty and Saez (2003) using IRS administrative
record data. The final section of the paper presents a summary and conclusions.
Throughout the paper, income is defined as pre-tax post-transfer household income
excluding capital gains, adjusted for differences in household size using the square root of
household size.3 Each individual is attributed with the size-adjusted income of the household to
which he or she belongs. Income refers to income for the calendar year preceding the March
interview. We convert the small number of negative and zero household income values each year
to one dollar prior to our calculations because a number of inequality indices are defined only for
positive income values. Our samples for each year are all individuals in CPS respondent
households, excluding individuals in group quarters or in households containing a member of the
military. All statistics are calculated using the relevant CPS sampling weights.
Topcoding in the March CPS
Topcoding in CPS public use data
In the March CPS, a respondent in each household is asked a series of questions on the
sources of income for the household. Starting in 1975, respondents reported income from 11
sources and since 1987 they have done so for income from 24 sources. See Appendix Table 1 for
a list of these income sources. Rather than simply topcoding high total household income values
in the public use data, the US Census Bureau topcodes high values for each source of household
income. See Appendix Tables 2 and 3 for a full list of topcode values over time in the public use
data. Prior to 1995, the Census Bureau assigned the topcode value from that source of income to
all topcoded income values in the public use data. Since then, they have substituted a cell mean
value derived from the internal data to each topcoded value in the public use data.

5

Because the Census Bureau cell means series starts in 1995, using the public use data
without correcting for this major change in the values included for the highest incomes, source
by source, results in a significant increase in measured income and income inequality in 1995
and subsequently simply because of the closer correspondence between the true reported income
and the value included in the public use file. Hence, whereas the use of cell mean imputations
after 1995 makes the public use data better conform to the internal data, not taking this
improvement in measurement into account overestimates how much actual income increased in
1995 among those at the highest income levels and the overall levels of income inequality. An
additional complication is that household income is the aggregation of multiple income sources
(income types and household members), each of which may be topcoded. As a result, the
prevalence of topcoding in household income is significantly greater than for any particular
income source, and topcoded household income values are not necessarily the highest incomes –
they may occur throughout the income distribution. Thus using the ratio of the 90th percentile to
the 10th percentile (the ‘P90/P10 ratio’) to minimize the impact of topcoding on inequality
estimates will not be entirely successful: see Burkhauser, Feng, and Jenkins (2007).
The major change in the public use data in 1995 is a specific example of the more general
problem that income topcoding presents researchers interested in measuring levels and trends in
the income and income distribution of the US population. Inconsistently-defined topcode values
lead to artificial increases or decreases in mean income and income inequality, since different
fractions of the population are subject to topcoding each year.4 This is a legitimate concern since
topcodes in the public use data have, in general, increased in a non-systematic manner over its
history, and part of the apparent trend in average income and income dispersion over time in the
uncorrected data is caused by topcoding capturing a larger portion of the income distribution.

6

Using cell mean imputations for topcoded observations substantially alleviates this problem after
1995, since cell means provide the information necessary to capture the income distribution
represented by the internal data. As a result, even if public topcodes are inconsistently adjusted
in the public use data, mean income for the entire population in the internal data can be matched
with the public use data using cell mean imputations.
Despite the Census Bureau’s attempt to alleviate the problem of topcoding, their cell
means have generally been ignored by researchers studying long-term income trends in the USA,
since to do otherwise exacerbates time-inconsistencies that arise from using unadjusted public
use data for the pre-1995 period and CPS data with cell mean imputations thereafter. Instead,
researchers analyzing CPS data that includes years prior to 1995 use other methods of controlling
for inconsistent topcoding in the public use data. These methods include measuring inequality
with P90/P10 ratios (e.g. Danziger and Gottschalk, 1993; Gottschalk and Danziger, 2005; Daly
and Valletta, 2006); artificially truncating the data by removing the highest and lowest two
percent of observations (e.g. Welch, 1999); or artificially lowering the topcodes to create a series
in which a constant percentage of people is topcoded in the data for each year (e.g. Karoly and
Burtless, 1995; Burkhauser, Butler, Feng, and Houtenville, 2004). This is referred to as the
consistent topcoding method. While each of these methods is preferable to using unadjusted data,
each has drawbacks.
Burkhauser, Feng, and Jenkins (2007) show that using P90/P10 ratios does not
completely alleviate topcoding problems, since incomes are topcoded by income source (not by
total income) and so there are topcoded incomes below the 90th percentile. Additionally, the
P90/P10 ratio captures different aspects of the income distribution than widely-used measures of
dispersion such as the Gini coefficient or members of the Generalized Entropy family.

7

Consistent top coding of the public use data can also cause problems. The percentage of
individuals with topcoded incomes, whether based on their own income or the income of others
in their household each year in the public use data, has grown sporadically over time from just
under 1 percent in 1975 to nearly 6 percent in 2006: see Figure 1. Unless public use data
topcodes are systematically increased over time as income increases, these topcodes cut deeper
into the income distribution. In that case, consistent topcoding methods do an increasingly poorer
job of capturing trends at the top of the income distribution as they remove larger fractions of the
population to maintain their consistency.
Censoring in CPS internal data
Using public use data with cell mean imputations cannot solve the problem of topcoding
entirely, because the internal data from which the cell means are derived are themselves
censored, albeit to a lesser degree than the public use data: see Figure 1.
Censoring in the internal data was initially implemented due to data-storage limitations in
the computing systems of the 1970s which necessitated truncating written records to 5 digits.
This was most binding on wage income, self-employment income and farm income. While these
data storage limitations are no longer a constraint, the Census Bureau continues its internal
censoring practice, partly due to concerns about data reliability of individuals who report an
extremely high income value and partly due to concerns about confidentiality.
In 1985 censoring limits were raised to $250,000 on each source of labor earnings and
internal censoring fell close to zero. Subsequent increases in censoring values have kept the
percentage of censored individuals in the internal data well below 1 percent although increases in
censoring from non-labor income sources in the past few years has increased the share of
censored individuals somewhat since 1994. Appendix Tables 4 and 5 provide the censoring

8

levels over time for each income source in the internal data. See Ryscavage (1995), Jones and
Weinberg (2000), Welniak (2003), and Burkhauser et al. (2004), for earlier discussions of the
problems of censoring in the public use and internal data.
Because we had access to the internal CPS data, we are able for the first time to correct
for censoring in these data back to 1975, and hence provide a more consistent measure of trends
in the income distribution and compare these trends with those found with the public use data.
A Consistent Censoring Approach
Consistent top coding (e.g. Karoly and Burtless, 1995; Burkhauser, Butler, Feng, and
Houtenville, 2004) creates censoring points that capture the same percentile of each source of
income in every year. Because total household income is derived as the sum of all of the
individual sources of income in a household, it is necessary to create a consistent topcode for
each of these sources of income over all years. We do so by finding the year at which the
censoring point for a given source is at the lowest point in the distribution of income within that
source and then using that percentile as our cutoff point for all years. Since the sources of income
reported by the Census Bureau changed in 1987, we recode income and censoring points for
years after this time to the pre-1987 sources in order to create a time consistent series across the
entire 30 year period between 1975 and 2004. Appendix Table 6 reports the percentage of the
distribution affected by our censoring points and the year in which the most restrictive censoring
points occurred for each source of income in both the public use and internal data sets.
The consistent censoring approach makes no parametric assumptions about the
underlying income distribution, and maximizes the use of the common proportion of the
available income information. Nevertheless, by construction, the approach ignores the very
highest incomes in the distribution each year, and so it will underestimate levels of inequality.

9

However, the fractions omitted do not vary over time, and so this approach provides timeconsistent trends of inequality for the part of the distribution below a certain fixed percentile that
it does capture.
A Multiple Imputation Approach
To correct for censoring and also capture the whole distribution, we develop the
imputation idea in a different direction. The key differences from the cell mean approach are,
first, we attempt to account for censoring in the internal data (as well as in public use data) and,
second, we derive imputations for topcoded values using a parametric model of the income
distribution (since, by definition, the ‘true’ uncensored underlying income in the internal data are
not available to us). Third, while the cell mean approach leads to a single imputation for each
topcoded value, we derive multiple imputed values using a suitable randomization procedure
which leads to multiple distributions for each year, and account for potential stochastic
imputation error by averaging estimates (hence the label ‘multiple imputation’).
The parametric model of the income distribution used for the imputation model is the
Generalized Beta of the Second Kind (GB2). The GB2 is a flexible form widely used in the
income distribution literature, and a number of studies have shown that it fits income
distributions extremely well across different times and countries: see e.g. Bordley, McDonald
and Mantrala (1996), Brachmann, Stich and Trede (1996), and Bandourian, McDonald, and
Turley (2002). Feng, Burkhauser, and Butler (2006) fitted GB2 distributions to labor earnings
using public use CPS data and argue that their Gini coefficients calculated from the fitted GB2
distributions provide more plausible estimates of inequality trends than do the Gini coefficients
derived from unadjusted internal data reported by the Census Bureau.

10

Our multiple imputation approach differs from earlier studies that used parametric
models to derive imputed values for topcoded incomes: see Fichtenbaum and Shahidi (1988) and
Bishop, Chiou, and Formby (1994). First, those authors fitted a one-parameter Pareto distribution
to the upper ranges of the income distribution, rather than the more flexible four-parameter GB2
model. Second, our approach takes account of the fact that, rather than being common to all
individuals, censoring levels vary across individuals (because topcoding is done at the level of
each income source rather than at the level of aggregate household income). Third, by using
multiple imputation methods, rather than a single imputation, we account for the variability
intrinsic in the imputation process.
Our multiple imputation approach involves five steps. First, for each year’s data, we fit a
GB2 distribution by maximum likelihood, accounting for individual level right-censoring. To
ensure that model fit is maximized at the top of the distribution, the GB2 is fitted using
observations in the richest 70 percent of the distribution only (using appropriate corrections for
left truncation in the ML procedure). Second, for each observation with a censored income, we
draw a value from the income distribution that is implied by the fitted GB2 distribution, using an
appropriate stochastic procedure. Third, using the distribution comprising imputations for
censored observations and observed incomes for non-censored observations, we estimate our
various inequality indices. Fourth, we repeated steps 2 and 3 one hundred times, and finally, we
combine the one hundred sets of estimates from each of the one hundred data sets for each year
using the ‘averaging’ rules proposed by Rubin (1987) and modified by Reiter (2003) for the case
of partially synthetic data. See Jenkins, Burkhauser, Feng and Larrimore (2008) for further
details of our multiple imputation approach.

11

In what follows we estimate inequality levels and trends using different series defined
according to the method by which we take account of censoring, and whether the basis source is
the public use or internal data. The series, and the acronyms by which we refer to them
subsequently, are summarized in Table 1.
Estimates of inequality levels and trends, 1975–2006
The revised cell mean series (Public-CM)
Figure 2 reports our estimates of income inequality levels and trends derived from four
series: Public-NoCM, Public-Unadjusted, Public-CM, and Internal-Unadjusted. Inequality is
summarized using the Gini coefficient. Because public use data are topcoded, mean household
income and Gini coefficients derived from them will be understated relative to those estimated
from the internal data unless cell mean imputations are used, since cell means provide more
information about individuals at the top of the income distribution.
In all years, the Gini estimates based on the Public-NoCM series are below those from
the Internal-Unadjusted series. To correct for this difference (and for several other reasons), the
Census Bureau revised its topcoding procedures in income year 1995. The result is reflected in
the difference between the Gini estimates derived from the Public-NoCM and Public-Unadjusted
series. Prior to 1995 the series are identical. After 1995 the Public-Unadjusted Gini values equal
the Internal-Unadjusted Gini values, and are dramatically greater than those derived from the
Public-NoCM series. (Note that this is not the case in 1999. We believe this is the result of an
uncorrected error in the Census Bureau cell mean series.) While the Gini values from the PublicUnadjusted series now better represents the Gini values derived from the Internal-Unadjusted
data, anyone uncritically using Gini values from the Public-Unadjusted data to describe changes
in income inequality in the United States would greatly exaggerate its increase in 1995.

12

Our Public-CM series corrects this problem – the Gini estimates derived from these data
match those derived from the Internal-Unadjusted data in all years including 1999: see Figure 2.
Thus the addition of our cell mean imputations to the CPS public use data allows researchers
without access to the Internal-Unadjusted data to produce the same inequality levels and trends
found in the Internal-Unadjusted data. But anyone uncritically using Gini values based on the
Internal-Unadjusted data to describe changes in income inequality would greatly exaggerate its
increase in 1993 when major changes occurred in the way the CPS was collected including
significant changes in the censoring points in the internal CPS data.
Long term trends in US income inequality
We now extend our analysis of long term trends using additional data series. There are
six in total: Public-Unadjusted; Public-CTC; Public-MI, Internal-Unadjusted; Internal-CTC, and
Internal-MI. Figure 3 depicts the trends over the period 1975–2004 in the Gini coefficients
derived from each of the series. We stop at 2004 because that is the last year of internal CPS data
to which we had access.
As discussed above, the use of cell means since 1995 in the Public-Unadjusted data
allows researchers to estimate Gini coefficients that closely match those estimated using the
Internal-Unadjusted data since then. But using the Public-Unadjusted Gini estimates to describe
trends in income inequality before and after 1995 distorts these trends. When we consistently
topcode public use data (Public-CTC series), the Gini estimate for each year is below the
corresponding estimate from the Public-Unadjusted data: see Figure 3. But the artificial jump in
1995 in the Public-Unadjusted Gini values is gone and the trend in Public-CTC Gini values more
closely follows the trends estimated using the Internal-Unadjusted data, including a noticeable
rise in inequality between 1992 and 1993.

13

When we repeat this exercise by consistently top coding internal data (Internal-CTC
series), once again the Gini estimates are smaller than those based on the Internal-Unadjusted
data but they are much closer to those estimated from the Internal-Unadjusted data than those
based on the Public-CTC data. This is unsurprising, since the Internal-CTC data now reach a
higher percentile of the Internal Unadjusted data. There remains a pronounced rise in inequality
based on the Internal-CTC data between 1992 and 1993, but that rise is much smaller that the
rise shown by the Internal-Unadjusted series between those years. This suggests that part of the
1993 jump is due to changes in censoring levels in the Internal-Unadjusted data in 1993. But
even the smaller but pronounced increase in the Gini between 1992 and 1993 that remains in the
Internal-CTC series is unlikely to come from a genuine change in income inequality and suggests
that other changes in CPS data collection methods are responsible. (See Ryscavage, 1995 and
Jones and Weinberg, 2000.)
Because both the Public-MI and Internal-MI series capture the very highest incomes, it is
not surprising that both lead to higher measured inequality levels than their respective unadjusted
counterparts. Unlike the Public-Unadjusted series, the Public-MI series does not jump in 1995,
suggesting that the jump in the Public-Unadjusted series at this point is purely due to introducing
cell mean imputations into the public use data. On the other hand, the Gini estimates derived
from the Internal MI series rose sharply in year 1993, showing the same pattern as InternalUnadjusted series. This is additional evidence that the 1993 jump in Gini is primarily due to
other survey design changes rather than data problems related to censoring.
Gini estimates derived from the Public-MI and Internal-MI series are relatively close to
each other, suggesting that our assumptions about the parametric form of the income distribution
work consistently despite the differences in topcoding prevalence in the public use and internal

14

CPS data. Before 1993, the two series are nearly identical. They diverged somewhat between the
1993–2004 period, but are still relatively close overall. The average of the Public-MI Gini
coefficients since 1993 is 0.431, only slightly lower than the 0.439 average for the Internal-MI
series.
We now use regression analysis to more formally investigate whether the differences in
levels and trends in inequality differ between the data series. Table 2 reports the results of our
analysis of differences between the Gini estimates derived from Public-CTC, Internal-CTC,
Public-MI, Internal-MI and those derived from Internal-Unadjusted CPS data. We do not
consider the Public-Unadjusted series as it contains less information than the internal CPS data
and its artificial 1995 jump makes it flawed compared to the other alternatives.
The dependent variable (y) in the regressions is a Gini estimate for a given year and data
series. The explanatory variables are: a constant, which is the Gini derived from the InternalUnadjusted data; a time trend (t = 1, 2, …, 30), which summarizes the trend in this Gini; four
dummy variables to represent other Gini data sources and thereby control for the difference
between the Gini estimates from each series and the corresponding estimate from the InternalUnadjusted series (pc = 1 if the series is Public-CTC and 0 otherwise; ic = 1 if the series is
Internal-CTC and 0 otherwise; pm = 1 if the series is Public-MI and 0 otherwise; im = 1 if the
series is Internal-MI and 0 otherwise); interactions between each of the series dummy variables
(pc, ic, pm, and im) and time (t), which controls for the difference between the trends across
series; a dummy variable for post-1992 years (u) which controls for a change in the levels after
1992 using the internal data; interactions between each of the Gini source variables (pc, ic, pm,
and im) separately interacted with u, which controls for divergence in levels after 1992; an
interaction between t and u, which controls for changes in the trend after 1992 using internal

15

data; and the Gini source variables (pc, ic, pm, and im) separately interacted with t and u, which
controls for divergence between trends after 1992.
First we discuss our results with respect to Gini estimates from the Internal-Unadjusted
series. The significant positive coefficient for time trend (t) shown in Table 2, column 1, shows
that inequality rose between 1975 and 1992. After 1992, although inequality continued to rise,
the rate of increase slowed significantly compared to the pre-1993 period (note the coefficients
on t and especially t*u). There was also a significant jump in inequality in the post-1992 years
compared to pre-1993 years: observe the statistically significant positive coefficient for u.
However, much of this increase in inequality results from changes in survey methods and
internal censoring points, as we demonstrate by comparisons with the other Gini series.
The coefficients for pc and for interactions with it allow us to compare Gini estimates
from the Public-CTC series to the Internal-Unadjusted series. Because consistent topcoding in
the public use data imposes topcodes below those found in unadjusted public use data, it is
unsurprising that the level of inequality is significantly lower using the Public-CTC series than
using the Internal-Unadjusted one. This can be seen for years prior to 1993 from the statistically
significant negative coefficient for pc and, for years after 1992, from the statistically significant
negative coefficient for interaction pc*u. Additionally, in 1993, when censoring points increased
dramatically, we see that while inequality increased according to the Public-CTC series (look at
the coefficients on u + pc*u), the magnitude of the increase was substantially smaller than that in
the Internal-Unadjusted series. This is also not surprising since consistent top coding dampens
Gini levels in every year, and so is more likely to mitigate changes.
Despite the statistically significant difference in levels of inequality and the artificial
jump in inequality in 1992, in years other than 1992–1993 the trends in inequality shown by the

16

Internal-Unadjusted series are not significantly different from those shown by the Public-CTC
series: the coefficient on pc*t is not statistically significant. An F-test of the null hypothesis that
pc*t + pc*t*u= 0 is not rejected, indicating that after 1992, the inequality trends in the two series
are not significantly different.
We showed previously that the Gini estimates derived from Internal-Unadjusted data can
be replicated using the Public-CM series. So the comparison just undertaken could be repeated
with a comparison between inequality levels derived from the Public-CTC and Public-CM series.
But the Public-CTC series is clearly dominated by the Internal-CTC series because internal data
allow us to observe the reported incomes of a greater share of the population, while still
controlling for problems of time inconsistency in topcoding.
Therefore, to check whether inequality trends of inequality according to InternalUnadjusted data differ significantly from those found for lower parts of the income distribution
that are consistently censored, we also examined the differences between the inequality series
based on the Internal-CTC and Internal-Unadjusted series. While the Internal-CTC data imposes
topcodes for observations at values below the incomes for the same observation in the InternalUnadjusted data, the difference in levels of inequality is no longer significant for years prior to
1993: observe the negative but statistically insignificant coefficient for ic. But the difference for
the years after 1993 is significantly lower as can be seen by the statistically significant negative
coefficient for ic + ic*u. However, once again, the difference in inequality trends between the
Internal-CTC and Internal-Unadjusted series are not significantly different either before 1993
(observe the coefficient on ic*t) or after 1992 (ic*t + ic*t*u).
We now examine the levels and time trends shown by the two Gini series using our
multiple imputation method. Because the multiple imputation method imputes income values for

17

topcoded observations, both Public-MI and Internal-MI lead to Gini estimates that are larger than
their Internal-Unadjusted counterparts, although the differences are only significant at the 5
percent level for the Public-MI series (note the coefficients for pm and im). The Public-MI series
also jumps in 1993 (u + pm*u), but the increase is much less than the jump shown by the
Internal-Unadjusted series (shown by a statistically significant negative coefficient for pm*u). In
contrast, as shown by a small negative and insignificant coefficient for im*u, the Internal-MI
series jumps in 1993 almost as much as the Internal-Unadjusted series. This again shows that
changes in survey methods are important factors underlying the measured change in inequality
levels after 1993. Our results are consistent with Census Bureau warnings that pre-1993 and
post-1992 inequality measures based on data from CPS internal data are not directly comparable
(Jones and Weinberg 2000).
Nevertheless, both Internal-MI and Public-MI series show the same linear time trend as
the Internal-Unadjusted series, in both the pre-1993 and post-1992 periods. This is shown by the
non-significance of the four time trend coefficients (pm*t, pm*t*u, im*t, and im*t*u). Thus,
subject to the break in 1993, all five Gini series demonstrate the same time trends for the whole
period 1975–2004. Also, the post-1992 rate of increase is much lower than the pre-1993 period.
Do results differ if different measures of inequality are used?
The Gini coefficient is just one of many commonly-used indices of inequality. It
incorporates particular assumptions about how income differences are aggregated at different
parts of the income distribution: it is relatively sensitive to income differences in the middle of
the distribution (‘middle sensitive’). This raises the question of whether alternative inequality
measures, ones incorporating different aggregation assumptions, might lead to different
conclusions about inequality trends, depending, for example, on whether changes in dispersion

18

occur mainly at the top or the bottom of the distribution. We explore the sensitivity of our results
to the choice of inequality measure by repeating our analysis using three indices from the
Generalized Entropy parametric family. (See e.g. Cowell, 2000, or Jenkins and Van Kerm,
2009.) We employ the three most commonly used General Entropy (GE) measures: I(0), the
mean logarithmic deviation (MLD), which is a relatively bottom-sensitive index; I(1), the Theil
index, which is relatively middle-sensitive; and I(2), half the squared coefficient of variation,
which is an index that is top-sensitive.
We calculated each of these GE indices using each of the six data series for which we
derived Gini coefficients, and graph the estimates in Figures 4, 5 and 6 for I(0), I(1) and I(2)
respectively. In all cases, measured inequality in a given year is greater in an internal data series
than in its public use data counterpart.
Once again, the total period can be divided into three sub-periods, 1975–1992, 1992–
1993, and 1993–2004. For each sub-period, we calculated the average annual percentage change
in each GE index and the Gini according to the different series: see Table 3. Once again, the
estimates based on Public-Unadjusted data are not shown because of the cell mean problem.
Table 3 shows that the change in measured income inequality between 1992 and 1993 is much
greater than the average change for each of the years before or after, regardless of the inequality
index or data series used. This further suggests the changes between 1992 and 1993 represent
changes in survey practice rather than a genuine change in the distribution of income.
Table 3 shows that average yearly increase in measured inequality is greater in the years
prior to 1993 than in the years after 1993 for all measures across all data sets, but the difference
is much less for the I(0) values than for any of the other measures. Because the I(0) values put
more weight on income differences in the lower ranges of the income distribution, this suggests

19

that changes in the upper ranges of the income distribution might be driving the slowdown of the
increase in inequality in the period 1993–2004.
As we did for our Gini estimates, we now use regression analysis to examine more
precisely the differences in the levels and trends in inequality according to the different data
series, where inequality is now measured by the three GE indices: see columns 2 through 4 of
Table 2. The explanatory variables in the regressions are defined in an analogous fashion to those
employed when comparing Gini levels and trends.
The results for I(0) clearly differ from those based on the Gini measure: see Table 2,
column 2. While the basic finding of a rise in inequality is still present for the InternalUnadjusted series – the coefficient on t is positive and statistically significant – there is no
change in the index’s trend after 1992, as the coefficient on t*u is not statistically significantly
different from zero. All other series demonstrate the same time trend: the F-test that t + pc*t, t +
ic*t, t + pm*t, and t + im*t each equal zero is soundly rejected at the 1 percent level in each case.
Similarly, none of the other series show a slowdown in the rising trend for the period 1993–2004.
Even at the 10 percent level, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients on
t*u+pc*t*u, t*u+ic*t*u, t*u+pm*t*u, and t*u+im*t*u equal zero.
With the exception that the level of inequality described by the Public-CTC series is
significantly lower than the corresponding values from Internal-Unadjusted series – the
coefficient on pc is negative and significant – all other variables in this regression are statistically
insignificant. In addition, the trends found in all five series are not significantly different over the
entire period. Since I(0) is relatively bottom-sensitive, and the differences between these
different series arise at the top of the distribution, it is not surprising that the choice of topcoding
method makes little difference for this index.

20

In contrast, the results for the I(1) values are very close to those found for the Gini
coefficient: see Table 2, column 3. According to the Internal-Unadjusted series, the basic time
trend (coefficient on t) is positive and statistically significant, as is the coefficient on u, while the
coefficient on their interaction, t*u, is negative and statistically significant. Thus, as for the Gini
index, inequality after 1992 according to I(1) is greater, but the annual increase in inequality
since 1993 is significantly lower than in the years prior to 1993.
When the Public-CTC and Internal-CTC series are used rather than the InternalUnadjusted one, the pre-1993 levels in I(1) are both significantly lower, as shown by the
coefficients on pc and ic. For the post-1992 period, both series show significantly smaller jumps
in levels: the coefficients on pc*u and ic*u are negative and statistically significant. But the post1992 inequality levels are still significantly higher than those for the pre-1993 period, for both
series. The null hypotheses that u+pc*u and u+ic*u are each equal to zero are both soundly
rejected. With respect to trends, the coefficient on pc*t is negative and statistically significant,
whereas the coefficient on ic*t is negative but not statistically significant.
The Public-MI and Internal-MI series both show higher levels of inequality than the
Internal-Unadjusted series for corresponding years. The Public-MI series show a smaller jump in
post-1993 levels, as shown by the negative and statistically significant coefficient on pm*u. Both
series, though, show higher levels of inequality in the post-1993 period than in the pre-1993
period. Both series show a clearly rising trend for the whole period, but the rates of increase in
the post-1993 period are significantly smaller, as shown by F-tests on t*u+pm*t*u and
t*u+im*t*u.
Finally, we turn to examine the levels and trends in I(2): see Table 2, column 4.
According to the Internal-Unadjusted series, the basic time trend is positive and significant, as is

21

the coefficient on t, while t*u is negative and significant. Therefore, as with the Gini and the I(1)
indices, inequality after 1992 is greater but the annual increase in inequality since 1993 is
significantly lower than the increase over the years prior to 1993.
When the Public-CTC and Internal-CTC series are compared to the Internal-Unadjusted
one, the pre-1993 levels of I(2) are significantly lower for both series, as shown by the
coefficients on pc and ic. For the post-1993 period, both series also show significantly smaller
degrees of increase in levels because the coefficients of pc*u and ic*u are negative and
statistically significant. But for both series, the post-1993 inequality levels are still significantly
higher than the pre-1993 period. The null hypotheses that u+pc*u and u+ic*u each equal zero are
both rejected. Both the CTC series show smaller upward trend for the pre-1993 period than does
the Internal-Unadjusted one: the coefficients on pc*t and ic*t are negative and statistically
significant. Although the Public-CTC series shows a lower trend after 1993 compared to before
1992, we cannot reject the null that the time trends before and after 1993 are the same in the
Internal-CTC series.
According to both the Public-MI and Internal-MI series, I(2) values are larger than the
corresponding value in the Internal-Unadjusted series. In contrast to the time trend results for the
Gini and I(1), the rates of increase in the post-1993 period are the same as the pre-1993 period.
Using F-tests, we find that the coefficients on t*u+pm*t*u and t*u+im*t*u are not significantly
different from zero. These results, as well as the contrast with those for the Gini and I(1), may
arise because I(2) estimates tend to have larger sampling variability relative to these other
indices, other things being equal.5 This can also be seen from large year-on-year changes in I(2)
values, and the large differences between their Public-MI and Internal-MI estimates, especially

22

in the post-1993 period (see Figure 6). Thus, more caution is warranted when interpreting I(2)
values.
Trends in Top Income Shares
Our results may surprise some readers – occasional users of the CPS may not be aware of
the problems that inconsistent top coding can cause. For example, they may not be aware of
comparability issues introduced by the Census Bureau’s use of cell mean imputations beginning
in 1995, and the changes in the CPS (public use and internal data) before and after 1993.6 Other
readers may be surprised by our findings because they appear to contradict the seminal work of
Piketty and Saez (2003), who report substantial growth in income inequality as measured by the
share of “adjusted gross income” (the amount of income that is taxable under federal income tax
laws in place each year) held by tax units (unadjusted for household size) at the top of the
distribution.
Up to now, we have focused on how best to use CPS data to make statements about levels
and trends in income inequality as it has conventionally been measured in the income
distribution literature. (See Gottschalk and Smeeding, 1997, and Atkinson and Brandolini, 2001,
for reviews.) In this section, we compare our CPS-based estimates of levels and trends in the
income distribution with those of Piketty and Saez (2003).7 In doing so, it is critical to point out
that there are fundamental differences between the measurement conventions used when
analyzing size-adjusted pre-tax post-transfer household income of individuals using crosssectional surveys like the CPS and using IRS data on the adjusted gross income of tax units as
done by Piketty and Saez (2003). Piketty and Saez (2003) were primarily interested in measuring
very long run trends (since 1913) in US income inequality and, because of data limitations, focus

23

only on a small part of that distribution – the share of adjusted gross income held by the top 10
percent of tax filing units and how that share is distributed within this part of the distribution.
In Figure 7 we report our estimates of the share of total income (as discussed in the first
part of this paper) held by the richest 10 percent of the population. We do so by cumulatively
reporting the share held by the 90th-95th percentile group and then by this group plus the next
richest 4 percent (95th-99th percentile group) and finally by adding on the share held by the top 1
percentile group for each year 1975–2004, based on the Internal-MI series. We also report the
corresponding cumulative share estimates from Piketty and Saez (2003) for their tax unit
samples and use of adjusted gross income (excluding capital gains).
Our Internal-MI top share estimates are in general somewhat lower than the
corresponding ones reported by Piketty and Saez (2003). This is not surprising since two quite
different concepts of income are being used. For instance, adjusted gross income does not
include government transfers since this income is not taxed. Because a much greater share of
non-taxable government in-cash transfers – AFDC/TANF, Social Security benefits, etc. – are
held by those in the poorest 90 percent of the pre-tax post transfer distribution, and this income is
included in our income measure, we would expect those in the top 10 percent of the pre-tax posttransfer income distribution to have a smaller share of total income than of adjusted gross
income in all years, as is the case in Figure 7.
Nevertheless, for both the income share held by the 90th–95th percentile groups and the
95th–99th percentile groups, the CPS-based and tax data-based series resemble each other closely,
in terms of both levels and trends. This is remarkable given the very different underlying
concepts of income and approaches taken. Both the Piketty and Saez (2003) IRS series and our
Internal-MI CPS series suggest that the share of income held by the 90th–95th percentile groups

24

remained relatively stable during the whole period 1975–2004, accounting for around 10–12
percent of total income. In terms of the share of income held by the 95th–99th percentile groups,
the Piketty and Saez (2003) IRS-based estimate grows slowly from 13 percent in 1975 to 15.1
percent in 2004. Over the same period, the growth in our corresponding Internal-MI CPS
estimate is remarkably similar: an increase from 10.5 percent to 12.5 percent.
In Figure 8, we disaggregate the share of income held by the richest 10 percent of the
income distribution further by reporting the share of income held by percentile groups within the
95th–99th percentile group according to our Internal-MI CPS series. Although income shares
increased slightly at the higher percentiles, through to the 99th percentile group, these increases
were relatively modest. Even for the 98th–99th percentile group, the growth in income shares
from 1975–2004 was less than 1 percent.
In contrast to the similar trends found in the share of income held by those in the 90th–
99th percentile group using either the Piketty and Saez (2003) series or our Internal-MI series,
there are substantial differences between the two series with respect to the level and trends in the
share of income held by the richest 1 percent. While the share of income help by the richest 1
percent grew substantially over the 1975–2004 period according to both series, growth in the
Piketty and Saez (2003) series is much greater, from 8.0 percent to 16.1 percent compared to an
increase from 5.4 percent to 9.8 percent in the Internal-MI CPS series. But this difference is even
greater when it is observed that one third of the increase in the income share of the top 1 percent
in the Internal-MI series from 1975–2004 occurred in 1993, and which is primarily attributable
to the CPS redesign. Hence a significant minority of this increase in the share of income held by
the top 1 percent in the Internal-MI series is likely to be due to better measurement of their
income by the CPS rather than by an actual increase in the share of income they held.

25

This same problem of changes in measurement versus changes in real income held by the
richest 1 percent of the distribution is also likely to explain at least some part of the rise in
income shares at the top of the income distribution in the Piketty and Saez (2003) series. As can
be seen in Figure 7, there is a dramatic 4 percentage point jump in the share of gross taxable
income held by the highest 1 percent of tax units reported by Piketty and Saez (2003) between
the years 1986 and 1988. This finding must, to some degree, be the result of changes in the way
the very richest tax units chose to report their income as a result of the Tax Reform Act of 1986
rather than the result of genuine changes in income inequality. This legislation provided
substantial incentives for the very richest tax units to switch income from Subchapter-S
corporations to wage income. (See Slemrod, 1996, and Reynolds, 2006 for a fuller discussion of
this type of tax elasticity issue in the Piketty and Saez, 2003 data and Feenberg and Poterba,
1993 for a more general discussion of the problems of measuring income inequality based on
income tax records.) Subtracting the 1986–1988 jump in the Piketty and Saez series would cut in
half the increase in the share of income held by the richest 1 percent over the whole period. Their
data for other years may also be subject to this same type of tax elasticity behavior, albeit to a
lesser extent. For example, for a group of high income corporate executives, Goolsbee (2000)
showed that almost all of the estimated responsiveness of taxable wage and salary income to
marginal tax rates from 1991 to 1995 was the result of shifts in the timing of compensation rather
than permanent shifts in the form of compensation.
Keeping this in mind, it is difficult to determine what is going on at the very top of the
income distribution using either the CPS data or the IRS data. Piketty and Saez (2003) find
greater increases in inequality after 1993 than we do primarily because of greater growth in the
share of income held by the richest 1 percent in their IRS data. It is uncertain to what degree this

26

difference is the result of our decreasing ability to capture income at the very highest income
levels, even using internal CPS data, or of behavioral changes in the way that individual tax units
report their adjusted gross income on their tax returns.
The growth in income in the years just prior to the 2000 stock market crash was greater
among the highest income groups, and the estimates of the income share of the richest 1 percent
from both series capture this increase as well as the decline in their share in the recession that
followed the stock market crash. The CPS may have been less able to capture this income going
to the top of the income distribution. But it also may be the case, as Reynolds (2006) argues, that
a greater increase in the use of tax-deferred savings accounts (401k plans, Keogh plans and IRA
tax shelters) by those in richer percentile groups but not in the very richest 1 percent of the
adjusted gross income distribution of tax units may also explain part of the rise in the top income
share reported by Piketty and Saez (2003).
Additional work is necessary to determine what precisely is happening at the very highest
income levels. But one more piece of evidence with respect to the poorest 99 percent of the
distribution – which can be measured with confidence in the CPS data – is that our trends for
income inequality are consistent with the trends in wage earnings over this period found by
Autor, Katz and Kearney (2008) using the public use CPS data.

Conclusions
We analyze trends in income inequality in the USA over three decades (1975–2004),
drawing on internal CPS data that are not generally available to researchers outside the Census
Bureau. Although the CPS is the most authoritative survey data source for studying US income
inequality, topcoding of each of its many sources of income artificially lowers the level of

27

inequality and potentially affects estimates of its trends over time, whether one uses public or
internal CPS data. We consider several methods for addressing topcoding, and as a byproduct of
this work, derive a revised cell mean imputation series that can be applied to public use data.
This series allows researchers to more accurately capture levels and trends in the internal data. In
addition, we take account of topcoding in the internal data using a multiple imputation approach
that uses parametric methods to derive imputations.
Using the Gini coefficient to measure inequality, we find the level of income inequality
based on our Internal-MI series is slightly higher in corresponding years inequality based on the
Internal-Unadjusted series before 1993 and significantly higher after 1993. But despite this
difference in levels, the trends in inequality we find using the two series are not significantly
different. Inequality rose over the whole period 1975–2004, but the rate of increase slowed after
1993. We find this same result using our Internal-CTC and Public-CTC estimates.
The story about trends differs when we use the three GE inequality indices, but the
differences are readily explicable in terms of the properties of the indices, specifically their
differences in sensitivity to income differences in different ranges of the income distribution. I(0)
rose steadily during 1975–2004, showing no sign of slowing down after 1993. But our I(1) and
I(2) series are similar to our Gini series in their trends, subject to the caveat that I(2) indices are
less precisely estimated, showing large year-on-year variation. Because I(0) is more bottomsensitive than the other inequality measures, our results suggest that what is happening in the
upper part of the income distribution is responsible for the 1990s slowdown in rate of inequality
increase.
Our results for household income are largely consistent with other research that has
examined levels and trends in wage inequality using public use CPS data (see e.g. Autor, Katz

28

and Kearney, 2008) but differ from the results found by Piketty and Saez (2003) after 1986
almost solely due to different trends in the share of income held by the richest 1 percent. With
IRS data about the distribution of adjusted gross income, not only do Piketty and Saez find
higher levels of inequality over all years than we do, but also a major increase in inequality
between 1986 and 1988 and a greater increase in income inequality trends in the post-1993
period. Although the rapid increase in income inequality in their tax data is caused in part by
changes in the way income is reported rather than a real change in underlying income inequality,
it is less certain why they find such larger increased in income inequality after 1993.
Our results suggest that, for at least the poorest 99 percent of the income distribution, the
increase in inequality since 1993 has been significantly slower in the USA than in the previous
two decades. Based on our Internal-MI series we find the level of income inequality rises when
we include an estimate that includes the very top part of the income distribution censored in the
unadjusted internal CPS data. But even in these estimates, the rise in income inequality slowed
after 1993. Our findings are consistent with those found by Piketty and Saez (2003) for the 90th–
99th percentile groups. It is only with respect to the richest 1 percent that we differ. And it is here
that we are at the limits of current knowledge, both with respect to the CPS data because of its
difficulty in obtaining information on the highest income households, and with respect to the IRS
data because of behavioral effects caused by changes in the tax laws. It is difficult to fully
understand how much of the yearly changes in inequality are the result of real changes in the
incomes of the very richest income tax units and how much is due simply to changes in the way
they report that income.

29

References
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Andrea Brandolini. 2001. “Promises and Pitfalls in the Use of
Secondary Data Sets: Income Inequality in OECD Countries as a Case Study.” Journal of
Economic Literature, 39 (3): 771–799.
Atkinson, Anthony B., Lee Rainwater, and Timothy Smeeding. 1995. Income Distribution in
OECD Countries. Evidence from the Luxembourg Income Study. Social Policy Studies No.
18. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
Autor, David, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. 2008. “Trends in U.S. Wage Inequality:
Revising the Revisionists.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90(2): 300–323.
Bandourian, Ripsy, James B. McDonald, and Robert S. Turley. 2002. “A Comparison of
Parametric Models of Income Distribution across Countries and Over Time.” Working
Paper No. 305. Luxembourg: Luxembourg Income Study.
http://www.lisproject.org/publications/LISwps/305.pdf
Bishop, John A., Jong-Rong Chiou, and John P. Formby. 1994.“Truncation Bias and the Ordinal
Evaluation of Income Inequality.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12: 123–
127.
Bordley, Robert F., James B. McDonald, and Anand Mantrala. 1996. “Something New,
Something Old: Parametric Models for the Size Distribution of Income.” Journal of Income
Distribution 6: 91–103.
Brachmann, Klaus, Andreas Stich, and Mark Trede. 1996. “Evaluating Parametric Income
Distribution Models.” Allgemeines Statistisches Archiv 80: 285–298.
Burkhauser, Richard V., J.S. Butler, Shuaizhang Feng, and Andrew Houtenville. 2004. “LongTerm Trends in Earnings Inequality: What the CPS Can Tell Us.” Economics Letters, 82:
295–299.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, Andrew J. Houtenville, and Ludmila Rovba. 20032004“Income Inequality in the 1990s: Re-Forging a Lost Relationship?” Journal of Income
Distribution, 12 (3–4): 8–35.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Shuaizhang Feng, and Stephen P. Jenkins. 2007. “Using the P90/P10
Ratio to Measure US Inequality Trends with Current Population Survey Data: A View
from Inside the Census Bureau Vaults.” ISER Working Paper 2007-14. Colchester, UK:
Institute for Social and Economic Research, University of Essex.
http://www.iser.essex.ac.uk/pubs/workpaps/pdf/2007-14.pdf
Burkhauser, Richard V. and Jeff Larrimore. 2008. “Trends in the Relative Economic Well Being
of Working-Age Men with Disabilities: Correcting the Record using Internal Current
Population Survey Data.” Center for Economic Studies Working Paper Series CES-WP-

30

08-05, March 2008.
http://www.ces.census.gov/index.php/ces/cespapers?down_key=101811
Burkhauser, Richard V., Takashi Oshio, and Ludmila Rovba. 2008. “How the Distribution of
After-Tax Income Changed Over the 1990s Business Cycle: A Comparison of the United
States, Great Britain, Germany, and Japan.” Journal of Income Distribution, 17 (1): 87–
109.
Cowell, Frank A. 2000. “Measurement of Inequality.” In: Anthony B. Atkinson and François
Bourguignon (eds), Handbook of Income Distribution, 87–166. Elsevier North Holland:
Amsterdam.
Cowell, Frank A., and Maria-Pia Victoria-Feser. 1996. “Robustness Properties of Inequality
measures.” Econometrica, 64: 77–101.
Daly, Mary C. and Robert G. Valletta. 2006. “Inequality and Poverty in United States: The
Effects of Rising Dispersion of Men’s Earnings and Changing Family Behaviour.”
Economica, 73 (289): 75–98.
Danziger, Sheldon and Peter Gottschalk. (Eds.) 1993. Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality in
America. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Feenberg, Daniel and James M. Poterba. 1993. “Income Inequality and the Incomes of Very
High-Income Taxpayers: Evidence from Tax Returns,” in Tax Policy and the Economy,
ed. James M. Poterba, 7, Cambridge, MA: NBER/MIT Press, pp.
Feng, Shuaizhang, Richard V. Burkhauser, and J.S. Butler. 2006. “Levels and Long-Term Trends
in Earnings Inequality: Overcoming Current Population Survey Censoring Problems
Using the GB2 Distribution.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 24 (1): 57–62.
Fichtenbaum, R. and Shahidi, H. (1988) “Truncation Bias and the Measurement of Income
Inequality.” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 6: 335–337.
Goolsbee, Austan. 2000. “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence from Executive
Compensation.” Journal of Political Economy, 108 (2): 352–378.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Timothy M. Smeeding. 1997. “Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings
and Income Inequality.” Journal of Economic Literature, 35 (2): 633–687.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Sheldon Danziger. 2005. “Inequality of Wage Rates, Earnings and Family
Income in the United States, 1975–2002.” Review of Income and Wealth 51 (2): 231–254.
Jenkins, Stephen P., and Philippe Van Kerm. 2009 forthcoming. “The Measurement of Economic
Inequality.” In: W. Salverda, B. Nolan and Timothy M. Smeeding (eds), The Oxford
Handbook on Economic Inequality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

31

Jenkins, Stephen P., Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng, and Jeff Larrimore. 2008.
“Measuring Inequality with Censored Data: A Multiple Imputation Approach.” ISER
Working Paper. Colchester, UK: Institute for Social and Economic Research, University
of Essex. (in preparation).
Jones, A.F., Jr., and Weinberg, D.H. 2000. “The Changing Shape of the Nation’s Income
Distribution.” Current Population Reports, U.S. Census Bureau, June 2000.
http://www.census.gov/prod/2000pubs/p60-204.pdf
Karoly, Lynn A. and Gary Burtless. 1995. “Demographic Changes, Rising Earnings Inequality,
and the Distribution of Personal Well-Being, 1959–1989.” Demography, 32 (3): 379–
405.
Kruger, Dirk, and Fabrizio Perri. 2006. “Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption
Inequality?” Review of Economic Studies, 73 (1): 163–193.
Larrimore, Jeff, Richard V. Burkhauser, Shuaizhang Feng and Laura Zayatz. 2009 forthcoming.
“Consistent Cell Means for Topcoded Incomes in the Public Use March CPS (1976–
2007).” Journal of Economic and Social Measurement.
Levy, Frank, and Richard J. Murnane. 1992. “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A
Review of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations.” Journal of Economic Literature,
30 (3): 1333–1381.
Piketty, Thomas, and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–
1998.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118 (1): 1–39.
Reiter, J.P. 2003. “Inference for Partially Synthetic, Public Use Microdata Sets.” Survey
Methodology, 29: 181–188.
Reynolds, Alan. 2006. Income and Wealth. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press.
Rubin, Donald B. 1987. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys. New York: Wiley.
Ryscavage P. 1995. “A surge in growing income inequality?” Monthly Labor Review, August,
51–61. http://www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/1995/08/art5full.pdf
Slemrod, Joel. 1996. “High-income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s: The Anatomy of
Behavioral Response”, In Empirical Foundations of Household Taxation, edited by
Martin Feldstein and James M. Poterba. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (for
NBER).
U.S. Census Bureau. Various years. Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the
United States: various years. (August), Current Population Reports, Consumer Income,
Washington DC: GPO.

32

U.S. Census Bureau. 2007. Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement
Technical Documentation. Washington DC: GPO.
Welch, Finis. 1999. “In Defense of Inequality” American Economic Review 89: 1–17.
Welniak, Edward J. 2003. “Measuring Household Income Inequality Using the CPS.” in James
Dalton and Beth Kilss (Eds.), Special Studies in Federal Tax Statistics 2003, Statistics of
Income Directorate, Inland Revenue Service, Washington DC.

33

Figure 1: Percentage of Individuals with Censored Household Income in March CPS, by
year

Internal data were not available for years after 2005.
Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

34

Figure 2: Gini Coefficient Estimates for Four Topcode Adjustment Methods, 1975–2006

Internal data were not available for years after 2005.
Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

35

Figure 3: Gini Coefficient Estimates for Six Topcode Adjustment Methods, 1975-2004

Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

36

Figure 4: I(0) Inequality Index Estimates for Six Topcode Adjustment Methods, 1975-2004

Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

37

Figure 5: I(1) Inequality Index Estimates for Six Topcode Adjustment Methods, 1975-2004

Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

38

Figure 6: I(2) Inequality Index Estimates for Six Topcode Adjustment Methods, 1975-2004

Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

39

Figure 7: Estimates of Top Income Shares: Piketty & Saez and Internal-MI Series, 1975–
2004

Source: http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/ and authors’ calculations from internal data files of March CPS.

40

Figure 8: Estimates of Top Income Shares: Internal-MI Series, 1975–2004

Source: Author’s calculations using internal March CPS data

41

Table 1: Income Distribution Series Derived from the March CPS, by Source and Method
for Addressing Censoring
Acronym
Internal-CTC
Internal-Unadjusted

Source
Internal
Internal

Internal-MI

Internal

Public-CTC
Public-Unadjusted

Public Use
Public Use

Public-CM

Public Use

Public-NoCM

Public Use

Public-MI

Public Use

Method for Addressing Censoring Issues
Consistently top-coded
Uses internal data as provided in Census Bureau files, without any
adjustments
Topcoded observations replaced by imputations derived from GB2
imputation model fitted to internal data; inequality estimates derived
using multiple imputation combination methods.
Consistently top-coded
Uses public use data as provided in Census Bureau files; includes
Census Bureau cell mean imputations for topcoded observations from
1995 onwards
Uses public use data as provided in Census Bureau files; includes cell
mean imputations for topcoded observations for all years
Uses public use data as provided in Census Bureau files, except that
no cell mean imputations used for any year (topcoded values used ‘as
is’).
Topcoded observations replaced by imputations derived from GB2
imputation model fitted to public use data; inequality estimates
derived using multiple imputation combination methods.

See main text for further details of the methods used to address topcoding issues.

42

Table 2: Differences in Inequality Levels and Trends Based on Regression Analyses

constant
t (time trend)
u (=1 if post-1992)
t*u
pc (=1 if public CTC)
pc*t
pc*u
pc*t*u
ic (=1 if internal CTC)
ic*t
ic*u
ic*t*u
pm (=1 if public MI)
pm*t
pm*u
pm*t*u
im (=1 if internal MI)
im*t
im*u
im*t*u

Gini
0.3528**
(0.0018)
0.0030**
(0.0002)
0.0592**
(0.0047)
-0.0023**
(0.0002)
-0.0158**
(0.0025)
-0.0003
(0.0002)
-0.0282**
(0.0067)
0.0006
(0.0003)
-0.0041
(0.0026)
-0.0002
(0.0002)
-0.0176*
(0.0067)
0.0004
(0.0003)
0.0046*
(0.0023)
0.0001
(0.0002)
-0.0188*
(0.0087)
0.0005
(0.0004)
0.0043
(0.0026)
0.0001
(0.0003)
-0.0026
(0.0073)
0.0003
(0.0004)

I(0)
0.2850**
(0.0048)
0.0044**
(0.0004)
0.0190
(0.0261)
0.0002
(0.0011)
-0.0173*
(0.0073)
-0.0005
(0.0006)
-0.0410
(0.0365)
0.0009
(0.0016)
-0.0048
(0.0074)
-0.0003
(0.0006)
-0.0274
(0.0376)
0.0006
(0.0016)
0.0059
(0.0069)
0.0002
(0.0006)
-0.0265
(0.0361)
0.0007
(0.0015)
0.0057
(0.0072)
0.0001
(0.0006)
-0.0032
(0.0359)
0.0005
(0.0015)

I(1)
0.2121**
(0.0029)
0.0042**
(0.0003)
0.1117**
(0.0099)
-0.0032**
(0.0005)
-0.0250**
(0.0035)
-0.0009*
(0.0003)
-0.0801**
(0.0119)
0.0015*
(0.0006)
-0.0080*
(0.0037)
-0.0005
(0.0003)
-0.0632**
(0.0126)
0.0012*
(0.0006)
0.0115**
(0.0038)
0.0006
(0.0004)
-0.0498*
(0.0238)
0.0010
(0.0010)
0.0122**
(0.0040)
0.0003
(0.0005)
0.0002
(0.0256)
0.0010
(0.0012)

I(2)
0.2489**
(0.0082)
0.0066**
(0.0008)
0.3849**
(0.0454)
-0.0071**
(0.0021)
-0.0535**
(0.0085)
-0.0026**
(0.0008)
-0.3586**
(0.0464)
0.0059**
(0.0022)
-0.0204*
(0.0088)
-0.0017*
(0.0008)
-0.3338**
(0.0497)
0.0061**
(0.0023)
0.0382**
(0.0143)
0.0043**
(0.0015)
-0.2143
(0.1565)
0.0055
(0.0065)
0.0508**
(0.0135)
0.0029
(0.0018)
0.1110
(0.2586)
0.0114
(0.0115)

The baseline data source is Internal-Unadjusted. Numbers reported in parentheses are standard errors. **
Significant at the 1% level. * Significant at the 5% level.
Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

43

Table 3: Average Annual Percentage Change in inequality by period, using alternative
March CPS datasets and inequality indices

Average annual percentage change
1975-1992
1992-1993
1993-2004

Gini Coefficients
Unadjusted Internal
Consistent Topcoding Public
Consistent Topcoding Internal
MI-GB2 public
MI-GB2 Internal
I(0)
Unadjusted Internal
Consistent Topcoding Public
Consistent Topcoding Internal
MI-GB2 public
MI-GB2 Internal
I(1)
Unadjusted Internal
Consistent Topcoding Public
Consistent Topcoding Internal
MI-GB2 public
MI-GB2 Internal
I(2)
Unadjusted Internal
Consistent Topcoding Public
Consistent Topcoding Internal
MI-GB2 public
MI-GB2 Internal

0.74
0.75
0.74
0.82
0.77

5.85
1.93
3.24
2.34
6.63

0.14
0.23
0.21
0.30
0.20

1.48
1.49
1.48
1.63
1.54

12.48
5.86
7.80
6.41
14.04

1.20
1.45
1.39
1.47
1.28

1.58
1.63
1.61
1.97
1.72

22.08
3.67
7.71
5.39
29.32

0.26
0.55
0.59
0.80
0.43

1.76
1.88
1.89
3.31

71.82
4.09
12.67
11.22

0.03
0.88
1.10
1.69

2.21

147.17

0.45

Source: Authors’ calculations from internal and public use data files of March CPS.

44

Appendix Table 1. Income Items Reported in the Current Population Survey

Name

Name in
Public Files

Labor Earnings
Wages
Self Employment
Farm
Other Sources

I51A
I51B
I51C

Social Security
Supplemental Security
Public Assistance
Interest
Dividends Rentals
Veterans
Retirement
Other

I52A
I52B
I53A
I53B
I53C
I53D
I53E
I53F

Name in
Internal
Files
Definition
1975–1986
WSAL_VAL
SEMP_VAL
FRSE_VAL

Wages and Salaries
Self employment income
Farm income

Income from Social Security and/or Railroad
I52A_VAL Retirement
SSI_VAL
Supplemental Security Income
PAW_VAL Public Assistance
INT_VAL
Interest
I53C_VAL Dividends, Rentals, Trust Income
I53D_VAL Veteran's, unemployment, worker's compensation
I53E_VAL Pension Income
I53F_VAL
Alimony, Child Support, Other income
1987–2006

Labor Earnings
Primary earnings
ERN_VAL
ERN_VAL Primary Earnings
Wages
WS_VAL
WS_VAL
Wages and Salaries-Second Source
Self Employment
SE_VAL
SE_VAL
Self employment income -Second Source
Farm
FRM_VAL
FRM_VAL Farm income -Second Source
Other Sources
Social Security
SS_VAL
SS_VAL
Social Security Income
Supplemental Security
SSI_VAL
SSI_VAL
Supplemental Security Income
Public Assistance
PAW_VAL PAW_VAL Public Assistance & Welfare Income
Interest
INT_VAL
INT_VAL
Interest
Dividends
DIV_VAL
DIV_VAL
Dividends
Rental
RNT_VAL
RNT_VAL Rental income
Alimony
ALM_VAL ALM_VAL Alimony income
Child Support
CSP_VAL
CSP_VAL
Child Support Income
Unemployment
UC_VAL
UC_VAL
Unemployment income
Workers Comp
WC_VAL
WC_VAL
Worker's compensation income
Veterans
VET_VAL
VET_VAL Veteran's Benefits
Retirement - Source 1
RET_VAL1 RET_VAL1 Retirement income - source 1
Retirement - Source 2
RET_VAL2 RET_VAL2 Retirement income - source 2
Survivors - Source 1
SUR_VAL1 SUR_VAL1 Survivor's income - source 1
Survivors - Source 2
SUR_VAL2 SUR_VAL2 Survivor's income - source 2
Disability - Source 1
DIS_VAL1
DIS_VAL1 Disability income - source 1
Disability - Source 2
DIS_VAL2
DIS_VAL2 Disability income - source 2
Education assistance
ED_VAL
ED_VAL
Education assistance
Financial assistance
FIN_VAL
FIN_VAL
Financial Assistance
Other
OI_VAL
OI_VAL
Other income
Sources: Current Population Survey Annual Demographic File Technical Documentation, 1976-2002. Current
Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement Technical Documentation, 2003-2007

45

Appendix Table 2. Public Use CPS Censoring Points for each Income Source in Dollars (1975–1986)

Year

Wages
(I51A)

Self
Employment
(I51B)

Farm
(I51C)

Social
Security
(I52A)

Supplemental
Security
(I52B)

Public
Assistance
(I53A)

Interest
(I53B)

1975 50,000
50,000
50,000 9,999
5,999
19,999
50,000
1976 50,000
50,000
50,000 9,999
5,999
19,999
50,000
1977 50,000
50,000
50,000 9,999
5,999
19,999
50,000
1978 50,000
50,000
50,000 9,999
5,999
19,999
50,000
1979 50,000
50,000
50,000 9,999
5,999
19,999
50,000
1980 50,000
50,000
50,000 9,999
5,999
19,999
50,000
1981 75,000
75,000
75,000 19,999
5,999
19,999
75,000
1982 75,000
75,000
75,000 19,999
5,999
19,999
75,000
1983 75,000
75,000
75,000 19,999
5,999
19,999
75,000
1984 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
1985 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
1986 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
Source: Current Population Survey Annual Demographic File Technical Documentation

Dividends
Rentals
(I53C)

Veterans
and
Workers
Comp
(I53D)

Retirement
(I53E)

Other
(I53F)

50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
75,000
75,000
75,000
99,999
99,999
99,999

29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999

50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
75,000
75,000
75,000
99,999
99,999
99,999

50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
75,000
75,000
75,000
99,999
99,999
99,999

Note: In the 1985 March CPS (income year 1984), six values for INCOMP exceeded $29,999 but were not topcoded. In the calculations we did for this paper we
corrected this error and topcoded these values at $29,999.

46

Appendix Table 3. Public Use CPS Censoring Points for each Income Source in Dollars (1987–2006)

Year

Primary
Earnings
(ERN_VAL)

Wages
(WS_VAL)

Self
Employment
(SE_VAL)

Farm
(FRM_VAL)

Social
Security
(SS_VAL)

Supplemental
Security
(SSI_VAL)

Public
Assistance
(PAW_VAL)

Interest
(INT_VAL)

Dividends
(DIV_VAL)

Rental
(RNT_VAL)

Alimony
(ALM_VAL)

Child
Support
(CSP_VAL)

1987
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
29,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1988
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
29,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1989
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
29,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1990
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
29,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1991
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
29,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1992
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
29,999
9,999
19,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1993
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
49,999
9,999
24,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1994
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
49,999
9,999
24,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1995
150,000
25,000
40,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1996
150,000
25,000
40,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1997
150,000
25,000
40,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1998
150,000
25,000
40,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
35,000
15,000
25,000
50,000
15,000
1999
150,000
25,000
40,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
35,000
15,000
25,000
40,000
15,000
2000
150,000
25,000
40,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
35,000
15,000
25,000
40,000
15,000
2001
150,000
25,000
40,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
35,000
15,000
25,000
40,000
15,000
2002
200,000
35,000
50,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
25,000
15,000
40,000
45,000
15,000
2003
200,000
35,000
50,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
25,000
15,000
40,000
45,000
15,000
2004
200,000
35,000
50,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
25,000
15,000
40,000
45,000
15,000
2005
200,000
35,000
50,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
25,000
15,000
40,000
45,000
15,000
2006
200,000
35,000
50,000
25,000
49,999
25,000
24,999
25,000
15,000
40,000
45,000
15,000
Source: Current Population Survey Annual Demographic File Technical Documentation (1988-2002), Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement Technical Documentation (2003-2007)

47

Appendix Table 3. (Continued)

Year

Unemployment
(UC_VAL)

Workers
Comp
(WC_VAL)

Veterans
(VET_VAL)

Retirement
1st source
(RET_VAL1)

Retirement
2nd Source
(RET_VAL2)

Survivors
1st Source
(SUR_VAL1)

Survivors
2nd Source
(SUR_VAL2)

Disability
1st Source
(DIS_VAL1)

Disability
2nd Source
(DIS_VAL2)

Education
Assistance
(ED_VAL)

Financial
Assistance
(FIN_VAL)

Other
(OI_VAL)

1987
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1988
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1989
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1990
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1991
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1992
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1993
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1994
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1995
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1996
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1997
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1998
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
1999
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
2000
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
2001
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
2002
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
2003
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
2004
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
2005
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
2006
99,999
99,999
99,999
45,000
45,000
50,000
50,000
35,000
35,000
20,000
30,000
25,000
Source: Current Population Survey Annual Demographic File Technical Documentation (1988-2002), Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic
Supplement Technical Documentation (2003-2007)

48

Appendix Table 4. Internal CPS Censoring Points for each Income Source in Dollars (1975–1986)

Year

Wages
(I51A)

Self
Employment
(I51B)

Farm
(I51C)

Social
Security
(I52A)

Supplemental
Security
(I52B)

1975 99,999
99,999
99,999
9,999
9,999
1976 99,999
99,999
99,999
9,999
9,999
1977 99,999
99,999
99,999
9,999
9,999
1978 99,999
99,999
99,999
9,999
9,999
1979 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
1980 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
1981 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
1982 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
1983 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
1984 99,999
99,999
99,999 19,999
9,999
1985 250,000
250,000
250,000 19,999
9,999
1986 250,000
250,000
250,000 19,999
9,999
Source: Author’s calculations using internal March CPS data

Public
Assistance
(I53A)

Interest
(I53B)

Dividends
Rentals
(I53C)

Veterans
and
Workers
Comp
(I53D)

19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

Retirement
(I53E)

Other
(I53F)

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

49

Appendix Table 5. Internal CPS Censoring Points for each Income Source in Dollars (1987–2005)

Year

Primary
Earnings
(ERN_VAL)

Wages
(WS_VAL)

Self
Employment
(SE_VAL)

Farm
(FRM_VAL)

1987
299,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1988
299,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1989
299,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1990
299,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1991
299,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1992
299,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1993
999,999
999,999
999,999
999,999
1994 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
1995 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
1996 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
1997 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
1998 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
1999 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
2000 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
2001 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
2002 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
2003 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
2004 1,099,999 1,099,999
999,999
999,999
Source: Author’s calculations using internal March CPS data

Social
Security
(SS_VAL)

Supplemental
Security
(SSI_VAL)

Public
Assistance
(PAW_VAL)

Interest
(INT_VAL)

Dividends
(DIV_VAL)

Rental
(RNT_VAL)

Alimony
(ALM_VAL)

Child
Support
(CSP_VAL)

29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
29,999
49,999
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000
50,000

9,999
9,999
9,999
9,999
9,999
9,999
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000

19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
19,999
24,999
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000
25,000

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

50

Appendix Table 5. (Continued)

Year

Unemployment
(UC_VAL)

Workers
Comp
(WC_VAL)

Veterans
(VET_VAL)

Retirement
1st source
(RET_VAL1)

1987
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
1988
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
1989
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
1990
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
1991
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
1992
99,999
99,999
29,999
99,999
1993
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1994
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1995
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1996
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1997
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1998
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
1999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
2000
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
2001
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
2002
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
2003
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
2004
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
Source: Author’s calculations using internal March CPS data

Retirement
2nd Source
(RET_VAL2)

Survivors
1st Source
(SUR_VAL1)

Survivors
2nd Source
(SUR_VAL2)

Disability
1st Source
(DIS_VAL1)

Disability
2nd Source
(DIS_VAL2)

Education
Assistance
(ED_VAL)

Financial
Assistance
(FIN_VAL)

Other
(OI_VAL)

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999
99,999

51

Appendix Table 6: Rate of topcoding when using consistent topcoding procedures
Public Consistent Topcodes
Percent
Binding
Topcoded
Year
Wage
Self Employment
Farm
Public Assistance
Supplemental Security
Social Security
Interest
Dividends
Veterans / Workers Comp
Retirement
Other Income

1.31%
3.93%
2.42%
0.48%
1.94%
0.40%
1.15%
1.58%
0.23%
0.17%
0.17%

2001
1978
2001
1995
1994
1997
2004
2001
1985
1979
1979

Internal Consistent Topcodes
Percent
Binding
Topcoded
Year

0.36%
1.38%
0.28%
0.48%
0.30%
0.40%
0.21%
0.15%
0.00%
0.10%
0.07%

1984
1984
1983
1995
1992
1997
2004
1984
1986
1984
1984

Source: Author’s calculations using public use and internal March CPS data

52

ENDNOTES
1

Each CPS survey measures income from the previous calendar year. In this paper, all

references are to the income year, so when we discuss the year 1975, this refers to income from
various sources that members of the household received in 1975 reported at the March 1976
Current Population Survey interview.
2

In 2006, we were granted permission to use the internal March CPS to test the sensitivity of

measured income inequality in the public use CPS. We were given access to internal March CPS
records from 1975–2004. These data include information on income above the public use
topcode thresholds for respondents in the March CPS survey up to the processing limit in the
March CPS data. The internal March CPS data the Census Bureau uses to produce the statistics
in its official Census publications are subject to these same processing limits. However these
processing limits are lower than the data collection limits for income in the March CPS, which
are the limits on the actual values collected in the March CPS. (See Welniak, 2003 for a more
complete discussion of the processing limits and data collection limits.) Although we had access
to the same income information the Census Bureau uses to produce its official Census
publications, since our research project was limited to how topcoding affects measurement of
inequality in the USA, the files do not contain the responses to all of the non-income related
questions in the March CPS dataset. These omissions occur because the U.S. Census Bureau
limits internal data availability to data within the scope of the project.
3

We follow the same procedure for generating size-adjusted household income as discussed in

Burkhauser and Larrimore, 2008. These procedures, particularly the use of the square root of
household members to adjust for household size are standard in the international comparative
income distribution literature: see for instance Atkinson, Rainwater and Smeeding (1995). Its use

53

is increasing in studies of US income distribution trends. See Burkhauser, Couch, Houtenville
and Rovba (2004), Gottschalk and Danziger (2005), and Burkhauser, Osaki, and Rovba (2008).
4

See Levy and Murnane (1992) for an early review of the income distribution literature and a

more formal statement of this problem.
5

I(2) is also relatively prone to non-robustness to the effects of outliers in the sense discussed by

Cowell and Victoria-Feser (1996). However, we would stress the sampling variability aspect,
since the ‘averaging’ process used to combine the estimates from our 100 multiply imputed data
sets are likely to smooth out the effects of any outliers being added by the imputation process.
6

For instance, the Luxembourg Income Study website (http://www.lisproject.org) reports Gini

estimates derived from Public-Unadjusted data across the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s without
documentation of the topcoding issues discussed here.
7

Piketty and Saez (2003) only constructed top income shares up to year 1998, but they

subsequently updated this series to year 2006, see http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~saez/. It is these
latter values that we report here.

54

