                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CRISES AND SUDDEN STOPS:
   EVIDENCE FROM INTERNATIONAL BOND AND SYNDICATED-LOAN MARKETS

                                         Graciela L. Kaminsky

                                         Working Paper 14249
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14249


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2008




This paper was written in part while I was a visiting scholar at the Bank of Japan. I gratefully acknowledge
the hospitality of the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies at the Bank of Japan. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Graciela L. Kaminsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Crises and Sudden Stops: ¸˛Evidence from International Bond and Syndicated-Loan Markets
Graciela L. Kaminsky
NBER Working Paper No. 14249
August 2008
JEL No. F30,F36

                                            ABSTRACT

The crises in Mexico, Thailand, and Russia in the 1990s spread quite rapidly to countries as far apart
as South Africa and Pakistan. In the aftermath of these crises, many emerging economies lost access
to international capital markets. Using data on international primary issuance, this paper studies the
determinants of contagion and sudden stops following those crises. The results indicate that contagion
and sudden stops tend to occur in economies with financial fragility and current account problems.
They also show that high integration in international capital markets exposes countries to sudden stops
even in the absence of domestic vulnerabilities.


Graciela L. Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
I. Introduction

          A myriad of currency crises have plagued the last decade of the 20th century. These
crises have not been confined to national borders, nor have they been confined to a particular
region. The Thai crisis engulfed –within days– Malaysia, Indonesia, and the Philippines, while
the Russian crisis spread as fast to countries as far apart as Brazil and Pakistan. Naturally, these
events have triggered an intense debate about the seemingly contagious nature of crises and
fueled a large and increasing empirical research on financial contagion.
          Most of the empirical evidence on contagion has concentrated on the behavior of prices,
be it stock market prices, exchange rates, or interest rates.        The bulk of the studies have
examined the comovement of financial prices in tranquil and crisis times.1 The results are
varied, with some of the episodes examined suggesting important spillovers across national
borders, but with other crises being mostly confined to an individual country.
          Other studies on contagion have focused on the ability of countries to access international
capital markets in times of stress. For example, Calvo and Reinhart (1996) examine contagion in
Latin America and find that when there are capital outflows in the large countries in this region,
the smaller countries are also affected. Other researchers have examined the role of common
creditors on triggering contagion in times of crises. Foreign banks can exacerbate the original
crisis by calling loans and drying up credit lines from the crisis country but can also propagate
crises by calling loans elsewhere as they rebalance the overall risk of their portfolio following
the initial losses. For example, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) and Van Rijckeghem and Weder
(2003) examine the aftermath of the 1982 Debt crisis and the 1997 Asian crisis and find that the
countries most affected by capital flow reversals are those that borrow from the same group of
international banks.
          This paper contributes to this latter area of research. To examine emerging markets’
access to the international capital market, I look at bond and syndicated-loan international gross
primary issuance. This data can provide a better assessment of access (or lack thereof) to
international markets than net capital inflows. While zero net capital inflows may reflect no
access to international capital markets, they may also reflect full access to international capital

1
    See, for example, Forbes and Rigobon (2001, 2002).

                                                         1
markets in which inflows are just offset by outflows. Instead, gross issuance captures the ability
of a country to both access new credit and to roll over the maturing debt. Using a new database
on issuance in international capital markets,2 this paper examines the ability of emerging markets
to access the bond and syndicated-loan markets in the aftermath of the Mexican, Thai, and
Russian crises and examines what type of economic, political, and financial conditions trigger
the largest reversals in international gross issuance.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the evolution of
emerging market country access to international capital markets since 1980 and examines the
changing nature of this issuance. This section also provides information on the importance of
not only bond and syndicated-loan issuance but also equity issuance in foreign markets. Section
III presents a higher resolution picture of bond and syndicated-loan markets in times of stress.
Section IV reviews the theories of financial contagion and examines the links between sudden
stops, international investors rebalancing portfolio strategies, and market fundamentals in
emerging economies.         Section V presents the conclusions.

II. A Brief History of Emerging Economies’ Access to International Capital Markets

         International financial integration dramatically increased in the last three decades. As
shown in Figure 1, total issuance in international capital markets rises from 82 billion dollars in
1980 to about 4.5 trillion dollars in 2004.         Perhaps the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in
1973 is the main driving force behind this explosion in international capital mobility. With no
need to defend the peg, countries can choose their own monetary policy without having to
restrict capital mobility and thus a new era of financial liberalization begins. As early as July
1973, United States, Germany, and Great Britain eliminate capital account restrictions, with
Japan liberalizing in 1979. In the late 1970s, Latin American and some Asian countries also
remove controls on capital account transactions and deregulate the domestic financial sector,
with international issuance by these two regions increasing seven-fold, from 33 billion dollars in
1980 to 260 billion dollars in 2004 (see the top panels in Figure 2). In the 1980s, the wave of


2
  The information on bond and syndicated-loan issuance is collected by Dealogic. This database has detailed
information on individual issues, including the amount of funds raised, the maturity, and the interest rate at which
the debt is contracted. See the Data Appendix for detailed information on the database.
                                                         2
international financial liberalization also embraces Western European countries as they move
towards the European Monetary System, with most Eastern European countries removing
controls on capital flows in the 1990s.3
        Emerging economies’ access to international capital markets is first fueled by the oil
shocks of the 1970s together with the growth of the Eurodollar market and amplified by a
remarkable spurt of bank lending during 1979-81. As shown in Figure 3, the first international
market to develop in the 1970s is the syndicated-loan market, with the Eurodollar market rapidly
channeling the high savings of OPEC countries to all developing countries. As shown in this
figure, loans are issued to the developing countries in Asia, the Middle East, Africa, and
especially Latin America. The boom in syndicated lending to emerging markets peaks at 58
billion dollars in 1981. Mexico’s default in August 1982 triggers an abrupt halt in lending, with
syndicated-loan issuance declining by 50 percent. With banks recalling their loans from all
emerging markets, other defaults follow. Most of Latin American countries suspend interest and
principal payments, and they are also followed by countries in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Africa.
The rest of the 1980s witnesses a collapse of access of emerging markets to the international
syndicated-loan market: Gross issuance of syndicated loans remains at half of the issuance
reached in the early 1980s. The collapse of Latin America’s issuance is even more dramatic,
with loan issuance at 15 percent of the level reached in 1981.
        By the end of the 1980s, a new development ends with the isolation of developing
markets from international capital markets: The Brady plan and its initiative to restructure
defaulted loans into bonds collateralized by U.S. treasuries in 19894 create, almost overnight, a
market for sovereign emerging market bonds. As investor confidence in emerging market
countries starts to recover gradually, both governments and the private sector start issuing bonds
in international capital markets. Latin America benefits especially from the new international

3
  See Kaminsky and Schmukler (2008) for a chronology of financial liberalization in industrial and emerging
countries.
4
  Brady bonds are dollar-denominated bonds, named after U.S. Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, traded on the
international bond market, allowing emerging countries to transform nonperforming debt into mostly collateralized
bonds. Most of the bonds had the principal collateralized by specially issued U.S. Treasury 30-year zero-coupon
bonds purchased by the debtor country using funding from IMF, the World Bank, and the country’s own foreign
exchange reserves. Interest payments on Brady bonds are in some cases also guaranteed by securities of at least
double-A rated credit quality held with the New York Federal Reserve Bank.
                                                       3
bond market. In fact, issuance in the bond market surpasses that of the syndicated- loan market,
with Latin American countries’ bond issuance increasing from 1 billion dollars in 1990 to 64
billion dollars in 1997.
        The Brady plan, with its initiative of restructuring distressed commercial bank loans, also
provides a new impetus to the syndicated-loan market. Helped by the easy monetary conditions
in industrial countries in the early 1990s, syndicated loans to emerging markets reach a new peak
at 200 billion dollars in 1997, almost four times higher than the level reached in the early 1980s.
This time around, the largest beneficiaries in emerging markets are the East Asian countries,
with gross issuance reaching almost 100 billion dollars in 1997. The nationality of lenders also
changes: While in the early 1980s most of the syndicates are composed of U.S. banks, in the
1990s Japanese and European banks play a leading role in lending to emerging markets,
especially to East Asian countries.
        A new feature of financial integration in the 1990s is the forceful development of an
international equity market. In this decade, corporations start not only to raise capital in the
highly unregulated international bond and syndicated-loan markets but also to participate in
regulated equity markets in various financial centers. For example, the liquid U.S. capital
markets start attracting record numbers of foreign issuers and investors in the early 1990s. In
particular, many foreign issuers find it easier to raise capital in the United States through the
creation of American Depositary Receipt Programs.5
        Again in the 1990s, as in the 1980s, booms are followed by capital flow reversals. The
first reversal occurs in the immediate aftermath of Mexico’s currency crisis in December 1994.
In this case, access to international capital markets resumes for most countries within one year
and returns to its peak value soon thereafter. The second, more severe reversal occurs in 1997
during the Asian crisis. This reversal is later aggravated by the Russian default in August 1998
and the Brazilian crisis in 1998-1999. This time, the collapse in international issuance is more
pronounced and long lasting, with Latin American total gross issuance declining about 40
percent in 1999 from its peak in 1997, and Asia total gross issuance declining 60 percent in


5
  The magnitude of equity issues is not directly comparable to the magnitude of debt issues because unlike equity,
bonds have finite maturities. Firms typically roll over bonds at maturity, and hence a part of the debt issues go
towards refinancing old debt and only the remaining part is new capital.
                                                        4
1998. The evidence from transition economies is similar to that of Asia and Latin America. In
the early 1990s, gross issuance sharply increases, with a peak in 1997 at 36 billion dollars. Also,
as in Asia and Latin America, international issuance declines approximately 30 percent
following the Russian crisis.
           In 2003, following the decline in interest rates in industrial countries, capital flows to all
emerging markets resumes, with gross issuance reaching their previous peak of the 1990s by
2005.

III. Crises and Sudden Stops: Preliminary Evidence

           This section shows a higher resolution picture of emerging economies’ participation in
international capital markets and of the sudden stops in times of turmoil. While about 75
emerging economies participate in international capital markets at one time or another, only a
small group of those countries participates actively in both markets. This paper will focus on
this smaller group of countries, those that have at least participated in more than ten percent of
the quarters in both the bond and the loan markets during the capital inflows episode of the early
1990s before the start of the episodes of crises of the 1990s. Table 1 shows the panel of twenty-
four countries. The panel includes ten Asian countries, eight Latin American countries, three
countries in the Middle East and Africa region, and three transition economies. Table 1 also
shows the extent of their participation in the bond and syndicated-loan market during the 1990-
1994 period.
           Figures 4 and 5 show the financial spillovers following the Mexican, Thai, and Russian
crises. They respectively report the change in gross bond issuance and the change in gross loan
issuance in the year following the crisis with respect to the issuance in the year prior to the crisis
(as a percent of GDP at PPP value6). The top panels look at the aftermath of the Mexican
devaluation in December 1994, the middle panels examine the aftermath of the collapse of the
Thai baht in July 1997, and the bottom panels study the aftermath of the Russian devaluation and
moratorium in August 1998. These figures capture three stylized patterns of the behavior of
international capital markets in times of turmoil in the 1990s.


6
    I use GDP in dollars at PPP values to eliminate the effect of the devaluations on the value of GDP in dollars.

                                                            5
       First, the extent of the sudden stops in the two markets in the aftermath of the three crises
is substantially different, with the retrenchment in participation of emerging economies in
international capital markets increasing progressively after the Thai and the Russian crises. The
reversal in gross issuance in the aftermath of the Mexican crisis is confined to a small group of
countries, especially in the syndicated-loan market where only 20 percent of the countries suffer
reversals in issuance. The share of countries suffering reversals in issuance in the aftermath of
the Thai crisis increases to 50 percent in the bond market (from 45 percent during the Mexican
crisis) and to 42 percent in the syndicated-loan market. Finally, we observe a more general
retrenchment in participation of emerging economies in the aftermath of the Russian crisis, with
70 percent of the countries in the sample suffering a decline in gross issuance in each market.
       Second, while the flight away from emerging markets becomes more pronounced during
the Thai and Russian crises in both markets, it is only in the syndicated-loan market where the
reversals become massive. In this market, the countries in the 85th percentile suffer reversals of
the order of 0.70 percent of GDP during the Mexican crises, with reversals increasing to almost 5
percent of GDP during the Thai crisis and to almost 6.5 percent of GDP during the Russian
crisis. Instead, the size of the reversals in the bond market for the countries in the 85th percentile
oscillates around 1 percent of GDP for all three crises.
       Third, only during the Thai crisis does contagion have a regional pattern. During the
Thai crisis, 70 percent of all the countries in Asia suffer pronounced reversals in both the bond
and syndicated-loan markets. In contrast, in the aftermath of the Mexican crisis, none of the
Latin American countries suffer reversals in the syndicated-loan market and only Peru suffers a
small decline in issuance in the bond market. As discussed before, contagion during the Russian
crisis is not contained within the region but spreads very quickly around the world.

IV. What Triggers Sudden Stops?

       The experience in the 1990s, with booms and busts in international capital flows and
crises sprouting around the world, has alarmed both the academic and policy communities and
has fueled a large and growing theoretical and empirical research to explain financial contagion
and sudden stops.


                                                  6
        Several authors have pointed out that contagion tends to be of a regional nature; it affects
countries in geographic proximity. For example, Glick and Rose (1999) conclude that patterns
of international trade are important in understanding how currency crises spread, above and
beyond any macroeconomic phenomena. They examine contagion during five different currency
crises (in 1971, 1973, 1992, 1994, and 1997) and show that currency crises affect clusters of
countries tied together by international trade. They also show that trade linkages can help to
explain cross-country correlations in exchange market pressure during crisis episodes, even after
controlling for macroeconomic factors. Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) also show that some
crises are of a regional nature but question whether this is due to trade links or to financial links,
particularly through the role played by banks. They claim that it is difficult to distinguish among
the two because most countries that are linked in trade are also linked in finance. One potential
channel of transmission stressed by Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) is the role of international
common lenders, in particular commercial banks. The behavior of foreign banks can both
exacerbate the original crisis, by calling loans and drying up credit lines, and also propagate
crises by calling loans elsewhere. The need to rebalance the overall risk of the bank’s asset
portfolio and to recapitalize following the initial losses can lead to a marked reversal in
commercial bank credit across markets where the bank has exposure. To evaluate the effect of
this channel of contagion, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2000) examine crises from 1970 to 1999
using data for twenty developing and small industrial countries. They show that during the 1982
Debt crisis most Latin American countries were borrowing from U.S. banks while in the Asian
crises of 1997, with the exception of the Philippines, all the crisis countries were mostly
borrowing from Japanese banks. When they group countries in accordance with their exposure
to a common creditor, they find that knowing that there is a country in crisis in that core group
has a higher predictive power about future crises in the group than knowing that a country has
trade links with the “original” crisis country.           Naturally, as emphasized by these authors,
financial links do not need to be just regional; now contagion can have global reach.7
        Most of the research on financial contagion stresses information asymmetries in capital
markets. For example, Calvo and Mendoza (2000) present a model where the fixed costs of

7
  See also, Kaminsky and Reinhart (2008) for an analysis of contagion in stock markets and the regional/global
scope of spillovers.
                                                      7
gathering and processing country-specific information give rise to herding behavior, even when
investors are rational. Kodres and Pritsker (2002) also study contagion in a model with rational
agents and information asymmetries. These authors stress the role played by investors who
engage in cross-market hedging of macroeconomic risks. In Calvo (1998), financial contagion
arises when a leveraged investor facing margin calls needs to sell (to an uninformed counterpart)
his or her asset holdings. Because of the information asymmetries, a “lemon problem” arises and
the asset can only be sold at a firesale price. A variant of this story can be told about an open-end
fund portfolio manager who needs to raise liquidity in anticipation of future redemptions. In
either case, the strategy will be not to sell the asset whose price has already collapsed but other
assets in the portfolio. In doing so, however, other asset prices are depressed and the original
disturbance spreads across markets. Hence, just as a commercial bank may call its loans to
Malaysia after Thailand has a crisis, so can a diversified investor choose (or be forced by margin
calls) to sell his or her Argentinean bond and equity holdings after Mexico devalues. In order to
be of any consequence, however, this channel of transmission requires that there be sufficient
asset market liquidity. In other words, all these models suggest that the channels of transmission
arise from the global diversification of financial portfolios.8 As such, they have the empirical
implication that countries with more internationally-traded financial assets and more liquid
markets should be more vulnerable to contagion. Small, highly illiquid markets are likely to be
under-represented in international portfolios to begin with and, as such, shielded from this type
of contagion.9
        Naturally, country fragilities will also matter when investors rebalance their portfolio in
times of turmoil. Moreover, the last theory of financial contagion focuses on common fragilities.
The so-called “wake-up-call hypothesis” (a term coined by Morris Goldstein, 1998) relies on
either investor irrationality or a fixed cost in acquiring information about emerging markets. In


8
  This type of spillover is clearly suggested by the Wall Street Journal on November 18, 1998, when explaining why
the Mexican stock market plummeted in August and September as leveraged investors faced margin calls: “Earlier
this year, so many families living in the fashionable suburb of San Pedro Garza Garcia invested in Russian bonds
that it became known as San Pedrosburgo. Now this wealthy enclave feels more like Stalingrad.”
9
  The finance literature has long recognized the importance of liquid asset markets and many have studied the price
effect of the liquidity premium. Most of this literature has concentrated on the experiences in mature financial
markets. So, for example, many authors have examined the behavior of the on-the-run (newly-issued) versus off-
the-run U.S. Treasury bond yields.
                                                        8
this story, once investors “wake up” to the weaknesses that were revealed in the crisis country,
they will proceed to avoid and move out of countries that share some characteristics with the
crisis country. So, for instance, if the original crisis country had a large current account deficit
and a relatively “rigid” exchange rate, then other countries showing similar features will be
vulnerable to similar pressures (see Basu, 1998, for a formal model).
           This section draws on these studies to empirically study why some countries suffer
severe reversals but others are left unscathed in the aftermath of the Mexican, Thai, and Russian
crises. The focus will be on country fragilities as well as on the role of the exchange rate regime,
and on the role of liquidity of markets and regional proximity.
           When examining country vulnerabilities, the research on crises and contagion has
focused on the effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal policy, problems in the current
account, fragility in the banking sector, and overall macroeconomic stability. Naturally, with a
large panel of countries we have to limit the number of indicators so as to keep our panel
balanced. CPI inflation is used to capture monetary policy. The government balance (as a share
of GDP) captures fiscal policy. The current account balance (as a share of GDP) and deviations
of the exchange from PPP are used to identify external imbalances. GDP growth rate deviation
from growth during normal times is used to capture overall macroeconomic stability.10
           Most of the currency crises of the 1990s occurred in the presence of banking problems.
Since vulnerabilities of the banking sector are associated with rapid credit creation (see, for
example, Kaminsky, 1998), I use the growth rate of domestic credit/GDP to capture banking
problems.11 These crises were also preceded by large booms in international borrowing and
extreme dollarization. Many have argued that moral hazard and government bailouts were the
main culprits behind these excesses.             For example, Dooley (2000) and Burnside, Eichenbaum,
and Rebelo (2001) conclude that fixing the exchange rate offers free insurance to firms that
borrow in dollars, creating moral hazard opportunities. These authors show that in the absence
of government insurance, it is optimal for banks to hedge exchange risk in forward markets. The


10
   The data for the current account balance, GDP in dollars at PPP values, GDP in domestic currency at constant
prices, Government Balance, the nominal exchange rate (current and PPP values), and the CPI inflation rate are
from the IMF World Economic Outlook Database.
11
     The data for domestic credit (of commercial banks) is from the IMF International Financial Statistics.

                                                            9
presence of government insurance eliminates the incentives to hedge the risk of devaluations,
encouraging banks to magnify their exchange exposure as they reap additional returns in the
event of no devaluation and are bailed out when devaluations erode the quality of loans.      These
models also suggest that sudden stops become more dramatic if countries adopt a fixed exchange
rate regime. To examine the effect of the exchange rate regime, I first have to identify the
episodes of fixed and flexible rates.      The International Monetary Fund reports an annual
classification of countries that peg or float. This index is based on what governments say they
are doing, a de jure classification. This approach, however, ignores the fact that many alleged
floaters intervene in the exchange market to reduce exchange rate volatility, while some fixers
devalue periodically to accommodate independent monetary policies. To address this problem, a
variety of authors have proposed a de facto classification. In this section, I use Reinhart and
Rogoff (2004) classification. These authors classify episodes into five groups: pegs, crawling
pegs, managed floating, freely floating, and freely falling. I divide the sample into two groups.
The fixed exchange rate group comprises the pegs and crawling pegs episodes; the flexible
exchange rate group comprises managed floating and freely floating. The exchange rate regime
indicator takes a value of 1 for fixed and 2 for flexible-exchange rate regimes.
       More recently, the literature on the determinants of crises and contagion has also focused
on political vulnerabilities. To capture political risk, I use The Political Risk Rating published in
the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). This index includes 12 weighted variables
covering both political and social attributes.        The components of this index include the
following indicators: Government Stability, Socioeconomic Conditions, Investment Profile,
Internal Conflict, External Conflict, Corruption, Military in Politics, Religious Tensions, Law
and Order, Ethnic Tensions, Democratic Accountability, and Bureaucracy Quality. The Political
Risk index is based on 100 points. The country scores, ranging from zero to 100, are then broken
into categories from Very Low Risk (80 to 100 points) to Very High Risk (zero to 49.5 points).
       To examine trade and financial links of contagion, I use two variables. Since trade-link
contagion is mostly of a regional nature, I use a distance indicator to capture this type of
spillovers. This indicator is equal to the distance of each country in the sample from the
“original” crisis country, in our case, Mexico, Thailand, and Russia, respectively.       But crises
have also spread, in part because of worldwide financial diversification. For this channel of

                                                 10
transmission to be of any consequence, there should be sufficient asset market liquidity. If bond
and loan markets are so underdeveloped that portfolio flows are trivial, then clearly this channel
of transmission is not likely to be quantitatively important.     Thus, to capture this channel of
contagion, I use a measure of each country’s participation in the corresponding international
capital market (the country’s share in total emerging market issuance in the international bond
(loan) market) to examine reversals in the bond (loan) market.
          Naturally, an epidemic may arise when multiple individuals are exposed to a common
virus. The global analogy to the common virus can be found in international interest rate
fluctuations, which have had much to do in explaining the cycles in capital flows to emerging
markets (See, for example, Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart, 1993). To account for the world
common factors, I use the U.S. federal funds real interest rate and the growth rate of world
output.
          Tables 2 and 3 report the results of univariate regressions for the bond and the
syndicated-loan market, respectively, and give us a preliminary reading on the role of the various
factors on contagion. The panel model consists of three cross sections, one for each crisis. The
cross-sections consist of data for the twenty four countries in Table 1. The dependent variable,
issuance in the year following the crisis minus issuance in the year preceding the crisis (as a
percent of GDP in dollars at PPP value), is shown in Figure 4 for the bond market and in Figure
5 for the syndicated-loan market. To mitigate potential endogeneity biases, all the explanatory
variables enter the regressions lagged one period.
          The first two explanatory variables in the tables are those capturing monetary and fiscal
policies. Interestingly, expansionary macropolicies cannot explain the extent of the spillovers in
the bond and the syndicated-loan markets in the aftermath of the crises of the 1990s. In contrast,
external fragility seems to capture a common trait among the countries that suffer larger
reversals. In the bond market, countries with current account deficits of about 5 percent of GDP
suffer issuance reversals of about 30 basis points of GDP larger than those with current account
balances. In the syndicated-loan market, this effect is even larger, reaching half percentage point
of GDP for a country with a current account deficit of about 5 percent of GDP. Similarly,
financial vulnerabilities as captured by the annual growth rate of domestic credit (as a share of
GDP) can explain sudden stops in the bond market. In this market, countries in the 80th

                                                 11
percentile of the distribution of credit growth have a reversal of approximately 40 basis points of
GDP larger than those in the 20th percentile. This effect is smaller (and not statistically different
from zero) in the syndicated-loan market. Liquidity (high participation in international capital
markets) also contributes to both lower bond and syndicated-loan issuance in times of turmoil.
In the bond market, countries with high participation in international issuance (those in the 80th
percentile) suffer a reduction in issuance of 50 basis points of GDP larger than those with low
participation (those in the 20th percentile). This effect is substantially larger in the syndicated-
loan market, reaching 1.5 percentage points of GDP. World market conditions also seem to have
been at the heart of withdrawals in the syndicated-loan market, with an increase of 1 percentage
point in the world real interest rate leading on average to a decline in issuance of about 1
percentage point of GDP. In contrast, the results in Table 2 suggest that fluctuations in interest
rates do not affect significantly issuance in the international bond market. Reversals in the loan
market seem to have been of a regional nature as captured by the indicator of distance from the
“original” crisis country.          This is not the case in the bond market. Finally, I do not find any
statistically significant effects of the exchange rate regimes, institutions, or world output.12
            Tables 4 and 5 report the estimates of the multivariate regressions for the bond and the
syndicated-loan market, respectively. The explanatory variables in these tables are those with
coefficients significantly different from zero in the univariate regressions.               In both tables,
regression 1 is the baseline regression, regressions 2-5 allow for various idiosyncratic effects for
each of the crises and a role for world market conditions, and the last regression includes random
effects. The regressions for the bond market include the current account/GDP ratio, the growth
rate of domestic credit/GDP, and the country share in total emerging market issuance in the
international bond market as explanatory variables. The regressions explaining changes in
issuance in the syndicated-loan market include the current account/GDP ratio, distance from the
original crisis country, and the country share in total emerging market issuance in the
syndicated-loan market as explanatory variables. As seen in regression 1, all the variables have
the expected sign and the coefficients are significantly different from zero at all conventional
significance levels.          Regression 2 allows for idiosyncratic external vulnerabilities. Note that


12
     For the syndicated-loan market, institutions have a coefficient with the wrong sign.

                                                           12
external imbalances do not trigger more dramatic reversals in bond or loan issuance in the
aftermath of the Mexican crisis. This is only a feature in the aftermath of the Thai and Russian
crises (although the effect is imprecisely estimated for the bond market in the aftermath of the
Russian crisis). The effect of external imbalances can be quite pronounced. For example, in the
aftermath of the Russian crisis, a current account deficit (as a share of GDP) of 5 percent leads to
a reversal in loan issuance of 1.5 percent of GDP. For the bond market, regression 3 allows for
idiosyncratic effects of banking fragilities across the three crises. During the Thai crisis, a 10-
percent increase in the domestic credit/GDP ratio leads to a decline in bond issuance of 0.3
percent of GDP but it has no statistically significant effect in the aftermath of the other crises.
The estimates in regression 3 in Table 4 suggest that the Thai crisis was the only one with a
regional scope.     Regression 4 indicates that across all crises, the countries with more
participation in the international bond market are those with more pronounced reversals in bond
issuance (although the effect is imprecisely estimated in this regression). In contrast, the bank
creditor channel is only statistically significant in the aftermath of the Thai and Russian crises.
Overall, the R 2 of these regressions ranges between 0.20 and 0.40, suggesting that domestic
vulnerabilities (external imbalances and banking problems) and high participation in
international capital markets contribute to explain the extent and duress of the reversals
following these crises. In contrast, regression 5 indicates that once the effects of domestic
vulnerabilities and liquidity are included in the estimations, world market conditions cannot
explain the spillovers of the 1990s. To check for robustness, the last regression includes random
effects. The results are not affected.

V. Conclusions

       This paper analyzes international issuance in the bond and syndicated-loan markets in the
aftermath of the Mexican, Thai, and Russian crises. I examine a sample of 24 emerging- market
countries. The results indicate that high integration in international capital markets exposes
countries to sudden stops even in the absence of domestic vulnerabilities. Since reversals are
mostly accompanied by large real depreciations and deep recessions, policy makers worry about
sharp downturns in capital flows. This is why some countries have reintroduced capital controls
in the midst of crises. While capital controls may work, at least in the very short run, the
                                                13
introduction of restrictions to capital mobility may have undesirable long-run effects. In
particular, capital controls protect inefficient domestic financial institutions and thus may trigger
even further financial vulnerabilities.13         Capital controls may also delay improvements in
corporate governance of non-financial firms because as countries liberalize their capital
accounts, domestic corporations start participating in international capital markets, mainly
through cross-listing in major world stock exchanges, with higher disclosure standards and under
the jurisdiction of a superior legal system. This certainly promotes more transparency in the
management of the firm and can trigger improvements in corporate governance (see, for
example, Stulz, 1999). Thus, regulation of capital flows may not only provoke financial
vulnerabilities but also lower economic growth. Moreover, the ability of governments to control
international capital flows diminishes with globalization.
        This suggests that capital controls may not be the optimal policy to deal with sudden
stops; while they may work in the short run, they may have adverse effects in the long run. My
results also suggest that larger reversals tend to occur in countries with banking and current
account problems. Thus conservative policies should be at the heart of dealing with volatile
capital flows.




13
  Claessens, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Huizinga (1998) present evidence that liberalization of the capital account and
foreign bank entry lead to improvements in banking system efficiency.
                                                      14
                                                 Data Appendix
                                Bond and Syndicated-Loan Issuance Data

           I use data gathered by Dealogic, a data analysis firm that produces two datasets on
financial asset issuance: Bondware, containing information on issuance in the international bond
and equity markets; and Loanware, containing information on the syndicated-loan market.14
Both databases start in 1980. Both datasets cover issuance by over 110 countries. For the bond
and the syndicated-loan markets, the databases include borrowing by both the private sector and
the government.
           Bondware contains information on issuance of bonds, both in the international and in the
domestic markets. In the paper, I restrict my analysis to issuance in international markets.
Following the BIS classification, for the bond market, I define international issuance as all
foreign currency issues by residents and non-residents in a given country and all domestic
currency issues launched in the domestic market by non-residents. In addition, domestic
currency issues launched in the domestic market by residents are also considered international
issues if they are specifically targeted at non-resident investors.15
           The Loanware dataset contains information on syndicated loans, issued both in the
international and in the domestic market since the 1980s. Syndicated loans are credits granted
by a group of banks to a borrower. Although there is a single contract, every syndicate member
has a separate claim on the debtor. As for the case of bonds, I am only interested in syndicated
loans issued in the international market.                I follow the BIS classification that identifies
international loans as all syndicated loans where the nationality of at least one of the syndicate
banks is different from that of the borrower.




14
     For a more detailed description of the Bondware and Loanware datasets, see Cipriani and Kaminsky (2007).
15
   This definition covers Euro-market offerings (i.e., bonds issued and sold outside the country of the currency in
which they are denominated, like dollar-denominated bonds issued in Europe or Asia), global bonds (i.e., single
offerings structured to allow simultaneous placements in major markets: Europe, U.S., and Asia), and foreign
offerings (i.e., bonds issued by firms and governments outside the issuer’s country, usually denominated in the
currency of the country in which they are issued). Foreign bonds include Samurai and Yankee bonds.
                                                         15
                                         References

Basu, Ritu, 1998, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      Volume 103, Number 3, August, 797-817.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo, 2001, “Hedging and Financial Fragility
       in Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes,” European Economic Review, Vol. 45, 1151–93.

Calvo, Guillermo, 1998, “Contagion in Emerging Markets: When Wall Street is a Carrier,”
       unpublished, in http://www.columbia.edu/~gc2286/ciecrp8.pdf

Calvo, Guillermo and Enrique Mendoza, 2000, “Rational Contagion and the Globalization of
       Securities Markets,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 51, Number 1, June, 79-
       113.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart, 1993, “Capital Inflows and Real
       Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 40, Number 1,
       108-151.

Calvo, Sara and Carmen Reinhart, 1996, “Capital Flows to Latin America: Is There Evidence of
       Contagion Effects?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 1619

Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Harry Huizinga, 1998, “How Does Foreign Entry
       Affect the Domestic Banking Market?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No.
       1918, May.

Cipriani, Marco, and Graciela Kaminsky, 2007, “A New Era of Financial Integration: Global,
       Market, and Country Factors,” George Washington University Working Paper.

Dooley, Michael, 2000, “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets,” Economic Journal, Royal
      Economic Society, Vol. 110 (460), January, 256-72.

Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon, 2001, “Contagion in Latin America: Definitions,
       Measurement, and Policy Implications,” Economia, Volume 1, Number 2, 1-46.

Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon, 2002, “No Contagion, Only Interdependence: Measuring
       Stock Market Co-movements,” Journal of Finance, Volume 57, Number 5, October,
       pages 2223-2261.

Glick, Reuven and Andrew Rose, 1999, “Contagion and Trade: Why are Currency Crises
       Regional?" Journal of International Money and Finance, Elsevier, vol. 18, Number 4,
       August, 603-617.



                                              16
Goldstein, Morris, 1998, The Asian Financial Crisis; Causes, Cures, and Systemic Implications,
       Policy Analyses in International Economics 55. Washington D.C.: Institute for
       International Economics,

Kaminsky, Graciela, 1998, “Currency and Banking Crises: The Early Warnings of Distress,”
      International Finance Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart, 2000, “On Crises, Contagion, and Confusion,”
      Journal of International Economics, Vol. 51 No. 1, June, 145-168.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Carmen Reinhart, 2008, “The Center and the Periphery: The
      Globalization of Financial Shocks,” in Carmen M. Reinhart, Carlos A. Végh and Andres
      Velasco (eds.), Money, Crises, and Transition: Essays in Honor of Guillermo Calvo,
      MIT Press, forthcoming.

Kaminsky, Graciela and Sergio Schmukler, 2008, “Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: Financial
      Liberalization and Stock Market Cycles,” Review of Finance, forthcoming

Kodres, Laura and Matt Pristker, 2002, “A Rational Expectations Model of Financial
      Contagion,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 57, 769-799.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff, 2004, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
      Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, No. 1, 1–
      48.

Stulz, René, 1999, “Globalization of Capital Markets and the Cost of Capital,” Journal of
       Applied Corporate Finance, Vol. 12, Number 3, 8-25.

Van Rijckeghem, Caroline and Beatrice Weder, 2003, “Spillovers through Banking Centers: a
      Panel Data Analysis of Bank Flows,” Journal of International Money and Finance,
      volume 22, Issue 4, August, 483-509.




                                             17
                                                      Figure 1
                          Global Gross Primary Issuance in International Capital Markets
                                                 (Billion Dollars)


 5,000


 4,000


 3,000


 2,000


 1,000


     0
         1980   1982     1984    1986    1988    1990     1992    1994    1996     1998    2000    2002    2004

Note: Global issuance includes issuance in bond, equity, and syndicated-loan markets by industrial and developing
countries.
                                                                                                              Figure 2
                                                                                 Emerging Economies' Gross Primary Issuance in International Markets
                                                                                                         (Billion Dollars)



                                           East Asia                                                                                                                    Latin America


 200                                                                                                                           150



 150
                                                                                                                               100

 100


                                                                                                                                50
  50



   0                                                                                                                             0
       1980
          0



              1982
                 2



                     1984
                        4



                            1986
                               6



                                   1988
                                      8



                                          1990
                                             0



                                                 1992
                                                    2



                                                         1994
                                                            4



                                                                   1996
                                                                      6



                                                                          1998
                                                                             8



                                                                                    2000
                                                                                       0



                                                                                           2002
                                                                                              2



                                                                                                  2004
                                                                                                     4




                                                                                                                                     1980



                                                                                                                                            1982



                                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                                   1984



                                                                                                                                                          1986
                                                                                                                                                             6



                                                                                                                                                                 1988



                                                                                                                                                                          1990



                                                                                                                                                                                 1992



                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                        1994



                                                                                                                                                                                               1996
                                                                                                                                                                                                  6



                                                                                                                                                                                                      1998



                                                                                                                                                                                                             2000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2004
                                   Middle East and Africa                                                                                                        Transition Economies


  80                                                                                                                            80



  60                                                                                                                            60



  40                                                                                                                            40



  20                                                                                                                            20



   0                                                                                                                             0
       1980



              1982



                     1984



                            1986



                                   1988



                                          1990



                                                  1992



                                                            1994



                                                                   1996



                                                                          1998



                                                                                    2000



                                                                                           2002



                                                                                                   2004




                                                                                                                                     1980



                                                                                                                                            1982



                                                                                                                                                   1984



                                                                                                                                                          1986



                                                                                                                                                                 1988



                                                                                                                                                                          1990



                                                                                                                                                                                 1992



                                                                                                                                                                                        1994



                                                                                                                                                                                               1996



                                                                                                                                                                                                      1998



                                                                                                                                                                                                             2000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2002



                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2004
Note: Issuance includes issuance in bond, equity, and syndicated-loan markets.
                                                                                                       Figure 3
                                                                          Emerging Economies' Gross Primary Issuance in International Markets
                                                                                                  (Billion Dollars)


                                           East Asia                                                                                                            Latin America


100                                                                                                                    80



 75                                                                                                                    60



 50                                                                                                                    40



 25                                                                                                                    20



  0                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                            1980



                                                                                                                                   1982



                                                                                                                                          1984



                                                                                                                                                 1986



                                                                                                                                                        1988



                                                                                                                                                               1990



                                                                                                                                                                      1992



                                                                                                                                                                                1994



                                                                                                                                                                                       1996



                                                                                                                                                                                              1998



                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000



                                                                                                                                                                                                            2002



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
      1980



             1982



                     1984



                            1986



                                   1988



                                          1990



                                                 1992



                                                         1994



                                                                1996



                                                                       1998



                                                                               2000



                                                                                      2002



                                                                                             2004
                                           Middle East and Africa                                                                                              Transition Economies


 40                                                                                                                    40



 30                                                                                                                    30



 20                                                                                                                    20



 10                                                                                                                    10



  0                                                                                                                     0
      1980



             1982



                     1984



                            1986



                                   1988



                                          1990



                                                 1992



                                                         1994



                                                                1996



                                                                       1998



                                                                               2000



                                                                                      2002



                                                                                             2004




                                                                                                                            1980



                                                                                                                                   1982



                                                                                                                                          1984



                                                                                                                                                 1986



                                                                                                                                                        1988



                                                                                                                                                               1990



                                                                                                                                                                      1992



                                                                                                                                                                                1994



                                                                                                                                                                                       1996



                                                                                                                                                                                              1998



                                                                                                                                                                                                     2000



                                                                                                                                                                                                            2002



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2004
                    bonds
                    equities
                    syndicated loans
                                                                                                                                                                                  -2
                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                     -2
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                           Mexico                                                      Malaysia                                               Hong Kong

                                                                                                      South Korea                                                       Mexico                                                   Malaysia

                                                                                                            Brazil                                                  Hong Kong                                                     Taiwan

                                                                                                          Malaysia                                                  Philippines                                              South Africa

                                                                                                           Russia                                                      Thailand                                                  Thailand

                                                                                                         Argentina                                                 South Korea                                                 Singapore

                                                                                                       Hong Kong                                                       Pakistan                                            Czech Republic

                                                                                                          Thailand                                                      Taiwan                                                      Peru

                                                                                                        Venezuela                                                     Colombia                                                     China

                                                                                                           Taiwan                                                        Brazil                                               Philippines

                                                                                                         Indonesia                                                       China                                                      India

                                                                                                          Pakistan                                                        India                                                     Chile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 4




                                                                                                         Colombia                                                         Peru                                                  Indonesia

                                                                                                    Czech Republic                                               Czech Republic                                                   Russia
                                                                                                                                                                                                   After the Thai Crisis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             After the Mexican Crisis




                                                                                                                                      After the Russian Crisis
                                                                                                             India                                                    Indonesia                                                   Mexico




in the year prior to the crisis (as a percent of GDP value in PPP terms).
                                                                                                            China                                                         Chile                                                  Hungary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Change in Issuance (as a Percent of GDP)




                                                                                                             Peru                                                       Russia                                                  Argentina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Global Spillovers in the International Bond Market




                                                                                                       Philippines                                                      Turkey                                                     Brazil

                                                                                                          Uruguay                                                      Hungary                                                  Colombia

                                                                                                      South Africa                                                    Argentina                                                Venezuela

                                                                                                           Turkey                                                      Uruguay                                               South Korea

                                                                                                             Chile                                                   Singapore                                                   Uruguay
                                                                                                                                                                   South Africa                                                   Turkey




Notes: Change in issuance is measured as issuance in the year following the crisis minus issuance
                                                                                                        Singapore
                                                                                                          Hungary                                                    Venezuela                                                   Pakistan
                                                                                                                     -12
                                                                                                                                                                                    -12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -12




                                                                                                                           -6
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                    6
                                                                                                                                                                                          -6
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6

                                                                                                       Hong Kong                                                      Hong Kong                                                    Singapore
                                                                                                    Czech Republic                                                 Czech Republic                                                    Malaysia
                                                                                                         Indonesia                                                      Indonesia                                                     Russia
                                                                                                          Hungary                                                    South Korea                                                     Pakistan
                                                                                                          Thailand                                                       Hungary                                                      Taiwan
                                                                                                      South Korea                                                        Pakistan                                                    Uruguay
                                                                                                         Argentina                                                       Thailand                                                  Venezuela
                                                                                                           Russia                                                         Russia                                                        India
                                                                                                          Pakistan                                                       Malaysia                                                      China
                                                                                                           Mexico                                                          China                                                       Brazil
                                                                                                         Colombia                                                       Colombia                                                     Hungary
                                                                                                            Brazil                                                          India                                                 Philippines
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 5




                                                                                                      South Africa                                                         Brazil                                                   Argentina
                                                                                                             Chile                                                          Chile                                                     Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                       After the Thai Crisis




                                                                                                                                        After the Russian Crisis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   After the Mexican Crisis




                                                                                                           Turkey                                                    South Africa                                                   Colombia




in the year prior to the crisis (as a percent of GDP value in PPP terms).
                                                                                                             India                                                        Turkey                                                      Turkey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Change in Issuance (as a Percent of GDP)




                                                                                                            China                                                        Uruguay                                                  Hong Kong
                                                                                                          Malaysia                                                          Peru                                                        Peru
                                                                                                       Philippines                                                        Taiwan                                                 South Africa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Global Spillovers in the International Syndicated-Loan Market




                                                                                                          Uruguay                                                       Argentina                                                       Chile
                                                                                                        Singapore                                                     Philippines                                                South Korea
                                                                                                        Venezuela                                                         Mexico                                                     Thailand




Notes: Change in issuance is measured as issuance in the year following the crisis minus issuance
                                                                                                           Taiwan                                                      Singapore                                                    Indonesia
                                                                                                             Peru                                                      Venezuela                                               Czech Republic
                                                                                                                  Table 1
                                                                             Number of Quarters of Participation in International Financial Markets (1990-1994)
                                                                                                               (in Percent)

                  Asia                                                    Latin America                                                         Middle East and Africa                                          Transition Economies
      Countries      Participation in Market                  Countries           Participation in Market                    Countries                      Participation in Market            Countries                  Participation in Market
                  Bond                Syndicated Loan                         Bond                 Syndicated Loan                                      Bond                 Syndicated Loan                           Bond                Syndicated Loan
China             60                       100          Argentina              75                       65            Pakistan                            10                      85           Czech Republic           20                      75
Hong Kong         95                       100          Brazil                 65                       90            South Africa                        30                      55           Hungary                  90                      85
Indonesia         60                       100          Chile                  10                       80            Turkey                              65                      100          Russia                   10                      90
India             35                       100          Colombia               25                       75
Malaysia          25                       100          Mexico                 100                      100
Philippines       40                       80           Peru                   10                       20
Singapore         25                       95           Uruguay                15                       20
South Korea       100                      100          Venezuela              55                       95
Thailand          45                       100
Taiwan            45                       90
                                                                            Table 2
                                                      Global Spillovers in the International Bond Market
                                                               Univariate Regression Results

                                                                                              Regressions
Indicators                                1           2          3          4          5           6          7        8          9         10      11

Macro Policy

Fiscal Balance/GDP                       0.01
                                        (0.68)
Inflation                                            0.00
                                                    (0.69)
External Account

Current Account Balance/GDP                                     0.06
                                                               (0.01)
Deviations from PPP                                                        0.04
                                                                          (0.72)
Real Economy

GDP Growth                                                                            -0.02
                                                                                     (0.57)
Financial Vulnerabilities

Domestic Credit/GDP                                                                               -0.02
                                                                                                 (0.01)
Exchange Rate Regime                                                                                         0.23
                                                                                                            (0.34)
Liquidity

Share in total bond issuance                                                                                          -0.07
                                                                                                                     (0.01)
Institutions

Political Risk Index                                                                                                             -0.01
                                                                                                                                (0.74)
Regional Patterns

Distance                                                                                                                                   0.02
                                                                                                                                          (0.40)
World Economic Conditions

World Economic Growth                                                                                                                               0.01
                                                                                                                                                   (0.31)
World Real Interest Rate                                                                                                                            0.05
                                                                                                                                                   (0.86)
Constant                                 0.11        0.08       0.18       0.01       0.11        0.12      -0.21     0.34      0.37       0.09    -0.93
                                        (0.37)      (0.48)     (0.11)     (0.99)     (0.35)      (0.26)     (0.53)   (0.01)    (0.67)     (0.42)   (0.57)

Adjusted R-Squared.                      -0.1       -0.01      0.09       -0.01      -0.01        0.08      -0.01    0.10       -0.01      0.00    -0.01
Number of Observations                    72          72        72          72         72          72         72      72          72        72       72
F-Statistic                              0.17        0.17      7.76        0.13       0.33        7.28      0.92     8.61       0.11       0.74    0.62
Prob (F-statistic)                       0.68       0.69       0.01        0.72       0.57        0.01       0.34    0.01        0.75      0.39     0.54



Notes: Changes in Bond Issuance (Issuance in the year following the crisis minus issuance in the year preceding the crisis) as a percent of GDP
is the dependent variable. P-values in parentheses.
                                                                             Table 3
                                                 Global Spillovers in the International Syndicated-Loan Market
                                                                Univariate Regression Results

Indicators                                1            2         3          4          5          6          7         8          9         10       11

Macro Policy

Fiscal Balance/GDP                      -0.08
                                        (0.15)
Inflation                                            0.00
                                                    (0.68)
External Account

Current Account Balance/GDP                                     0.10
                                                               (0.06)
Deviations from PPP                                                        0.23
                                                                          (0.40)
Real Economy

GDP Growth                                                                            0.10
                                                                                     (0.24)
Financial Vulnerabilities

Domestic Credit/GDP                                                                              -0.01
                                                                                                (0.52)
Exchange Rate Regime                                                                                        0.33
                                                                                                           (0.57)
Liquidity

Share in total loan issuance                                                                                          -0.30
                                                                                                                     (0.00)
Institutions

Political Risk Index                                                                                                             -0.08
                                                                                                                                (0.01)
Regional Patterns

Distance                                                                                                                                    0.18
                                                                                                                                           (0.03)
World Economic Conditions

World Economic Growth                                                                                                                                 0.01
                                                                                                                                                    (0.77)
World Real Interest Rate                                                                                                                             -1.23
                                                                                                                                                    (0.06)
Constant                                 0.64       -0.49      -0.32      -0.97      -0.55      -0.45      -0.91      0.62       5.23      -0.47     3.82
                                        (0.03)      (0.08)     (0.26)     (0.14)     (0.05)     (0.11)     (0.28)    (0.10)     (0.01)     (0.08)   (0.33)

Adjusted R-Squared.                      0.02        -0.01      0.04      -0.01       0.01      -0.01      -0.01     0.17       0.08       0.07     0.05
Number of Observations                    72           72        72         72         72         72         72       72         72         72       72
F-Statistic                              2.10         0.18      3.54       0.73       1.41       0.41       0.32     15.33      7.81       5.19     2.96
Prob (F-statistic)                       0.15         0.68      0.06       0.40       0.24       0.53       0.57     0.00       0.01       0.03     0.06



Notes: Changes in Loan Issuance (Issuance in the year following the crisis minus issuance in the year preceding the crisis) as a percent of GDP
is the dependent variable. P-values in parentheses.
                                                                      Table 4
                                                Global Spillovers in the International Bond Market
                                                        Multivariate Regression Results

                                                                           Panel Least Squares                                    Cross Section
                 Indicators                       1                2                3                  4              5          Random Effects

Current Account Balance/GDP                       0.04            -0.01             0.03               0.04           0.04              0.04
                                                (0.04)           (0.07)           (0.11)             (0.04)         (0.05)            (0.05)
Domestic Credit/GDP                              -0.02            -0.02            -0.01              -0.02          -0.02             -0.02
                                                (0.01)           (0.03)           (0.49)             (0.04)         (0.02)            (0.02)
Share in Total Bond Issuance                     -0.06            -0.07            -0.07              -0.05          -0.06             -0.07
                                                (0.01)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.15)         (0.01)            (0.01)
Thai Crisis Idiosyncratic Effects

Current Account Balance/GDP                                       0.11
                                                                 (0.01)
Domestic Credit/GDP                                                                -0.03
                                                                                  (0.06)
Share in Total Bond Issuance                                                                          -0.00
                                                                                                     (0.95)
Russian Crisis Idiosyncratic Effects

Current Account Balance/GDP                                       0.05
                                                                 (0.31)
Domestic Credit/GDP                                                                -0.01
                                                                                  (0.60)
Share in Total Bond Issuance                                                                          -0.04
                                                                                                     (0.40)
World Economic Conditions

World Economic Growth                                                                                                0.01
                                                                                                                    (0.64)
World Real Interest Rate                                                                                             0.11
                                                                                                                    (0.64)

Constant                                         0.40             0.41             0.41               0.40           -0.63             0.41
                                                (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)             (0.00)         (0.67)            (0.00)

Adjusted R-Squared.                              0.22             0.27             0.24              0.21            0.20              0.20
Number of Observations                            72               72               72                72              72                72
F-Statistic                                      7.66             6.19             5.45              4.69            4.63              7.00
Prob (F-statistic)                               0.00             0.00             0.00              0.00            0.00              0.00



Notes: Changes in Bond Issuance (Issuance in the year following the crisis minus issuance in the year preceding the crisis) as a percent
of GDP is the dependent variable. P-values in parentheses.
                                                                       Table 5
                                          Global Spillovers in the International Syndicated-Loan Market
                                                         Multivariate Regression Results

                                                                            Panel Least Squares                                   Cross Section
                Indicators                        1                2                3                4                5          Random Effects

Current Account Balance/GDP                      0.08            -0.09             0.08             0.07             0.08              0.09
                                                (0.11)           (0.24)           (0.11)           (0.11)           (0.11)            (0.12)
Distance                                         0.16             0.17             0.11             0.09             0.12              0.15
                                                (0.03)           (0.02)           (0.45)           (0.22)           (0.09)            (0.03)
Share in Total Loan Issuance                    -0.28            -0.27            -0.29            -0.07            -0.28             -0.28
                                                (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.00)           (0.49)           (0.00)            (0.00)
Thai Crisis Idiosyncratic Effects

Current Account Balance/GDP                                       0.23
                                                                 (0.04)
Distance                                                                           0.31
                                                                                  (0.16)
Share in Total Loan Issuance                                                                        -0.23
                                                                                                   (0.05)
Russian Crisis Idiosyncratic Effects

Current Account Balance/GDP                                       0.29
                                                                 (0.01)
Distance                                                                           -0.02
                                                                                  (0.90)
Share in Total Loan Issuance                                                                        -0.44
                                                                                                   (0.00)
World Economic Conditions

World Economic Growth                                                                                                 0.01
                                                                                                                    (0.72)
World Real Interest Rate                                                                                             -0.98
                                                                                                                    (0.10)
Constant                                         0.67            -0.30             0.76             0.70             3.91              3.91
                                                (0.07)           (0.58)           (0.04)           (0.04)           (0.27)            (0.27)

Adjusted R-Squared.                              0.23             0.29             0.30             0.35             0.26              0.26
Number of Observations                            72               72               72               72               72                72
F-Statistic                                      8.11             6.78             5.59             8.79             6.04              6.85
Prob (F-statistic)                               0.00             0.00             0.00             0.00             0.00              0.00



Notes: Changes in Loan Issuance (Issuance in the year following the crisis minus issuance in the year preceding the crisis) as a percent
of GDP is the dependent variable. P-values in parentheses.
