NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MODELING THE LONG RUN:
VALUATION IN DYNAMIC STOCHASTIC ECONOMIES
Lars Peter Hansen
Working Paper 14243
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14243

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

Prepared for the Fisher-Schultz Lecture at the 2006 European Meetings of the Econometric Society.
I appreciate helpful comments by Emilio Barucci, Jaroslav Borovicka, Buz Brock, Valentin Haddad,
Mark Hendricks, Eric Janofsky, Jim Marrone, Nour Meddahi, Monika Piazzesi, Phil Reny, Chris Rogers,
Jose Scheinkman, Grace Tsiang, Harald Uhlig, Jessica Wachter and Neng Wang, Amir Yaron. This
paper is very much influenced by my joint work with John Heaton, Nan Li and Jose Scheinkman on
this topic and by related work I have done with Xiaohong Chen and Tom Sargent. This material is
based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Award Number SES0519372.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Lars Peter Hansen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Modeling the Long Run: Valuation in Dynamic Stochastic Economies
Lars Peter Hansen
NBER Working Paper No. 14243
August 2008
JEL No. C0,E44,G1
ABSTRACT
I explore the equilibrium value implications of economic models that incorporate reactions to a stochastic
environment. I propose a dynamic value decomposition (DVD) designed to distinguish components
of an underlying economic model that influence values over long horizons from components that impact
only the short run. To quantify the role of parameter sensitivity and to impute long-term risk prices,
I develop an associated perturbation technique. Finally, I use DVD methods to study formally some
example economies and to speculate about others. A DVD is enabled by constructing operators indexed
by the elapsed time between the date of pricing and the date of the future payoff (i.e. the future realization
of a consumption claim). Thus formulated, methods from applied mathematics permit me to characterize
valuation behavior as the time between price determination and payoff realization becomes large.
An outcome of this analysis is the construction of a multiplicative martingale component of a process
that is used to represent valuation in a dynamic economy with stochastic growth. I contrast the differences
in the applicability between this multiplicative martingale method and an additive martingale method
familiar from time series analysis that is used to identify shocks with long-run economic consequences.

Lars Peter Hansen
Department of Economics
The University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
l-hansen@uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

In this paper I propose to augment the toolkit for modeling economic dynamics and econometric implications with methods that reveal the important economic components of longterm valuation in economies with stochastic growth. These tools enable informative decompositions of a model’s dynamic implications for valuation. They are the outgrowth of
my observation of and participation in an empirical literature that aims to understand the
low frequency links between financial market indicators and macroeconomic aggregates.
Current dynamic models that relate macroeconomics and asset pricing are constructed
from an amalgam of assumptions about preferences (such as risk aversion or habit persistence, etc), technology (productivity of capital or adjustment costs to investment), and
exposure to unforeseen shocks. Some of these components have more transitory effects
while others have a lasting impact. In part my aim is to illuminate the roles of these model
ingredients by presenting a structure that features long run implications for value. By value
I mean either market or shadow prices of physical, financial or even hypothetical assets.
These methods are designed to address three questions:
• What are the long-term value implications of nonlinear economic models with stochastic growth?
• To which components of the uncertainty are long-run valuations most sensitive?
• What kind of hypothetical changes in preferences and technology have the most
potent impact on the long run? What changes are transient?
Although aspects of these questions have been studied using log-linear models and log-linear
approximations around a growth trajectory, the methods I describe offer a different vantage
point. These methods are designed for the study of valuation in the presence of stochastic
inputs that have long-run consequences. While the methods can exploit any linearity, by
design they can accommodate nonlinearity as well. In this paper I will develop these tools,
as well as describe their usefulness at addressing these three economic questions. I will
draw upon some diverse results from stochastic process theory and time series analysis,
although I will use these results in novel ways.
There are a variety of reasons to be interested in the first question. When we build
dynamic economic models, we typically specify transitional dynamics over a unit of time
for discrete-time models or an instant of time for continuous time models. Long-run implications are encoded in such specifications; but they can be hard to decipher, particularly
1

in nonlinear stochastic models. I explore methods that describe long-run limiting behavior,
a concept which I will define formally. I see two reasons why this is important. First some
economic inputs are more credible when they target low frequency behavior. Second these
inputs may be essential for meaningful long-run extrapolation of value. Nonparametric statistical alternatives suffer because of limited empirical evidence on the long-run behavior
of macroeconomic aggregates and financial cash flows.
Recent empirical research in macro-finance has highlighted economic modeling successes
at low frequencies. After all, models are approximations; and applied economics necessarily
employs models that are misspecified along some dimensions. In this context, then, I hope
these methods for extracting long-term implications from a dynamic stochastic model will
be welcome additional research tools. Specifically, I will show how to deconstruct a dynamic
stochastic equilibrium implied by a model, revealing what features dominate valuation over
long time horizons. Conversely, I will formalize the notion of transient contributions to
valuation. These tools will help to formalize long-term approximation and to understand
better what proposed model fixups do to long-term implications.
This leads me to the second question. Many researchers study valuation under uncertainty by risk prices, and through them, the equilibrium risk-return tradeoff. In equilibrium, expected returns change in response to shifts in the exposure to various components
of macroeconomic risk. The tradeoff is typically depicted over a single period in a discretetime model or over an instant of time in a continuous time model. I will extend the
log-linear analysis in Hansen et al. (2008a) and Bansal et al. (2008) by deriving the longrun counterpart to this familiar exercise. Specifically, I will perform a sensitivity analysis
that recovers prices of exposure to the component parts of long-run (growth-rate) risk. I
will define formally risk prices in nonlinear models as they depend on the investment horizon, and in particular characterized their limiting behavior. These limits are basic inputs
into the study of the term structure of risk prices. Given my focus on valuation, these
same methods facilitate long-run welfare comparisons in explicitly dynamic and stochastic
environments.
Finally, consider the third question. Many components of a dynamic stochastic equilibrium model can contribute to value in the long run. Changing some of these components
will have a more potent impact than others. To determine this, we could perform value
calculations for an entire family of models indexed by the model ingredients. When this is
not practical, an alternative is to explore local changes in the economic environment. We
may assess, for example, how modifications in the intertemporal preferences of investors
2

alter long term risk prices and interest rates. The resulting derivatives quantify these and
other impacts and can inform statistical investigations.

1.1

Overview

There are a variety of applications of the dynamic value decomposition (DVD) methods
that I describe. They can be used to
i) construct model-based measures of consumption or cash-flow duration;
ii) construct risk-adjusted measures of long-term premia;
iii) characterize long-term risk-exposure dynamics;
iv) characterize of the long-term risk-price dynamics;
v) make local and global model comparisons.
A valuation model assigns prices to consumption processes or cash-flows for each hypothetical payoff horizon. Cash flows that make substantial contributions to value far into the
future are said to have high duration. This duration depends on how the cash flow grows
and how that cash flow is discounted. There is a premia for a cash flow at each horizon
relative to a riskless counterpart. The risk premia depend on the risk exposures (the cash
flow’s dependence on the underlying shocks) and on the risk prices (the marginal compensation to investors that bear the risk associated with these shocks). In my applications I
feature long-term risk-price dynamics and model comparisons.
My characterization of risk-price dynamics is based on a valuation counterpart to the
impulse-response functions featured in macroeconomic dynamics. I construct a risk-price
trajectory by computing a derivative for each payoff horizon, which is the marginal change
in a risk premia induced by a marginal change in risk exposure of a cash flow constructed
from underlying macroeconomic shocks. To feature risk-price dynamics while abstracting
from risk-exposure dynamics, I value martingale cash flows built from alternative shocks.
By design, the expected future cash-flows are independent of the prediction horizon.
In one of my applications in section 7, I compare the risk price implications for a model
in which investors have power utility to a counterpart model with recursive utility using
a risk-sensitive parameterization of preferences. For analytical simplicity I restrict the
elasticity of intertemporal substitution of the investors to be unity for this second model.
3

The investors in this model care about the intertemporal composition of risk in contrast
to those in the first model. I show how the limiting risk prices are the same for the two
models by setting appropriately the parameters of investor preferences.
Following Bansal and Yaron (2004), I consider a model with predictability in consumption growth rates. While I consider a three shock specification, the analysis of the shock
to the consumption growth rate is particularly revealing. Such a shock has an impact
that builds gradually as is reflected in the continuous-time impulse response function for
the logarithm of consumption depicted in the top panel of figure 1. When investors have
time-separable power utility, the risk-price trajectory also builds gradually over the alternative investment horizons as depicted by the dashed line in the lower panel of figure 1.
It converges to a limit that I will characterize. The convergence is slower than for the impulse response function. In this example economy, the impulse-response function converges
exponentially. In contrast, I will show that the risk-price trajectory displays a hyperbolic
convergence. Notice that the risk price trajectory eventually becomes almost coincident
with the hyperbolic curve depicted by lower solid line in figure 1. I will provide formal
characterizations of both the limit point of the risk-price trajectory and the hyperbolic
curve that approximates the trajectory as the payoff horizon becomes long. While much of
asset pricing literature focuses on short-term or local risk prices, the methods in this paper
reveal pricing features for longer payoff horizons.
In addition to exposing the pricing dynamics for a given model, DVD methods facilitate
model comparisons. Investor preferences are forward looking in the recursive utility model,
and this is reflected in a larger and flatter risk-price trajectory depicted as the solid line
in figure 1. Even though the model with power utility investors has the same long-term
limiting risk price, its risk-price trajectory starts near zero and only approximates its limit
for extremely long payoff horizons.2

1.2

Game plan

My game plan for the technical development in this paper is as follows:
i) Underlying Markov structure (section 2): I pose a Markov process in continuous time.
The continuous-time specification simplifies some of our characterizations, but it is not
essential to our analysis. I build processes that grow over time by accumulating the
impact of the Markov state and shock history. The result will be functionals, additive
2

Details about computations including the parameter choices are given in section 7 and appendix C

4

Impulse Response to a Growth−Rate Shock
.020
.015
.010
.005
0

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

175

200

175

200

Trajectory for the Growth−Rate Risk Price
.20
.15
.10
.05
0

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

Figure 1: Impulse responses and risk price trajectories for the growth-rate shock. The
horizontal axis is given in quarterly time units. The top panel gives the impulse-responses
of the logarithm of consumption using the same parameter values as in figure 4. The
bottom panel reproduces risk prices depicted in figure 4. The lower solid curve in the
bottom panel is the trajectory for a model with power utility investors, the upper solid
curve is for a model with recursive utility investors, and the dashed curve is the hyperbolic
approximation to this trajectory.
5

or multiplicative. Additive functionals are typically logarithms of macro or financial
variables and multiplicative functionals are levels of these same time series.
ii) Decomposition of Additive functionals (section 3): An additive functional accumulates
the impact of a Markov state over time via summation or integration. I produce a
familiar decomposition of an additive functional Y into three components:
Yt =

νt
+
Ŷt
−g(Xt ) + g(X0 )
↑
↑
↑
linear trend
martingale
difference.

(1)

This decomposition nests decompositions from the macroeconomic time series literature and the stochastic process literature on central limit approximation. This decomposition identifies permanent shocks as increments to the martingale component.
Such shocks dominate the stochastic component of growth over long-horizons and reflect exposure to risk that have long-term consequences for valuation.
iii) Multiplicative processes and valuation (section 4): I build multiplicative functionals
by exponentiating additive ones. Thus I work with levels instead of logarithms as
in the case of additive functionals. Alternative multiplicative functionals can capture
stochastic discounting or stochastic growth. The stochastic discount factor processes
are deduced by economic models and designed to capture both pure discount effects and
risk adjustments. The multiplicative construction reflects the effect of compounding
over intervals of time. Growth fluctuations are modeled by accumulating local stochastic growth exponentially over intervals of time. I study valuation in conjunction with
growth by constructing families of operators indexed by the valuation horizon. The
operators will map the transient components to payoffs, cash flows or Markov claims
to a numeraire consumption good. As special cases I will study growth abstracting
from valuation and valuation abstracting from growth. I use multiplicative functionals
constructed from the underlying Markov process to represent the previously described
family of operators.
iv) Long-run approximation (section 5): I measure long-run growth and the associated
decay in value through the construction of principal eigenvalues and principal eigenfunctions. I use an extended version of Perron-Frobenius theory to establish a multi-

6

plicative analog to decomposition (1):
Mt =

exp (ρt)

M̂t

↑
↑
exponential trend martingale

h

e(X0 )
e(Xt )

i

↑
ratio.

(2)

where M is the exponential of an additive functional and is chosen to represent valuation in the presence of stochastic growth. This gives a decomposition of the valuation
dynamics (DVD). Although superficially similar, factorization (2) is distinct from (1)
because the exponential of a martingale is not itself a martingale. In performing calculations, I use the martingale to change the underlying probability measure in a way
that supports a convenient characterization of long-run behavior in valuation. In my
applications, M ’s will be constructed from explicit economic models and hypothetical
changes in stochastic growth trajectories.
v) Sensitivity and long-run pricing (section 6): Of special interest is how the long-run
attributes of valuation change when I make small alterations in a) growth processes
or b) stochastic discount factors used to represent valuation. I show formally how to
conduct a sensitivity analysis with these two applications in mind. The applications
I feature show how marginal changes in the risk exposure of hypothetical growth processes alter risk premia. This calculation gives me an operational way to construct risk
prices as a function of the investment horizon. Analogous calculations applied to the
stochastic discount factor show how long-term values and rates of return are predicted
to change as the attributes of the economic environment are modified.
vi) Applications to the asset-pricing literature (section 7): I apply the methods to study
some existing models of asset pricing and to compare their long-run implications. While
the methods are much more generally applicable, I sidestep some numerical issues by
exploring specifications for which there are quasi-analytical characterizations. In the
applications I produce pricing counterparts to impulse functions familiar in literature
on economic dynamics. Impulse responses characterize how economic variables respond
over time to the underlying shocks. In contrast, I assess the valuation consequences for
consumption trajectories or cash flows that are “exposed” to macroeconomic shocks. I
assign risk prices to shocks at alternative investment horizons by valuing hypothetical
cash flows constructed from the respective macroeconomic shocks. Such price calcula-

7

tions require economic models that are “structural” to give me the necessarily latitude
to extrapolate value implications. The methods accommodate nonlinearities present
in the underlying Markov dynamics. The pricing consequences of these nonlinearities
are revealed by the methods I describe.
The ideas developed in this paper have important antecedents from a variety of literatures. Rather than provide a comprehensive literature review at the outset, I will point
out important prior contributions as I develop results.3

2

Probabilistic specification

While there are variety of ways to introduce nonlinearity into time series models, for
tractability we concentrate on Markovian models. For convenience, we will feature continuous time models with their sharp distinctions between small shocks modeled as Brownian
increments and large shocks modeled as Poisson jumps. Let X denote the underlying
Markov process summarizing the state of an economy. We will use this process as a building block in our construction of economic relations.

2.1

Underlying Markov process

I consider a Markov process X defined on a state space E. Suppose that this process can
be decomposed into two components: X c + X d . The process X is right continuous with
left limits. With this in mind I define:
Xt− = lim Xt−u .
u↓0

I depict local evolution of X c as:
dXtc = µ(Xt− )dt + σ(Xt− )dWt
where W is a possibly multivariate standard Brownian motion. The process X d is a
jump process. This process is modeled using a finite conditional measure η(dx∗ |x) where
R
R
η(dx∗ |Xt− ) is the jump intensity. That is,  η(dx∗ |Xt− ) is the approximate probability
3

Alternative and distinct approaches to characterizing asset price dynamics with similar motivations
can be found in Daniel and Marshall (2005), Dybvig et al. (1996) and Otrok et al. (2002).

8

that there will be a jump for small time interval . The conditional measure η(dx∗ |x) scaled
by the jump intensity is the probability distribution for the jump conditioned on a jump
occurring. Thus the entire Markov process is parameterized by (µ, σ, η).
I will often think of the process X as stationary, but strictly speaking this is not necessary. As I will next show, nonstationary processes will be constructed from X.

2.2

Convenient functions of the Markov process

Consider the frictionless asset pricing paradigm. Asset prices are depicted using a stochastic discount factor process S. Such a process cannot be freely specified. Instead restrictions
are implied by the ability of investors to trade at intermediate dates. The use of a Markov
assumption in conjunction with valuation leads us naturally to the study of multiplicative functionals or their additive counterparts formed by taking logarithms. I will also
use multiplicative functionals to depict growth components of cash flows or consumption
processes.
An additive functional Y is constructed from the underlying Markov process such that
that Yt+τ −Yt = φτ (Xu for t < u ≤ t+τ ) for any t ≥ 0 and any τ ≥ 0. For convenience, it is
initialized at Y0 = 0. Notice that what I call an additive functional is actually a stochastic
process defined for all t ≥ 0. Even if the underlying Markov process is stationary, an
additive functional will typically not be. Instead it will have increments that are stationary
and hence the Y process can display arithmetic growth (or decay) even when the underlying
process X does not. An additive functional can be normally distributed, but I will also
be interested in other specifications. Conveniently, the sum of two additive functionals is
additive.
I consider a family of such functionals parameterized by (β, ξ, χ) where:
Rt
i) β : E → R and 0 β(Xu )du < ∞ for every positive t;
Rt
ii) ξ : E → Rm and 0 |ξ(Xu )|2 du < ∞ for every positive t;
iii) χ : E × E → R, χ(x, x) = 0.
Z
Yt =

t

Z

ξ(Xu− ) · dWu +

β(Xu )du +
0

t

0

X

χ(Xu , Xu− )

(3)

0<u≤t

The additive functional Y in (3) has three components, each of which accumulates linearly
Rt
over time. The first component is a simple integral, 0 β(Xu )du, and as a consequence it
9

Rt
is locally predictable. The second component is a stochastic integral, 0 ξ(Xu ) · dWu , and
it reflects how “small shocks” alter the functional Y . These small shocks are modeled as
Brownian increments. This component is a local martingale, and I will feature cases in
which it is a martingale. Recall that the best forecast of the future value of a martingale
is the current value of the martingale. The third component shows how jumps in the
underlying process X induce jumps in the additive functional. If X jumps at date t, Y
P
also jumps at date t by the amount χ(Xt , Xt− ). The term 0≤u≤t χ(Xu , Xu− ) thus reflect
the impact of “large shocks”. This component is not necessarily a martingale because the
jumps may have a predictable component. The integral
Z
β̃(x) =

χ(x∗ , x)η(dx∗ |x).

(4)

E

captures this predictability locally. Integrating β̃ over time and subtracting it from the
jump component of Y gives an additive local martingale:
X

Z
χ(Xu , Xu− ) −

t

β̃(Xu )du.
0

0<u≤t

I will be primarily interested in specifications of χ for which this constructed process is a
martingale. In summary, an additive functional grows or decays stochastically in a linear
way. Its dynamic evolution can reflect the impact of small shocks represented as a statedependent weighting of a Brownian increment and the impact of large shocks represented
by a possibly nonlinear response to jumps in the underlying process X.
The logarithms of economic aggregates can be conveniently represented as additive
functionals as can the logarithms of stochastic discount factors used to represent economic
values.4 I next consider the level counterparts to such functionals.
While a multiplicative functional can be defined more generally, I will consider ones
that are constructed as exponentials of additive functionals: M = exp(Y ). Thus the ratio
Mt+τ /Mt is constructed as a function of Xu for t < u ≤ t + τ .5 Multiplicative functionals
are necessarily initialized at unity.
Even when X is stationary, a multiplicative process can grow (or decay) stochastically
in an exponential fashion. Although its logarithm will have stationary increments, these
4

For economic aggregates, it is necessary to subtract of the date zero logarithms in order that Y0 = 0.
This latter implication gives the key ingredient of a more general definition of a multiplicative functional.
5

10

increments are not restricted to have a zero mean.

3

Log-linearity and long-run restrictions

A standard tool for analyzing dynamic economic models is to characterize stochastic steady
state relations. These steady states are obtained by deducing a scaling process or processes
that capture growth components common to many time series. Similarly, the econometric
literature on cointegration is typically grounded in log-linear implications that restrict
variables to grow together. Error-correction specifications seek to allow for flexible transient
dynamics while enforcing long-run implications. Economics is used to inform us as to which
time series move together. See Engle and Granger (1987).6 Relatedly, Blanchard and Quah
(1989) and many others use long-run implications to identify shocks. Supply or technology
shocks broadly conceived are the only ones that influence output in the long run. These
methods aim to measure the potency of shocks while permitting short-run dynamics.
Prior to studying multiplicative functionals, I consider the decomposition of an additive
functional. My initial investigation of additive functionals is consistent with the common
practice of building models that apply to logarithms of macroeconomic or financial times
series. While there are alternative ways to decompose time series, what follows is closest
to what I will be interested in. An additive functional can be decomposed into three
components:
Yt =

νt
+
Ŷt
−g(Xt ) + g(X0 )
↑
↑
↑
linear trend
martingale
difference.

(5)

This decomposition gives a way to identify shocks with “permanent” consequences. Recall
that the best forecast of the future values of a martingale is the current value of that martingale. Thus permanent shocks are reflected in the increment to the martingale component
of (5). It helps to isolate the exposure of economic time series to macroeconomic risk that
dominates the fluctuation of Y over long time horizons.
The remainder of this section is organized as follows. I first verify formally the martingale property Ŷ , and then I give operational ways to construct this decomposition. I end
the section with two examples. The first example gives the continuous-time counterpart to
6

Interestingly, Box and Tiao (1977) anticipated the potentially important notion of long run comovement in their method of extracting canonical components of multivariate time series.

11

this decomposition for a model with linear stochastic dynamics. This example illustrates
the construction of permanent shocks that is typically used in conjunction with vector autoregressive methods. The second example introduces stochastic volatility. This example
allows for volatility to fluctuate over time in a manner that can be highly persistent. Thus
a particular form of nonlinearity is introduced into the analysis, a form that has received
considerable attention in both the macroeconomics and asset-pricing literatures.
My first formal statement of decomposition (5) is:
Theorem 3.1. Suppose that Y is an additive functional with increments that have finite
second moments. In addition, suppose that
1
E (Yτ |X0 = x) = ν,
τ →∞ τ
lim

and
lim E (Yτ − ντ |X0 = x) = g(x),

τ →∞

where the convergence is in mean square. Then Y can be represented as:
Yt = νt + Ŷt − g(Xt ) + g(X0 ).

(6)

where {Ŷt } is an additive martingale.
Proof. Let Yt∗ = Yt − νt. Let Ft be the sigma algebra generated by the X process between
time 0 and time t. As a consequence of the Law of Iterated Expectations and the meansquare convergence,
g(Xt ) + Yt∗ =
=
=
=
=


∗
lim E Yt+τ
− Yt∗ |Xt + Yt∗
τ →∞

∗
lim E Yt+τ
− Yt∗ |Ft + Yt∗
τ →∞

∗
lim E Yt+τ
|Ft
τ →∞



∗
∗
∗
− Yt+
|Ft+ + Yt+
|Ft
lim E E Yt+τ
τ →∞


∗
E g(Xt+ ) + Yt+
|Ft

Thus {Yt∗ + g(Xt )} is a martingale with initial value g(X0 ). After subtracting g(X0 ),
Ŷt = Yt∗ + g(Xt ) − g(X0 )
remains a martingale, but it has initial value zero as required for an additive functional.
12

I next show how to use the local evolution of the additive functional to construct the
components of this decomposition. Recall the representation given in (3):
t

Z

Z

t

ξ(Xu− ) · dWu +

β(Xu )du +

Yt =
0

0

X

χ(Xu , Xu− ),

0≤u≤t

and the construction of β̃ in formula (4). Then
Z

t

ξ(Xu ) · dWu +

Ỹt =
0

X

Z
χ(Xu , Xu− ) −

t

β̃(Xu )du

(7)

0

0≤u≤t

is a local martingale. In what follows let
β̂ = β + β̃.
I now have the ingredients for the following result.
Theorem 3.2. Suppose
i) X is a stationary, ergodic Markov process;
ii) Ỹ given in (7) is a square integrable martingale;
iii) β̂(Xt ) has a finite second moment;
iv) There is a solution g to
Z
g(x) =

∞



h

i

E β̂(Xt ) − E β̂(Xt ) |X0 = x dt;

0

Then Ŷ given by Yt − νth + g(Xit ) − g(X0 ) is a martingale with stationary, square integrable
increments with ν = E β̂(Xt ) .
This theorem gives an algorithm for computing ν from the local evolution of Y and the
stationary distribution for X. It remains to compute the function g of the Markov state.
Since Ŷ is a martingale, its increments should not be predictable. As a consequence,
1
β̂(x) − ν + lim E [g(Xt ) − g(x)|X0 = x] = 0,
t↓0 t

13

(8)

which gives an equation for g that depends on the local evolution of X. The calculation of
the expected time derivative:
1
lim E [g(Xt ) − g(x)|X0 = x] = Ag(x)
t↓0 t
defines the so called generator A for the Markov process. Specifying a generator A is one
way to represent the transition dynamics for Markov process. In the case of a multivariate
diffusion, this equation is known to be a second-order differential equation as an implication
of Ito’s Lemma. There are well known extensions to accommodate jumps. Using the
generator, in light of (8) the function g satisfies
Ag = ν − β̂.

(9)

For the diffusion model, this leads to solving:


2
1
∂g(x)
0 ∂ g(x)
· µ(x) + trace σ(x)σ(x)
= ν − β̂(x).
∂x
2
∂x∂x0

(10)

The local evolution of the martingale Ŷ is given by:


∂g(Xt )
ξ(Xt )dWt +
∂x

0
σ(Xt )dWt ,

where the first term is contributed by the local evolution of Ỹ and the second term by the
local evolution of g(X).
More generally, to obtain a solution g to a long-run forecasting problem, it suffices to
solve equation (9) depicted using the local evolution of the Markov process. Much is known
about such an equation. As argued by Bhattacharya (1982) and Hansen and Scheinkman
(1995), when X is ergodic this equation has at most one solution. When X is exponentially
ergodic, there always exists a solution.7
Following Gordin (1969), by extracting a martingale we can produce a more refined
7

These references suppose that X is stationary. Hansen and Scheinkman (1995) use an L2 notion of
exponential ergodicity using the implied stationary distribution of X as a measure. Bhattacharya (1982)
establishes a functional counterpart to the central limit theorem using these methods. In both cases strong
dependence in X can be tolerated provided there exists a solution to (9).

14

analysis. Specifically, an implication of the Martingale Central Limit Theorem is that
1
1
lim √ (Yt − νt) ≈ √ Ŷt ⇒ normal
t→∞
t
t
is normally distributed with mean zero.8 In addition to central limit approximation, there
are other important applications of this decomposition. For linear time series, Beveridge
and Nelson (1981) and others use this decomposition to identify Ŷt as the permanent component of a time series. When there are multiple additive functionals under consideration
and they have common martingale components of lower dimension, then one obtains the
cointegration model of Engle and Granger (1987). Linear combinations of the vector of
additive functionals will have a time trend and martingale component that are identically
zero. Blanchard and Quah (1989) use such a decomposition to identify permanent shocks.
The martingale increments are innovations to supply or technology shocks.
I now consider some examples.
Example 3.3. Suppose that
dXt = AXt dt + BdWt ,
dYt = νdt + HXt dt + F dWt
where A has eigenvalues with strictly negative real parts and W is a multivariate standard
Brownian motion. In this example β̂(x) = ν + Hx, and g satisfies the partial differential
equation:


2
1
∂g(x)
0 ∂ g(x)
· (Ax) + trace BB
= −Hx
∂x
2
∂x∂x0
which is a special case of (10). This equation has a linear solution:
g(x) = −HA−1 x
The surprise movement or “innovation” to g(Xt ) is −HA−1 BdWt . Thus in this example,
Z
Ŷt =

t


F − HA−1 B dWu

0

is the martingale component.
8

See Billingsley (1961) for the discrete-time martingale central limit. Moreover, there are well known
functional extensions of this result.

15

Next I consider a model with stochastic volatility.
Example 3.4. Suppose that X and Y evolve according to:
[1]
dXt
[2]
dXt

=

[1]
A11 Xt dt

=

[2]
A22 (Xt

dYt = νdt +

+

[2]
A12 (Xt

q
[2]
− 1) + Xt B1 dWt ,

q
[2]
− 1)dt + Xt B2 dWt

[1]
H1 Xt dt

+

[2]
H2 (Xt

q
[2]
− 1)dt + Xt F dWt .

Both X [2] and Y are scalar processes. The process X [2] is an example of a Feller square root
process, which I use to model the temporal dependence in volatility. I restrict B1 B2 0 = 0
implying that X [1] and X [2] are conditionally uncorrelated. The matrix A11 has eigenvalues
with strictly negative real parts and A22 is negative. Moreover, to prevent zero from being
attained by X [2] , I assume that A22 + 21 |B2 |2 < 0. I have parameterized this process to have
mean one when initialized in its stationary distribution, which for my purposes is essentially
a normalization. In this example g solves the partial differential equation:
"
#
"
#
!
B1 B1 0
0
∂ 2 g(x1 , x2 )
∂g(x1 , x2 ) A11 x1 + A12 (x2 − 1) x2
·
+ trace
= −H1 x1 −H2 (x2 −1),
∂x
2
∂x∂x0
A22 (x2 − 1)
0
|B2 |2
which is a special case of (10). The solution is:


g(x1 , x2 ) = −H1 (A11 )−1 x1 − H2 − H1 (A11 )−1 A12 (A22 )−1 (x2 − 1).
q
[2]
The local innovation in g(Xt ) is Xt [−H1 (A11 )−1 B1 − [H2 − H1 (A11 )−1 A12 ] (A22 )−1 B2 ] dWt .
Thus in this example the martingale component for Y is given by:
Z tq



[2] 
Xu F − H1 (A11 )−1 B1 − H2 − H1 (A11 )−1 A12 (A22 )−1 B2 dWu .
Ŷt =
0

This example has the
q same structure as example 3.3 except that the Brownian motion
[2]
shocks are scaled by Xt to induce volatility that varies over time. While example 3.3 is
fully linear, example 3.4 introduces a nonlinear volatility factor. More generally, additive
functionals do not have to be linear functions of the Markov state or linear functions of
Brownian increments. Nonlinearity can be built into the drifts (conditional means) or the
diffusion coefficients (conditional variances). Under these more general constructions, the
function g used to represent the transient component will not be a linear function of the
16

Markov state.9
Even when such nonlinearity is introduced, conveniently the sum of two additive functionals is an additive functional. Moreover, the sum of the martingale components is the
martingale component for the sum of the additive functionals provided that the constructions use a common information structure.
As I have already argued, the additive decomposition is valuable for identifying shocks
with durable consequences or for characterizing long-run consequences of shocks. Additive
decompositions have direct ties to the study of log-linear relations, either exact or approximate, are convenient for many purposes. For the purposes of valuation, in what follows
I will use multiplicative functionals. Such functionals can be represented conveniently as
the exponentials of additive functionals. One strategy at my disposal is first to decompose
additive functionals and then to exponentiate the components. Thus for Mt = exp(Yt ):
  exp[−g(X )]
t
Mt = exp(νt) exp Ŷt
exp[−g(X0 )]
for the decomposition given in (6). While such a factorization is sometimes of value, for
the purposes of my analysis, it is important that I construct an alternative factorization.
Except in degenerate examples, the exponential of a martingale is not a martingale. If
the process is lognormal, then this assumption can be used to transform exp(Ŷ ) into a
martingale by scaling it by an exponential function of time. Later I will illustrate this
outcome. More generally, I will construct an alternative multiplicative decomposition via
a different approach that will be of direct use.10
Prior to our development of an alternative decomposition, I discuss some limiting characterizations that will interest us.

4

Limiting characterizations of stochastic growth or
discounting

In this section I describe the relation between a local growth rate of a multiplicative functional M and its long-term or asymptotic counterpart. The local growth rate is defined
9

The Markov assumption is also not necessary for such a decomposition.
While the additive decomposition is linked to a Law of Large Numbers and a Central Limit Theorem,
this alternative decomposition has much closer ties to the Theory of Large Deviations.
10

17

as:
β ∗ (x) = lim
t↓0

E (Mt |X0 = x) − 1
t

provided that this limit exists. Since Mt = exp(Yt ) and
Z

t

Z

t

ξ(Xu− ) · dWu +

β(Xu )du +

Yt =

0

0

X

χ(Xu , Xu− )

0≤u≤t

as in (3), the local growth rate is computed to be
1
β (x) = β(x) + |ξ(x)|2 +
2
∗

Z
(exp[χ(y, ·)] − 1) η(dy|x)

(11)

using, when necessary, continuous-time stochastic calculus. Notice that direct exposure to
Brownian motion risk and jump risk contributes to this local growth rate.
By contrast, define the asymptotic growth (or decay) rate as:
lim

t→∞

1
log E [Mt |X0 = x] = ρ(M )
t

provided that this limit is well defined. Compounding has nontrivial consequences for the
long-term growth rate when the local growth rate is state-dependent. I will characterize
this asymptotic limit and explore the relation between the average local growth rate and the
asymptotic growth rate. Here I am interpreting growth liberally so as to include discounting
as well. For instance, what I develop in this section is also germane to the study of longterm implications of compounding of short-term discount rates that are state dependent.
This topic has been explored in the study of climate policy (see for instance Newell and
Pizer (2003, 2004)) and in the study of the long-term behavior of stochastic discount factors
(see for instance Alvarez and Jermann (2000)).

4.1

A revealing special case

Prior to a more general development, I illustrate calculations using an environment with
an underlying continuous-time Markov chain that visits only a finite number of states.
I characterize long-run stochastic growth (or decay) by posing and solving an approximation problem using what is called a principal eigenvector and eigenvalue. The principal
eigenvector has positive entries. As I will illustrate, there is a well-defined sense in which
this eigenvector dominates over long valuation horizons. The approximation problem I
18

will study more generally its origins from what is known as Perron-Frobenius theory of
matrices.
Example 4.1. When a Markov process has n states, the mathematical problem that we
study can be formulated in terms of matrices. To model a jump process, consider a matrix
N with all nonnegative entries as a way to encode the conditional measure η(dx∗ |x). Recall
that this measure encodes both the jump intensity (the likelihood of a jump) of the underlying
Markov state X and the jump distribution (conditioned on a jump, where the process will
jump to). The matrix of transition probabilities for X over an interval of time t is known
to be given by exp(tA) where
A = N − diag {N1n }
where 1n is an n-dimensional vector of ones and diag{·} is a diagonal matrix with the
entries of the vector argument located in the diagonal positions. Notice in particular that A
has all positive entries in the off-diagonal positions, and it satisfies A1n = 0n . This property
is the local counterpart to the requirement that the entries in any row of exp(tA) are the
transition probabilities conditioned on the state associated with the selected row. That is,
exp(tA)1n = 1n .
For a multiplicative functional associated with an n-state jump process, state dependent
growth or decay rates are modeled using β and χ. Recall that β dictates the growth or
decay absent any jump and χ dictates how the multiplicative function jumps as a function
of the jumps in the underlying Markov process. For this discrete-state problem, I represent
the function β as vector b. Similarly, I represent function exp[χ(x∗ , x)] as an n by n matrix
K with positive entries. Form an n by n matrix B
B = K × N − diag {N1n } + diag {b}
where × used in the matrix multiplications denotes element-by-element multiplication. This
construction of B modifies A to include state dependent growth (or decay) associated with
the corresponding multiplicative functional. The off-diagonal entries of B are all positive,
but typically B1n is not equal to 0n in contrast to A1n . I form an indexed family of
operators, in this case matrices, indexed by the time horizon by exponentiating the matrix
tB:
Mt = exp(tB).
The date t matrix Mt reflects the expected growth, discounting or the composite of both
19

over an interval of time t. The entries of Mt are all nonnegative, and I presume that for
some time horizon t, the entries are strictly positive. The matrix Mt is typically not a
probability matrix in our applications, however. (Column sums are not unity.) Instead
Mt reflects continuous compounding of stochastic growth or discounting over a horizon t.
The matrix B encodes the instantaneous contributions to growth or discounting, and it
generates the family of matrices {Mt : t ≥ 0}. Specifically, the vector
β ∗ = B1n
contains the state dependent growth rates defined more generally in formula (11).
Given an n × 1 vector f , Perron-Frobenius theory characterizes limiting behavior of
1
log Mt f by first solving:
t
Be = ρe.
where e is a column eigenvector restricted to have strictly positive entries and ρ is a real
eigenvalue. Consider also the transpose problem
B0 e∗ = ρe∗

(12)

where e∗ also has positive entries. Depending on the application, ρ can be positive or
negative. Importantly, ρ is larger than the real part of any other eigenvalue of the matrix
B.
Taking the exponential of a matrix preserves the eigenvectors and exponentiates the
eigenvalues. As a consequence, Mt has an eigenvector given by e and with an associated
eigenvalue equal to exp(ρt). The multiplication by t implies that the magnitude of exp(ρt)
relative to the other eigenvalues of Mt becomes arbitrarily large as t gets large. As a
consequence,
1
log Mt f = ρ
t→∞ t
lim (log Mt f − tρ) = log(f · e∗ )1n + log e
lim

t→∞

(13)
(14)

for any vector f for which f · e∗ > 0, where I have normalized e∗ so that e∗ · e = 1. Formally,
(13) defines ρ as the long-run growth rate of the family of matrices {Mt : t ≥ 0}. In the
remainder of this section, I develop and apply a generalization of this limit. After adjusting
for this growth rate, (14) gives an example of a more refined approximation that I explore

20

in section 5. The logarithm of the eigenvector e exposes the impact of state-dependent
compounding of growth or discounting over long horizons.
To accommodate continuous Markov states, I will use operators in place of the matrices.
These operators are introduced in the next subsection section. They have a complicated
eigenvalue structure because I allow a more general specification of the underlying Markov
process. For instance, there may be multiple eigenvalues associated with distinct positive
eigenfunctions. Typically at most one of these eigenvalue-eigenfunction pairs is of interest
to us. As in the finite-state example, the resulting eigenvalue ρ(M ) is referred to as the
principal eigenvalue and the associated eigenfunction e is the principal eigenfunction.

4.2

Operator families

A key step in my analysis is the construction of a family of operators from a multiplicative
functional M . Formally, with any multiplicative functional M we associate a family of
operators:
Mt f (x) = E [Mt f (Xt )|X0 = x]
(15)
indexed by t. When M has finite first moments, this family of operators is at least well
defined on the space of bounded functions.11
I use alternative constructions of M where is sometimes the product of multiple components. The stochastic process components have explicit economic interpretations including
stochastic discount factor processes, macroeconomic growth trajectories, or growth processes used to represent hypothetical financial claims to be priced. My use of stochastic discount factor processes to reflect valuation is familiar from empirical asset pricing.
For instance, see Hansen and Richard (1987), Cochrane (2001), and Singleton (2006). A
stochastic discount factor for a given payoff horizon discounts the future and it adjusts for
risk when used to assign values to a future payoff. A stochastic discount factor process
assigns values to a cash flow process such as a consumption process that will be realized
in future dates or a dividend process on an infinitely-lived security. This process typically
decays asymptotically. Such decay is needed for an infinitely-lived security with a growing
cash flow to have a finite value as in the case of equity. In contrast to this earlier literature,
I am interested in the stochastic process of discount factors over alternative horizons t as
a way to study the dynamics of valuation in the presence of stochastic growth.
11

See Hansen and Scheinkman (2008) for a a more general and explicit formulation of the domain of
such operators.

21

Why feature multiplicative functionals? The operator families that interest us are necessarily related. They must satisfy one of two related and well known laws: the Law of
Iterated Expectations and the Law of Iterated Values. The Law of Iterated Values imposes temporal consistency on valuation. In the case of models with frictionless trade at
all dates, it is enforced by the absence of arbitrage. In the frictionless market model prices
are modeled as the output from forward-looking operators:
St f (x) = E [St f (Xt )|X0 = x] .
In this expression S is a stochastic discount factor process and f (Xt ) is a contingent claim
to a consumption numeraire expressed as a function of a Markov state at date t and St f
depicts its current period value. Thus Mt = St and M = S. The Law of Iterated Values
restricted to this Markov environment is:
St Sτ = St+τ

(16)

for t ≥ 0, τ ≥ 0 where S0 = I, the identity operator. To understand this, the date t price
assigned to a claim f (Xt+τ ) is Sτ f (Xt ). The price of buying a contingent claim at date 0
with payoff Sτ f (Xt ) is given by the left-hand side of (16) applied to the function f . Instead
of this two-step implementation, consider the time zero purchase of the contingent claim
f (Xt+τ ). Its date zero purchase price is given by the right-hand side of (16).
Alternatively, suppose that Et is a conditional expectation operator for date t associated
with a Markov process. This is true by construction when M = 1, because in this case:
Et f (x) = E [f (Xt )|X0 = x]
I will show that other choices of M can give rise to expectation operators provided that
we are willing to alter the implicit Markov evolution. The Law of Iterated Expectations or
the Chain Rule of Forecasting implies:
Et Eτ = Et+τ
for τ ≥ 0 and t ≥ 0. In the case of conditional expectation operators, Et 1 = 1 but this
restriction is not necessarily satisfied for valuation operators.
These laws are captured formally as a statement that the family of operators should be

22

a semigroup.
Definition 4.2. A family of operators {Mt } is a (one-parameter) semigroup if a) M0 = I
and b) Mt Mτ = Mt+τ for t ≥ 0 and τ ≥ 0.
I now answer the question: Why use multiplicative functionals to represent operator
families? I do so because a multiplicative functional M guarantees that the resulting
operator family {Mt : t ≥ 0} constructed using (15) is a one parameter semigroup.
In valuation problems, stochastic discount factors are only one application of multiplicative functionals. Multiplicative functionals are also useful in building cash flows or
claims to consumption goods that grow over time. While X may be stationary, the cash
flow
Ct = Gt f (Xt )G̃0
displays stochastic growth when G is a multiplicative functional. I include the adjustment
G̃0 because I normalized the the growth process to be one at date zero. Scaling by G̃0 is
a way to ensure that the initialization G0 = 1 is indeed only a normalization. Moreover,
shifting the vantage point from time zero to time τ ,
Ct+τ
=
Gτ G̃0



Gt+τ
Gτ


f (Xt+τ ).

I study cash flows of this type by building an operator that alters the transient contribution to the cash flow f (Xt ). This leads us to study
Pt f (x) = E [St Gt f (Xt )|X0 = x] .
The value assigned to Ct is given by G̃0 Pt f (X0 ) because G̃0 is presumed to be in the date
zero information set. Importantly, it is the product of two multiplicative functionals that
we use for representing the operator Pt : M = SG. Exploiting the recursive and time
invariant nature of Markov pricing, the value assigned to Ct+τ at time τ is Gτ G̃0 Pt f (x).

4.3

Products and co-dependence

Covariances play a prominent role in representing risk premia in asset valuation. I will
suggest a long-run counterpart that is motivated by studying the behavior of products of
multiplicative functionals. While the product of two multiplicative functionals is multi-

23

plicative,


ρ M [1] M [2] =
6 ρ M [1] ) + ρ(M [2] .
Co-dependence is important when characterizing even the limiting behavior of the product
M [1] M [2] . In fact the discrepancy:


ρ M [1] M [2] − ρ M [1] ) − ρ(M [2] .

(17)
[1]

[2]

will be used to give a long-run version of a risk premium. If Mt and Mt happen to
be jointly log normal for each t, then (17) is equal to the limiting covariance between the
corresponding logarithms:


1
[1]
[2]
lim Cov Yt , Yt
t→∞ t
where M [j] = exp(Y [j] ) for j = 1, 2. While this illustrates that co-dependence plays a

central role in ρ M [1] M [2] , we will not require log-normality in what follows.
Here is an application of this apparatus to a dynamic extension of a familiar asset
pricing problem. The risk premium on a cash-flow Gt f (Xt ) paid out at date t and valued
at date zero is measured by:
1
t

log E [Gt f (Xt )|X0 = x] −
log
expected payoff
−

1
t

log E [St Gt f (Xt )|X0 = x] +
log
price
−

1
t

log E [St |X0 = x]
(18)
log
riskfree return

where f is specified such that the respective logarithms are well defined. The term:
E [Gt f (Xt )|X0 = x]
E [St Gt f (Xt )|X0 = x]
is the expected return on the investment over the horizon t, and
1
E [St |X0 = x]
is the expected return on a riskless investment.
By letting t shrink to zero and computing marginal changes in the risk exposure, I
reproduce the local risk premia familiar in the continuous-time asset pricing literature. In
contrast, the purpose of the methods described in this paper is to study the limit as the
investment horizon is made arbitrarily long and to explore the corresponding changes in

24

risk exposure. Provided that f is inconsequential to the limit, the long-horizon limit is
risk premium = ρ(G) + ρ(S) − ρ(SG).

(19)

In the log-normal case this limiting risk premia will turn out to be the negative covariance
of the increments in the martingale components of log G and log S (see calculations in
example 5.2 in subsection 5.2).
Prior to proceeding, I comment a bit on the previous literature. The study of the dynamics of risk premia is familiar from the work of Wachter (2005), Lettau and Wachter
(2007) and Hansen et al. (2008a). Hansen et al. (2008a) characterize the resulting limiting risk premia and the associated risk prices in a log-linear environment.12 Hansen
and Scheinkman (2008) extend this approach to fundamentally nonlinear models with a
Markov structure. The perturbation method of section 6 gives a way to compute risk prices
in nonlinear Markov environment.13 Later I will extend this characterization to produce
long-term risk prices and long-term risk return tradeoffs.

4.4

Local versus global

In the decomposition of an additive functional, the linear trend coefficient averages the
local state dependent growth rate: ν = E [β ∗ (Xt )]. I now explore the relation between the
local, state dependent growth rate and the long-run counterpart ρ(M ).
Consider for the moment a special class of multiplicative functionals:
Z

t

Mt = exp


β(Xu )du .

0

Such functionals are special because they are smooth, or locally riskless. The multiplicative
12

Hansen et al. (2008a) also consider the limiting behavior of holding period returns. This limit includes
contributions from the principle eigenfunction and the principal eigenvalue of the associated valuation
operator for pricing cash flows with stochastic growth components.
13
Wachter (2005) develops a computational approach based on pricing what she calls “zero-coupon”
equity, which in our notation is E [St Gt f (Xt )|X0 = x]. Her algorithm has component prices that converge
to zero as the horizon is extended. By using an adaptation of the so-called “power method”, these prices
can be rescaled to have nondegenerate limit. The limiting function is a principal eigenfunction of the type
that I have described. The power method rescales each iteration and hence adjusts for the asymptotic
decay. The limit of this rescaling reveals the eigenvalue. Using this more refined characterization of the
limit could improve computational performance by providing an approximation for the infinite sum of
terms starting from a given horizon forward. The results of Hansen and Scheinkman (2008) described in
section 5 provide justification for the limit approximation.

25

functional has a state dependent growth rate given by β(x). If β(x) were constant (state
independent), then the long-run growth rate ρ(M ) and the local growth rate would coincide.
When β fluctuates, log(Mt ) will have a well-defined average growth rate η, but Jensen’s
inequality prevents us from just exponentiating this average to compute ρ(M ).
The limit ρ(M ) in this special case is a key ingredient in the study of large deviations.
Rt
While 1t 0 β(Xu )du obeys a Law of Large Numbers and converges to its unconditional
expectation η, more can be said about small probability departures from this law. Large
Deviation Theory seeks to characterize these departures by evaluating expectations under
the stationary distribution for an alternative probability measure assigned to X. The same
tools used in Large Deviation Theory allow me study the link between β and ρ where β is
the local growth or decay rate and ρ is the asymptotic counterpart.
Let Q be a probability distribution over the state space E of the Markov process X.
Following Donsker and Varadhan (1976), Dupuis and Ellis (1997) and others, construct a
rate function J(Q) to measure the discrepancy between the original stationary distribution
and Q. See appendix A for a construction of this measure and for a discussion of how it
relates to some of my discussion that follows. The function J is convex in the probability
measure Q, and it is used to construct what is called a Laplace principle that characterizes
the limit:
Problem 4.3.

Z
ρ(M ) = sup

β(x)dQ − J(Q) ≥ E [β(Xt )]

Q

The inequality follows because J(Q) = 0 when Q is the stationary distribution of the
Markov process X.
This optimization problem is inherently static, with the dynamics loaded into the construction of convex function J. The function J is constructed independent of the choice
of β. Recall that β is the local growth rate of M and its associated semigroup. The
long-run limiting growth rate of a multiplicative functional and its associated semigroup
exceeds on average the local growth rate integrated against the stationary distribution of
the underlying Markov process. Optimization problem (4.3) characterizes formally this
difference.14
14

Large deviation theory exploits problem (4.3) because ρ(M ) implies a bound of the form:

 Z t
1
β(Xu ) ≥ k ≤ exp (t [ρ(M ) − k])
Prob
t 0

26

This analysis applies to stochastic growth and to stochastic discounting provided that
the associated multiplicative functional is locally predictable. For instance, these methods
provide a general way to characterize the link between short-term and long-term discounting as posed by Newell and Pizer (2003, 2004). In this application −β is the instantaneous
discount rate and −ρ is the long-term discount rate used in policy evaluation. Motivated
by problems in climate policy analysis, they study discounting abstracting from stochastic
growth and adjustment for risk. Their focus is on the long-run consequences for valuation of fluctuations in short-term discount rates. Specifically they argue that −ρ can
be substantially smaller than −Eβ. Optimization problem 4.3 gives a general statement
characterization this inequality for Markov valuation problems. This optimization problem
shows that in the long-run it is a distorted average of −β(Xt ) that is germane for discounting. Given the maximization over alternative probability distributions, −ρ(M ) will be less
than the average of −β. The magnitude of this discrepancy depends on the potency of the
convex penalty function J(Q).15 As we will see the resulting penchant for small long-term
discount rates can be undermined by taking account of risk.
Recall from (11) that for more general multiplicative functional M that local growth
rate β ∗ includes adjustments for local exposure to Brownian motion and jump risk. The
multiplicative functional M can be decomposed into two component multiplicative functionals:

Z t
β ∗ (Xu )du Mt∗

Mt = exp

(20)

0

where M ∗ is a local martingale.16 Both components are multiplicative functionals. When
this local martingale is a martingale, it is associated with a distorted probability distribution
for X.17 The probability twisting associated with M ∗ preserves the Markov structure.
The entropy measure discussed previously is now constructed relative to the probability
for large t. This bound is only revealing when k > ρ(M ). Our interest in ρ(M ) is different, but the
probabilistic bound is also intriguing.
15
While this analysis allows for nonlinearity in the Markov dynamics, it does not include the case in
which the process {β(Xt )} is nonstationary except through a sequence of approximating models.
16
In the case of supermartingales, this decomposition can be viewed as a special case of one obtained by
Ito and Watanabe (1965). They show that any multiplicative supermartingale can be represented as the
following product of two multiplicative functionals:
Mt = Mt` Mtd
where {Mt` : t ≥ 0} is a nonnegative local martingale and {Mtd : t ≥ 0} is a decreasing process whose only
discontinuities occur where {Xt : t ≥ 0} is discontinuous.
17
Applied to valuation problem without growth this distorted probability distribution is the risk neutral
distribution familiar from mathematical finance.

27

distribution associated with M ∗ . This extension permits M processes that are not locally
predictable, provided that we change probability distributions in accordance with M ∗ . The
long-run growth rate ρ(M ) remains the solution to a convex optimization problem:
Problem 4.4.

Z
ρ(M ) = sup


β (x)dQ − J (Q)
∗

∗

Q

where J∗ is constructed using the change in probability measure.18
While optimization problem 4.4 guarantees that ρ(M ) exceeds an average of β ∗ , this
average is computed using a change of measure. Thus the average local growth rate could
be greater than the long-run growth rate computed under the original probability measure when there the multiplicative functional is exposed locally to risk. In this sense the
variability channel featured by Newell and Pizer (2003, 2004) could be even be more than
offset by the presence of local exposure of the discount or growth factors to risk.19 For
instance, the “exposure” of the stochastic discount factor to risk is what captures local risk
premia, that is risk-premia for short-term investments, as I will characterize shortly. Risk
adjustments also have long-term consequences as reflected in the formula:
ρ(GS) − ρ(S)
for the long-term risk-adjusted rate of return.
Instead of directly solving problem 4.4, in the next section I will develop a method to
compute ρ because this method will also provide a more refined characterization of the
valuation dynamics.

5

Multiplicative factorization

So far, I have focused on the behavior of growth or decay rates. Since convergence will be
slow in some example economies, and as a consequence it is important to develop a more
refined approximation. I now propose a refinement based on a multiplicative factorization
of stochastic growth or discount functionals with three components: a) an exponential
18

The link between this optimization problem and the eigenvalue problem is well known in the literature
on large deviations in the absence of a change of measure, for instance see Donsker and Varadhan (1976),
Balaji and Meyn (2000) and Kontoyiannis and Meyn (2003).
19
This offset is important to produce an upward sloping term structure of interest rates.

28

function of time, b) a positive martingale, c) a ratio of function of the Markov process at
zero and t:
h
i
e(X0 )
Mt =
exp (ρt)
M̂t
e(Xt )
↑
↑
↑
growth or
martingale
state
decay
change in probability dependence

(21)

This decomposition constitutes provides the ingredients for a decomposition of value dynamics (a DVD). Component a) governs the long-term growth or decay. It is constructed
from a principal eigenvalue. I will use component b), the positive martingale, to build an
alternative probability measure.20
The dynamics of risk pricing and premia are best understood in terms of this alternative
measure as reflected in the formula:
log Mt f (x) − ρt = log e(x) + log Ê [f (Xt )ê(Xt )|X0 = x]

(22)

where Ê is used to denote the expectation operator under the twisted measure and ê = 1e .
Thus after adjusting for the growth (or decay) rate ρ, the implied values of a cash flow as
a function of the investment horizon is represented conveniently in terms of the dynamics
under the twisted probability measure.
This alternative probability measure gives me a framework for a formal study of longterm approximation on which I can use the existing toolkit for the study of Markov processes
that are “stochastically stable.”
Definition 5.1. The process X is stochastically stable under the measure ˆ· if
lim Ê [f (Xt )|X0 = x] = Ê [f (Xt )]

t→∞

(23)

for any f for which Ê(f ) is well defined and finite.21
Under this stochastic stability, the limit as the investment horizon t becomes large of
20

As an alternative approach, Rogers (1997) proposes a convenient parameterization of a martingale
from which one can construct examples of multiplicative functionals of the form (21). Given my interest
in structural economic models of asset pricing and in products of stochastic discount factor and growth
functionals, I will instead explore factorizations of pre-specified multiplicative functionals.
21
This is stronger than ergodicity because it rules out periodic components. Ergodicity requires that
time series averages converge but not necessarily that conditional expectation operators converge.

29

(22) is
lim [log Mt f (x) − tρ] = log e(x) + log Ê [f (Xt )ê(Xt )] .

t→∞

(24)

The second term on the right-hand side computes the unconditional expectation of f ê
under the twisted probability measure, provided of course that this expectation is finite
and positive. This generalizes result (14) for the finite-state Markov chain example 4.1.
Limit (24) gives a hyperbolic approximation for log Mt f (x) as a function of the investment
horizon:

1
1
log Mt f (x) ≈ ρ +
log e(x) + log Ê [f (Xt )ê(Xt )] .
t
t
By applying this approximation to M = SG, I have an operational method for characterizing how a DVD converges to its limit value.
Component c) is built directly from the principle eigenfunction e. It captures state
dependence and it provides a way to characterize the convergence to the limiting growth
(or decay) rate ρ. The choice of f contributes a constant term log Ê [f (Xt )ê(Xt )], while
the principle eigenfunction e determines the state dependence independent of f . At this
juncture I call this component transient by analogy to the decomposition of an additive
functional. Later I will relate this term to components of models that are transient from
the standpoint of valuation.
Multiplicative factorization (21) is also a decomposition of a stochastic growth or discount process. All three components are themselves multiplicative functionals, but with
very different behavior. The term exp(ρt) is not stochastic. The multiplicative martingale
has expectation unity for all t and thus is not expected to grow. When applied to stochastic
discount factor processes, Alvarez and Jermann (2000) interpret the martingale as reflecting the role of permanent macroeconomic shocks in understanding the term structure of
interest rates. The third component appears “transient” when the underlying Markov process X is stationary. While the stochastic inputs of the martingale M̂ will be long lasting,
perhaps the same is not true for this third component.22
This component-by-component analysis turns out to be misleading. The components
are correlated and this correlation can have an important impact on the long-run behavior
of the original M process. Thus I am led to ask: Q1: Is factorization (21) unique? Q2:
When is this factorization useful? The answers to these two questions are intertwined. The
remainder of the section answers these questions and develops more fully the construction
22
Although positive, the martingale component of the factorization will typically not converge to a
limiting random variable with unit expectation.

30

and implications of (21).

5.1

Factorization

I build the factorization as follows. First I solve:
E [Mt e(Xt )|X0 = x] = exp(ρt)e(x)

(25)

for any t where e is strictly positive as in (12). The function e can be viewed as a principal eigenfunction of the semigroup with ρ being the corresponding eigenvalue. Since this
equation holds for any t, it can be localized by computing:
lim
t↓0

E [Mt e(Xt )|X0 = x] − exp(−ρt)e(x)
= 0,
t

(26)

which gives an equation in e and ρ to be solved. The local counterpart to this equation is
Be = ρe,
where
lim
t↓0

(27)

E [Mt e(Xt ) − e(x)|X0 = x]
= Be(x)
t

The operator B is the so-called generator of the semigroup constructed with the multiplicative functional M . It is an operator on a space of appropriately defined functions.
Heuristically, it captures the local evolution of the semigroup. In the case of a diffusion
model, this generator is known to be a second-order differential operator:




2
∂f
1 2
1
0 ∂ f
0
+ trace σσ
Bf = β + |ξ| f + (σξ + µ) ·
.
2
∂x 2
∂x∂x0
It is convenient to express the corresponding eigenvalue equation in terms of log e after
dividing the equation by e:

ρ=





0


2
1 2
∂ log e 1
1 ∂ log e
∂ log e
0
0 ∂ log e
0
β + |ξ| + (σξ + µ) ·
+ trace σσ
+
σσ
2
∂x
2
2
∂x
∂x
∂x∂x0

We have seen the finite-state counterpart to this equation in section 4.1.
Typically it suffices to solve the local equation (27) to obtain a solution to (25). See
Hansen and Scheinkman (2008) for a more detailed discussion of this issue. In the finite31

state Markov model of section 4.1, convenient and well known sufficient conditions exist for
there to be a unique (up to scale) positive eigenfunction satisfying (25). More generally,
however, this uniqueness will not hold. Instead I will obtain uniqueness from additional
considerations.
Given a solution to (25), I construct a martingale via:

M̂t = exp(−ρt)Mt


e(Xt )
,
e(X0 )

which is itself a multiplicative functional. The multiplicative decomposition (21) follows
immediately by letting ê = 1e and solving for M in terms of M̂ , ρ and ê.

5.2

Additive versus multiplicative decomposition

There are important differences in the study of additive and multiplicative functionals and
decompositions. For instance, principal eigenfunction e in the multiplicative factorization
(21) is not the exponential of the the function g used in the additive decomposition (5):
exp[g(x)] 6= e(x).
In special cases, however, the two are related.
Example 5.2. Consider again example 3.3 and recall the additive functional:
dYt = νdt + HXt dt + F dWt .
Form
Mt = exp(Yt ).
While the exponential of a martingale is not a martingale, in this case the exponential of the
additive martingale will become a martingale provided that we multiply the additive martingale by an exponential function of time. This simple adjustment exploits the lognormal
specification as follows:



t
−1
2
M̂t = exp Ŷt − |F − HA B| .
2

32

is a martingale. The growth rate for M is:
|F − HA−1 B|2
ρ(M ) = ν +
2
In this example it is easy to go from a martingale decomposition of an additive functional to that of a multiplicative functional. An equivalent way to proceed is to build e as an
exponential of a linear function of x, and to seek a solution to (27). It may be verified that
−1
2
e(x) = exp(−HA−1 x) = exp[g(x)] is the solution to this equation for ρ = ν + |F −HA2 B| .
Thus e is obtained by exponentiating the function g used in the additive martingale construction. The eigenvalue ρ includes an extra volatility adjustment. This is typical in
log-normal models. In this case the relevant variance, |F − HA−1 B|2 , is that of the additive martingale scaled by the time interval of evolution.
This adjustment illustrates both the discount-rate reduction of Newell and Pizer (2003,
2004) in a special case and the ambiguity of this comparison in general. When M is
a discount factor process constructed with F = 0, the long-term discount rate is −ν −
|HA−1 B|2
and the short-term (instantaneous) rate is −ν − HXt . On average, the long-term
2
rate is smaller, consistent with the outcome of problem 4.3. If, however, the stochastic
−1
2
discount factor has F 6= 0, the long-term rate is −ν − |F −HA2 B| and the short-term rate
2
is −ν − HXt − |F2| . The ordering of short-term and long-term discount rates now depends
on the relative magnitude of the instantaneous volatility, |F |, and the long-term volatility,
|F − HA−1 B|, of the logarithm of the stochastic discount factor process.
Consider now two log-normal functionals M [1] and M [2] parameterized by (ηi , Fi , Hi )
for i = 1, 2. A simple calculation reveals that
ρ(M [1] M [2] ) − ρ(M [1] ) − ρ(M [2] ) = (F1 − H1 A−1 B) · (F2 − H2 A−1 B),
which is the covariance of the increments to the martingale components of log M [1] and
log M [2] . When M [1] is a stochastic discount factor and M [2] is a stochastic growth factor,
from formula (19) it follows that the negative of this covariance is the long-term risk
premium.
In log-normal example 5.2 there is a simple link between the additive decomposition
and the multiplicative factorization. My next example shows that this link breaks down
when volatility is state dependent.

33

Example 5.3. Consider again Example 3.4, and recall the additive functional:
dYt = νdt +

[1]
H1 Xt dt

+

[2]
H2 (Xt

q
[2]
− 1)dt + Xt F dWt .

Form
Mt = exp(Yt ).
" #
" #
x1
α1
Guess a solution e(x) = exp (α · x) where x =
and α =
. To compute ρ(M ), I
x2
α2
solve a special case of (27):
1
ν + x1 0 (A11 0 α1 + H1 0 ) + (x2 − 1) (A12 0 α1 + A22 α2 + H2 ) + x2 |α0 B + F |2 = ρ.
2
which I derive as a special case of (27). Thus the coefficients on x1 and x2 are zero when:
A11 0 α1 + H1 0 = 0
1
A12 0 α1 + A22 α2 + H2 + |α1 0 B1 + α2 B2 + F |2 = 0.
2

(28)

The first equation can be solved for α1 and the second one for α2 given α1 . The solution to
the first equation is:
α1 = −(A11 0 )−1 H1 0
The second equation is quadratic in α2 , so there may be two solutions. Specifically,

B2 · F + A22
α2 = −
|B2 |2
p
|B2 · F + A22 |2 − |B2 |2 (|F − H1 (A11 )−1 B1 |2 + 2H2 − 2H1 (A11 )−1 A12 )
±
,
|B2 |2


(29)

provided that the term under the square root sign is positive. Notice in particular that this
term will be positive for sufficiently small |B2 |. Finally,
ρ = ν − (A12 0 α1 + A22 α2 + H2 ).
In contrast to example 5.2, e is not the exponential of the function g used in the additive
martingale construction in example 5.3. Moreover, in example 5.3 there are two possible
solutions for e that are exponentials of linear functions of the state vector. I will have cause

34

to select one of these solutions as the interesting one to use in approximation. Finally, twice
the difference between ν and ρ is no longer interpretable as a long-run variance.

5.3

Martingales and changes in probabilities

Why might positive multiplicative martingales be of interest? A positive martingale scaled
to have unit expectation is known to induce an alternative probability measure. This trick
is a familiar one from asset pricing, but it is valuable in many other contexts. Since M̂ is
a martingale, I form the distorted or twisted expectation:
h
i
Ê [f (Xt )|X0 ] = E M̂t f (Xt )|X0 .
For each time horizon t, I define an alternative conditional expectation operator. The
martingale property is needed so that the resulting family of conditional expectation operators obeys the Law of Iterated Expectations. It insures consistency between the operators
defined using M̂t+τ and M̂t for expectations of random variables that are in the date t conditioning information sets. Moreover, with this (multiplicative) construction of a martingale,
the process remains Markov under the change in probability measure.
I present a method for long-run approximation, which is quite distinct from log-linear
methods that approximate around a steady state. Instead a martingale component of M is
used to change the probability measure, and approximation can proceed using tools from
the study of Markov processes with stable stochastic dynamics. The stability condition is
presumed to hold under the distorted or twisted probability distribution.
Theorem 5.4. Given a multiplicative functional M , suppose that e and ρ satisfy equation
(26) and that X is stochastically stable under the ˆ· probability measure. Then

f (Xt )
|X0 = x e(x).
E [Mt f (Xt )|X0 = x] = exp(ρt)Ê
e(Xt )


Moreover,
lim exp(−ρt)E [Mt f (Xt )|X0 = x] = Ê [f (Xt )ê(Xt )] e(x)

t→∞

provided that Ê [f (Xt )ê(Xt )] is finite where ê = 1/e.
It follows from Theorem 5.4 that once we scale by the growth rate ρ, we obtain a onefactor representation of long-term behavior. Changing the function f simply changes the
35

coefficient on the function e. Thus the state dependence is approximately proportional to
e as the horizon becomes large. For this method to justify our previous limits, we require
that f ê have a finite expectation under the ˆ· probability measure. The class of functions f
for which this approximation works depends on the stationary distribution for the Markov
state of the ˆ· probability measure and the function ê. The resulting functions f of the
Markov state have transient contributions to valuation since for these components:
1
log E [Mt f (Xt )|X0 ] = ρ(M ).
t→∞ t
lim

Definition 5.5. For a given multiplicative functional M , a function f (X) is transient if X
is stochastically stable under the probability measure implied by the martingale component
and Ê[f (Xt )ê(Xt )] is well defined and finite.
The family of f ’s that define transient processes determines the sense in which the principal
eigenvalue and function dominate in the long run. How rich this collection will be is problem
specific. As we will see, there are important examples when this density has a fat tail which
limits the range of the approximation. On the other hand, the process X can be strongly
dependent under the ˆ· probability measure.
As I noted previously, there is an extensive set of tools for studying the stability of
Markov processes that can be brought to bear on this problem. For instance, see Meyn
and Tweedie (1993) for a survey of such methods based on the use of Foster-Lyapunov
criteria. See Rosenblatt (1971), Bhattacharya (1982) and Hansen and Scheinkman (1995)
for alternative approaches based on mean-square approximation. While there may be
multiple representations of the form (21), Hansen and Scheinkman (2008) show that there
is at most one such representation for which the process X is stochastically stable.
Recall that in example 5.3 we found two solutions for α2 by solving the quadratic
equation (28). As an implication of the Girsanov Theorem, associated with each solution
is an alternative probability measure under which
q
[2]
dWt = Xt (F 0 + B1 0 α1 0 + B2 0 α2 )) dt + dŴt .
where Ŵt is a multivariate standard Brownian motion under the twisted measure. The
implied twisted evolution equation for X [1] is:
 [2]
[1]
[1]
[2]
dXt = A11 Xt dt + A12 (Xt − 1)dt + B1 F 0 + |B1 |2 α1 Xt dt + dŴt ,
36

and for X [2] is
[2]
dXt

=

[2]
A22 (Xt

0

2

− 1)dt + B2 F + |B2 | α2



[2]
Xt dt

q
[2]
+ Xt dŴt

p
[2]
= ± |B2 F 0 q
+ A22 |2 − |B2 |2 (|F − H1 (A11 )−1 B1 |2 + 2H2 − 2H1 (A11 )−1 A12 )Xt dt
−A22 dt +

[2]

Xt dŴt ,

where in the second representation I have substituted from solution (29). I select the
“minus” solution to achieve stochastic stability.

5.4

Long-run unusual behavior of multiplicative martingales

As I have shown, the martingale component M̂ is valuable as a means of changing the
probability measure and studying approximation as the time horizon becomes large. The
martingale is useful provided that implies a stochastic evolution that is stochastically stable. This change of measure is what makes a multiplicative martingale valuable analytically
valuable as a means of long-term approximation. From another perspective, however, the
multiplicative martingale can have degenerate or unusual behavior in the limit. This behavior does not resemble the central limit approximation I deduced for an additive martingale.
Since a multiplicative martingale is positive, it is bounded from below. By the Martingale Convergence Theorem, M̂ converges to a limiting random variable that I denote M̂∞ .
While


E M̂t |X0 = x = 1


for all t, it may be that E M̂∞ |F0 ≤ 1 and is often zero. For instance, it is zero in the
log-normal example 3.3. While the martingale induces an alternative “twisted ” probability
measure, it does so in a way that is not absolutely continuous in the limit as t becomes
arbitrarily large. The twisted probability of limit events may assign positive probability to
events that previously had measure zero. The multiplicative martingale remains valuable
as a change of measure when the stochastic dynamics are stable even though the martingale
itself may converge to zero.
I obtain a more refined characterization of the behavior following an approach initiated
by Chernoff (1952).23 Specifically I bound a threshold probability by taking expectations
23

See Newman and Stuck (1979) for a continuous-time Markov version of this formulation.

37

of a dominating function:
n
h
i ab
o 1
1
log P r M̂t ≥ exp(b)|X0 = x ≤ log E (M̂t )a |X0 = x −
≤0
t
t
t
for any 0 ≤ a ≤ 1 and any real number b. Provided that the left-hand side limit is strictly
negative, I have an exponential bound on the threshold probability for the multiplicative
martingale as the horizon is extended. This bound may be optimized by the choice of a.
Notice that M̂ a is itself a multiplicative functional (in fact a multiplicative supermartingale)
and can be studied using the methods described in this paper. Such bounds give a precise
sense in which large positive movements in M̂ over long horizons are unlikely. Notice
that as the horizon gets large the contribution of b to the bound on the right-hand side
becomes inconsequential. The limiting exponential decay rate does not depend on the
chosen threshold. Thus while M̂ is used productively as a change in probability measure
used in long-term approximation, the process itself can become small. For this reason,
I find (21) most interesting as a DVD, than as a directly interpretable factorization of
a multiplicative stochastic process.24 In particular, the martingale gives an alternative
probability measure that is convenient to represent risk premia and prices over alternative
payoff horizons.

5.5

Transient model components

I now suggest what it means for there to be temporary growth components or temporary
components to stochastic discount factors. I focus on a stochastic discount factor process implied by an asset pricing model, but there is an entirely analogous treatment of a
stochastic growth functional.
Consider a benchmark valuation model represented by a stochastic discount factor,
M = S, or the product of a stochastic discount functional and a reference growth functional
M = SG. I ask: what modifications have transient implications for valuation? The tools I
described in this section give an answer.
Given an M implied by a benchmark valuation model, recall our multiplicative factorization (21):
e(X0 )
.
Mt = exp(ρt)M̂t
e(Xt )
24

See Alvarez and Jermann (2000) for its use as a direct decomposition of a stochastic discount factor
process.

38

Moreover, suppose that under the associated ˆ· probability measure X satisfies a stochastic
stability condition 5.1. Consider an alternative model of the form:
Mt∗ = Mt

fˆ(Xt )
fˆ(X0 )

(30)

for some fˆ where M is used to represent a benchmark model and M ∗ an alternative model.
As argued by Bansal and Lehmann (1997) and others, a variety of asset pricing models
can be represented like this with the time-separable power utility model used to construct
M . Function fˆ may be induced by changes in the preferences of investors such as habit
persistence or social externalities. I will illustrate such representations in section 7. In light
of (30), a candidate factorization for M ∗ is:
Mt∗ = exp(ρt)M̂t

e(X0 )fˆ(Xt )
.
e(Xt )fˆ(X0 )

The exponential and martingale components remain the same as for the factorization of
M . This gives me an operational notion of a transient change in valuation.
Definition 5.6. The difference in the semigroups associated with M ∗ and M is transient if
their multiplicative factorizations share the same exponential growth (or decay) component:
exp(ρt) and the same martingale component: M̂ for which the process X is stochastically
stable under the implied change in probability measure.
When the difference between the semigroups associated with M and M ∗ is transient,
long-term components to the factorizations are the same. The principal eigenfunctions,
however, can be different. For instance, the principal eigenfunction for M ∗ given by (30)
is: e∗ = e/fˆ.25 The difference between e and e∗ alters the family of transient functions
because for f to be transient for M ∗ :
h
i
Ê f (Xt )ê(Xt )fˆ(Xt ) < ∞.
In particular, this restriction depends on fˆ. Thus the collection of functions for which the
long-term approximation methods are applicable is altered. Moreover, even if f is transient
My reference to e∗ as an eigenfunction is a bit loose because I have not prespecified a space of functions
that it resides in. Instead I use the formalization of Hansen and Scheinkman (2008) that defines an
eigenfunction using a martingale approach.
25

39

for both M and M ∗ , the (state dependent) coefficient for the hyperbolic approximation
differs whenever:
h
i
Ê [f (Xt )ê(Xt )] 6= log Ê f (Xt )ê(Xt )fˆ − log fˆ(x).
What have I established in this section? I have a constructed a factorization of a
multiplicative functional first to characterize how a DVD converges to its long-term limit,
and second to reveal when alternative economic models have the same long-term limiting
valuations.

6

Perturbation

Derivatives computed at a baseline configuration of parameters reveal sensitivity of a valuation model to small changes in a parameters. For instance, in Hansen et al. (2008a) the
pricing implications of a parameterized family of valuation models depend on the intertemporal elasticity of the investors. They compute derivatives as an alternative to solving the
model for the alternative parameter configurations. A risk price is also a derivative. It is a
marginal change in a risk premium induced by a marginal change in risk exposure. Thus a
key to constructing a risk price is to parameterize the risk exposure of a hypothetical cash
flow.
In both of these applications, the multiplicative functionals used in constructing the
semigroup depend on a model parameter. Thus I consider M () as a parameterized family
of multiplicative functionals and analyze value implications in the vicinity of  = 0. The
parameter can be a preference parameter as in the work of Hansen et al. (2008a), or it
can be a parameter that governs the exposure to a source of long-term risk that is to be
valued. My specific aim is to study how risk-premia associated with alternative investment
horizons depend on the parameter . In the Hansen et al. (2008a) application, the stochastic
discount factor process is depicted as S() and M () = S()G where G is the stochastic
growth component of a hypothetical or real cash flow. In the applications I consider in
section 7,  parameterizes the long-run risk exposure of a hypothetical cash flow. In this
case M () = SG() and the derivative of risk premium gives a risk price for the respective
horizon.
With a perturbation analysis, it is possible to exploit a given solution to a model in the
study of sensitivity to model specification. Changing the parameter  of M () allows me to

40

perturb the valuations associated with this process. My choice of a scalar parameterization
is made for notational convenience. The multivariate extension is straightforward.
In my applications in section 7, G() is a parameterized family of multiplicative martingales. I use martingales in order to feature the role of pricing dynamics, since the trajectory
of expected cash flows will be identically equal to one when G() is a multiplicative martingale. I feature diffusion models, so G() can be expressed as
t

Z
log Gt () =
0

1
ξ(Xu ; )dWu −
2

Z

t

|ξ(Xu ; )|2 du.

0

The respective risk price is:
risk price = −

d1
log E[St Gt ()|X0 = x]
d t

.

(31)

=0

By exploring alternative parameterizations of risk exposures, I can infer which directions are
of most concern to investors as reflected by pricing implications of an underlying economic
model.
The mathematical finance literature includes calculations of the local sensitivity of prices
of derivative securities to underlying parameters. The finite horizon risk prices that interest
me have the same structure as some of the calculations in this literature.26 The specific
calculation that interest me can be obtained by adapting a formula in Fourni et al. (1999).
Imitating the calculation in their Proposition 3.1, construct
Z
∆t =

t

Dξ(Xu ; 0) · [dWu − ξ(Xu ; 0)0 du]

(32)

0

where Dξ(Xu ; ) is the partial derivative of ξ with respect to . Notice that ∆ is an additive
functional. I use this functional to represent the derivative of interest:27
d
log E [St Gt ()f (Xt )|X0 = x]
d

=
=0

E [St Gt (0)f (Xt )∆t |X0 = x]
.
E [St Gt (0)f (Xt )|X0 = x]

(33)

The results in Fourni et al. (1999) have been extended to include some specifications of
jumps in Davis and Johansson (2006) with the corresponding modifications of the additive
26

Such derivatives are often referred to as the “Greeks” in the option pricing literature.
Fourni et al. (1999) derive this formula after imposing some regularity conditions that I do not repeat
here. Their regularity conditions are sufficient conditions and turn out not to satisfied for some of my
examples. For these I examples, however, I can perform direct calculations of the sensitivities.
27

41

functional ∆.
To study limiting properties, I first solve the principal eigenvalue problem for  = 0 and
use the solution to construct a probability measure ˆ· as we described previously. Recall
that in the stochastic evolution under the twisted probablity measure, dWt becomes a
multivariate standard Brownian motion with an explicit drift distortion that depends on
the Markov state. With this change of measure,
d
log E [St Gt ()f (Xt )|X0 = x]
d


=x


=
(Xt )
Ê fe(X
|X
=
x
0
t)
Ê

=0



f (Xt )
∆ |X0
e(Xt ) t

where e is the principal eigenfunction for the semigroup constructed from M = SG(0).
In the remainder of this section I will show that the limiting derivative is:
1
d
ρ()|=0 = Ê∆t
d
t

(34)

which can be evaluated for any choice of t including choices that are arbitrarily small.
Notice that ∆ is an additive functional. Thus, I obtain the derivative of ρ by computing the
average of the average trend growth of additive functional ∆ under the twisted ˆ· probability
measure. While many readers may just prefer to accept this formula including the limiting
version as the investment horizon becomes small, for completeness I give a (heuristic)
derivation.

6.1

Long-term limiting behavior

Let M () = SG(), and recall the decomposition:
Mt () = exp [ρ()t] M̂t ()

e(X0 ; )
e(Xt ; )

where I have used our parameterization of M and the fact that parameterizing M in terms of
 is equivalent to parameterizing the components. Consider first the martingale component.
Here I borrow an insight from maximum likelihood estimation. Note that
h
i
E M̂t ()|X0 = x = 1

42

for all . The derivative of this expectation with respect to  is necessarily zero. Thus





d
d
Ê
log M̂t ()|=0 |X0 = x = E
M̂t ()|X0 = x = 0.
d
d
Many readers familiar with statistics will have a feeling of familiarity. This argument is
essentially the usual argument from maximum likelihood estimation for why a score vector
d
log M̂t () evaluated at  = 0 is the score
for a likelihood function has mean zero where d
of the likelihood over an interval of time t.
Now use the decomposition and differentiate log Mt ()
d
d
dρ()
d
d
log Mt () = t
+ log M̂t () − log e(Xt ; ) + log e(X0 ; ).
d
d
d
d
d
Take expectations and use the fact that X is stationary under the ˆ· probability measure to
obtain


d
dρ()
1
= Ê
log Mt ()
.
(35)
d =0
t
d
=0
This argument was not specific to diffusions there it applies to models with jumps as
well. In the special case of a diffusion it agrees with (34).

6.2

Using the local evolution

I now make formula (35) operational by studying the limiting version as t declines to zero.
ˆ t )dt denote the drift of the Brownian motion W
Under the ˆ· change of measure, I let ξ(X
implying that new drift for X is
ˆ
µ̂(x) = µ(x) + σ(x)ξ(x).
I let
η̂(dy|x) = exp[χ̂(y, x)]η(dy|x)
denote the new measure used to capture local evolution of the jump component to the
Markov process. Recall that this conditional measure encodes the jump intensity and the
jump distribution conditioned on a jump taking place.
The functional log Mt () is an additive functional, and its derivative is as well. Recall

43

the continuous time model of Y we specified in equation (3):
Z

t

Z

t

0

0

X

ξ(Xu ; ) · dWu +

β(Xu ; )du +

Yt () =

χ(Xu , Xu− ; )

0<u≤t

and form M (a) = exp[Y (a)]. It is most convenient to take limits of (34) as t → 0. This
entails computing an average local mean under the distorted distribution:
 h

i
d
d
ˆ t)
ρ()|=0 = Ê
β(Xt ; ) + ξ(Xt ; ) · ξ(X
d
d
=0

Z
d
χ(y, Xt ; )
exp[χ̂(y, Xt )]η(dy|Xt )
+Ê
d
=0

(36)

ˆ t )dt as the drift under the ˆ·
where we have used the fact that the Brownian motion has ξ(X
distribution and used the conditional measure exp[χ̂(y, Xt )]η(dy|Xt ) to construct the ˆ· the
jump intensity and the jump distribution conditioned on the current Markov state.
I have been a bit heuristic or cavalier about taking derivatives. Formal treatments
do currently exist in the applied mathematics literature. For example Kontoyiannis and
Meyn (2003) (see their Proposition 6.2) consider smoothness of parameterized families of
operators in their formal development of large deviation results for Markov processes.

6.3

Convergence

Will the hyperbolic convergence extend to the risk prices? It carries over the in example
economies that I consider, and there are good reasons to expect that a more general analysis
is possible. From formulas (33) and (34),
d
log E [St Gt ()f (Xt )|X0 = x]
d

−t
=0

d
ρ()|=0 =
d

Ê

h


i
∆t − Ê∆t |X0 = x
h
i
.
(Xt )
Ê fe(X
|X
=
x
0
t)

f (Xt )
e(Xt )



For simplicity, suppose that f = e, and consider the limit:


lim Ê ∆t − Ê∆t |X0 = x .

t→∞

(37)

Recall that ∆ is an additive functional, and Theorem 3.2 gives a martingale decomposition
of such a functional. It is the decomposition under that change of measure that interests
me. Subtracting the mean of ∆t in expression (37) removes the linear trend component,
44

and the conditional expectation of the martingale component is zero. Thus




Ê ∆t − Ê∆t |X0 = x = −Ê [ĝ(Xt )|X0 = x] + ĝ(x)
where ĝ is the g of Theorem 3.2 for ∆ under the change of measure. Thus


lim Ê ∆t − Ê∆t |X0 = x = −Êĝ(Xt ) + ĝ(x).

t→∞

More generally, that is when f 6= e, I expect the martingale component of ∆ to contribute
to this limit and an additional computation is required.28

7

Applications

In my study of asset pricing, I consider two limits. One reproduces the local risk prices
familiar from asset pricing theory by taking limits as the investment horizon shrinks to zero,
and the other constructs long-term risk prices as limits when the investment horizon is made
arbitrarily large. Intermediate time frames form a “term structure” of risk prices between
these two limits. These dynamics are conveniently characterized using the properties of
the twisted Markov transition described in section 5.
I have already characterized long-term risk premia in the presence of stochastic growth
using the formula:
ρ(G) + ρ(S) − ρ(SG).
In what follows, I let G be a multiplicative martingale as a way to abstract from cash
flow dynamics. For such a G, ρ(G) = 0 because there is no expected cash flow growth.
A reader may object by claiming that I have now eliminated growth altogether. Even
worse almost all of the sample paths of G may converge to zero. Consider, however, a
more general multiplicative specification of a cash flow. Typically it is the martingale
component that determines the long-term risk prices and not the transient component.
Moreover, fluctuations in growth are embedded in the martingale component, and the
deterministic exponential growth component does not alter risk premia or prices at any
horizon.29 Instead of extracting martingale components from initial multiplicative growth
28

Potentially, the limit calculation could exploit Properties P2 and P6 of Malliavin calculus described in
Fourni et al. (1999).
29
While multiplicative martingales may have degenerate long-run behavior, we could apply Theorem 3.2
and eliminate the trend term in logarithms. This allows for central-limit-type behavior for long horizons,

45

processes, I will build them directly and explore the resulting pricing implications. I use
the construction of risk prices given in section 6 by computing derivatives of the form (31).
In this section I ask: what are the long-term implications for alternative models of the
stochastic discount factor? Among the models I consider are those designed to enhance
short-term risk prices and induce variation in these prices over time. I use the apparatus
described in previous sections to explore the implications for long-term risk prices, and I
provide revealing comparisons across some models that are currently featured in the asset
pricing literature. The calculations abstract from production, but they provide a dynamic
characterization of a) the impact of risk aversion over alternative investment horizons,
b) impact of risk prices on risk premia. These calculations will deliberately extrapolate
value implications beyond the support of the data by looking at pricing implications for
hypothetical cash flows at different horizons. In this sense, I will be using the models as
“structural”. These pricing calculations are of direct interest and they are informative
for welfare cost calculations using the methods in Hansen et al. (1999) and Alvarez and
Jermann (2004).

7.1

Stochastic discount factors

Multiplicative representations pervade the asset pricing literature. Various changes have
been proposed for the familiar power utility model. There is menu of such models in the
literature featuring alternative departures. Consider an initial benchmark specification that
emerges when investors have preferences represented using discounted power utility:

St = exp(−δt)

Ct
C0

−γ
.

Many alterations in this model take the form:
St∗ = St

fˆ(Xt )
.
fˆ(X0 )

Transient components in asset pricing models have been included to produce short run
fluctuations in asset prices. As argued by Bansal and Lehmann (1997), these fluctuations
may take the form of habit persistence or as an extension of the power utility model of
investor preferences.
and it does not alter the implied risk premia and corresponding risk prices.

46

7.2

Models without consumption predictability

In this subsection I explore a simple model of consumption dynamics under which the
power utility model has transparent implications. My aim is to reveal how risk prices
change across horizons for alternative models.
Suppose that consumption is a geometric Brownian motion:
d log Ct = µc dt + Fc dWt ,
where Ct is aggregate consumption. I allow the Brownian motion {Wt : t ≥ 0} to be
multivariate.30
Construct S in accordance with the power utility model:


Z t
Fc · dWu .
St = exp −δt − γtµc − γ
0

where γ1 is intertemporal elasticity of substitution and δ is the subjective rate of discount.
For risk pricing, I introduce a growth functional that is a martingale:
Z
Gt = exp
0

t

t
Fg · dWu − |Fg |2
2



for the reasons I stated at the outset of this section.
In what follows I will make comparisons between a model with investors that have preferences represented by discounted, time-separable, power utility (a Breeden model) and
a model in which a temporally dependent social externality is introduced in the manner
proposed by Campbell and Cochrane (1999). In terms of my previous notation, S is the
stochastic discount factor for the power utility model and S ∗ is the stochastic discount factor
for a decentralized Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model. The reference to decentralization is important because internalizing the social externality alters the stochastic discount
factor. A social planner would internalize this externality and this would be reflected in
the stochastic discount factor.
I will provide a precise formula for S ∗ subsequently, but I first describe the results. If
the power parameter γ is held fixed across the model specifications, the local risk prices
30

Here I allow for W to generate a larger filtration that the underlying Markov process X. What is critical
for me is that the Markov dynamics are not altered with this more refined filtration. As emphasized to me
by Eric Renault, this can be appropriately formulated as a statement that additional Brownian increments
to be priced do not Granger-cause the underlying Markov process.

47

are known to be be very different as I will illustrate. Not only are they systematically
larger with the consumption externality, they vary over time. What happens as we change
horizons? To address this, I study the limit prices. Specifically, I characterize the limiting
risk premia:
risk premium = ρ(S ∗ ) + ρ(G) − ρ(S ∗ G)
and see how they change as I alter the risk exposure. The risk prices are the derivatives of
the risk premium with respect to Fg used to represent stochastic growth.
By construction, ρ(G) = 0. The long-term risk price vector for the Breeden (1979)’s
model is γFc . I will show that the long-term risk prices for the Campbell-Cochrane model
remain the same as those in the Breeden (1979) model with a very important proviso.
There is a discontinuity when Fg = 0. Specifically, I will show that
risk premium = γFc · Fg + r − r∗ .

(38)

where r is the riskless rate of interest for the power utility model and r∗ is the corresponding
rate for the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model for the same value of the subjective rate
of discount.31 This discontinuity is depicted in figure 2 in which we depict the risk premia
when investors care about external habits and when they do not. Typically the risk premia
converge to zero as Fg converges to zero, but in fact the limiting risk premium is the
differential in the risk-free rates between the the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model
and the Breeden (1979) model. In figure 2 this discontinuity is sizable. It is the distance
on the vertical axis between the circle and the dot. While this discontinuity is only present
in the limit, it is indicative that risk prices are large near Fg = 0 for valuation over long
time horizons. Campbell and Cochrane (1999) show that the conditional second moment
of the stochastic factor diverges as the time horizon is extended. Our analysis gives a more
refined characterization of the limiting behavior. The limiting risk premia remain finite
and the limiting risk prices coincide with the Breeden (1979) model except at σg = 0. In
summary, the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model has risk-premia that remain larger in
the limit as the investment horizon is increased than those in the Breeden (1979) model.
31

I do not mean to imply that an econometrician or calibrator would select the same value of δ for each
model. For instance, Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Wachter (2005) use values of the subjective rate
of discount that are much larger than would be used if the Breeden (1979) model was calibrated to asset
return data. Even if the subjective rate of discount for the Campbell-Cochrane model is to fit interest rates,
the calculation of r using this same subjective rate of discount, although counterfactual, is a revealing input
into the risk-premia formula for the Campbell-Cochrane model.

48

The nonlinearity in this model induces an infinite risk price when evaluated at the point
at a which there is no exposure to growth-rate risk.
Next I use a specification of consumption externalities proposed by Santos and Veronesi
(2006). Santos and Veronesi (2006) imitate the increase in local prices that are present in
the Campbell-Cochrane model, but the term structure of risk prices is different. The limit
prices are the same as in a corresponding Breeden economy and as consequence are small.
Given the dramatically larger local risk prices, I study the dependence of these prices on
the investment horizon. Figure 3 gives the risk price trajectory for the Santos-Veronesi
model and shows the pull towards the Breeden model. The change of measure induced by
the martingale dictates the transitional dynamics of the risk prices. In this model there is
a state variable that measures private consumption relative to a social habit stock. The
trajectories depend on this state variable. As is evident in this figure, the sensitivity of
the risk prices to the Markov state vanishes much more quickly than the convergence to
the limit prices. This initial convergence is dictated by the Markov process under the
twisted evolution. As I argued previously the convergence of the risk premia trajectories
is eventually hyperbolic in the investment horizon (see formula (24)), and the same is
typically true of the risk-price trajectory. Figure 3 includes a hyperbolic function as a
reference curve, and the trajectories starting from different Markov states converge to this
hyperbolic function.32 Later in this section, I show how the coefficient for this hyperbolic
function depends on the stationary distribution under the twisted Markov law.
Figure 3 also illustrates the importance of state variability in the prices for shorter
investment horizons. The figure considers initializations at the .25 and .75 quantiles of
the stationary distribution for the Markov state. The sizeable differences in local prices,
eventually vanish but the when the state is set at the .25 quantile, there is a hump shape
to the risk-price trajectory.

7.3

Models with consumption predictability

Suppose now that consumption evolves according to the stochastic evolution of example
3.4 where
q
[2]
[1]
(39)
d log Ct = µc dt + Hc Xt dt + Xt Fc dWt
32

A special feature of this asset pricing model is that the approximating hyperbolic function does not
depend on the Markov state.

49

5

4

risk premium

r−r*
3

2

1

0

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
risk exposure

0.8

1

Figure 2: Risk premia as function of risk exposure. The vertical axis is scaled by one
hundred so the risk premia are in percent. The dot-dashed line denotes the implied premia
when investors have “external habits”, and the solid line denotes the implied premia when
investors have expected utility preferences. The parameter values for the state evolution
are: Fc = 0.0054 and µc = .0056. I set γ = 2, and for the model with investors that have
external habits I set θ = 0 and ξ = .035. The parameter ξ is continuous time counterpart
to the corresponding parameter in Table 1 of Campbell and Cochrane (1999).

50

0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

0

50

100

150
200
250
investment horizon (quarters)

300

350

Figure 3: Risk price as a function of the investment horizon. The horizontal axis is given
in quarterly time units. The bottom solid line denotes the implied prices when investors
have expected utility preferences and the upper line depicts the hyperbolic function that is
constructed using the invariant distributions under the twisted measures used to approximate the limiting behavior of the long-term prices when investors have external habits.
The dashed line gives the risk-price trajectory obtained by setting x at the .75 quantile
of its stationary distribution, the dash-dotted gives this same trajectory when x is set at
the .25 quantile of its stationary distribution. The parameter values for the state evolution
are: Fc = 0.0054 and µc = .0056. I set γ = 1, and for the model with investors that have
external habits ξ = .04, κ = 80 and µx = .7. These parameters are taken from Table 1 of
Menzly et al. (2004) adjusted to a quarterly time scale.

51

400

[1]

Consumption growth is predictable as captured by Hc Xt , and consumption volatility is
[2]
state dependent as captured by Xt . As a point of reference, consider first the Breeden
(1979) model. Thus the stochastic discount factor is


Z tq
Z t
[2]
[1]
Hc Xu du − γ
Xu Fc dWu .
St = exp −δt − γµc t − γ
0

0

Consider a growth functional constructed as a martingale:
Gt



Z tq
Z
1
1 t
[2]
2
2
[2]
= exp − |Fg | t −
|Fg | (Xu − 1)du +
Xu Fg dWu .
2
2 0
0

I compare the risk price implications for a model in which investors have power utility
(a Breeden model) to a counterpart model with recursive utility using a the risk-sensitive
parameterization of Kreps and Porteus (1978) preferences in which the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is unity.33 The Kreps-Porteus investors care about the intertemporal composition of risk in contrast to investors in the Breeden model. In order that the
limiting risk prices are the same, I set the risk aversion parameter for the Kreps-Porteus
specification to coincide with that of the power used in the Breeden model. I justify this
claim in subsection 7.5 where I show formally that the stochastic discount factor S ∗ for the
recursive utility model

 [r]
e (Xt )
∗
[r]
(40)
St = exp(−ρ t)St [r]
e (X0 )
for some scalar ρ[r] and some function e[r] . This is a limiting result as the subjective rate
of discount in investor preferences tends to zero. As a consequence of (40), M ∗ = S ∗ G and
M = SG will share the same martingale component but not the same decay or growth
rate in a factorization of the form (21. The shared martingale shows that the long-term
risk return tradeoff is the same for the two models. On the other hand, the presence of ρ[r]
in formula (40) implies that the long-term interest rates is different for the two models. I
expect this because the elasticity of intertemporal substitution is different for the investors
in the two models.
For both models it is straightforward to compute the “term structure” of risk prices. I
depict the risk-price trajectories in figure 4 for a three-shock (three independent Brownian
motions) version of the consumption dynamics given in equation (39). These trajectories
33

See Schroder and Skiadas (1999) for a continuous-time formulation of the consumption-portfolio problem for an investor with such preferences.

52

Consumption Risk Price
.20
.15
.10
.05
0

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

300

350

400

300

350

400

Growth−Rate Risk Price
.20
.15
.10
.05
0

0

50

100

150

200

250

Volatility Risk Price
.10

.05

0

0

50

100

150
200
250
investment horizon (quarters)

Figure 4: Risk prices indexed by investment horizon. The horizontal axis is given in
quarterly time units. The upper solid line denotes recursive utility model, and dashed line
the expected utility model. The lower solid line gives the the hyperbolic approximation
for the expected utility model. The parameter values for the state evolution are: A11 =
−.025, A12 = 0, A22 = −.075, B1 = [0 .00038 0], B2 = [0 0 − .19], Hc = [1 0],
Fc = [0.0047 .00076 0]. The risk prices are by localizing around G = C. For illustrative
purposes I set γ = 10. See Hansen et al. (2008b) for estimation of the parameter values
for this model. How to “calibrate” γ is an interesting question in its own right, a question
that much has already been written on. I personally like the discussion in Hansen (2007).
[1]
[2]
To construct these plots I set X0 = 0 and X0 = 1.
53

give the risk prices as a function of the payoff horizon. Each panel corresponds to a different
shock. A positive realization of the first shock increases the realized consumption growth;
(a positive realization of) the second shock increases the growth rate in consumption, and
(a positive realization of) the third shock diminishes consumption volatility. Shocks two
and three have persistent consequences because growth rates and volatility are modeled
as first-order autoregressions (see Example 3.4). The impulse-response function for the
logarithm of consumption depicted in the top panel of figure 1 is for the second shock.34
The formulas for risk-price trajectories are given in appendix C.
In the Breeden (1979) model, the local (instantaneous) risk price is negligible for shock
two and zero for shock three as displayed in panels two and three of figure 4. The risk
prices increase with horizon as the impact of the shocks on consumption becomes more
magnified over longer horizons. There are two forces behind the convergence. Growth
rates and volatility are highly persistent even under the change of measure. Moreover,
as I have already argued, the eventual convergence to the limiting prices is hyperbolic in
the investment horizon. This is reflected in the second and third panels, where I plot the
hyperbolic function derived for the limiting approximation.
Investor preferences are forward looking in the recursive utility model, and this is evident
in the nonzero local risk prices for shocks two and three as depicted in the panels two
and three of figure 4. The forward-looking component to these prices is reflected in the
continuation values for the consumption plans. The resulting enhancement of the local price
of the growth rate shock illustrates the pricing mechanism featured by Bansal and Yaron
(2004). The similarity of the risk prices over long horizons between the Breeden (1979)
model and the recursive utility model illustrates a finding in Hansen et al. (2008a).35 The
risk-price trajectory is literally flat for the first shock and the two models imply the same
risk prices. (See the first panel of 4.) The coincidence of the pricing trajectories for the
two models of investor preferences illustrates a point made by Kocherlakota (1990). While
stochastic volatility induces variation in local risk prices, the shock to volatility, like the
direct shock to consumption commands a relatively small risk price at all horizons. Note
c
The top panel plots the function H
A1 [exp(tA11 ) − 1] B1 for the parameter values given in figure 4. In
the moving-average representation there is a scaling by the square root of the
q conditional variance process

34

[2]

X [2] evaluated at the appropriate calendar date. The mean-square norm of Xt is one for its stationary
distribution, and thus I have not distorted the magnitude of the impulse responses. See Gallant et al.
(1993) for a discussion of impulse-response functions in nonlinear environments.
35
The Hansen et al. (2008a) of consumption dynamics is different. They abstract from stochastic volatility
and they use a discrete-time vector autoregressive model of consumption and corporate earnings to model
the consumption dynamics.

54

the range in the third panel is one half that of the other two panels.
In the remainder of this section, I provide the details of the calculations of risk premia
and prices. Uninterested readers can skip this material.

7.4

Risk prices in the absence of consumption predictability

I consider formally the implications of three different models of investor preferences.
7.4.1

Model of Breeden

For the benchmark S model and the martingale specification of the growth process G, the
martingale factorization is:



t
t
2
2
St Gt = M̂t exp −δt − γµc t + | − γFc + Fg | − |Fg | ,
2
2
where

Z
M̂t = exp
0

t


t
2
(Fg − γFc )dWu − | − γFc + Fg | .
2

It follows that
ρ(SG) = −δ − γµc +

γ2
|Fc |2 − γFc · Fg .
2

By setting Fg = 0,
ρ(S) = −δ − γµc +

γ2
|Fc |2 .
2

Thus
ρ(G) + ρ(S) − ρ(GS) = γFc · Fg
The long-term risk prices can be computed by differentiating the right-hand side with
respect to the risk exposure vector Fg , and are thus equal to: γFc .
The dynamics of pricing for this example is degenerate, and in particular the local risk
price vector is also equal to γFc . Specifically, the local expected rate of return is given by
− lim
t↓0

1
γ2
log E [Gt St |X0 = x] = δ + γµc + − |Fc |2 + γFc · Fg .
t
2

(41)

By setting Fg = 0 notice that the instantaneous risk-free interest rate is constant and
2
identical to the long-term counterpart: −ν(S) = δ + γµc − γ2 |Fc |2 . The vector of risk prices
obtained by differentiating the local risk-premium with respect to the risk-exposure vector
55

Fg is γFc , which is identical to the long-run counterpart. This link between the short-run
and long-run prices follows because of the separability and absence of state dependence in
preferences of the investor and the lack of predictability in aggregate consumption. Later in
this section I will relax the underlying assumptions and explore the short-run and long-run
consequences.
In the calculations that follow, I will use the multiplicative martingale M̂ as a change
of measure. As a result the process W is no longer a standard Brownian motion but is
altered to have a drift −γFc + Fg . This is an application of the Girsanov Theorem, which
is used extensively in mathematical finance and elsewhere.
7.4.2

Campbell and Cochrane model

Campbell and Cochrane (1999) modify the Breeden asset pricing model with power utility
by introducing a stochastic subsistence point process C ∗ that shares the same stochastic
growth properties as consumption. In the language of time series, this process is cointegrated with consumption. The process C ∗ could be a social externality, which justifies its
dependence on consumption shocks. Alternatively, it is a way to model exogenous preference shifters that depend on the same shocks as consumption. The resulting stochastic
discount factor process is:
St∗

(Ct − Ct∗ )−γ
= exp(−δt)
(C0 − C0∗ )−γ


We may rewrite this as:
St∗


= St




(1 − Ct∗ /Ct )−γ
.
(1 − C0∗ /C0 )−γ

In what follows let
Xt + b = − log(1 − Ct∗ /Ct ),
which we model as a process that exceeds zero. Notice that adding a positive constant b
to Xt preserves the positivity and it does not alter the pricing implications. It does alter
investor risk aversion (see Campbell and Cochrane (1999) or the appendix B). Using this
notation, write:


exp (γXt )
∗
St = St
.
exp (γX0 )
In light of the discussions in section 5.5, I expect the differences between the valuation
implications for Campbell-Cochrane model and the Breeden model be transient. As I will
56

show, however, a substantial qualification is required to make this conclusion.
Following Campbell and Cochrane (1999) and Wachter (2005), assume that
dXt = −ξ(Xt − µx )dt + λ(Xt )Fc dWt

(42)

where I restrict λ(0) = 0. Squashing the variability at zero prevents the process X from
being attracted to zero. After the imposing the change of probability measure obtained
from the Breeden model, the law of motion for this equation is:
dXt = −ξ(Xt − µx )dt + (Fg − γFc ) · Fc λ(Xt )dt + λ(Xt )Fc dŴt .

(43)

We use this evolution to compute the counterpart to (41):
lim
t↓0

1
1
log E [Gt St∗ |X0 = x] = lim log E [Gt St exp[γ(Xt − X0 )]|X0 = x]
t↓0 t
t
1
= −r − γFc · Fg − lim Ê [exp[γ(Xt − X0 )]|X0 = x]
t↓0 t
= −r − γFc · Fg + γξ(x − µx ) + γ(Fg − γFc ) · Fc λ(x)
+γ 2

λ(x)2 |Fc |2
2

(44)
2

where r is the risk-free rate from the Breeden economy (r = δ + γµc + γ2 |Fc |2 ) and the last
equality is computed using Ito’s formula.
Consider first the interest rate behavior. Campbell and Cochrane (1999), suppose the
risk-rate is an affine function of the state: r∗ +θ(x−µx ). With this outcome, the parameter
θ controls the variation in the risk-free rate. To support this functional form the value of
r∗ is
r∗ = r + (θ − γξ)µx .
The volatility function λ is given by
λ(x) = 1 − (1 + ζx)1/2
where

. 2(γξ − θ)
.
ζ= 2
γ |Fc |2

(See appendix B.) In order that the term inside the square root be positive, θ < γξ.

57

The local risk prices for the Campbell-Cochrane model are the entries of the vector:
γFc − γλ(x)Fc = γ (1 + ζx)1/2 Fc
which follows because (44) is affine in Fg and the risk prices are the negative of the partial
derivative with respect to Fg . By design the local risk prices are state dependent and are
larger than in the power utility model for a given value of γ. Moreover, the state variable
increment dXt responds negatively to consumption growth shocks because λ(x) < 0. By
design, risk premia are larger in bad times as reflected by unexpectedly low realizations of
consumption growth. As demonstrated by Campbell and Cochrane (1999) in their closely
related discrete-time model, the coefficient of relative risk aversion is also enhanced. In
fact it is equal to γ[1 − λ(µx )] for µx = x. (See also appendix B.)
Consider next the long-run behavior of value. I use evolution equation (43), and the
formula for the logarithmic derivative of the density for a scalar diffusion:
2 drift
d log diffusion
d log q
=
−
dx
diffusion
dx

(45)

where the drift coefficient (local mean) is −ξ(x − µx ) under the original measure or −ξ(x −
µx ) + (Fg − γFc ) · Fc λ(Xt ) under the twisted measure. The diffusion coefficient (local
variance) is λ(x)2 |Fc |2 .
The limiting behavior is dominated by the constant term:
d log q
γ 2ξ
=−
< 0.
lim
x→∞
dx
γξ − θ

(46)

As a consequence the process X is stationary under the twisted probability measure and
under the original probability measure as reflected by (42) and (43) respectively. It remains
to study what functions have finite moments under the twisted evolution.
When γξ > θ > 0, exp(γXt ) has a finite expectation under the twisted stationary
density because the limit in (46) is strictly less than −γ. In contrast, when θ < 0 this
expectation will be infinite. Thus when θ > 0 the contribution to preferences will be
transient, but not when θ < 0.
When θ = 0, a more refined calculation is required because log q behaves like a positive

58

scalar multiple of −γx for large x. This leads me to study,
lim

x→∞

√


x

d log q
+γ
dx




= −2

Fg · Fc
Fc · Fc



ζ −1/2

Fg · Fc
=−
|Fc |

r

2γ
.
ξ

For the modification in the stochastic discount factor to be transient, this term must be
√
negative because twice this limit is the coefficient on x in the large x approximation of
log q(x) + γx. While this term is zero when Fg is zero, it will be negative provided that the
shocks to log Gt and log Ct are positively correlated.
I now characterize the limiting risk premia:
risk premium = ρ(S ∗ ) + ρ(G) − ρ(S ∗ G).
By construction, ρ(G) = 0. When θ > 0,
risk premium = ρ(S ∗ ) − ρ(S ∗ G) = γFc · Fg
as in the Breeden (1979) model. When θ = 0 and Fc · Fg > 0, ρ(S ∗ G) is the same as in the
Breeden (1979) model:
ρ(S ∗ G) = −δ − γµg − γFc · Fg +

γ2
|Fc |2 ,
2

but ρ(S ∗ ) differs and is given by the implied real interest rate r∗ . This justifies formula
(38) and figure 2.36
I have just shown that the case in which θ = 0 has special limiting properties. Campbell
and Cochrane (1999) feature this case. The instantaneous interest rate is constant and equal
to r∗ . The long-term interest rate is the same. Interestingly, when θ = 0, exp(γx) is a
strictly positive solution to the eigenvalue equation:
E [St exp(γXt )|X0 = x] = exp(−r∗ t) exp(γx).
It is one of two such solutions since
E [St |Xo = x] = exp(−rt).
36

Presumably, the risk prices evaluated at Fg = 0 are finite at any finite horizon, but they become
arbitrarily large as the valuation horizon is extended inducing a discontinuity in the limit.

59

The multiplicative martingale
M̃t = exp(rt)St

exp(γXt )
exp(γX0 )

implies a change in measure, but under this change of measure the process {Xt } is stochastically unstable. See Appendix B.
What do I make of this? I constructed two alternative martingales related to the
stochastic discount factor process S and hence S ∗ . Each martingale was built using a
positive eigenfunction. Only one implies stable stochastic dynamics for X. As shown by
Hansen and Scheinkman (2008), this uniqueness is to be expected.
When θ = 0 the multiplicative martingale M̃ is the pertinent one for pricing discount
bond whereas the martingale M̂ for pricing growth rate risk over long horizons. The
discontinuity in the long-term risk premia as a function of Fg as expressed in (38) reflects
the separate roles of the two martingales in pricing. When θ > 0, only the multiplicative
martingale M̂ is pertinent to pricing.
7.4.3

Santos and Veronesi model

Santos and Veronesi (2006) consider a related model of the stochastic discount factor. The
stochastic discount factor has the form:


Xt + 1
∗
.
St = St
X0 + 1
In this case

1
Ct∗
= 1 − b(Xt + 1)− γ
Ct

for some positive number b. Changing b alters the relationship between C and C ∗ , but not
the stochastic discount factor.
The process for X is a member of Wong (1964)’s class of Markov processes built to
imply stationary densities that are in the Pearson (1916) family. Wong (1964) characterizes
solutions to stochastic differential equations with a linear drift and a quadratic diffusion
coefficient. One such process is the one used by Santos and Veronesi:
dXt = −ξ(Xt − µx )dt + λ(Xt )Fc dWt , Xt > 0

60

where
λ(Xt ) = −κXt
and µx > 0.37 The specification of local volatility is designed to keep the process X above
unity. As in the Campbell-Cochrane specification, the process X responds negatively to a
consumption shock.
The local risk prices are now given by
γFc +

κx
Fc .
x+1

In addition to being state dependent, they exceed those implied by the power utility model
since the second term is always positive and they vary over time.
To study long-term pricing, we again use the twisted evolution equation (43) but with
this new specification of λ. The twisted law of motion for X is
dXt = −ξˆ (Xt − µ̂x ) dt − κXt Fc · dŴt
where
ξˆ = ξ−γκ|Fc |2 + κFc · Fg
ξ
µ̂x =
µx
ξˆ
This process remains in the class studied by Wong (1964). To explore its long-term
implications, formula (45) is again informative. The logarithmic derivative of the density
is
"
#
ˆ
d log q̂(x)
ξ(x − µ̂x ) 1
= −2
−
.
dx
κ2 |Fc |2 x2
x
As a consequence, the right tail behaves like x−ς where
ς=2

ξˆ
+1
κ2 |Fc |2

!

The twisted density q̂ has a finite first moment provided that ξˆ is positive. The mean is
37

This process is the F process of Wong (1964).

61

given by µ̂x . Thus provided that the mean reversion parameter ξ is sufficiently large
ξ ≥ γκ|Fc |2 − κFc · Fg .

(47)

When inequality (47) is satisfied for an open set of values of Fg that includes zero, the
long-term risk prices agree with the power utility model.
A convenient feature of this Santos and Veronesi (2006) model is that the risk prices
can be more fully characterized by “paper and pencil”. In particular, the logarithm of the
expected return for horizon t is:
1
1
1
− log E [Gt St∗ |X0 = x] = γFc · Fg − log Ê (Xt + 1|X0 = x) + log(x + 1).
t
t
t
Moreover,
h

i


Ê (Xt + 1|X0 = x) = 1 + 1 − exp −tξˆ µ̂x + exp −tξˆ x
Thus the hyperbolic approximation to the risk premia trajectory is:
risk premium ≈ γFc · Fg −

i
1h
ˆ + log(1 + x)
log(1 + ξ)
t

The risk prices for a finite horizon are obtained by differentiating the risk premia with
respect to Fg .
In summary, provided that the mean revision parameter ξ is sufficiently large, the
behavior of the long-term risk prices for the Santos-Veronesi models are quite different
from those that arise in the Campbell-Cochrane specification. Their transient nature is
more evident, and there is no discontinuity at Fg = 0.

7.5

Risk prices in the presence of consumption predictability

In what follows I characterize formally the local prices and their long time horizon limits for
the Breeden model and the Kreps-Porteus model. Thus I justify what happens at both ends
of the “term structure” of risk prices, and I produce the corresponding twisted measure.
I specify the preferences for investors in the two models so that the long-term risk prices
are the same. To support this claim, I show that the martingale components used in the
changes of measure are the same for both models, and I produce the corresponding twisted
probability measures. By borrowing insights from the literature on robust control, I also
argue that risk prices for the Kreps-Porteus model can be interpreted in part as model
62

uncertainty prices using recursive versions of investor preferences that reflect a robust
concern about model specification.
7.5.1

Risk prices for the Breeden model

The local risk price for dWt is
q
[2]
Xt γFc .
Let
dYt = d log St + d log Gt ,
and let
H1 = −γHc
1
H2 = − |Fg |2
2
F = −γFc + Fg
1
ν = −δ − γµc − |Fg |2
2
Then this specification of Y is a special case of example 3.4. Applying formulas (36) and
(32), the long-term risk price is the expected drift under the twisted measure induced by
M̂ of
q
[2]
[2]
Fg Xt dt − Xt dWt
where

q
i
h
[2]
0
0 [b]
0 [b]
dWt = Xt F + (B1 ) α1 + (B2 ) α2 dt + dŴt

where Ŵ is a multivariate standard Brownian motion under this alternative measure. I
[b]
[b]
denote the positive eigenfunction by exp(α1 · x1 + α2 x2 ). Thus the long-term risk price
vector is:


[2]
[b]
[b]
[ γFc − (B1 )0 α1 − (B2 )0 α2
]
Ê Xt
local

growth

volatility

By construction X [2] has mean one under the original probability distribution. The
twisted distribution alters this mean because under the distorted probability
[2]
dXt

=

[2]
A22 (Xt

h

− 1)dt + B2 F +

[b]
(B2 ) α2
0

i

[2]
Xt dt

q
[2]
+ Xt dŴt

with Ŵ a multivariate standard Brownian motion. Rearranging terms in the drift coefficient
63

gives
[2]
dXt

= Â22



[2]
Xt

− µ̂2



q
[2]
dt + Xt dŴt

where
h
i
[b]
Â22 = A22 + B2 F 0 + (B2 )0 α2


A22
[2]
µ̂2 =
= Ê Xt .
Â22
The twisted probability distribution will alter the X [1] dynamics as well.
I now interpret some of the contributions to this price vector. The term:
Ê
q



[2]
Xt



γFc

[2]

averages the local risk prices scaled by Xt using the twisted distribution. The remaining
terms are induced by the predictability in the consumption growth rate and consumption
volatility. For instance,




[2]
[b]
[2]
−Ê Xt (B1 )0 α1 = −γ Ê Xt (B1 )0 [(A1 )0 ]−1 (Hc )0

(48)

reflects the temporal dependence in the growth rate of consumption, as featured in the longterm pricing calculations by Hansen et al. (2008a). The third term reflects the temporal
dependence in volatility.
7.5.2

Pricing with risk-sensitive recursive utility

I now explore a limiting version of a specification of investor preferences that is known to
alter local prices. This limit allows me to explore the intersection between two literatures,
the literature in economics on recursive utility and the literature on risk-sensitive control
theory.
Discounted version of risk-sensitive control typically solves the date zero problem of the
investor (see Whittle (1990) for a discussion of the role of discounting). Hansen and Sargent
(1995) give a recursive utility version of risk-sensitive control that also accommodates
discounting, and Hansen et al. (2006) study this formulation in continuous time. Under this
specification, there is risk-sensitive adjustment to the future continuation value of future
consumption processes as in Kreps and Porteus (1978) and Epstein and Zin (1989) and it
64

avoids some of the pitfalls of the standard specification of risk-sensitive control. In what
follows I use a parameterization of Tallarini (2000) in which the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution is unity. This restriction facilitates analytical characterization. I will take
limits of the stochastic discount factor as the subjective rate of discount converges to
zero. Since consumption grows stochastically, this will push me outside the risk-sensitive,
undiscounted, ergodic control studied by Runolfsson (1994). In the discounted version of
recursive preferences, the stochastic discount factor is;
St∗


= exp(−δt)

where V̂ is a martingale component of

 
1−γ
Vt
V0

C0
Ct


V̂t

(49)


: t ≥ 0 and V is the stochastic process

of continuation values.38
The process V and hence V̂ are constructed from the underlying consumption dynamics.
I use a homogeneous of degree one specification of the utility recursion to construct the
continuation value process V implying that any common scaling of current and future
consumption results in the same scaling of the continuation value. In formula (49) for a
stochastic discount factor, δ continues to be the subjective rate of discount and the inverse
ratio of consumption growth reflects the unitary intertemporal elasticity of substitution in
the preferences of the investor.
For this recursive utility model of investor preferences, the continuation value V and
consumption C share the same growth components. Their ratio CVtt can be expressed as a
function f˜ of the Markov state, and f˜ solves the equation:
E
δ log f˜(x) = lim



Ct
C0

1−γ



f˜(Xt )|X0 = x − f˜(x)
t

t↓0

.

(50)

 1−γ
The solution gives a formula for CVtt
= f˜(x) from which I solve for CVtt .
To study the relation between the stochastic discount factor S ∗ and the stochastic
discount factor S for the power utility model, I take limits as δ tends to zero. While the
continuation value process becomes infinite, the ratio VV0t remains well defined in the limit for
38
martingale
 The
 component is obtained by removing the locally predictable component of
1−γ
Vt
: t ≥ 0 as in (20) and Ito and Watanabe (1965) and verifying that the local martingale is
V0

in fact a martingale.

65

all t as δ declines to zero. Call the resulting multiplicative process Ṽ . Similarly, construct
C̃ in the same fashion by dividing Ct by C0 . The limiting stochastic discount factor can be
represented as:
V̂t
St∗ =
C̃t
where V̂ is a multiplicative martingale.
I will show that it is the martingale component of C̃ 1−γ in this limiting case. Equation
(50) ceases to have a solution when δ = 0. Instead I look for a positive eigenfunction
associated with the multiplicative functional C̃ 1−γ . Then
Ṽt
C̃t

!1−γ
∝ e[r] (Xt ) exp(−ρ[r] t).

where e[r] is a positive eigenfunction and ρ[r] the corresponding principal eigenvalue associated with the multiplicative functional C̃ 1−γ .39 The dependence on t is necessary to allow
the continuation value ratio Ṽ to grow at a different rate than the consumption ratio C̃.
The eigenfunction and value are chosen so that the implied martingale induces a change of
measure with stable stochastic dynamics for X.
Recall that I constructed Ṽ to be one at date t = 0. As a consequence,
1−γ

(Ṽt )



[r]

= exp(−ρ t)

e[r] (Xt )
e[r] (X0 )



(C̃t )1−γ

The right-hand side is the multiplicative martingale component of C̃ 1−γ . Thus by extracting
the martingale component of (C̃)1−γ , I obtain the martingale V̂ = Ṽ 1−γ for the stochastic
discount factor S ∗ in formula (49).
With this computation, I turn to studying the relation between S and S ∗ . Write
[r]

V̂t = exp(−ρ t)



Ct
C0

1−γ

e[r] (Xt )
.
e[r] (X0 )

As a consequence,
St∗


=

C0
Ct



[r]

V̂t = exp(−ρ t)St

39



e[r] (Xt )
e[r] (X0 )



Even though we have introduced stochastic growth in consumption, there is direct counterpart to ρ[r]
and e[r] in Runolfsson (1994)’s analysis of stochastic risk sensitive control in the absence of discounting.

66

The stochastic discount factors for the Breeden model and the Kreps-Porteus model have
the same martingale components, although the decay rates are different. This representation suggests that the adjustment to preferences induces transient modifications of risk
premia while altering the long-run risk free rate. I expect the interest rate differences to
exists because the elasticity of substitution differs for the two models of investor preferences. The long-term risk price calculation given in (48) continues to apply to this model
even though the local prices are different from the Breeden (1979) model.40
I next consider the local or instantaneous prices for the recursive utility model. The
eigenvalue ρ[r] and eigenfunction e[r] capture the differences in the instantaneous interest
rate and the eigenfunction e[r] alters the local risk prices vis a vis the Breeden (1979) model.
These prices are given by
q
[2]
[r]
[r]
Xt [γFc − (B1 )0 α1 − (B2 )0 α2 ].
q
[2]
The term Xt [γFc is local price vector in the Breeden (1979) model. In the recursive
utility model, it is modified because of predictability in consumption growth and volatility.
The role of consumption predictability is:
q

q
[2]
[2]
0 r
− Xt (B1 ) α1 = (1 − γ)
Xt
(B1 )0 [(A1 )0 ]−1 (Hc )0 .
and is familiar from the analysis in Bansal and Yaron (2004), Campbell and Vuolteenaho
(2004) and Hansen et al. (2008a). It is a recursive utility enhancement of the local risk
prices based on predictability in consumption growth rates. The term
[r]

−(B2 )0 α2

gives an adjustment for the predictability of volatility and is analogous to an adjustment
in Bansal and Yaron (2004). There are counterparts to both of these adjustment in the
long-term risk prices given in formula (48).
As I remarked previously, there is an alternative interpretation of the risk-sensitive
model of investor preferences. Under this interpretation, V̂ is a martingale induced by
solving a penalized “worst-case” problem in which the given specification of consumption
40

Hansen et al. (2008a) make this observation for a discrete-time log-linear model abstracting from
stochastic volatility. Thus distorted expectation in (48) plays no role in their analysis.

67

dynamics is used as a benchmark model. The “robust” adjustment is made to this benchmark probability specification by solving a minimization problem that penalizes changes in
the probability law. For example, see Petersen et al. (2000) and Anderson et al. (2003).41
Associated with V̂ is a change in probability and this change alters the instantaneous
interest rate and the local prices relative to model in which investors use discounted logarithmic utility to rank consumption. Thus my calculations show formally how investor
concern about robustness induces approximately the same (as δ becomes small) long-term
risk prices as a model in which investors are endowed with a power utility with relative risk
aversion γ and no concern about robustness.
The preceding analysis exploits two important restrictions on investor preferences. The
intertemporal elasticity of substitution is unity and the subjective rate of discount is zero.
A natural extension is to compute two additional “derivatives” as a device to study the
impact of changing investor preferences. For the long-term risk premia, this can be done by
applying the perturbation method described in section 6. Hansen et al. (2008a) have used
this method to explore changes in the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.42 Perturbing
risk prices requires the computation of additional cross derivatives since a risk price is itself
a derivative.

7.6

Other models of asset prices

The examples that I have studied feature the role of investor preferences. A similar analysis applies to some equilibrium models with market frictions. The solvency constraint
models of Luttmer (1992), Alvarez and Jermann (2000) and Lustig (2007) have the same
multiplicative martingale components as the corresponding representative consumer models
without market frictions. While suggestive, a formal study of the type I have just presented
for other models would reveal the precise nature of this transient adjustment to stochastic
discount factors induced by solvency constraints and other forms of market imperfection.
Applying these methods to the disaster-recovery models of Rietz (1988), Barro (2006)
and Gourio (2008) will expand on the comparisons made across specifications of the consumption dynamics. Gourio (2008) shows that adding recoveries following disasters has an
important impact on local (one-period) risk premia. Recoveries make the consequences of
41

These papers explore stochastic perturbations in contrast to the original paper of Jacobson (1973) who
developed the link to a deterministic version of robust control.
42
In the case of the subjective rate of discount, the “derivative” will depend on which of the alternative
models of investor preferences is entertained, recursive utility as in Kreps and Porteus (1978).

68

disasters “transient” so that the specification changes explored by Gourio (2008) will have
important consequences for the entire term-structure of risk prices.

8

Conclusion

Decompositions of additive functionals have proved valuable in macroeconomic time series as an aid in identifying shocks and quantifying their impact. The increments to the
martingale components of these decompositions are the permanent shocks. In this paper
I have considered an alternative decomposition. To support a dynamic value decomposition (DVD), I featured multiplicative factorizations of stochastic discount and growth
functionals. These factorizations allowed me to
a) characterize a long-term risk-return relation;
b) construct risk prices for alternative investment horizons and characterize their long-term
behavior;
c) compare implications for valuation of alternative structural economic models.
The methods I described require a “structural” model because they extrapolate value
implications by featuring the the pricing of synthetically constructed martingale cash flows.
Valuation of such cash flows reveals the dynamics of risk prices. While local prices are familiar to the literature on asset pricing, my aim was to explore the entire term structure
of such prices. Thus I produced risk-price trajectories that can be viewed as the valuation
counterpart to impulse response functions commonly used in economic dynamics. The analytical methods that I proposed here and in the antecedents, Hansen et al. (2008a) and
Hansen and Scheinkman (2008), characterize what happens at longer horizons. A central
part of this analysis is the extraction of martingale components used to transform the
underlying probability measure. This change of measure provides a more refined characterization of risk-price trajectories and supports DVD’s more generally. I suggest two ways
to make model comparisons based on DVD’s. One classifies when the implications of two
alternative valuation models are transient. The other considers a parameterized family of
valuation models and computes derivatives of long-term risk premia with respect to this parameter. These derivatives measure the sensitivity of value implications to a small change
in the parameter.

69

While I have focused on risk-price dynamics, the methods I described can also be applied
to study the dynamics of risk exposure in the presence of stochastic growth. Consumption
or cash flows will typically have different risk exposures at alternative investment horizons.
The methods suggested here give a model-based way to measure the resulting cash-flow
duration as it contributes to measures of value. A single period return to equity with cash
flows or dividend that have stochastic growth components can be viewed as a bundle or
portfolios of holding period returns on cash flows with alternative payout dates. (See Lettau
and Wachter (2007) and Hansen et al. (2008a).) Even though the pricing is “local”, the
risk exposure of the composite securities depends on how far into the future the primitive
payoff will be realized. The methods described here can be adapted to study how cash flow
dynamics are reflected in single-period returns of infinitely-lived securities or cash flows.
To conclude I want to be clear on two matters. First, while a concern about the role of
economics in model specification is a prime motivator for this analysis, I do not mean to
shift focus exclusively on the limiting characterizations. Specifically, my analysis of longrun approximation in this paper is not meant to pull discussions of transient implications
off the table. Instead I mean to add some clarity into our understanding of how valuation
models work by understanding better which model levers move which parts of the complex
machinery. As I showed in examples from the asset pricing literature, the initial points
in the risk price trajectories, the local risk prices, can be far from their limits. Thus
the hyperbolic approximations I suggested provide an important refinement, and transient
model components contribute to these approximations. Moreover, the outcome of the
analysis is informative even if it reveals that some models blur the distinction between
permanent and transitory model components.
Second, while my discussion of statistical approximation has been notably absent, I do
not have to remind time series econometricians of the particular measurement challenges
associated with the long run. Indeed there is a substantial literature on such issues. In
part my aim is to suggest a framework for the use of such measurements. But some of the
measurement challenges remain, and I suspect the prior information about the underlying
economic model will be required for sensible applications. Also, some of the same statistical
challenges with which we econometricians struggle should be passed along to the hypothetical investors that populate our economic models. When decision-making agents within an
economic model face difficulties in making probabilistic extrapolations of the future, the
associated ambiguities in statistical inferences may well be an important component to the
behavior of asset prices.
70

A

A static max-min problem

In this appendix I develop further the static problem discussed in section 4.4 using results
from the applied mathematics literature. Let D+ denote the strictly positive functions in D,
and let Q denote the family of probability measures Q on the state space E of the Markov
process. Let B be the generator of the semigroup. Following Donsker and Varadhan (1975),
Donsker and Varadhan (1976) and Berestycki et al. (1994), I study the following max-min
problem:
Z  
Bf
% = sup inf+
dQ.
(51)
f
Q∈Q f ∈D
Let B be the generator of the multiplicative semigroup. Split this generator into two
components:
Bf (x) = β ∗ (x)f (x) + Af (x)
where43
.
β ∗ (x) = B1(x)
.
Af (x) = Bf (x) − β ∗ (x)f (x).
Notice that by construction Af = 0 when f is a constant function. Suppose that A
generates a semigroup of conditional expectations for a Markov processes. This requires
additional restrictions, but these restrictions are effectively imposed on B. I refer to β as
the local growth or decay rate for the semigroup.
Consider the first the inner minimization problem of (51). Split the objective and write:

Z 
Af
∗
dQ.
inf
β +
f ∈D+
f
Notice that the infimum over f does not depend on β ∗ . This in part leads Donsker and
Varadhan (1975) and others to feature the optimization problem:
 Z 
 
Af
J (Q) = sup −
dQ
f
f ∈D+
∗

(52)

The function J∗ is convex in Q since it can be expressed as the maximum of convex (in
43

While the function 1 does not vary over states the outcome applying B to 1 will typically vary with x
and hence the notation B1(x).

71

fact linear) functions of Q. Moreover, it can be justified as a relative measure of entropy
between probabilities when the process implied by A possesses a stationary distribution.
The measure is relative because it depends on the generator A of a Markov process and
measure discrepancies from the stationary distribution of this process.
I use this representation of the solution to the inner problem to write the outer maximization problem as:
Z

β ∗ dQ − J∗ (Q) ,

sup
Q

which is the problem posed in (4.4).
Suppose that the solution to the max-min problem is attained with probability measure
Q∗ . Consider again the inner optimization problem (52) and suppose that the supremum is
attained at f ∗ . Let g be any other function in the domain of B such that f ∗ + rg is strictly
positive for some r. For instance, if f ∗ is strictly positive and continuous, then it suffices
that g be continuous, sufficiently smooth and have compact support in the interior of the
state space. The first-order conditions are:
Z 

Let f =

g
,
f∗


Ag g(Af ∗ )
−
dQ∗ = 0.
∗
∗
2
f
(f )

and rewrite this equation as:
Z 


A(f ∗ f ) f (Af ∗ )
−
dQ∗ = 0.
f∗
f∗

(53)

This first-order condition for r has a probabilistic interpretation. The operator
A(f ∗ f ) f (Af ∗ )
−
f∗
f∗
∗
B(f f ) f (Bf ∗ )
=
−
f∗
f∗

A∗ f =

(54)

generates a distorted Markov process, and the first-order condition justifies Q∗ as the
stationary distribution of the distorted process.
To show the relation between the optimization problem and the principle eigenvalue
problem, suppose that
ρe = Be
for e in D+ . Construct a twisted generator using algorithm (54) with f ∗ = e, and suppose
72

this generates a stochastically stable Markov process with stationary distribution Q∗ . In
particular, it satisfies (53). Notice that
Z 
inf

f ∈D+

Bf
f


dQ ≤ ρ

because e is in D+ and ρ is an eigenvalue. Thus
Z 
sup inf

Q∈Q f ∈D+

Bf
f


dQ ≤ ρ.

When Q = Q∗ , provided that e is the only solution to the inner minimization problem up
to a scale factor, the upper bound is attained. As a consequence, ρ = % and this static
problem gives an alternative construction of the principal eigenvalue.

B

Reconsidering the Campbell-Cochrane Model

In this appendix I give some more details of my analysis of the Campbell-Cochrane model.
Part of this discussion will be familiar to careful readers of Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
I include some repetition because I parameterize their model in aa different (but equivalent)
way.
The instantaneous interest for the Campbell and Cochrane (1999) model is:
− lim
t↓0

λ(x)2 |σc |2
1
log E [St∗ |X0 = x] = r − γξ(x − µx ) − γ 2
+ γ 2 |σc |2 λ(x),
t
2

which follows from (44) by setting σg = 0. They suppose the risk-rate is an affine function
of the state: r∗ + θ(x − µx ). Thus
r∗ + θ(x − µx ) = r + γξ(x − µx ) − γ 2

λ(x)2 |σc |2
+ γ 2 |σc |2 λ(x).
2

I infer the value of r∗ by setting x = 0:
r∗ = r + (θ − γξ)µx

73

(55)

Substituting this formula into (55), by a simple complete-the-square argument:
(θ − γξ)x −

γ 2 |σc |2
γ 2 |σc |2
=−
[λ(x) − 1]2 .
2
2

Thus
λ(x) = 1 − (1 + ζx)1/2
. 2(γξ − θ)
ζ=
γ 2 |σc |2
Campbell and Cochrane (1999) propose that the risk exposure of Ct∗ be zero when
Xt = µx . The idea is that Ct∗ is locally predetermined. To understand the ramifications of
this, recall that
Ct∗ = Ct − Ct exp(−Xt − b)
where we now will determine the coefficient b. The coefficient b is important in quantifying
risk aversion. The familiar measure of relative risk aversion is now state dependent and
given by
risk aversion = γ exp(Xt + b).
The local risk exposure for Ct∗ is
Ct [1 − exp(−Xt − b)]σc dBt + Ct exp(−Xt − b)λ(Xt )σc dBt .
Thus we require that
1 + exp(−x − b)[λ(x) − 1] = 0,
or
1 − λ(x) = exp(x + b)
for x = µx . Squaring the equation and multiplying by exp(−2µx )




 
2(γξ − θ)
exp(−2µx ) 1 +
µx = exp(2b)
γ 2 |σc |2
which determines b. At this value of b, the relative risk aversion measure is γ[1 − λ(µx )]
when x = µx .
As an extra parameter restriction, they suggest requiring that the derivative of the risk

74

exposure with respect to x be zero at x∗ :
exp(−µx − b)[1 − λ(µx )] + exp(−µx − b)λ0 (µx ) = 0,
or

0
1
[λ(µx ) − 1]2 = λ0 (µx )[λ(µx ) − 1] = [λ(µx ) − 1]2 .
2

Thus



γξ − θ
2(γξ − θ)
µx ,
=1+
γ 2 |σc |2
γ 2 |σc |2

which is the restriction on the underlying parameters. Specifically,
1
γ 2 |σc |2
µx = −
2 2(γξ − θ)
Notice that we may now express λ as:
 1/2
2(γξ − θ)
λ(x) − 1 = − 1 +
x
γ 2 |σc |2


1/2

2(γξ − θ)
γξ − θ
+
(x − µx )
= −
γ 2 |σc |2
γ 2 |σc |2

1/2
γξ − θ
= −
[1 + 2(x − µx )]1/2 .
γ 2 |σc |2




as derived in Campbell and Cochrane (1999).
Finally, I consider the change measure implied by the martingale:
M̃t = exp(rt)St

exp(γXt )
exp(γX0 )

It implies an alternative distorted evolution:


dXt = −ξ(Xt − µx ) − γλ(Xt )|σc |2 dt + λ(Xt )σc dŴt


= −ξ(Xt − µx ) − γλ(Xt )|σc |2 + γλ(Xt )2 |σc |2 dt + λ(Xt )σc dW̃t


= −ξ(Xt − µx ) + γ(1 + ζXt )|σc |2 − γ(1 + ζXt )1/2 |σc |2 dt + λ(Xt )σc dW̃t


= ξXt + ξµx + γ|σc |2 − γ(1 + ζXt )1/2 |σc |2 dt + λ(Xt )σc dW̃t
where
dŴt = γλ(Xt )2 σc dt + dW̃t
75

and W̃t is a standard Brownian increment under the probability measure implied by M̃ .
Given the strong pull of the drift to the right for large Xt , this evolution results in unstable
stochastic dynamics.

C

Risk premia for finite payoff horizons

In this appendix I give differential equations I solve to compute the risk-price trajectories
for the model with consumption predictability. The analytical tractability is familiar from
the literature on affine models (e.g. see Duffie and Kan (1994)).
Consider Example 3.4 and continued in Example 5.3. The additive functional is:
dYt = νdt +

[1]
H1 Xt dt

+

[2]
H2 (Xt

q
[2]
− 1)dt + Xt F dWt .

Form
Mt = exp(Yt ).
My aim is to compute
Mt 1(x) = E [Mt |X0 = x]
where the left-hand side notation reflects the fact that operator is evaluated at the unit
function and this evaluation depends on the state x. I use the following formula for this
computation.
d
[Mt f (x)]
(56)
BMt f =
dt
Guess a solution
Mt 1(x) = E [Mt |X0 = x] = exp [α(t) · x + %(t)]
" #
"
#
x1
α1 (t)
where x =
and α(t) =
. Notice that
x2
α2 (t)
d
exp [α(t) · x + %(t)] = exp [α(t) · x + %(t)]
dt





d
d
α(t) · x + %(t) .
dt
dt

Moreover,
B exp [α(t) · x + %(t)]
= ν + H1 x1 + H2 (x2 − 1)
exp [α(t) · x + %(t)]
+x1 0 A11 0 α1 (t) + (x2 − 1)[A12 0 α1 (t) + A22 α2 (t)]
76

+

x2
|F + α1 (t)0 B1 + α2 (t)B2 |2 .
2

First use (56) to produce a differential equation for α1 (t):
d
α1 (t) = H1 0 + A11 0 α1 (t).
dt
by equating coefficients on x1 . This differential equation has as its initial condition α1 (0) =
0. Similarly, by equation coefficient on x2 ,
d
1
α2 (t) = H2 + A12 0 α1 (t) + A22 α2 (t) + |F + α1 (t)0 B1 + α2 (t)B2 |2
dt
2
This uses the solution for α1 (t) as an input. The initial condition is α2 (0) = 0. Finally,
d
%(t) = ν − H2 − A12 0 α1 (t) − A22 α2 (t).
dt
The initial condition is %(0) = 0.

77

References
Alvarez, Fernando and Urban Jermann. 2000. Efficiency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing
with Risk of Default. Econometrica 775–798.
Alvarez, Fernando and Urban J. Jermann. 2004. Using Asset Prices to Measure the Welfare
Cost of Business Cycles. Journal of Political Economy 112 (6):1223–1256.
Anderson, Evan W., Lars Peter Hansen, and Thomas J. Sargent. 2003. A Quartet of
Semigroups for Model Specification, Robustness, Prices of Risk, and Model Detection.
Journal of the European Economic Association 1:69–123.
Balaji, Srinivasan and Sean P. Meyn. 2000. Multiplicative Ergodicity and Large Deviations
for an Irreduciable Markov Chain. Stochastic Processes and their Applications 90:123–
144.
Bansal, Ravi and Bruce N. Lehmann. 1997. Growth-optimal Portfolio Restrictions on Asset
Pricing Models. Macroeconomic Dynamics 1 (2):333–354.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron. 2004. Risks for the Long Run: A Potential Resolution of
Asset Pricing Puzzles. Journal of Finance 59 (4):1481–1509.
Bansal, Ravi, Robert Dittmar, and Dana Kiku. 2008. Cointegration and Consumption
Risks in Asset Returns. Review of Financial Studies forthcoming.
Barro, Robert J. 2006. Rare Disasters and Asset Markets in the Twentieth Century. Quarterly Journal of Economics 59 (4):823–866.
Berestycki, Henri, Louis Nirenberg, and S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan. 1994. The Principal
Eigenvalue and the Maximum Principal for Second-Order Elliptic Operators in General
Domains. Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics 47:47–92.
Beveridge, Stephen and Charles R. Nelson. 1981. A New Approach to the Decomposition
of Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory Components with Particular
Attention to the Measurement of the ‘Business Cycle’. Journal of Monetary Economics
7 (2):151–174.
Bhattacharya, Rakhi N. 1982. On the Functional Central Limit Theorem and the Law of
the Iterated Logarithm. Zeitschrift für Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und verwandte Gebiete
60:185–201.

Billingsley, Patrick. 1961. The Lindeberg-Levy Theorem for Martingales. American Mathematical Monthly 12.
Blanchard, Oliver J. and Daniel Quah. 1989. The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand
and Supply Disturbances. American Economic Review 79 (4):655–673.
Box, George E. and George C. Tiao. 1977. Canonical Analysis of Multiple Time Series.
Biometrika 64:355–366.
Breeden, Douglas T. 1979. An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic Consumption and Investment Opportunities. Journal of Financial Economics 7 (3):265–296.
Campbell, John Y. and John H. Cochrane. 1999. By Force of Habit. Journal of Political
Economy 107 (2):205–251.
Campbell, John Y. and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. 2004. Bad Beta, Good Beta. American
Economic Review 94 (5):1249–1275.
Chernoff, Herman. 1952. A Measure of Asymptotic Efficiency for Tests of a Hypothesis
Based on the Sum of Observations. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 23:493–507.
Cochrane, John H. 2001. Asset Pricing. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Daniel, Kent and David Marshall. 2005. Equity-Premium and Risk-free-rate Puzzles at
Long Horizons. Macroeconomic Dynamics 1 (2):452–484.
Davis, Mark H. A. and Martin P. Johansson. 2006. Malliavin Monte Carlo Greeks for Jump
Diffusions. Stochastic Processes and their Applications 116 (1):101–129.
Donsker, Monroe E. and S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan. 1975. On a Variational Formula for the
Principal Eigenvalue for Operators with Maximum Principle. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 72 (3):780–783.
———. 1976. On the Principal Eigenvalue of Second-Order Elliptic Differential Equations.
Communications in Pure and Applied Mathematics 29:595–621.
Duffie, Darrell and Rui Kan. 1994. Multi-Factor Term Structure Models. Philosophical
Transactions: Physical Sciences and Engineering 347 (1684):577–586.
Dupuis, Paul and Richard S. Ellis. 1997. A Weak Convergence Approach to the Theory of
Large Deviations. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. John Wiley and Sons.

Dybvig, Philip H., Jr. Ingersoll, Jonathan E., and Stephen A. Ross. 1996. Long Forward
and Zero-Coupon Rates Can Never Fall. The Journal of Business 69 (1):1–25.
Engle, Robert and Clive W. J. Granger. 1987. Co-integration and Error Correction: Representation, Estimation and Testing. Econometrica 55:251–276.
Epstein, L. and S. Zin. 1989. Substitution, Risk Aversion and the Temporal Behavior of
Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework. Econometrica 57 (4):937–
969.
Fourni, Eric, Jean-Michel Lasry, Jrme Lebuchoux, Pierre-Louis Lions, and Nizar Touzi.
1999. Applications of Malliavin Calculus to Monte Carlo Methods in Finance. Finance
and Stochastics 3 (4):391–413.
Gallant, A. Ronald, Peter E. Rossi, and George Tauchen. 1993. Nonlinear Dynamic Structures. Econometrica 61 (4):871–907.
Gordin, Mikhail I. 1969. The Central Limit Theorem for Stationary Processes. Soviet
Mathematics Doklady 10:1174–1176.
Gourio, Francios. 2008. Disasters and Recoveries. American Economic Review 98 (2):68–73.
Hansen, Lars Peter. 2007. Beliefs, Doubts and Learning, Valuing Macroeconomic Risk.
American Economic Review 97 (2).
Hansen, Lars Peter and Scott F. Richard. 1987. The Role of Conditioning Information in
Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing Models. Econometrica
50:587–614.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent. 1995. Discounted Linear Exponential Quadratic
Gaussian Control. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 40.
Hansen, Lars Peter and Jose Scheinkman. 1995. Back to the Future: Generating Moment
Implications for Continuous Time Markov Processes. Econometrica 63:767–804.
———. 2008. Long-Term Risk: An Operator Approach. Econometrica forthcoming.
Hansen, Lars Peter, Thomas J. Sargent, and Jr. Tallarini, Thomas D. 1999. Robust Permanent Income and Pricing. The Review of Economic Studies 66 (4):873–907.

Hansen, Lars Peter, Thomas J. Sargent, Guahar A. Turmuhambetova, and Noah Williams.
2006. Robust Control and Model Misspecification. Journal of Economic Theory 128:45–
90.
Hansen, Lars Peter, John C. Heaton, and Nan Li. 2008a. Consumption Strikes Back?:
Measuring Long-Run Risk. Journal of Political Economy 116:260–302.
Hansen, Lars Peter, Junghoon Lee, Nick Polson, and Seung Min Yae. 2008b. Assessing the
Recursive Utility Model. University of Chicago.
Ito, Kiyosi and Shin Chi Watanabe. 1965. Transformation of Markov Processes by Multiplicative Functionals. Annals of Institute Fourier 15:13–30.
Jacobson, David H. 1973. Optimal Stochastic Linear Systems with Exponential Performance Criteria and Their Relation to Deterministic Differential Games. IEEE Transactions for Automatic Control AC-18:1124–131.
Kocherlakota, Narayana R. 1990. Disentangling the Coefficient of Relative Risk Aversion
from the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution: An Irrelevance Result. The Journal
of Finance 45 (1):175–190.
Kontoyiannis, Ioannis and Sean P. Meyn. 2003. Spectral Theory and Limit Theorems for
Geometrically Ergodic Markov Processes. Annals of Applied Probability 13:304–362.
Kreps, David M. and Evon L. Porteus. 1978. Temporal Resolution of Uncertainty and
Dynamic Choice. Econometrica 46 (1):185–200.
Lettau, Martin and Jessica Wachter. 2007. Why is Long-Horizon Equity Less Risky? A
Duration-Based Explanation of the Value Premium. Journal of Finance 62:55–92.
Lustig, Hanno. 2007. The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth Distribution.
Working paper, UCLA.
Luttmer, Ezro. 1992. Asset Pricing in Economies with Frictions. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Chicago.
Menzly, Lior, Tano Santos, and Pietro Veronesi. 2004. Understanding Predictability. Journal of Political Economy 112 (1):1–47.

Meyn, Sean P. and Richard L. Tweedie. 1993. Stability of Markovian Processes III: FosterLyapunov Criteria for Continuous Time Processes. Advances in Applied Probability
25:518–548.
Newell, Richard G. and William A. Pizer. 2003. Discounting the Future: How Much Do
Uncertain Rates Increase Valuations. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46:52–71.
———. 2004. Uncertain Discount Rates in Climate Policy Analysis. Energy Policy 32:519–
529.
Newman, Charles M. and Barton W. Stuck. 1979. Chernoff Bounds for Discriminating
Between Two Markov Processes. Stochastics 2:139–153.
Otrok, Christopher, B. Ravi Kumar, and Charles H. Whiteman. 2002. Habit Formation: A
Resolution of the Equity Premium Puzzle. Journal of Monetary Economics 49 (5):1261
– 1288.
Pearson, Karl. 1916. Mathematical Contributions to the Theory of Evolution, XIX: Second
Supplement to a Memoir on Skew Variation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London. Series A 216:429457.
Petersen, Ian R., Matthew R. James, and Paul Dupuis. 2000. Minimax Optimal Control
of Stochastic Uncertain Systems with Relative Entropy Constraints. IEEE Transactions
on Automatic Control 45:398–412.
Rietz, Thomas A. 1988. The Equity Risk Premium: A Solution. Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (1):117–131.
Rogers, L. C. G. 1997. The Potential Approach to the Term Structure of Interest Rates
and Foreign Exchange Rates. Mathematical Finance 7 (2):157–164.
Rosenblatt, Murray. 1971. Markov Processes: Structure and Asymptotic Behavior. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
Runolfsson, Thordur. 1994. Optimal Control of Stochastic System with an Exponential-ofintegral Performance Criterion. Systems and Control Letters 22:451 – 456.

Santos, Tano and Pietro Veronesi. 2006. Habit Formation, the Cross Section of Stock
Returns and the Cash-Flow Risk Puzzle. Columbia University and the University of
Chicago.
Schroder, Mark and Costas Skiadas. 1999. Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Selection
with Stochastic Differential Utility. Journal of Economic Theory 89:68–126.
Singleton, Kenneth J. 2006. Empirical Dynamic Asset Pricing: Model Specification and
Econometric Assessment. Priceton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Tallarini, Thomas D. 2000. Risk-sensitive real business cycles. Journal of Monetary Economics 45 (3):507–532.
Wachter, Jessica. 2005. Solving Models with External Habit. Finance Research Letters
2:210–226.
Whittle, Peter. 1990. Risk Sensitive and Optimal Control. West Suffix, England: John
Wiley and Sons.
Wong, Eugene. 1964. The Construction of a Class of Stationary Markoff Processes. In
Stochastic Processes in Mathematical Physics and Engineering, edited by R. E. Bellman, no. 17 in Proceedings of Symposia in Applied Mathematics, 264–276. American
Mathematical Society.

