                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                WHY DO FOREIGN FIRMS LEAVE U.S. EQUITY MARKETS?

                                             Craig Doidge
                                          G. Andrew Karolyi
                                            René M. Stulz

                                        Working Paper 14245
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w14245


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




This paper was previously circulated as "Why Do Foreign Firms Leave U.S. Equity Markets? An Analysis
of Deregistrations Under SEC Exchange Act Rule 12h-6". Warren Bailey, Cam Harvey, and Gerhard
Hertig provided useful comments as did seminar participants, at HEC Montreal, Ohio State University,
Nanyang Technological University, National University of Singapore, Singapore Management University,
and the Swiss Institute of Technology (Zurich). We thank Paul Bennett, Jean Tobin, Greg Krowitz,
and other members of the New York Stock Exchange’s Market Listings group for their help with data
and background information on listings. Mike Anderson, Aray Gustavo Feldens, Rose Liao, and Xiaoyu
Xie provided excellent research assistance. Doidge thanks the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada and Karolyi thanks the Dice Center for Financial Economics for financial support.
 The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.¸˛The earlier version of this paper is available to NBER subscribers
and those eligible for free downloads at:¸˛http://www.nber.org/papers/w14245.rev0.pdf¸˛If you are
not a subscriber, you may purchase the earlier version by contacting NBER subscriptions at (617)
588-1405

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why Do Foreign Firms Leave U.S. Equity Markets?
Craig Doidge, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 14245
August 2008, Revised April 2009
JEL No. F30,G15,G34

                                               ABSTRACT

This paper investigates Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) deregistrations by foreign firms
from the time the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) was passed in 2002 through 2008. We test two theories,
the bonding theory and the loss of competitiveness theory, to understand why foreign firms leave U.S.
equity markets and how deregistration affects their shareholders. Firms that deregister grow more
slowly, need less capital, and experience poor stock return performance prior to deregistration compared
to other foreign firms listed in the U.S. that do not deregister. Until the SEC adopted Exchange Act
Rule 12h-6 in 2007 the deregistration process was extremely difficult for foreign firms. Easing these
procedures led to a spike in deregistration activity in the second-half of 2007 that did not extend into
2008. We find that deregistrations are generally associated with adverse stock-price reactions, but
these reactions are much weaker in 2007 than in other years. It is unclear whether SOX affected foreign-listed
firms and deregistering firms adversely in general, but there is evidence that the smaller firms that
deregistered after the adoption of Rule 12h-6 reacted more negatively to announcements that foreign
firms would not be exempt from SOX. Overall, the evidence supports the bonding theory rather than
the loss of competitiveness theory: foreign firms list shares in the U.S. in order to raise capital at the
lowest possible cost to finance growth opportunities and, when those opportunities disappear, a listing
becomes less valuable to corporate insiders and they go home if they can. But when they do so, minority
shareholders typically lose.


Craig Doidge                                          René M. Stulz
University of Toronto                                 The Ohio State University
105 St. George St.                                    Fisher College of Business
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E6                              806A Fisher Hall
Canada                                                2100 Neil Avenue
craig.doidge@rotman.utoronto.ca                       Columbus, OH 43210-1144
                                                      and NBER
G. Andrew Karolyi                                     stulz_1@cob.osu.edu
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
2100 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
karolyi@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

    A large literature examines why foreign firms choose to list their shares on a U.S. stock exchange.1

Recently, there has been an increase in the number of foreign firms leaving U.S. markets, which has led to

concern that U.S. stock exchanges have become less attractive to foreign firms, perhaps because of the

passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) in 2002. For foreign firms to escape all the obligations they

accept by listing on a U.S. stock exchange, they must delist from that exchange and terminate registration

and reporting requirements with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Without deregistering,

a foreign firm is still subject to U.S. securities laws and, until recently, deregistration was very difficult.

On March 21, 2007, the SEC adopted a new rule (referred to as Exchange Act Rule 12h-6) that makes it

much easier for foreign firms to deregister. Following this policy change, more exchange-listed firms

deregistered in 2007 and 2008 than from 2002 through to the adoption of the new rule. In this paper, we

investigate why firms deregister, how the change in rules affected firms’ deregistration decisions, and

what the consequences are for shareholders when firms deregister. Our sample allows us to analyze

deregistrations that take place in the years immediately after the adoption of SOX at a time when the

process was difficult as well as those that take place more recently when firms could much more easily

leave U.S. markets.

    Much empirical evidence affirms that, through cross-listing on a U.S. stock exchange, a foreign firm

subjects itself to U.S. laws and institutions, and that doing so has benefits. For simplicity, we call this the

“bonding theory” of cross-listings since, by subjecting themselves to U.S. laws and institutions, the

controlling shareholders of foreign firms credibly bond themselves to avoid some types of actions that

might decrease the wealth of minority shareholders.2 However, recently, there has been a lot of concern

that the passage of SOX, as well as other regulatory developments in the U.S., has made it more costly for

foreign firms to have a U.S. listing. We call this view the “loss of competitiveness theory,” since it is

1
 See Karolyi (2006) for a review of this literature.
2
  Coffee (1999, 2002) and Stulz (1999) are the first to postulate this argument that a U.S. listing enhances the
protection of the firm’s investors and, consequently, reduces the agency costs of controlling shareholders. See,
among others, Reese and Weisbach (2002), Doidge (2004), Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz (2004), Hail and Leuz
(2009), and Lel and Miller (2008) for related evidence.


                                                       1
based on the notion that U.S. capital markets have fallen behind other markets in attracting foreign cross-

listings.3 Each of these views has direct, testable implications for which types of foreign firms deregister

from U.S. markets and for the shareholder wealth consequences of such decisions.

    With the bonding theory, a U.S. cross-listing has a cost for corporate insiders, which is that they face

restrictions in consuming private benefits, and a benefit, which is that they can finance growth

opportunities on better terms. The benefit from cross-listing depends critically on how much corporate

insiders gain from having their firm access capital markets on better terms. Empirical evidence shows that

cross-listing firms have better growth opportunities and that their shareholders benefit when they cross-

list (Reese and Weisbach, 2002; Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2004, 2009; and Hail and Leuz, 2009).

Insiders at a firm with no foreseeable need for external capital gain no benefit from having their firm

cross-listed in the U.S. unless they intend to sell their stake. By terminating registration in the U.S.,

insiders at a firm with enough cash flow to finance its growth opportunities can extract more private

benefits from their firm. Therefore, we expect firms to terminate registration in the U.S. when doing so is

feasible and when it benefits their insiders. New laws and regulations that make it harder for insiders to

extract private benefits, such as the passage of SOX, would make it more likely that insiders choose

deregistration. This is not because the U.S. has become less competitive, but rather, because being listed

in the U.S. becomes less attractive for insiders even though it might have become more advantageous for

minority shareholders. Bonding is valuable for firms with good growth opportunities, so one reason that

insiders would choose to deregister the firm they control is if it no longer has valuable growth

opportunities. In the remainder of the paper, we call this specific hypothesis the bonding theory of

deregistrations. With this theory, firms with poor growth opportunities in relation to their cash flows are

more likely to deregister. Shareholders of firms that deregister are expected to be hurt by deregistration,




3
  Zingales (2007) puts forward this alternative hypothesis. Additional arguments in support of this view can be
found in reports of the Committee for Capital Market Reform (2006, 2007), a report of the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce (2008), and a report by McKinsey & Company (2007) commissioned by U.S. Senator Charles Schumer
and New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg.


                                                      2
since it increases the corporate insiders’ discretion to extract private benefits at the expense of the public

shareholders.

    Bonding could become less valuable because of increased deadweight costs associated with a U.S.

exchange listing and these greater deadweight costs could lead to deregistration for firms that derive a low

benefit from bonding. The loss of competitiveness theory does not require that firms choose to cross-list

because of a bonding benefit. All that is required for that theory to be valid is the existence of a benefit for

all shareholders from cross-listing that subsequently erodes for some firms because of increased

deadweight costs associated with the burdens of U.S. laws and regulations. For such firms, cross-listing

becomes a net cost rather than a net benefit. However, it is important to emphasize that with the loss of

competitiveness theory, all shareholders lose as a result of the loss of competitiveness and they all benefit

from deregistration. We explicitly test the loss of competitiveness hypothesis in the context of the passage

of SOX, but some of our results apply to more general causes of a loss of competitiveness.

    The SOX-related competitiveness explanation predicts that there are cross-listed firms for which SOX

imposed deadweight costs big enough to make it worthwhile for them to deregister. With the loss of

competitiveness theory, whether or not a firm deregisters depends on the size of the adverse impact of

SOX in relation to the benefits of listing. Although we cannot observe directly the benefits of listing, we

can investigate whether the necessary condition for the explanation based on SOX-related deadweight

costs holds; namely, that foreign firms, in general, and deregistering firms, in particular, were adversely

affected by SOX. We can also investigate whether the changes in regulations that made deregistration

easier were beneficial for these firms. Presumably the market could assess whether a U.S. listing was

valuable for a firm in the post-SOX environment. If a listing was no longer valuable for a firm, that firm

would want to deregister and therefore would benefit from the passage of Rule 12h-6, which made

deregistration easier. If there was any residual uncertainty about the benefits of deregistration for a firm, it

would be resolved when that firm announced its intent to deregister. With the loss of competitiveness

theory, the market should interpret such an announcement favorably.




                                                       3
    We examine 144 firms that deregistered from a major U.S. exchange between 2002 and 2008. Of

these firms, 73 deregister after the adoption of Rule 12h-6 in 2007 and 2008. Throughout the period,

firms that deregister have lower growth opportunities, as measured by sales growth and Tobin’s q, than

firms that do not deregister. We also compute a proxy for the financing deficit (see Frank and Goyal,

2003) for the cross-listed firms that deregister as well as for those that do not. Strikingly, firms that

deregister have a financing surplus, so that they are returning funds to capital providers, in contrast to the

firms that do not deregister. In general, firms that deregister come from wealthier countries but are less

likely to be from a common law country. Before the adoption of the rule, firms that deregistered were

much smaller than those that did not; the median total assets of deregistering firms was 25% of that of the

median firm that did not deregister. Since the adoption of Rule 12h-6, the size of deregistering firms is

comparable to that of the firms that do not deregister. Such a result is not surprising because firms that

deregistered before the rule had to have less than 300 registered U.S. shareholders, a criterion that favored

small firms and firms with concentrated ownership, a key finding of the study by Marosi and Massoud’s

(2008) on foreign firm deregistration activity before and after the passage of SOX. An important

contribution of our study is that we can evaluate directly whether Rule 12h-6 made a difference in a

firm’s decision to deregister. Indeed, we find that it did, at least on a transitory basis. We uncover a spike

in deregistrations in 2007, but find that the number of deregistrations in 2008 is not unusual for our

sample period. We also find evidence that firms that deregister experience poor stock return performance

over a number of years before deregistration. Compared to other foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges,

the deregistering firms also have a significantly lower “cross-listing premium,” an excess valuation

measured in terms of Tobin’s q ratios relative to peer firms in the deregistering firms’ country of

domicile.

    We next examine stock-price reactions of deregistering firms around major events surrounding the

passage of SOX. Using a common dummy variable for all SOX events, we find no clear evidence that the

deregistering firms were affected adversely by SOX compared to other foreign firms listed on U.S.

exchanges or even that foreign firms were affected at all. However, with some regressions, we find that


                                                      4
the firms that deregistered after Rule 12h-6 were adversely affected by announcements that foreign firms

would not be exempt from SOX. All of the SOX evidence is sensitive to the benchmark used. In

particular, when we find evidence of adverse effects of SOX, it tends to be for an equally-weighted

benchmark and not for a value-weighted benchmark, suggesting that the impact of SOX was larger for

smaller foreign firms.

    If being listed in the U.S. had deadweight costs for deregistering firms, we would expect a positive

stock-price reaction for these firms to the announcement of the adoption of Rule 12h-6, since it means

that these firms would be better able to avoid that deadweight cost. Fernandes, Lel, and Miller (2009)

examine the stock-price reactions of all foreign-listed firms to the final announcement of the adoption of

Rule 12h-6. They detect no stock-price reaction, on average, but do show that firms that come from

countries with weaker governance and disclosure were adversely affected by the adoption of Rule 12h-6,

a finding that they interpret to be supportive of the bonding theory. Like them, we examine the stock-

price reaction of firms to the announcement of the adoption of Rule 12h-6. However, our focus is

different from theirs. They investigate whether the cross-sectional variation in the stock-price reactions of

exchange-listed firms to the announcement is supportive of the bonding hypothesis. We investigate the

difference in the stock-price reactions to the announcement between the exchange-listed firms that do not

use Rule 12h-6 to deregister and those that do in order to assess whether the market viewed the adoption

of the rule to be particularly valuable for the firms that made use of it during our sample period. We find

no evidence that the firms that deregister using Rule 12h-6 reacted any differently to the announcement of

the rule than firms that have not deregistered.

    Finally, we examine the stock-price reactions to the deregistration announcements themselves. As in

Marosi and Massoud (2008), who examine the stock-price reactions around deregistration announcements

from 1990 to 2006, we find a significant negative stock-price reaction to deregistration announcements

before the passage of Rule 12h-6. However, after the adoption of the rule, the average announcement

abnormal return is not different from zero and, while negative on average and for the median firm, is

significantly less so than the average announcement return before adoption of the rule. This evidence


                                                     5
suggests that the firms that initially took advantage of Rule 12h-6 were firms that did not benefit much

from being in the U.S. perhaps because of poor growth opportunities, deadweight costs stemming from

some SOX-related rules, and/or that the market largely anticipated the actions of these firms. However,

we also find that firms with better growth opportunities and larger financing deficits have significantly

worse deregistration-related stock-price reactions. We argue that the most plausible interpretation of this

result is that firms more likely to benefit from bonding experience more adverse stock-price reactions to

deregistration announcements, as we would expect with the bonding hypothesis of deregistrations.

Conversely, because we always reject the hypothesis that the abnormal returns around firms’

deregistration announcements are positive, the evidence is inconsistent the loss of competitiveness

hypothesis.

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we describe the past and new

rules governing deregistration for foreign firms listed for trading on major U.S. exchanges. We also

survey existing empirical research on the economic consequences of deregistration and delisting decisions

under the old rules. Section 3 introduces our sample and compares characteristics of deregistering firms

with those of foreign listed firms that have not deregistered. The event-study analysis of the stock-price

reactions of the deregistering firms to the passage of SOX, to the announcement of the new Rule 12h-6,

and around their respective decisions to deregister all follow in Section 4. We then offer concluding

remarks.



2. The Past and Present Deregistration Process for Foreign Private Issuers in the U.S.

    On March 21, 2007, the SEC unanimously adopted Exchange Act Rule 12h-6 which substantially

eased conditions under which foreign private issuers (FPIs) can terminate the registration of a class of

securities under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act and its resulting Section 13(a) reporting obligations,

or terminate and not merely suspend Section 15(d) reporting obligations. The new rule took effect on June

4, 2007. In this section, we describe (a) the pre-existing rule and empirical evidence on deregistrations by




                                                     6
FPIs under that rule, and (b) the key elements of the new rule and some background on why it was

adopted.



a. The Old Rule and Some Evidence

    Under the pre-existing Exchange Act Rule 12g-4, the primary determinant regarding whether a FPI

can terminate its registration of a class of equity securities under Section 12(g) of the Exchange Act is if

the securities are held by less than 300 residents in the U.S. (or alternatively, less than 500 residents if

assets are less than $10 million). If a firm successfully terminates its Section 12(g) registration, it must

then consider whether it has reporting obligations under Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act. Section 15(d)

provides that the periodic reporting requirements of Section 13(a) are applicable to any FPI that files a

registration statement under the Securities Act. The criteria to suspend Section 15(d) reporting obligations

under Exchange Act Rule 12h-3 are similar to those under Rule 12g-4. The key distinction is that the

reporting obligations are suspended, rather than terminated. If the number of U.S. holders exceeds 300 (or

500, if assets are less than $10 million) at the end of a fiscal year, the FPI must resume its reporting

obligations.4 These conditions are certified by voluntarily filing with the SEC Form 15, a one-page form

that includes information such as the class of securities being deregistered, the class of securities that still

may require a duty to file, the filer’s address, and the number of shareholders of record in the U.S. For

many FPIs, it was difficult, and often, impossible to deregister, even when U.S. holdings were small and

when trading in the U.S. was low (Greene and Underhill, 2008).

    Each U.S. exchange sets its own delisting standards and these are considerably less burdensome than

those that govern deregistration from SEC reporting obligations. Macey, O’Hara, and Pompilio (2004)



4
  What constitutes a FPI is governed by Exchange Act Rule 3b-4 and the relevant statutory section applies only to
equity securities as noted. For the purpose of determining the number of U.S. resident shareholders, a FPI must use
the method of counting provided under Rule 12g3-2(a). This method requires looking through the record ownership
of brokers, dealers, banks, or other nominees on a worldwide basis and counting the number of separate accounts of
customers resident in the U.S. for which the securities are held. Under this rule, issuers are required to make
inquiries of all nominees, wherever located and wherever in the chain of ownership, for the purpose of assessing the
number of U.S. resident holders. See SEC Release Number 34-55540 of the Federal Register (Volume 72, Number
65, p. 16934, April 5, 2007).


                                                         7
classify delisting standards into two broad categories: profit-related and reputation-related standards. The

profit standards are put in place to eliminate those firms that are unprofitable to the exchange and they

stipulate minimum criteria based on market capitalization, price per share, number of publicly-held

shares, number of registered shareholders, and trading volume.5 The reputation-related standards are set to

maintain the exchange’s reputation as a self-regulatory organization (Chemmanur and Fulghieri, 2003)

and allow the exchange to delist firms that go bankrupt, are to be liquidated, or fail to meet the

exchange’s corporate governance standards. Macey, O’Hara, and Pompilio discuss how foreign firms

may be exempted from some of these reputation-related standards.

    Many FPIs trade in the U.S. on major stock exchanges in the form of an American Depositary Receipt

(ADR). The procedure for termination of an ADR program is set forth in the deposit agreement between

the depositary bank and the firm. It usually requires a 30-day notice period prior to termination and the

depositary bank will continue to issue ADRs up until the termination date and keep open the ADR facility

for a period afterwards (up to one year) for ADR holders to be able to cancel. Cash distributions are

initiated by the depositary bank for any ADR holders who have not cancelled by that point in time. This

ADR termination process is again much less onerous than the process associated with deregistration from

reporting obligations to the SEC.

    There are several empirical studies of the determinants and economic consequences of foreign

delistings from U.S. stock exchanges, fewer on those of foreign delistings from other markets and, to the

best of our knowledge, only three on foreign deregistrations from U.S. markets. Liu (2004) looks at the

stock-price reactions of 103 foreign firms involuntarily delisting from U.S. markets over the period 1990-

2003, while Liu and Stowe (2005) examine the effects of 54 U.S. firms voluntarily delisting from Japan

(1982-2002). The former study shows a 4.49% decline on average, while the latter shows no reaction

whatsoever. Witmer (2006) confirms a 6% decline for a larger sample of 116 foreign delistings from U.S.




5
 See NYSE Listing Standards (www.nyse.com/regulation/listed/1147474807344.html) and Listing Standards and
Fees, Nasdaq Stock Market, May 2008 (www.nasdaq.com).


                                                     8
exchanges between 1990 and 2003, but he also shows that firms that voluntary delist and firms with

smaller turnover in U.S. markets experience smaller negative reactions.

    Li (2007) and Smith (2008) focus their studies on the impact of the passage of SOX on the economic

consequences of foreign delistings in U.S. markets. Specifically, Li uncovers an insignificant negative

pre-SOX stock-price reaction around delistings (-1.58% for 15 events with three-day event windows)

while Smith finds an insignificant, but positive reaction (7.75% for 39 events); both studies find positive

post-SOX reactions (an insignificant 2.39% for 40 delistings for Li; 7.52% for 33 events in Smith).

Hostak, Karaoglu, Lys, and Yang (2007) consider a post-SOX sample of 75 voluntary foreign delistings

but, unlike the Li and Smith studies, they uncover a statistically-significant -1.10% three-day cumulative

abnormal return. Part of the reason for the differences in these results may stem in part from how

researchers identify voluntary delistings in the first place and also in part from the special characteristics

of the firms that make that choice. Chaplinsky and Ramchand (2008) identify only 48 “true” voluntary

delistings from a total sample of 760 foreign firms delisting over the period from 1961 to 2004 and show

that the firms delisting following SOX have lower profitability, lower median assets and market

capitalization, poorer preceding stock-price performance, and lower analyst coverage. Piotroski and

Srinivasan (2008), like Chaplinsky and Ramchand, conclude that important non-SOX related factors

influence delisting decisions.

    Only three studies examine the determinants of and the consequences of the decision by foreign firms

to deregister from U.S. markets.6 These studies are related to the delisting studies described above.

Delisting from a U.S. exchange eliminates the obligation to meet the exchange’s listing requirements, but

does not eliminate SEC registration requirements. Firms might delist with the intent of ultimately

deregistering, but delisting does not guarantee that firms will meet the criteria to deregister because they

could still have more than 300 U.S. shareholders after delisting. At the same time, Hostak, Karaoglu, Lys,

and Yang (2007) focus on voluntary delistings and argue that the assumption that delisting is ultimately

6
 Two studies examine the long-term impact of SOX in terms of deregistration decisions of U.S. issuers. Leuz,
Triantis, and Wang (2008) and Marosi and Massoud (2007) find that more issuers deregister in the post-SOX period,
but the significantly-negative announcement abnormal returns are similar in the pre- and post-SOX periods.


                                                       9
aimed at deregistration is reasonable. They conclude that firms with weaker corporate governance delisted

to avoid the governance mandates of SOX rather than to avoid compliance costs associated with SOX.

    Witmer (2006) uncovers a statistically insignificant negative stock-price reaction (-0.60%) in the

three days around announcement of Form 15 filing dates. Almost all of his deregistration events take

place after the passage of SOX. Li (2007) and Marosi and Massoud (2006) specifically examine the

changes in the count of deregistration events and resulting stock-price reactions before and after SOX. Li

finds an insignificant negative reaction around pre-SOX deregistrations (-0.62%) and an insignificant

positive reaction after SOX (+2.30%). Marosi and Massoud, however, do not find such an evolution: the

stock-price reactions are negative both before and after SOX.7 One possible reason for the conflicting

findings in these studies is that they classify “voluntary” deregistrations differently and therefore identify

different samples of deregistering firms. To make it easier for researchers to understand better the

determinants of deregistration and to clarify the choices we made in constructing our sample, we furnish

appendices that provide a list of all firms included in our sample as well as the delisting firms that we did

not include with appropriate reasons given.



b. The New Rule 12h-6

    New Exchange Act Rule 12h-6 proposes market-based tests such that firms can qualify for

deregistration using a benchmark of less than 5% of average worldwide trading volume taking place on

U.S. markets (measured over the preceding year). The average daily trading volume (ADTV) must be no

greater than 5% of the worldwide ADTV for that security (with clear definitions of which securities

qualify for calculation during the preceding 12-month period in order to qualify for a Form 15F filing

used to notify the SEC of the decision to terminate registration). Either the standard is met at the time of

delisting from the U.S. exchange or there is a one-year ineligibility period for the ADTV calculation after

an exchange delisting. There are also three additional conditions: (a) FPIs must have been a reporting


7
 We refer here to the working paper version of the paper because the published version (Marosi and Massoud,
2008) does not contain as much information for the comparison of the pre-SOX and post-SOX periods.


                                                     10
company for at least one year, (b) they must not have sold securities in a registered offering for at least

one year, and (c) they must maintain a listing in a foreign jurisdiction (their primary trading market) for at

least one year (see Federal Register, Volume 72(65), 16941-16944). Under the new rules, any FPI can

deregister its equity securities, although some would have to delist their securities and wait for 12 months

to meet the trading volume requirement before deregistering (Greene and Underhill, 2008).8

    The rule was originally proposed on December 23, 2005 (Release No. 34-53020) and, following a

comment period, was re-proposed on December 22, 2006 (Release No. 34-55540). Why did the SEC

change the rule? The original proposal release states:

         “The Commission proposed to amend these rules out of concern that, due to the
         increased globalization of securities markets in recent decades as well as other trends, it
         has become difficult for a foreign private issuer to exit the Exchange Act reporting system
         even when there is relatively little U.S. investor interest in its U.S.-registered securities.
         However, because of the burdens and uncertainties associated with terminating
         registration and reporting under the Exchange Act, the current exit process may serve as
         a disincentive to foreign private issuers accessing the U.S. public capital markets.”
         (Federal Register 70, 77689-77690)

    There was, in fact, much controversy over the effects of SEC registration and enforcement on foreign

companies cross-listed on major U.S. stock exchanges leading up to the original rule proposal. The fact

that over 30 comment letters were submitted from 40 different businesses, financial and legal

associations, foreign companies and government agencies, and advisory, accounting, and law firms bears

this out. The burdens and uncertainties regarding terminating registration likely became an incremental

concern in the after-math of the passage of SOX in 2002. Two letters from the European Association of

Listed Companies (EALIC) that discussed these concerns were submitted to the SEC well before the

original rule was proposed (February 9, 2004 and March 18, 2005).9 A further 91 comments were




8
  It is not known how many FPIs were eligible to deregister under old rules, but it was less than 26%. The original
rule proposal in December 2005 relaxed the deregistration criteria, but not to the extent that was eventually adopted
with Rule 12h-6. With the rules in the original proposal, the SEC estimated that about 26% of FPIs would be eligible
to deregister (Greene and Underhill, 2008).
9
  We did not find any evidence that the individual deregistering firms lobbied for a change in the rules before the
SEC announcements of the rule change, although the letters from the EALIC may have represented a number of the
Western European based firms. We did find that 11 of the deregistering firms in our sample commented on,
expressed support for, or inquired about the proposed rule change.


                                                         11
submitted between January 18, 2006 and February 23, 2007 by various law and accounting firms,

consultancy firms, representatives of stock exchanges, academics as well as affected foreign firms.10

     Fernandes, Lel, and Miller (2009) examine the market impact of the final adoption of Rule 12h-6 on

foreign firms. They show that the average abnormal return over the three days surrounding the rule

change of exchange-listed foreign firms is -0.138% and is statistically insignificantly different from zero,

but the median abnormal return of -0.294% is significant. For over-the-counter traded Level 1 ADRs, the

median abnormal return is -0.534%, but is not statistically significant. The negative reactions are

concentrated in firms from countries with weaker home-country disclosure requirements. They interpret

their results to be supportive of the bonding theory since the rule change makes it easier for foreign firms

to break their commitment to U.S. rules and regulations and hence reduces the value of that commitment.

Their study does not address the questions we focus on in this study which is to understand why firms

deregister and what the consequences are of deregistration for a firm’s shareholders.



3. Which Firms Deregister?

     In this section, we first describe our sample of foreign firms that deregistered from U.S. markets and

then compare the characteristics of these firms with those of firms cross-listed on U.S. exchanges that did

not deregister. We first evaluate financial and operating characteristics. Next, we compare the risk-

adjusted returns performance of a portfolio of the foreign firms that deregistered with those of a

benchmark portfolio of firms cross-listed on U.S. exchanges that did not deregister over the period from

2001 to 2008. Finally, we provide some evidence on the post-deregistration experience of deregistering

firms.




10
   A summary of the principal comments regarding the original rule and the re-proposed rule amendments is found
in Section I.B and I.C of the Release Number 34-55540 of the Federal Register (Volume 72, Number 65, pp. 16935-
36, April 5, 2007).


                                                      12
a. The Sample of Deregistering Firms

     In this paper, we want to understand why foreign firms leave major U.S. exchanges and what the

consequences are for their shareholders. Therefore, we consider only firms that, prior to deregistration,

had their common stock listed on a U.S. exchange (directly or more generally in the form of an ADR).

Our sample of deregistrations does not include firms that deregister bonds previously trading in the U.S.

By restricting our sample of deregistrations to firms listed on a major U.S. exchange, we make sure that

SOX applies to the firms included in our sample. Further, it is important for our study that a firm delists

and deregisters voluntarily. In other words, it makes the choice of delisting as a step toward

deregistration. This restriction excludes, for instance, firms that delist because they are acquired or

because they no longer meet the listing criteria of the exchange on which they are listed. Neither

motivations for deregistration discussed in the introduction would apply to the firms that we exclude.

     Identifying which delistings and deregistrations prior to Rule 12h-6 are voluntary is challenging, as

evidenced by the disparity in sample sizes in prior studies.11 To construct the sample of firms that

deregister before Rule 12h-6, we start from the list of firms cross-listed on a U.S. exchange that

voluntarily delist between January 2002 and March 2007 (we exclude firms that delisted and deregistered

prior to SOX).12 In total we identify 88 voluntary delistings over this period. Delistings are identified

from information provided by the Bank of New York, Citibank, and the Center for Research on Security

Prices (CRSP). We then search for press releases in Lexis-Nexis and Factiva to determine the reason for

delisting. In identifying firms that voluntarily delist, we take them at their word and record a delisting as



11
   Marosi and Massoud (2008) identify 126 deregistrations between 2002 and 2006 (including 97 between 2002 and
2005). Li (2007) includes only 55 deregistrations from 2002 – 2005, after excluding firms that also delist in the
home country, become private, are acquired, have stock prices less than one unit of home currency, go bankrupt or
are liquidated within a year of the deregistration date. Hostak, Karaoglu, Lys, and Yang (2007) study 75 voluntary
delistings (excluding Canadian firms) from U.S. exchanges between 2002 and 2006. Although delisting does not
necessarily imply deregistration, the number of voluntary delistings should represent an upper bound on the number
of voluntary deregistrations.
12
   Although SOX was signed into law on July 30, 2002, we include 10 voluntary delistings (seven are included in
the final sample) between April and June of 2002. On January 17, 2002, SEC Chairman Harvey Pitt proposed to
create a public accounting oversight board. On February 14 the “Oxley” bill was introduced to the House Committee
on Financial Services. The committee approved the bill on April 22 and the House passed it on April 24, 2002
(Litvak, 2007).


                                                       13
voluntary if a firm states that it is voluntary.13 From the initial list of 88 voluntary delistings, we exclude

17 firms that could potentially be included in a study of voluntary deregistrations. We exclude four firms

that delisted in 2001 or earlier, but deregistered after SOX (two of these firms actually deregistered in

January 2002 while the other two deregistered in 2003 and 2005). For these firms, the process of leaving

the U.S. began with the delisting that occurred prior to SOX. Five firms that delisted between 2003 and

2005, but then deregistered under Rule 12h-6 after March 2007 are also removed from the sample. We

further exclude two firms that deregistered more than two years after delisting. In our empirical work, we

require firms to have data in Datastream and Worldscope and we exclude one firm that is not in

Worldscope. Finally, we exclude five firms that voluntarily delisted between 2002 and 2006 for which we

could not verify deregistration via a Form 15 filing with the SEC. Our final sample has 71 firms that

deregistered before the adoption of Rule 12h-6 over the period from 2002 through March 2007.

     For the sample of firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6, we start with the list of 200 firms filing SEC

Form 15F certification of FPI termination of registration between March 21, 2007 and December 30,

2008. These filings are available from the SEC website for that period. Not all of these firms qualify for

our analysis for a variety of reasons. First, we exclude 35 “involuntary” deregistration events due to

mergers, acquisitions, and successor registrations. In 25 of the cases, a registered firm was acquired and

the registered firms’ shares were deregistered after the acquisition. In the other 10 cases, an unregistered

foreign company acquired a registered company and sought deregistration under the “expanded scope”

condition of Rule 12h-6 related to successor issues (see Federal Register, Volume 72(65), p. 16945). We

search for mergers, consolidations, exchanges of securities, acquisitions of assets or other control-related

events to identify possible “involuntary” filings. Second, not all firms delisted voluntarily. Six firms were

delisted by a U.S. exchange for violating listing standards. These firms moved to the OTC market and

subsequently deregistered. Third, we exclude five firms that delisted prior to Rule 12h-6, but deregistered

13
  Classifying voluntary and involuntary delistings is often difficult. Some delisting firms are often close to financial
distress so that what appears to be a firm’s choice could, in fact, simply be a pre-emptive action for an inevitable
involuntary delisting by the exchange. We identify 17 cases in which the delisting is announced as voluntary but
coincides with financial difficulties, cost-cutting or restructuring programs, or regulatory issues such as SEC
investigations. For robustness, we verify that our results hold if we exclude these firms from the sample.


                                                          14
after Rule 12h-6 (one firm delisted in 2003, three in 2004, and one more in 2005). These firms initiated

the process of exiting U.S. markets under the old rules, but actually exited under the new Rule 12h-6.

Fourth, the new rule permits FPIs to terminate reporting obligations associated with debt securities. We

identify 27 debt deregistrations, all of which we exclude. Fifth, two firms are excluded because they are

not in Worldscope or Datastream. Sixth, 29 firms deregistered equity securities, but the firms were never

listed on a U.S. exchange.14 Seventh, 16 firms that previously filed Form 15 under the previous Rules

12g-4 and 12h-3 are excluded. The new Rule 12h-6 establishes conditions under which a previous Form

15 filer, who could have applied for suspension of reporting obligations, can now terminate reporting

obligations and would thus necessitate filing of Form 15F. Fifteen of these firms are included in the pre-

Rule 12h-6 sample (one firm is excluded from that sample because it delisted more than two years before

deregistration). Finally, seven other firms are excluded for various reasons. Our final sample includes 73

firms that deregistered under Rule 12h-6. Appendix A lists the firms in each sample, their deregistration

form types, filing dates, announcement of filing dates, country of domicile, and home trading market. The

firms excluded based on the screens above, including the reasons for their exclusion, are listed in

Appendix B.

     Prior to Rule 12h-6, most of the deregistering foreign firms in Appendix A are from Europe,

including 15 (21% of the sample) from the U.K., 5 (7%) from Germany, and 5 (7%) from Sweden. From

2002 through 2006, U.K firms comprise, on average, 9% of all U.S. exchange-listed firms, while German

and Swedish firms each comprise 3% or fewer of the total. The largest non-European contingent of

deregistering firms is from Canada (8 firms, 11%). Canadian firms represent the largest contingent of

foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges from 2002 to 2006 (27% of the total). Except for eight firms from

Mexico, few firms from emerging markets deregistered. Following Rule 12h-6, the majority of

deregistering firms are also from Europe, including 13 from the U.K. (18%), 12 from France (16%), and


14
  In 1999, the National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) announced that the SEC approved the NASD’s
proposed OTC Bulletin Board (OTCBB) Eligibility Rule that requires only companies that file periodic reports to
the SEC to trade on the OTCBB. The SEC required all foreign securities on the OTCBB to be fully registered, but
only after 1999 and following a phase-in period.


                                                      15
seven each from Germany and Netherlands (10%). Outside Europe, five firms from Australia and five

firms from Canada deregistered (7% each).

    Figure 1 shows the distribution of our sample of deregistering firms from 2002 through 2008. In each

of the first four years of our sample, the number of deregistrations is less than 15. In 2006, the number of

increases to 23, and there is a huge jump in 2007, when the count reaches 57 (2 under the old rules and 55

under new Rule 12h-6). In 2008, the number of deregistrations drops sharply to 18, a count that is similar

to that prior to the rule change. The pattern of deregistration activity around the adoption of Rule 12h-6

suggests that firms that wanted to deregister could not do so because the procedure was too restrictive

before the adoption of the rule, but that the number of such firms was limited. This view is reinforced by

considering deregistration events by month in 2007. By historical standards, there is a flood of

deregistrations in the first month (June 2007) that the rule becomes effective. In that month, 29 firms

deregistered, or 52.72% of the firms that deregistered under the new rule in 2007. The drop in

deregistrations in 2008 also suggests that the number of firms that wanted to leave was limited. If firms

wanted to deregister in 2007, but could not meet the 5% trading volume requirement, they could delist in

2007, meet the trading volume requirement by 2008 and then deregister.



b. Comparisons of Firm Attributes

    We obtain a variety of firm-level financial and operating variables on the deregistering firms and on

all other firms cross-listed in the U.S. To identify the cross-listed firms, we use information from a variety

of sources, including the ADR divisions of the Mellon Bank of New York, Citibank, J.P. Morgan, the

New York Stock Exchange (NYSE), NASDAQ, OTCBB, end-of-year editions of the National Quotation

Bureau’s Pink Sheets, CRSP, firms’ annual reports, SEC Form 20-F filings, and Lexis-Nexis and Factiva

searches. Information from the various datasets is manually cross-checked and verified. The data

provided by Citibank and CRSP allows us to keep track of both active and inactive issues for U.S.

listings, which mitigates concerns about survivorship bias. We classify firms by listing type, including

those on the major exchanges (via Level 2 non-capital-raising or Level 3 capital-raising ADR programs,


                                                     16
direct listings, or New York Registered Shares) as well as listings by means of a Rule 144a private

placement, and over-the-counter (OTC) issues by means of the OTC Bulletin Board (OTCBB), or the

Pink Sheets (usually via Level 1 ADRs).

     We begin by comparing the deregistering firms to a benchmark sample of foreign firms with listings

on the major U.S. exchanges that did not deregister. For our comparisons, we evaluate deregistering firms

relative to benchmark firms in the year before deregistration. There are between 447 and 651 benchmark

firms in a given year, depending on the availability of the firm attribute. Our data source for firm

characteristics is Thomson Financial’s Worldscope database. Worldscope covers companies in more than

50 developed and emerging markets, representing more than 96 percent of the market value of the world’s

publicly traded companies. We include firms with total assets of at least $10 million that are not

domiciled in tax havens (e.g., Cayman Islands, British Virgin Islands), but we also assess the sensitivity

of our analysis to employing higher thresholds of $100 million in total assets and to excluding financial

firms.

     The firm-level variables are defined as follows. Total assets are in U.S. dollars, converted from local

currencies at fiscal year-end exchange rates and leverage is defined as total debt divided by total assets.

Ownership measures the fraction of shares outstanding held by corporate insiders as computed by

Worldscope.15 It includes, but is not restricted to, shares held by officers, directors and their immediate

families, those held in trust, those held by other corporations, those held by pension plans, and by

individuals who hold 5% or more of the outstanding shares. We use three proxies for growth

opportunities: sales growth, Tobin’s q, and global industry q, which is the median Tobin’s q ratio of the

global industry group to which the firm belongs. Sales growth is measured as a two-year geometric

average of annual inflation-adjusted growth in sales. We adjust sales growth for inflation using the change

in the consumer price index for the country, as reported by the International Monetary Fund. Following

the literature, we compute Tobin’s q as follows. For the numerator, we take the book value of total assets,


15
  Dahlquist, Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2003) discuss the strengths and weaknesses of Worldscope’s
ownership data.


                                                     17
subtract the book value of equity, and add the market value of equity. For the denominator, we use the

book value of total assets. We follow Frank and Goyal (2003) and compute a firm’s financing deficit as

the sum of cash dividends, investments and net changes in working capital less internal cash flows, scaled

by total assets.16 We use return on assets (ROA) as a measure of accounting performance. Sales growth,

Tobin’s q, the financing deficit, and ROA are winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentiles to reduce the

potential impact of outliers.

     We also use as country variables legal origin (e.g., Common law) from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,

Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), a legal index that multiplies the anti-director rights variable from Djankov,

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008) by the rule of law index from La Porta, Lopez-de-

Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998),17 stock market capitalization divided by GDP (Gross Domestic

Product) and (log of) Gross National Product (GNP) per capita. The latter two variables are from the

World Bank WDI database.

     Table 1 compares characteristics of deregistering firms and foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges.

We provide tests of differences in means with two-sided t-statistics and of medians with Wilcoxon rank-

sum tests. Whether deregistering before Rule 12h-6 or after, the deregistering firms have lower sales

growth and a lower Tobin’s q. Deregistering firms also have a financing surplus – a negative financing

deficit – in contrast to benchmark firms. This means that deregistering firms are returning funds to

investors rather than raising external capital. Firms that return funds to investors are generally firms with

poor growth opportunities since they cannot justify raising external capital to finance growth

opportunities. Further, deregistering firms are less likely to come from common law countries than



16
   We match the relevant Worldscope data items, subject to availability, for cash dividends (WS 04551), investments
(including capital expenditures, WS 04601 plus additions to other assets, assets from acquisitions, changes in
investments, other uses for investing, less disposals of fixed assets), net changes in working capital (increase in cash
and short term investments, WS 04851, less funds from operating activities, WS 04831, less increase in short term
borrowings, WS 04821), less internal cash flow (which includes net income, WS 04001, depreciation, deferred
taxes, extraordinary items, other cash flows, effects of exchange rate on cash and other sources of financing ). On
average, we successfully match 60 percent of the sample of exchange-listed firm-year observations, including
deregistering firms, from 2001 through 2007.
17
   We obtain values for the rule of law measure for China, Hungary, Poland, and Russia from Pistor, Raiser, and
Gelfer (2000).


                                                          18
benchmark firms. Deregistering firms come, on average, from countries with higher GNP per capita than

benchmark firms but lower stock market capitalization to GDP.

     Firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6 differ in important ways from firms that deregistered before.

Not surprisingly given the nature of the change in rules, firms that deregister under the new rule are larger

than the firms that deregistered before (median $6.5 billion in total assets versus $393 million) and have

less concentrated ownership (21% of shares outstanding versus 31%). In fact, firms that deregister under

Rule 12h-6 are significantly larger than benchmark firms (by medians, at least) while firms that deregister

before are significantly smaller. Firms that deregister before the rule have significantly lower ROA than

benchmark firms as well as firms that deregister after. The ROA of firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6

is not significantly different from that of the benchmark firms. However, firms that deregister under the

new rule have significantly higher leverage than benchmark firms (28% total debt to assets versus 18%)

and firms that deregister before. This higher leverage could be the outcome of poorer performance.

     We perform several robustness checks. We exclude financial firms from the deregistering and

benchmark set of firms and require minimum total assets to exceed $100 million. Inferences are

unchanged for the firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6. However, the result for sales growth holds only

for medians for the firms that deregister before the new rule.

     In Table 2, we estimate a multi-period logit model from 2002 to 2008 to compare the characteristics

of deregistering firms with those of foreign firms listed on major U.S. exchanges that did not deregister.

The dependent variable is set to a value of one in the year of deregistration; a value of zero corresponds to

a firm that does not deregister in a given year. After firms deregister, they are removed from the dataset.18

All firm characteristics are lagged by year so that we use data from 2001 to 2007. The coefficient

standard errors are adjusted for clustering on firms – they are computed assuming observations are


18
   Shumway (2001) shows that a multi-period logit model is equivalent to a discrete-time hazard model because the
likelihood functions of the two models are identical. For our purposes, the advantage of the logit model is that it
estimates a constant in the regression, whereas, the constant is subsumed into the baseline hazard in a Cox model.
Without a constant in the model we cannot estimate a dummy variable that equals one for firms that deregistered
after Rule 12h-6.



                                                        19
independent across firms, but not within firms. The sample for Model 1 includes deregistrations before

Rule 12h-6 as well as deregistrations under Rule 12h-6. The coefficients on Tobin’s q, the financing

deficit, and Log(Assets), are negative and statistically significant while the coefficient on Log(GNP) is

positive and significant. In Model 2, we add a dummy variable to Model 1 that takes value one for the

period for which deregistration was possible under Rule 12h-6. All the coefficients that are significant in

Model 1 are significant in Model 2, but the coefficient on Rule 12h-6 is positive and significant,

indicating that, even after controlling for given firm and country characteristics, Rule 12h-6 made

deregistration more likely. Economically, the impact of the rule change is large: the marginal effect

associated with this Rule 12h-6 coefficient is 3.46 percent (with all other control variables evaluated at

their unconditional means). An important concern is that the size and significance of this coefficient may

be driven by the spike in deregistrations in 2007. Model 3 is estimated only for the period before Rule

12h-6. The coefficients on Tobin’s q and the financing deficit are negative and significant at the 10%

level, while the coefficient on total assets is significant at the 1% level. The coefficient on the insider

ownership variable is now positive and significant. Finally, Model 4 is estimated over the period for

which Rule 12h-6 is in effect. Tobin’s q is significant at the 10% level in Model 4, as is sales growth. The

financing deficit continues to be negative and significant. Not surprisingly, the coefficient on Log(Assets)

is significantly lower in Model 3 than in Model 4 and the coefficient on insider ownership is significantly

higher. Higher leverage makes deregistration more likely in Model 4 and the coefficient on Leverage is

significantly higher than in Model 3. Finally, the coefficient on Legal is negative and significant at the

10% level in Model 4 and it is significantly lower than the coefficient in Model 3. A Chi-squared test

shows that the hypothesis that the coefficients in Models 3 and 4 are equal can be rejected at any

reasonable level of significance. We estimate the models of Table 2 restricting the sample to non-financial

firms with assets in excess of $100 million and the results (not reported) are similar.19


19
  One possible explanation for the increase in deregistration activity that is not directly related to the bonding
hypothesis or to the loss of competitiveness hypothesis is that these firms invested in improving their transparency
and governance systems so that a U.S. exchange listing became less valuable for their minority shareholders. To
explore this possibility, we obtained 2006 data on the corporate governance scores from FTSE Institutional


                                                        20
    Figure 2 shows that these differences in firm characteristics exist for a number of years. In Panel a,

we show the evolution of sales growth for the benchmark exchange-listed firms and for the Rule 12h-6

deregistering firms from 2000 to 2007. Between 2001 and 2003, the average sales growth rates of the

deregistering and benchmark firms both declined substantially. However, the growth opportunities of the

deregistering firms did not recover after 2003, while those of the benchmark exchange-listed firms did. It

seems unlikely that the passage of SOX had influence over the evolution of sales growth of some foreign

cross-listed firms during this period.

    To compare differences in the “cross-listing premium” for the Rule 12h-6 deregistering firms and the

benchmark exchange-listed firms, we estimate regressions similar to those in Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz

(2004, 2009) except that we estimate the premium separately for each group of firms.20 Panel b of Figure

2 shows the evolution of the premium. In 2000, both groups have large premiums and the difference

between them is not statistically significant. In 2001 and 2002, the premium decreases for both groups of

firms and the difference between them remains insignificant. In 2003, the premium for the benchmark

exchange-listed firms increases relative to the deregistering firms and that difference remains through

2006. The premium is significantly greater for the benchmark firms each year from 2003 through 2006

with the exception of 2005 (p-values of 0.04, 0.09, 0.21, and 0.05, respectively, by year). The difference

is not significant in 2007. The difference in the evolution of the premium after 2002 is consistent with the

difference in the evolution of sales growth, which makes it unlikely that it was caused by SOX. Further,

the event study evidence that follows in Section 4 shows that it is even less likely that SOX had an impact

Shareholder Services (ISS), which covers a broad range of governance attributes, mostly for firms from developed
countries. The ISS sample includes 2,349 non-U.S. firms. We matched the ISS sample with our sample in Table 2
for 54 of the 73 Rule 12h-6 deregistering firms and for 274 of their exchange-listed peers. Overall, the governance
scores are lower for the deregistering firms, but when we re-estimate our multi-period logits with this smaller
sample, we find that these scores do not furnish any additional explanatory power.
20
   The cross-listing premium is estimated from an ordinary least squares regression of Tobin’s q on dummy variables
for whether the firm was exchange-listed at some point and deregistered in 2007 under Rule 12h-6 or not, whether it
is a non-deregistering U.S. exchange-listed firm or not, whether it is a Rule 144a private placement or not, whether it
is an Level 1 OTC U.S. listing or not, whether it is listed in London on AIM, as a depositary receipt, or as an
ordinary listing, trailing two-year geometric-averaged sales growth, median Tobin’s q of the global industry group
of the firm, and log assets. The regression includes all non-financial firms that are in the Worldscope database and
have total assets of at least $100 million in a given year. We use this more restrictive sample here to make the results
comparable with prior research. The regression is estimated with country fixed effects and with country-level
clustering of standard errors.


                                                          21
on the differential evolution of the cross-listing premium for deregistering firms and for the benchmark

exchange-listed firms during this period.



c. Comparison of Portfolio Returns

     Was the stock return performance of the deregistering firms different from the performance of the

benchmark exchange-listed firms during the period leading up to their decision to deregister? With the

bonding theory of deregistration, we would expect that firms with poor growth opportunities in relation to

their cash flows are more likely to deregister. Further, with that theory, firms would have listed when they

had good growth opportunities. Consequently, we would expect their returns to underperform leading up

to the decision to deregister. With the loss of competitiveness hypothesis, there is no reason to expect

persistent abnormal performance in the deregistering firms, but with that hypothesis deregistering firms’

stock prices should react poorly to announcements related to SOX if it decreased the competitiveness of

U.S. markets.

     We evaluate the risk-adjusted returns on a portfolio of the firms that deregistered over the period from

2001 to 2008. Deregistering firms are included in the portfolio starting on January 5, 2001 and are

excluded from the portfolio starting one week prior to deregistration. We require that there are at least

five firms in this portfolio. We compute U.S. dollar-denominated weekly (Friday to Friday) home-market

returns with data from Datastream. A similar procedure is followed for a portfolio of the benchmark

exchange-listed firms.21 The return difference between the two portfolios is regressed on the weekly U.S.

dollar-denominated return on the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) world market portfolio

(excluding the U.S.) obtained from Datastream (in excess of the U.S. Treasury bill yield from CRSP), as




21
  We exclude benchmark firms with less than 100 weekly observations over the period of analysis (2001-2008),
those with less than $10 million in total assets, and any firms that delisted prior to July 8, 2002. To eliminate
extreme observations associated with thin trading, we require that firms’ shares trade in at least 40% of the weekly
observations. Finally, we screen the data for errors (see Ince and Porter (2006) for a discussion of the issues). The
portfolio consists of 600 to 700 different firms over the period of analysis.


                                                         22
well as the size and book-to-market factors, SMB and HML, from Fama and French (1993) obtained from

Professor Ken French’s website at Dartmouth University.22

     Table 3 presents the regression results. We estimate the regressions using equally-weighted portfolio

returns (Models 1 to 3) and value-weighted portfolio returns (Models 4 to 6). The intercept of the

regressions captures the difference in risk-adjusted return performance between deregistering firms and

benchmark firms. Models 1 and 4 include all deregistering firms and are estimated from January 5, 2001

– June 27, 2008 (the last date for which there are at least five firms in the deregistering firm portfolio).

We include a dummy variable in these regressions for firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6. Models 2

and 5 include only firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6 (estimated over January 5, 2001 –

December 15, 2006) and Models 3 and 6 include only firms that deregistered under Rule 12h-6. We find

that deregistering firms perform poorly compared to benchmark firms when using equally-weighted

portfolio returns when we examine all deregistering firms as well as for firms that deregistered before and

after Rule 12h-6. However, the result is sensitive to whether we use value-weighted portfolios or equally-

weighted portfolios for firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6. The fact that these firms underperform

when we use an equally-weighted portfolio but not a value-weighted portfolio suggests that the

underperformance is greater among the smaller firms that deregister. When we restrict the sample to non-

financial firms with assets in excess of $100 million, the results reported in Table 3 are generally the

same.



d.       The Post-Deregistration Experience of Deregistering Firms

     Data is not yet available to investigate post-deregistration characteristics by firms that deregistered

under Rule 12h-6. However, we can use data for firms that deregistered before the rule change to

investigate how the characteristics of these firms changed from the year before deregistration to the year

after. We focus on the median of a given characteristic for deregistering firms and compare it to the

22
  SMB is a market-neutral hedge portfolio of U.S. stocks which takes long positions in small capitalization stocks
and short positions in large capitalization stocks. HML is a market-neutral hedge portfolio of U.S. stocks which
takes long positions in high book-to-market ratio stocks and short positions in low book-to-market ratio stocks.


                                                       23
median of the exchange-listed firms. We require firms to have data in Worldscope for the year before and

the year after deregistration. This requirement leaves us with a sample of 57 deregistering firms. For sales

growth, we use one-year trailing sales growth rather than two-year trailing sales growth as before. We

find that asset size and ROA falls compared to benchmark firms. We also find that ownership becomes

more concentrated. Such greater concentration might enable insiders to extract more private benefits from

control.



4. SOX, Loss of Market Competitiveness, and Deregistering Foreign Firms

    The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 is perhaps the most controversial reform of American corporate law

in the last 70 years. It establishes rules affecting not only every public company registered in the U.S., but

also many legal, auditing, and financial services firms and government agencies dealing with public

companies. A number of public policy organizations and others link the passage of SOX to a loss of U.S.

market competitiveness (Committee for Capital Market Reform, 2006, 2007; McKinsey and Company,

2007; U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 2007; and, Zingales, 2007).

    Several empirical studies evaluate the effects of SOX on U.S. firms by examining stock returns,

changes in accounting and audit costs, and going-private decisions, but with mixed results (see, among

others, Rezaee and Jain, 2006; Chhaochharia and Grinstein, 2007; Engel, Hayes, and, Wang, 2007; Li,

Pincus, and Rezo, 2007; Zhang, 2007). Leuz (2007) argues that the greatest challenge to these studies is

the absence of a natural control group of comparable, but unaffected, U.S. firms against which to judge

the impact of SOX. As a result, other researchers have sought answers by focusing on the impact of SOX

on various decisions and market outcomes for foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges relative to

equivalent domestic peers unaffected by the legislation (Duarte, Kong, Young, and Siegel, 2007; Hostak,

Karaoglu, Lys, and Yang, 2007; Doidge, Karolyi, and Stulz, 2009; Marosi and Massoud, 2008; and,

Piotroski and Srinivasan, 2008). Studies by Berger, Li, and Wong (2005), Li (2007), Litvak (2007), and

Smith (2008) examine the abnormal stock-price reactions of foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges to the

announcements of the passage of key provisions of the Act and other important related events. Litvak


                                                     24
concludes that there is a significant negative reaction to SOX events for exchange-listed foreign firms

when measured relative to foreign firms not listed in the U.S. and to foreign firms listed in the U.S. via

Rule 144a and Level 1 ADRs as benchmarks; Berger, Li, and Wong look at similar SOX-related events

but use a value-weighted portfolio of U.S. stocks as a benchmark and find a positive reaction for foreign

exchange-listed stocks; and, both Li and Smith uncover significant negative abnormal returns for foreign-

listed firms when measured relative to home-market index returns as benchmarks.

    In this section, we compare the stock-price reactions to SOX of cross-listed firms on U.S. exchanges,

in general, and specifically of firms that deregister. The loss of competitiveness theory relies on the view

that SOX affected firms adversely. As a result of this adverse effect, the value of a U.S. listing became

negative for some firms and these firms became eager to leave the U.S. markets. They did so when they

could, which for some firms meant that they had to wait for the adoption of Rule 12h-6 to leave. The loss

of competitiveness theory implies that the shareholders of firms that deregistered would have suffered

greater wealth losses from the passage of SOX than those of firms that did not deregister. To test this

hypothesis, we necessarily have to investigate whether firms with U.S. exchange listings and

deregistering firms had adverse stock-price reactions on SOX announcement days and, even more

importantly, whether those reactions were larger for deregistering firms.

    We can also test a corollary of the loss of competitiveness theory. The SEC eventually adopted the

change in rules on terminating registration after significant lobbying pressure from a number of

organizations and firms that grew in the wake of SOX. The Commission first issued proposed

amendments in December 2005; following an open comment period, the revised rule was issued in

December 2006 and adopted in March 2007. When it became clear that qualifying firms could deregister

under the new, less-burdensome rules, their shareholders should have benefited. The SEC announcements

should be associated with positive abnormal returns for the firms that would eventually deregister relative

to other firms with U.S. exchange listings. Further, if there was any uncertainty about whether a specific

firm could deregister, a firm’s deregistration announcement following the rule’s adoption by the

Commission should have been associated with a positive abnormal stock-price reaction. Finally, we


                                                    25
should expect that the positive abnormal stock-price reactions should be larger for those firms that were

most adversely impacted by the passage of SOX. We investigate each of these three additional hypotheses

in this section.



a. Stock-Price Reactions of Foreign Firms to SOX

     To investigate whether deregistering firms were more adversely affected by SOX than firms that did

not deregister, we obtain daily U.S. dollar-denominated home-market returns from 2001 to 2003 from

Datastream on each of the deregistering firms listed in Appendix A and on the benchmark set of

exchange-listed foreign firms that did not deregister, as used in the analysis of the previous section. We

also obtain daily U.S. dollar-denominated returns from Datastream on stocks of foreign companies listed

in the U.S. markets via Level 1 OTC ADRs or Rule 144a private placements.23

     SOX-related event dates are extracted from Table 1 of Litvak (2007).24 She identifies 14 different

events that range from the earliest proposal by the SEC to create a public company accounting oversight

board (eventually, the PCAOB) in January 17, 2002, to deliberations and passage of the bill in the House

of Representatives (April 22 to 24, 2002) and in the Senate Banking Committee and Senate (June 12 and

July 16, 2002, respectively), to the President’s signing of the bill (July 30, 2002). In the context of the

loss of competitiveness hypothesis, some events are interpreted positively for U.S. listed foreign firms,

such as SEC Chairman Harvey Pitt’s suggestion at a Financial Times conference of an exemption for

foreign companies (October 8, 2002), though most are perceived as negative developments.

     To assess the effect of these SOX-related events, we construct equally- and value-weighted portfolios

of all exchange-listed firms, of the deregistering firms and subsets thereof, and of a benchmark set of

exchange-listed firms that did not deregister (seven different portfolios, in total). This approach allows us

23
   Firms with less than 260 daily observations over the period from January 1, 2001 to December 31, 2003 are
excluded, as well as those with less than $10 million in total assets and those that delisted prior to July 8, 2002. As
noted earlier, we also apply screens for thin trading and data errors.
24
   The 14 SOX event dates in Litvak differ from the 17 events in Zhang (2007), though 9 events are common.
Zhang’s dates were constructed for U.S. firms and do not include three events specific to foreign private issuers. The
time-line of events in Smith (2008) is adopted from Engel, Hayes, and Wang (2007), which, in turn, is broadly
similar to those in Li, Pincus, and Rego (2003) and Rezaee and Jain (2003).


                                                          26
to estimate the overall impact of SOX for each group of firms, while accounting for cross-correlations in

firms’ stock returns, a critical issue when analyzing the impact of common events, like regulatory

changes, across firms (see Schwert, 1981, Schipper and Thompson, 1983; and, Binder, 1985). To estimate

the abnormal stock-price reactions for the SOX events, we specify and estimate by ordinary least squares

(OLS) the following regression over the period from January 1, 2001 to December 31, 2003:

                    Rp,t = α + β × Rb,t + δ´Event_Dummy + εt,

where Rp is the daily return for the portfolio of interest, Rb is the return on a benchmark portfolio, and

Event_Dummy is a vector that contains 14 dummy variables associated with each of the key SOX dates.

     We estimate this regression for the seven portfolios using equally-weighted portfolio returns (Models

1 to 7) and another seven portfolios using value-weighted portfolio returns (Models 8 to 14). In each

regression, the benchmark portfolio consists of Level 1 OTC and Rule 144a firms. These firms constitute

an appropriate benchmark since they are foreign firms that are participating in the international capital

markets, but are not registered under the Securities Act of 1933 or the Exchange Act of 1934 and are not

subject to the provisions of SOX. To define the event dummies, we set each dummy variable equal to one

for the day of the event, the day before, and the day after, and to zero on all other days. We include one

day before and after the event because the stocks in each portfolio come from different countries where

the home markets of these stocks often have different opening hours than the U.S. markets. As a result,

news in the U.S. on date t could be impounded in the stock price in its home country on date t-1 or on day

t+1.25 All the models with long only positions have an R-square in excess of 50% and the coefficient of

the portfolios on the benchmark portfolio is close to one. The coefficients on the constant term and on the

event dummies that are reported in Table 4 are multiplied by 100.

     In Models 1 and 8, Rp is the return on a portfolio that includes all foreign firms cross-listed on U.S.

exchanges. Two SOX dates have a significant abnormal return for Models 1 and 8. For the equally-


25
   Although we use the same event dates as Litvak (2007), we define the event dummies differently to account for
differences in the time zones of the firms’ home markets. For example, for the early SEC announcement on January
17, we set it to one on January 16, 17, and 18 whereas Litvak sets it to one only on January 18 (Litvak, 2007, Table
1). When we re-define the dummies this way, however, none of our main conclusions are affected.


                                                        27
weighted portfolios in Model 1, there is a negative significant abnormal return on the date of the first

announcement by the Senate Committee (Event 4, 0.52% with a t-statistic of 1.70) but there is a positive

and significant abnormal return on the day that the President signed the bill into law (Event 11, 0.65%

with a t-statistic of 2.11). The latter result is not consistent with the loss of competitiveness hypothesis,

but the former is. For the value-weighted portfolios in Model 8 there are positive and significant

coefficients around the day that the Senate Banking Committee met and approved the bill (Event 5, 0.61%

with a t-statistic of 2.05) and around the day that Chairman Pitt suggested an exemption (Event 13, 0.40%

with a t-statistic of 1.73). The latter result is consistent with the loss of competitiveness hypothesis, but

the former is not. Overall, there is no pervasive evidence that the SOX event days had an adverse impact

on foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges.

    Models 2 and 9 are estimated for all deregistering firms. For both regressions, there is a significant

negative abnormal return associated with a date when an announcement was made that foreign-listed

firms would not be exempted from some SOX rules. For the equally-weighted portfolio, there is an

abnormal return of -0.984% (t-statisic of 2.39) for the announcement of no exemption to SEC Rule 302

(Event 12) and an abnormal return of 0.500% that is insignificant for the announcement of no exemptions

to Rules 404, 406, and 407 (Event 14). For the value-weighted portfolio, there is an insignificant

abnormal return of -0.343% for the former announcement and an abnormal return of -0.578% significant

at the 10% level for the latter announcement. Though these results are consistent with the loss of

competitiveness hypothesis, in Model 9 there is a large positive and significant abnormal return on the

day of the Senate Committee decision (Event 5) that is hard to interpret in the context of that hypothesis.

We also estimate these regressions separately for the firms that deregister before Rule 12h-6 (Models 3

and 10) and those that deregister under that rule (Models 4 and 11). The evidence is mixed. For the

equally-weighted portfolios, the firms that use Rule 12h-6 appear to be sensitive to announcements

concerning potential exemptions from SOX. However, this is not the case for the value-weighted

portfolios. The evidence for equally-weighted returns is weaker for the firms that deregister before Rule

12h-6.


                                                     28
    The last three sets of regressions for both the equally-weighted and value-weighted portfolio returns

are long positions in the deregistering firms and short positions in portfolios of exchange-listed firms that

did not deregister (in Models 5 and 12, the deregistering firm portfolio includes all deregistering firms; in

6 and 13, it includes firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6; and, in 7 and 14, it includes firms that

deregistered under Rule 12h-6). The results show again some evidence that deregistering firms experience

worse returns on dates of announcements that foreign firms would not be exempted from SOX rules for

the equally-weighted portfolios. For the value-weighted portfolios, the results are weaker. Moreover, the

deregistering firms do better on two other dates when they would be predicted to have worse returns

(Events 5 and 9) and they do worse on two dates when they would be predicted to do better (Events 10

and 13). On balance, it seems that the smaller firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6, but not the larger

firms, were affected more strongly by announcements concerning the applicability of SOX to cross-listed

firms than other cross-listed firms.

    In Panel b, we aggregate all the SOX dates into one SOX dummy variable. We use a value of -1 for

the days that should have positive abnormal returns according to the loss of competitiveness hypothesis.

Again, we find different results for the equally-weighted and value-weighted portfolios. For the equally-

weighted portfolios, the deregistering firms were affected adversely by the SOX events and the non-

deregistering firms were not. There is no evidence that SOX had any effect for any group of firms when

we use value-weighted portfolio returns. In Panel c, we redefine our composite SOX dummy variable for

a subset of SOX events; namely those identified by Litvak (2007) in her Table 1 as important. These dates

are highlighted in bold in Panel a of Table 4. The evidence is mixed. There is some evidence that the SOX

announcements had a negative impact when we consider the returns of equally-weighted portfolios and

there is evidence that the impact is worse for firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6 than it is for firms




                                                     29
that do not deregister. However, there is no evidence for the value-weighted portfolios that these SOX

announcements had a negative impact on the stock prices of foreign firms.26

     What we learn from these different specifications is that inferences about whether or not SOX had an

adverse impact on foreign firms listed on U.S. exchanges or on deregistering firms are model sensitive.

For example, Litvak (2007) concludes that SOX had a negative impact on the stock prices of foreign

firms with U.S. exchange listings. However, her approach gives equal weight to each observation or uses

an equally-weighted benchmark.27 The results we report in Table 4 with equally-weighted portfolios are

consistent with the results reported in Litvak (2007), but the results with value-weighted portfolios show

that there is little evidence to support the conclusion that SOX had a negative impact on stock prices.

Since an equally-weighted portfolio gives more weight to small firms than a value-weighted portfolio, it

seems reasonable to say that the results are consistent with the view that the aggregate wealth losses

associated with SOX were not economically significant but that there is some evidence that the smallest

firms were affected adversely. When we compare firms that deregistered with those that did not, there is

evidence that firms that deregistered under Rule 12h-6 were affected more adversely by SOX when we

use equally-weighted portfolios, but none when we use value-weighted portfolios. Our evidence for

foreign firms is therefore consistent with some evidence for U.S. firms showing that smaller firms were

affected adversely by SOX but not the larger firms (e.g. Chhaochharia and Grinstein, 2007). These

conclusions are robust if we restrict our sample firms to non-financial firms with assets of more than $100

million.




26
   To understand better the role of portfolio weighting in the results, we also estimate regressions in Panel c using an
equally-weighted portfolio as the dependent variable and a value-weighted portfolio as the benchmark portfolio. The
results are similar to those reported in the table.
27
   The t-statistics on the SOX dummies reported in Litvak’s Table 6 are also likely overstated. The regressions are
estimated using ordinary least squares, which is problematic when the regression uses firm-level data and event
dates common across all firms. The standard errors do not account for the cross-correlation of the error terms across
firms, which is likely to be substantial around the event period.


                                                          30
b. Stock-Price Reactions of Deregistering Firms to Exchange Act Rule 12h-6

     Did the firms that deregistered in 2007 and 2008 under Rule 12h-6 react favorably to the

announcements of the new rules to ease the process toward termination of registration? The loss of

competitiveness theory would predict it would be so since the market at that time would have understood

well the costs of the new provisions of SOX and likely knew that these firms would have a good chance

to be eligible to exercise the option to deregister under the new rules.

     To answer this question, we use the same equally- and value-weighted portfolios of the sample of

deregistering firms (Rule 12h-6 firms only) and benchmark portfolios of the other exchange-listed foreign

firms and Level 1 OTC/Rule 144a private placement firms. There are three events we consider in the

analysis: (a) December 14, 2005, which was the date of the announcement of the proposed rule,28 (b)

December 13, 2006, which was the date of the announcement of the re-proposed rule after the extended

comment period,29 and (c) March 21, 2007, when the Commission officially adopted the rule. We use the

same methodology as the previous section considering each deregistration event date with a separate

dummy variable and a condensed event dummy for all three events.

     Table 5 provides our estimates of the stock-price reactions to the announcements related to Rule 12h-

6. We find that no date that has a significant stock-price reaction. The result for exchange-listed firms for

the last announcement date is not surprising in light of the work of Fernandes, Lel, and Miller (2009).30

The result for deregistering firms is hard to reconcile with the loss of competitiveness theory since the

market would presumably have anticipated that these firms would benefit from the announcements.

However, the estimates are not supportive of the bonding theory either. With that theory, we would

expect a negative announcement return for the rule change since allowing firms to renege more easily on

the bonding provided by adherence to U.S. laws and regulations would decrease the value of a U.S.

28
   See Release No. 34-53020 and as it applies to 17 Code of Federal Regulation Parts 200, 232, 240 and 249.
http://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/34-53020.pdf.
29
   See Release No. 34-55005 at http://www.sec.gov/rules/proposed/2006/34-55005.pdf.
30
   Fernandes, Lel and Miller (2009) focus on the March 27, 2007 date, but also consider several dates related the
passage of Rule 12h-6, including the December 14, 2005 first proposal, the December 13, 2006 re-proposal of the
rule, and a January 25, 2005 announcement that the SEC was considering a revision. They also find that the stock
prices of firms do not appear to have reacted to these earlier announcements.


                                                       31
listing. At the same time, Fernandes, Lel, and Miller (2009) find that the stock-price reactions are

negative and significant for firms from countries with weak governance and disclosure. They conclude

that this result is consistent with the bonding theory. We repeated the analysis with the more restrictive

sample that excludes financial firms are requires assets of at least $100 million and with longer event

windows and our basic results are unchanged.31



c. Stock-Price Reactions of Deregistering Firms to their Deregistration Announcements

     We now turn to the stock-price reactions around firms’ deregistration announcements. We estimate

abnormal returns using three-day market model residuals. Our benchmark portfolio consists of all non-

U.S. firms with Level 1 and Rule 144a ADRs for Panel a and all non-deregistering foreign firms cross-

listed on U.S. exchanges in Panel b. We lose four firms from the sample of firms that deregistered prior to

Rule 12h-6 because they do not have returns data available in Datastream around their respective

deregistration announcement dates. Further, we exclude six firms that made other potentially confounding

announcements on the same day that they announced their deregistration decisions. We compute t-

statistics and account for cross-sectional dependence as in Brown and Warner (1985).

     The results are reported in Table 6. We first consider the sample of all deregistering firms. Regardless

of the benchmark portfolio used, the mean abnormal return is negative (between -1.11% and -1.26%) and

significant at least at the 5% level. All binomial tests are significant as well. When we turn to the pre-Rule

12h-6 deregistering firms, we find larger negative abnormal returns (-1.92% to -2.15%). Finally, when we

turn to the Rule 12h-6 deregistering firms, the average abnormal return is not significantly different from

zero and is significantly smaller than the average abnormal return of the firms that deregistered before the
31
   Although the results are similar when we use a longer event window, it is still possible that the market anticipated
the rule change announcements. On February 9, 2004, the European Association for Listed Companies submitted a
letter to the SEC complaining about the deregistration rules. On various occasions prior to the new rule proposal in
December 2005, the SEC announced it was considering changes to the rules, but did not provide any details. For
example, in a speech on January 25, 2005, SEC Chairman William Donaldson stated that he “expects the SEC to
consider whether there should be a new approach to the deregistration process for foreign private issuers” and, on
October 7, 2005, SEC Commissioner Cynthia Glassman stated that “I fully support the staff's initiative to take a
fresh look at our rules in order to ease the deregistration process, so long as any new approach continues to protect
US investors.” See “SEC set to make delisting easier for foreign firms” Reuters News (January 25, 2005) and
“The SEC in a global marketplace: current issues” States News Service (October 7, 2005).


                                                          32
rule. However, the binomial test is significant for the Rule 12h-6 firms. In all cases, we can reject the

hypothesis that the average or median abnormal return is positive. Though we do not show the results in

the table, we also evaluated the abnormal returns for each calendar year. The average abnormal return is

negative every year, although in 2007 the average abnormal return is small in magnitude (only -0.15%).

Strikingly, however, the average abnormal return for 2008 is -1.52% with a t-statistic of -1.11. The lack of

precision could stem from the fact that there are only 17 observations in 2008, but, in any case, one

should be careful in interpreting the average abnormal return for that year. Interestingly, this average

abnormal return is more similar to the returns before Rule 12h-6 than to the average abnormal return for

2007.

    We performed several robustness checks on these results. First, we excluded financial firms and firms

with assets of less than $100 million. This size requirement has a minimal impact on the Rule 12h-6

sample, but, not surprisingly, it has a bigger impact on the sample of firms that deregistered prior to that

rule, where we lose about 30% of the firms. The results for the Rule 12h-6 firms are similar to those

reported in the table, while those for the firms that deregistered prior to this rule are weaker. We also

investigate the sensitivity of the results to the choice of event date. For firms that deregistered prior to the

rule change, in 43 out of 67 cases, delisting and deregistration are announced on the same date, while for

firms that deregistered under Rule 12h-6, the announcement date is the same for 62 out of 73 firms.

Because delisting could be the first signal that the firm plans to deregister, we use the delisting

announcement as the event date if it is before the deregistration announcement. The results are similar to

those reported in the table, although the announcement returns for firms that deregistered prior to the rule

change are smaller in magnitude (around -1.60% with t-statistics of 1.80).

    We next turn to regressions to understand the cross-sectional variation in abnormal returns. These

regressions are presented in Table 7. The format of the table is exactly the same as the format of Table 2,

although we add two additional variables in these regressions: “U.S. trading %” which is the percentage

of the total average daily trading volume (home market plus U.S. market) that takes place in the U.S. and

a “SOX cost dummy” which equals one for the 28 firms that mentioned compliance costs associated with


                                                      33
SOX as a motivation for the deregistration decision in their respective press releases. We estimate the

regressions using firm characteristics from the year before deregistration. We show results for two

benchmark portfolios: the equally-weighted portfolio of Level 1 OTC/Rule 144a cross-listed firms and

the value-weighted portfolio of exchange cross-listed firms that did not deregister.

    Model 1 includes all deregistering firms. The most reliable result we find is that firms with larger

financing deficits have significantly larger negative share price reactions. That is, shareholders experience

a wealth loss in firms with greater financing needs that choose to pursue deregistration from U.S. markets.

This finding is consistent with the finding in Table 2 earlier that firms with such deficits are much less

likely to pursue a deregistration in the first place. The finding is robust to the benchmark portfolio used in

the specification of abnormal returns (including unreported specifications of value-weighted portfolios of

Rule 144a/OTC benchmark firms and equally-weighted portfolios of exchange listed benchmark firms).

Few of the other variables are reliably significant in these regressions. Part of the reason may be that the

other proxies for growth opportunities, such as sales growth, Tobin’s q, global industry q, and ROA are

correlated. To assess this possibility, we evaluate alternative model specifications. For example, if we

exclude Tobin’s q, ROA, and the financing deficit variables, the negative coefficient on sales growth

becomes significant. In Model 2, we include a dummy variable that equals one for firms that deregister

under Rule 12h-6. This dummy variable is not significant and the other results are unchanged.

    The results differ for firms that deregister before the adoption of Rule 12h-6 (Model 3) and those that

deregister under that rule (Model 4). We find that for firms that deregister prior to Rule 12h-6, the

coefficient on the financing deficit remains negative and significant. For firms that deregister under Rule

12h-6, the coefficient on the financing deficit, though still negative, is no longer significant. However,

deregistering firms under Rule 12h-6 with higher sales growth do experience worse announcement

returns, even when including the alternative proxies for growth opportunities in the specification (at least

with the Rule 144a/OTC firms as the benchmark portfolio). In Table 1, we show that Rule 12h-6

deregistrants are larger in size and have smaller financing surpluses than the pre-Rule 12h-6 deregistrants,




                                                     34
which could explain why share price reactions are more acutely sensitive to financing needs for pre-Rule

12h-6 deregistrants and to sales growth for Rule 12h-6 deregistrants.

    Overall these results are consistent with the bonding hypothesis. With that hypothesis, bonding is

more valuable for firms with better growth opportunities that have to be financed externally. In all of our

regressions, sales growth consistently has a negative coefficient (though it is only significant in the

regressions for the Rule 12h-6 subsample in the regressions reported in the table) and we always find that

one of the variables that proxies for growth opportunities or financing need is significantly negatively

related to the stock-price reaction to the deregistration announcement. However, one alternative

explanation of the sales growth and financing deficit results could be that the market infers from the

announcement that the firm’s growth opportunities are poorer than expected or their financing needs are

more severe. Leuz, Triantis, and Wang (2008) test this hypothesis for a sample of U.S. firms that

deregister. The problem with this explanation in our context, however, is that it requires a theory other

than bonding to rationalize why the market would have such a reaction. Admittedly, there is a cost saving

from delisting and deregistering, but that saving would seem small enough for the firms in our sample

such that it is unlikely to support such a signaling outcome.

    We further investigate whether firms attribute their decision to deregister partly to SOX and U.S.

regulatory burdens. For 28 of the 134 firms included in the event study, we find evidence of this, based on

statements made in the press release of the deregistration announcement and set the SOX cost dummy

equal to one for these firms. This dummy variable has a negative coefficient in seven out of eight of the

models, but it is never statistically significant.

    The evidence in Table 7 suggests that deregistration is typically bad news for shareholders of firms

with good growth opportunities or with financing needs. Such firms are those for which a U.S. listing

with SEC registration is likely to be more valuable. Hence, it might not be surprising that the market

would react poorly to the announcement that such firms chose to deregister. As we noted in Table 2, the

firms that deregister under Rule 12h-6 are different from those that deregistered before.




                                                     35
5. Conclusions

    In this paper, we analyze a sample of firms that chose to deregister from the SEC and leave U.S.

equity markets over the period from 2002 through 2008. Because it was extremely difficult to deregister

before March 27, 2007 when the SEC adopted its new Exchange Act Rule 12h-6 to facilitate

deregistration, foreign firms that wished to deregister most likely did not do so because they were unable

to meet the necessary requirements. When Rule 12h-6 came into effect, deregistration became

substantially easier and the change in the rules was followed by a large spike in the number of

deregistrations that did not extend into the following year. We investigate why foreign firms deregister,

how the rule change affected firms’ deregistration decisions, and what the economic consequences are of

their decisions to deregister.

    Two theories offer predictions about the characteristics of and consequences for deregistering firms.

The first theory follows directly from the bonding theory of cross-listing that predicts corporate insiders

value a listing when their firm has valuable growth opportunities that they can finance on better terms by

committing to the laws and rules that govern U.S. markets. The listing comes at a cost to insiders since it

limits their ability to extract private benefits from their controlling position. If a firm is no longer

expected to require outside finance because its growth opportunities have been taken advantage of or

because they have disappeared, a listing is no longer valuable for insiders. Consequently, firms that

deregister should be those with poor growth opportunities, have little need for external capital, and have

performed poorly. Deregistration should be advantageous for insiders, but not for minority shareholders,

so that it should be accompanied by a negative abnormal return. Further, this negative return should be

worse for firms with higher growth opportunities and more need for external capital. With the bonding

theory, the value of a cross-listing is higher for a firm if it is harder for the firm to deregister.

Consequently, the passage of new Exchange Act Rule 12h-6 should have had an adverse impact on cross-

listed firms. Like Fernandes, Lel, and Miller (2009), we fail to find support for this prediction of the

bonding theory for the overall rule change. However, they further investigate the cross-sectional reaction




                                                    36
to the announcement and find that the firms that in theory would benefit the most from bonding reacted

more poorly to the announcement.

    We also consider a hypothesis which we call the loss of competitiveness theory. This theory predicts

that firms deregister because the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, and possibly other regulatory

developments, reduced the net benefits of a U.S. listing so that, for some firms, the value of a listing

became negative. With this explanation, foreign firms should have experienced wealth losses from SOX,

the firms that deregistered should have experienced worse wealth losses, and the introduction of the new

deregistration rules and the deregistration announcements themselves should increase shareholder wealth.

It is possible, however, that the deadweight regulatory costs that motivate the loss of competitiveness

theory could have led to deregistration activity even if the bonding hypothesis is correct, in that these

costs might have led cross-listings to stop being advantageous for some firms.

    We find no unambiguous evidence supportive of the loss of competitiveness hypothesis. The clearest

evidence in favor of this hypothesis would be that deregistering firms benefit from deregistration and

were adversely affected by SOX. We find no evidence that the minority shareholders of deregistering

firms benefit from deregistration. There is some evidence that these firms were affected adversely by

SOX when we use equally-weighted portfolios, but not when we use value-weighted portfolios and value-

weighed portfolios are arguably the correct way to measure the overall economic impact since they reflect

the overall value change of these firms. In contrast, we find evidence that is consistent with the bonding

hypothesis. Specifically, the deregistering firms are poor performers, have lower growth opportunities,

and have a financing surplus, all characteristics that reduce the value of a cross-listing with the bonding

theory. Further, we find in most tests that the market reacts negatively to the announcements of SEC

deregistration. Finally, we show that the stock-price reactions are worse for firms with better growth

opportunities and with greater financing deficits, which are the firms that are still likely to benefit more

from bonding.




                                                    37
References

Berger, Philip G., Feng Li, and Franco Wong, 2005, The impact of Sarbanes–Oxley on cross-listed
        companies, working paper, University of Chicago.

Binder, John J., 1985, On the use of the multivariate regression model in event studies, Journal of
        Accounting Research 23, 370-383.

Brown, Stephen J., and Jerold B. Warner, 1985, Using daily stock returns: the case of event studies,
       Journal of Financial Economics 14, 3-31.

Chhaochharia, Vidhi, and Yaniv Grinstein, 2007, Corporate governance and firm value: the impact of the
      2002 governance rules, Journal of Finance 62, 1789-1825.

Chaplinsky, Susan, and Latha Ramchand, 2008, From listing to delisting: foreign firms’ entry and exit
       from the U.S., working paper, University of Virginia.

Chemmanur, Thomas J. and Paolo Fulghieri, 2006, Competition and cooperation among exchanges: a
     theory of cross-listing and endogenous listing standards, Journal of Financial Economics, 82,
     455-489.

Coffee, John C., 1999, The future as history: the prospects for global convergence in corporate
        governance and its implications, Northwestern University Law Review 93, 641-708.

Coffee, John C., 2007, Law and the market: the impact of enforcement, University of Pennsylvania Law
        Review 156, 299-311..

Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, 2006, Interim report of the Committee for Capital Markets
      Regulation, Available at: www.capmktsreg.org.

Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, 2007, The competitive position of the U.S. public equity
      market, Available at: www.capmktsreg.org.

Dahlquist, Magnus, Lee Pinkowitz, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2003, Corporate governance
       and the home bias, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 38, 87-110.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, The law and
       economics of self-dealing, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430-465.

Doidge, Craig, 2004, U.S. cross-listings and the private benefits of control: evidence from dual-class
       firms, Journal of Financial Economics 72, 519-553.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2004, Why are foreign firms listed in the U.S.
       worth more? Journal of Financial Economics 71, 205-238.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, René M. Stulz, Karl V. Lins, and Darius P. Miller, 2009, Private
       benefits of control, ownership, and the cross-listing decision, Journal of Finance 64, 425-466.

Doidge, Craig, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René M. Stulz, 2009, Has New York become less competitive
       than London in global markets? Evaluating foreign listing choices over time, 2009, Journal of
       Financial Economics 91, 253-277.



                                                 38
Duarte, Jefferson, Katie Kong, Lance A. Young, and Stephan Siegel, 2007, Foreign listings, US equity
        markets, and the impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, working paper, University of Washington.

Engel, Ellen, Rachel M. Hayes, and Xue Wang, 2007, The Sarbanes–Oxley Act and firms’ going-private
        decisions, Journal of Accounting and Economics 44, 116-145.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds,
       Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fernandes, Nuno G., Darius P. Miller, and Ugur Lel, 2009, Escape from New York: the market impact of
       loosening disclosure requirements, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Frank, Murray Z., and Vidhan K. Goyal, 2003, Testing the pecking order theory of capital structure,
       Journal of Financial Economics 67, 217-248.

Greene, Edward F,, and Robert Underhill, 2008, Deregistration issues in the US for foreign private
       issuers, Capital Markets Law Journal 2, 115-132.

Hail, Luzi, and Christian Leuz, 2009, Cost of capital effects and changes in growth expectations around
        U.S. cross-listings, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Hostak, Peter, Emre Karaoglu, Thomas Lys, and Yong Yang, 2007, An examination of the impact of the
        Sarbanes-Oxley Act on the attractiveness of U.S. capital markets for foreign firms, working
        paper, Northwestern University.

Ince, Ozgur S., and R. Burt Port, 2006, Individual equity return data from Thomson Datastream: Handle
        with care, Journal of Financial Research 29, 463-479.

Karolyi, G. Andrew, 2006, The world of cross-listings and cross-listings of the world: Challenging
        conventional wisdom, Review of Finance 10, 99-152.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, Law and
       finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

Lel, Ugur, and Darius P. Miller, 2008, International cross-listing, firm performance and top management
       turnover: a test of the bonding hypothesis, Journal of Finance 63, 1897-1937.

Leuz, Christian, 2007, Was the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 really this costly? A discussion of evidence
       from event returns and going-private decisions, Journal of Accounting and Economics 44, 146-
       165.

Leuz, Christian, Alexander J. Triantis, and Tracy Wang, 2008, Why do firms go dark? Causes and
       economic consequences of voluntary SEC deregistrations, Journal of Accounting and Economics
       45, 181-208.

Li, Haidan, Morton Pincus, and Sonja Rego, 2008, Market reaction to events surrounding the Sarbanes-
        Oxley Act of 2002 and earnings management, Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming.

Li, Xi, 2007, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and cross-listed foreign private issuers, working paper, University
         of Miami.

Litvak, Kate, 2007, The effect of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act on non-U.S. companies cross-listed in the U.S.,
        Journal of Corporate Finance 13, 195-228.
                                                  39
Liu, Shinhua, 2004, The impact of involuntary foreign delistings: An empirical analysis, working paper,
        Texas A&M International University.

Liu, Shinhua, and John Stowe, 2005, The shareholder wealth effects of voluntary foreign delistings: An
        empirical analysis, Applied Financial Economics Letters 1, 199-204.

Macey, Jonathan R., Maureen O'Hara, and David Pompilio, 2005, Down and out in the stock market: The
       law and finance of the delisting process, working paper, Cornell University.

McKinsey & Company, 2007, Sustaining New York’s and the US’ global financial services leadership,
      Available at: http://www.senate.gov/~schumer/.

Marosi, Andras and Nadia Massoud, 2007, Why do firms go dark? Journal of Financial and Quantitative
        Analysis 42, 421–442

Marosi, Andras, and Nadia Massoud, 2008, ‘You can enter, but you cannot leave…’ – U.S. securities
       markets and foreign firms, Journal of Finance 63, 2477-2506.

Piotroski, Joseph D. and Suraj Srinivasan, 2008, Regulation and bonding: the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the
        flow of international listings, Journal of Accounting Research 46, 383-425.

Pistor, Katharina, Martin Raiser, and Stanlislaw Gelfer, 2000, Law and finance in transition economies,
        Economics of Transition 8, 325-368.

Reese, William, and Michael Weisbach, 2002, Protection of minority shareholder interests, cross-listings
       in the United States, and subsequent equity offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 65-104.

Rezaee, Zabihollah, and Pankaj Jain, 2006, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 and security market
       behavior: Early evidence, Contemporary Accounting Research 23, 629-654.

Schipper, Katherine, and Rex Thompson, 1983, The impact of merger-related regulations on the
       shareholders of acquiring firms, Journal of Accounting Research 21, 184-221.

Schwert, G. William, 1981, Using financial data to measure effects of regulation, Journal of Law and
       Economics 24, 121-158.

Smith, Geoffrey, 2008, A look at the impact of Sarbanes-Oxley on cross-listed firms, working paper,
       University of Illinois.

Stulz, René M., 1999, Globalization, corporate finance, and the cost of capital, Journal of Applied
        Corporate Finance 12, 8-25.

U.S. Chamber of Commerce, 2008, Strengthening U.S. capital markets: A challenge for all Americans,
       Center for Capital Markets Competitiveness, Washington, DC.

White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroscedasticity consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test for
       heterescedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.

Witmer, Jonathan L., 2006, Why do firms cross-(de)list? An examination of the determinants and effects
       of cross-delisting, working paper, Bank of Canada.



                                                  40
Zhang, Ivy X., 2007, Economic consequences of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Journal of Accounting
        and Economics 44, 74-115.

Zingales, Luigi, 2007, Is the U.S. capital market losing its competitive edge? working paper, University
        of Chicago.




                                                  41
Table 1. Summary Statistics.
This table compares the characteristics of the 144 non-U.S. firms that deregistered from major U.S. exchanges with the characteristics of non-U.S. firms with
cross-listings on U.S. exchanges that did not deregister. There are 71 firms that deregistered between 2002 and March 2007 prior to Rule 12h-6: 9 in 2002; 14 in
2003; 9 in 2004; 14 in 2005; 23 in 2006; and 2 in 2007. There are 73 firms that deregistered using Rule 12h-6 between March 21, 2007 and December 31 30,
2008: 55 in 2007 and 18 in 2008. Each year there are between 447 and 651 exchange-listed firms that did not deregister between 2002 and 2008 with data on
firm characteristics. Firm characteristics are compared in the year prior to deregistration and the data is pooled across two sub-periods, 2002-March 2007 (Panel
a) and April 2007-2008 (Panel b). The Excess median is computed by subtracting the median value for a given characteristic for exchange-listed firms from the
deregistering firm’s characteristic. The table reports the median of this difference. Firm-level data is from the Worldscope database. Sales growth is inflation
adjusted two-year sales growth (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), global industry q is the median global industry q, Tobin’s q is computed as ((Total Assets –
Book Equity) + Market Value of Equity) / Total Assets (all variables are in local currency), the financing deficit is computed as the sum of cash dividends,
investments, change in net working capital less internal cash flow, scaled by total assets (multiplied by 10 in the table for reporting purposes), total assets are in $
millions, leverage is defined as total debt divided by total assets, ROA is return on assets, and ownership is the data item “closely-held shares” from Worldscope.
Common law is a dummy variable that equals one if a country’s legal origin is based on common law. Legal is anti-director × rule of law, from Djankov et al.
(2008) and La Porta et al. (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) and stock market capitalization to GDP are from the World Bank WDI Database. *, **, and ***
indicate that the deregistering firms’ characteristics are significantly different from the exchange-listed firms’ characteristics in a given period at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels, respectively. #, ##, and ### indicate that the Excess median for firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6 is significantly different from the
Excess median for firms that deregistered after Rule 12h-6.
                                          Panel a. Pre-Rule 12h-6 period (2002-March 2007)                                   Panel b. Rule 12h-6 period (April 2007-2008)

                                      Deregistering firms                        Exchange-listed firms                  Deregistering firms                    Exchange-listed firms
                                                              Excess                                                                              Excess
                        Mean                  Median                              Mean        Median       Mean                Median                           Mean        Median
                                                              median                                                                              median
Sales growth            0.04*                  0.02***         -0.04               0.11         0.06       0.05***              0.04***            -0.05         0.13         0.09
Tobin’s q               1.54    *
                                                1.25           -0.10               1.74         1.35       1.69   ***
                                                                                                                                 1.42              -0.12         2.01         1.53
Global industry q        1.26                   1.19           0.01    #
                                                                                   1.26         1.19       1.40   ***
                                                                                                                                1.40    *
                                                                                                                                                   -0.02         1.50         1.41
Financing deficit       -0.02   **
                                              -0.03   ***
                                                               -0.06   ##
                                                                                   0.43         0.03      -0.06   ***
                                                                                                                                -0.04   **
                                                                                                                                                   -0.01         0.60         0.07
Total assets          5325.65       ***
                                              393.32   ***
                                                             -1062.28      ###
                                                                                 31972.32      1455.6    26304.49      ***
                                                                                                                              6556.72       ***
                                                                                                                                                  4552.11      58480.7      2004.62
Leverage                 0.22                   0.17          -0.04   ###
                                                                                   0.23         0.21       0.27   ***
                                                                                                                                0.28   ***
                                                                                                                                                    0.1          0.20         0.18
ROA                    -0.07   ***
                                               0.02   ***
                                                              -0.02   ###
                                                                                   0.01         0.04        0.05                 0.06              0.01          0.03         0.05
Ownership                0.37                   0.31           0.02   ##
                                                                                   0.33         0.28       0.23   **
                                                                                                                                0.21   **
                                                                                                                                                   -0.04         0.32         0.25
Common law              0.46    *
                                               0.00   **
                                                               -1.00               0.58         1.00       0.36   ***
                                                                                                                                0.00   ***
                                                                                                                                                   -1.00         0.57         1.00
Legal                   30.79                  31.43           -0.17               31           31.6       31.84   *
                                                                                                                                35.00              3.40         29.89        31.60
GNP / capita           10.02   ***
                                              10.17   ***
                                                               0.14    #
                                                                                   9.65        10.03      10.46   ***
                                                                                                                                10.51              0.01          9.90        10.50
Market cap / GDP        0.91   **
                                                0.95           -0.02               1.02         0.97       1.28   *
                                                                                                                                1.18   **
                                                                                                                                                   -0.16         1.42         1.34



                                                                                               42
Table 2. Multi-Period Logit Regressions: The Characteristics of Deregistering Firms.
The logit models estimate the probability of deregistration in year t, given that the firm has not yet deregistered, over
the period from 2002 to 2008. The dependent variable equals one for the 144 non-U.S. firms that deregistered from
major U.S. exchanges in the year of deregistration (71 firms prior to Rule 12h-6 and 73 firms after Rule 12h-6).
After firms deregister they are removed from the dataset. Model 1 includes all deregistering firms. Model 2 is the
same as Model 1, but adds a Rule 12h-6 dummy variable that equals one for firms that deregistered under that rule.
Model 3 is estimated over 2002-2006 and excludes firms that deregistered after Rule 12h-6. Model 4 is estimated
over 2007-2008 and excludes firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6. Firm-level data is from the Worldscope
database. All independent variables are lagged by one year. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth
(winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), Tobin’s q is computed as ((Total Assets – Book Equity) + Market Value of
Equity) / Total Assets (all variables are in local currency), global industry q is the median global industry q, the
financing deficit is computed as the sum of cash dividends, investments, change in net working capital less internal
cash flow, scaled by total assets, total assets are in $ thousands, leverage is defined as total debt divided by total
assets, ROA is the return on assets, and ownership is the data item “closely-held shares” from Worldscope. Legal is
anti-director × rule of law, from Djankov et al. (2008) and La Porta et al. (1998). Log of GNP per capita ($) and
stock market capitalization to GDP are from the World Bank WDI Database. The t-statistics, in parentheses are
adjusted for clustering on firms – they are computed assuming observations are independent across firms, but not
within firms. Pseudo-R2 is a goodness-of-fit measure based on the difference between unrestricted and restricted
likelihood functions. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. #,
##, and ### indicate statistical significance for a chi-squared test that tests whether the coefficients are equal
between the pre-Rule12h-6 (Model 3) and Rule 12h-6 (Model 4) periods and “Chi-squared” indicates the joint test
that all coefficients are equal between pre-Rule 12h-6 and Rule 12h-6 periods.
                                      Model 1               Model 2                Model 3               Model 4
                                  All deregistering    All deregistering       Pre-Rule 12h-6           Rule 12h-6
                                        firms                 firms          deregistering firms deregistering firms
 Constant                            -18.804               -13.902                -12.237                     -13.931
                                     (5.06)***             (4.95)***              (3.15)***                   (3.01)***
 Sales growth                         -0.525                -0.590                 -0.254                      -1.503
                                      (1.04)                (1.12)                 (0.39)                      (1.91)*
 Tobin’s q                            -0.264                -0.248                 -0.328                      -0.228
                                     (2.31)**              (2.19)**                (1.77)*                     (1.65)*
 Global industry q                     0.241                -0.495                  0.598                      -0.998
                                      (0.74)                (1.22)                 (1.19)                     (1.59)##
 Financing deficit                    -2.190                -2.251                 -2.586                      -2.201
                                     (2.72)***             (3.04)***               (1.86)*                    (2.93)***
 Log(Assets)                          -0.145                -0.170                 -0.247                      -0.124
                                     (3.39)***             (3.95)***              (3.63)***                  (2.05)**, #
 Leverage                             -0.025                 0.138                 -1.094                       1.469
                                      (0.05)                (0.24)                 (1.11)                    (1.77)*, ##
 ROA                                  -0.433                -0.627                 -1.378                       1.351
                                      (0.53)                (0.78)                 (1.63)                      (0.92)
 Ownership                             0.259                 0.252                  1.335                      -0.705
                                      (0.60)                (0.56)                (2.11)**                    (1.13)##
 Legal                                -0.015                -0.005                  0.021                      -0.024
                                      (1.30)                (0.46)                 (1.07)                    (1.67)*, #
 Stock market cap / GDP               -0.247                -0.479                 -0.654                      -0.405
                                      (1.57)               (2.17)**               (2.40)**                     (1.26)
 Log(GNP)                              1.818                 1.400                  1.133                       1.584
                                     (4.70)***             (4.78)***              (2.69)***                   (3.38)***
 Rule 12h-6 dummy                                            1.507
                                                           (6.31)***
 Chi-squared test (p-value)                                                                   61.55 (0.00)

 Number of observations               3384                   3384                   2527                       857
 Pseudo R2                           0.0931                 0.1370                 0.1144                     0.1269

                                                           43
Table 3. Return Performance of Deregistering Firms.
This table compares the return performance of firms that deregistered with non-U.S. firms cross-listed on U.S. exchanges that did not deregister. The regression,
RDereg, t – RBench, t = α + β × [RW_exUS, t – Rf,t) + γ × SMBt + δ × HMLt + εt, is estimated by OLS. RDereg is the weekly (Friday to Friday) U.S. dollar return on a
portfolio of firms that deregistered. RBench is return on a portfolio of non-U.S. firms cross-listed on U.S. exchanges that did not deregister. We require that this
portfolio have at least five firms. RW_exUS is the weekly U.S. dollar return on the world market portfolio (excluding the U.S.). SMB and HML are the size and
book to market factors from Fama and French (1993). Firms with less than 100 weekly observations, less than $10 million in total assets, and firms that delisted
prior to July 8, 2002 are excluded. Deregistering firms are included in the portfolio starting on January 5, 2001 and are excluded from the portfolio starting one
week prior to deregistration. Models (1) and (4) include all deregistering firms and the regression is estimated from January 5, 2001 – June 27, 2008. Models (2)
and (5) estimate the regression for the firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6 (over January 5, 2001 – Dec 15, 2006). Models (3) and (6) estimate the
regression for firms that deregistered after Rule 12h-6 (over January 5, 2001 – June 27, 2008). t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                 Equally-weighted portfolio returns                                      Value-weighted portfolio returns

                                  (1)                   (2)                    (3)                        (4)                   (5)                    (6)
                           All deregistering     Pre-Rule 12h-6            Rule 12h-6             All deregistering      Pre-Rule 12h-6            Rule 12h-6
                                 firms          deregistering firms    deregistering firms              firms           deregistering firms    deregistering firms

Constant                      -0.00238              -0.00241               -0.00127                   -0.00082              -0.00191                -0.00004
                              (3.17)***             (2.63)***               (2.03)**                    (1.27)               (1.78)*                  (0.07)
World market ex-U.S.           0.06489               0.09496                0.06154                   -0.04622               0.24007                -0.10168
                               (2.22)**              (2.10)**               (2.06)**                   (1.83)*              (4.53)***               (3.79)***
SMB                           -0.04543               0.06284               -0.14028                    0.06620               0.22073                 0.03695
                                (0.85)                (0.82)                (2.57)**                    (1.43)               (2.45)**                 (0.75)
HML                           -0.02229              -0.16274                0.05459                    0.22673              -0.02368                 0.30749
                                (0.38)               (2.00)**                (0.91)                   (4.47)***               (0.25)                (5.73)***
Rule 12h-6 dummy               0.00261                                                                 0.00158
                               (2.04)**                                                                 (1.42)

Number of observations           391                  309                    391                        391                   309                     391
Adjusted R2                     0.0159               0.0285                 0.0182                     0.0561                0.0902                  0.1147




                                                                                44
       Table 4. Stock-Price Reactions of Exchange-Listed firms and Deregistering Firms Around SOX Events.
       The regression Rp,t = α + β × Rb,t + δ´Event_Dummy + εt, is estimated from Jan 1, 2001 – Dec 31, 2003. Event_Dummy is a vector that includes dummy
       variables for the SOX event dates from Litvak (2007), Table 1. Events predicted to have a negative (positive) reaction have “-” (“+”) superscripts. Events in bold
       are identified by Litvak (2007) as important SOX events. In (1) and (8) Rp is the daily U.S. dollar return on a portfolio that includes all non-U.S. firms cross-
       listed on U.S. exchanges. In (2) and (9) the portfolio includes all firms that deregistered between 2002 and 2008; in (3) and (10) it includes all firms that
       deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6 between 2002 and 2006; in (4) and (11) it includes all firms that deregistered after Rule 12h-6 between 2007 and 2008. In (5) –
       (7) and (12) – (14) Rp is the difference in returns on the portfolio of deregistering firms (all deregistering firms; deregistering firms prior to Rule 12h-6;
       deregistering firms after Rule12h-6) and the portfolio of exchange-listed firms that did not deregister (denoted “Dereg – Exch”). Rb is the return on the
       benchmark portfolio that includes all non-U.S. firms listed in the U.S. via Level 1 or Rule 144a ADRs. Firms with less than 260 daily observations, less than $10
       million in total assets, and firms that delisted prior to July 8, 2002 are excluded. In Panel a, coefficients are estimated for each event dummy variable. In Panels b
       and c, a single dummy variable that equals one (negative one) on predicted negative (positive) events is defined. Coefficients on the constant and the event
       dummies are multiplied by 100. t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. The t-
       statistics for the coefficient on the benchmark portfolio are all significant at the 1% level (*’s not shown).

                                                                   Equally-weighted portfolio returns                                                      Value-weighted portfolio returns

                                                                        (3)        (4)                                                                         (10)       (11)
                                             (1)       (2)                                                                            (8)        (9)
                                                                        Pre-      Rule        (5)           (6)           (7)                                  Pre-      Rule        (12)      (13)      (14)
                                           Exch        All                                                                          Exch         All
Panel a. Individual SOX event dummies                                  Rule       12h-6     Dereg –       Dereg –       Dereg –                               Rule       12h-6      Dereg –   Dereg –   Dereg –
                                           listed     Dereg                                                                         listed      Dereg
                                                                       Dereg      Dereg      Exch          Exch          Exch                                 Dereg      Dereg       Exch      Exch      Exch
                                           firms      Firms                                                                         firms       Firms
                                                                       Firms      Firms                                                                       Firms      Firms

Constant                                   -0.026    -0.104           -0.122     -0.091     -0.095            -0.113    -0.081     -0.053       -0.051       -0.129      -0.027      0.002    -0.075     0.027
                                                          ***              ***        ***        ***              ***        ***         ***         **           ***                              **
                                           (1.34)    (3.93)           (3.40)     (3.52)     (4.91)        (3.96)        (3.83)     (2.79)      (2.37)        (3.02)      (1.25)     (0.13)    (2.15)    (1.21)
1- Early SEC                               -0.292    -0.503           -0.433     -0.559     -0.257            -0.187    -0.312     -0.093       -0.215       -0.574      -0.108     -0.139    -0.498    -0.031
                                           (0.95)     (1.23)           (0.78)     (1.40)     (0.86)           (0.42)     (0.96)     (0.31)      (0.64)        (0.86)     (0.32)     (0.49)    (0.91)    (0.09)
2- House Committee                         -0.351    -0.830           -1.560     -0.250     -0.582            -1.312    -0.001     -0.142       -0.232       -0.639      -0.125     -0.103    -0.510     0.005
                                                              **           ***                       *            ***
                                           (1.14)    (2.02)           (2.80)      (0.63)    (1.96)        (2.98)         (0.00)     (0.48)      (0.69)        (0.96)     (0.37)     (0.36)    (0.93)    (0.02)
3- Full House                              -0.231    -0.344           -0.618     -0.124     -0.137            -0.411     0.083     -0.147       -0.227       -0.254      -0.224     -0.091    -0.118    -0.088
                                           (0.97)     (1.08)           (1.43)     (0.40)     (0.59)           (1.21)     (0.33)     (0.64)      (0.87)        (0.49)     (0.85)     (0.42)    (0.28)    (0.33)
4- Senate Committee 1st announcement       -0.521    -0.321           -0.468     -0.202      0.243            0.096      0.362     -0.031       0.289         0.108      0.317       0.365     0.185     0.394
                                           (1.70)*    (0.78)           (0.84)     (0.51)     (0.82)           (0.22)     (1.11)     (0.11)      (0.85)        (0.16)     (0.93)     (1.29)    (0.34)    (1.15)
5- Senate Committee follow up              0.382      0.519            0.205      0.771      0.166            -0.148     0.418      0.611       1.029         0.913      1.046       0.478     0.361     0.494
                                           (1.25)     (1.26)           (0.37)    (1.94)*     (0.56)           (0.34)     (1.28)    (2.05)**    (3.04)***      (1.37)    (3.07)***   (1.69)*   (0.66)    (1.45)
6- WorldCom Announcement                   0.135      0.260            0.274      0.251      0.152            0.166      0.143      0.435       0.181         0.477      0.087      -0.290     0.007    -0.384
                                           (0.44)     (0.63)           (0.49)     (0.63)     (0.51)           (0.38)     (0.44)     (1.46)      (0.53)        (0.71)     (0.25)     (1.02)    (0.01)    (1.12)
7- Sarbanes Amendment                      -0.158    -0.221           -0.231     -0.213     -0.076            -0.086    -0.069     -0.125       -0.247        0.478      -0.399     -0.138     0.587    -0.290
                                           (0.59)     (0.62)           (0.48)     (0.62)     (0.30)           (0.23)     (0.24)     (0.49)      (0.84)        (0.83)     (1.35)     (0.57)    (1.24)    (0.98)

                                                                                                         45
       Table 4, continued.

                                                                  Equally-weighted portfolio returns                                                  Value-weighted portfolio returns

                                                                       (3)       (4)                                                                      (10)       (11)
                                              (1)       (2)                                                                         (8)      (9)
                                                                       Pre-     Rule         (5)          (6)           (7)                               Pre-      Rule       (12)        (13)        (14)
                                            Exch        All                                                                       Exch       All
Panel a. Individual SOX event dummies       listed     Dereg
                                                                      Rule      12h-6      Dereg –      Dereg –       Dereg –
                                                                                                                                  listed    Dereg
                                                                                                                                                         Rule       12h-6     Dereg –     Dereg –     Dereg –
                                                                      Dereg     Dereg       Exch         Exch          Exch                              Dereg      Dereg      Exch        Exch        Exch
                                            firms      Firms                                                                      firms     Firms
                                                                      Firms     Firms                                                                    Firms      Firms



8- Dorgan Amendment                        -0.281      -0.465        -0.658     -0.309      -0.222          -0.415     -0.067     -0.420    -0.334       -0.777     -0.274     0.098       -0.345      0.158
                                           (0.81)      (1.00)         (1.04)    (0.69)      (0.66)          (0.83)     (0.18)     (1.24)    (0.87)       (1.03)     (0.71)     (0.31)      (0.56)     (0.41)
9- Bills pass House and Senate             0.039        0.317         0.651     0.051       0.336           0.670      0.071      0.291     0.236        1.517      -0.054     -0.062      1.218      -0.352
                                           (0.16)      (0.96)         (1.46)    (0.16)      (1.41)          (1.90)*    (0.27)     (1.22)    (0.87)      (2.84)***   (0.20)     (0.28)     (2.78)***   (1.29)
  +
10 Conference Report                       -0.013       0.503         0.247     0.711       0.626           0.370      0.834      0.136     -0.437       -0.677     -0.403     -0.650      -0.889     -0.615
                                           (0.05)      (1.40)         (0.51)   (2.04)**    (2.40)**         (0.96)    (2.92)***   (0.52)    (1.49)       (1.17)     (1.36)    (2.65)***   (1.88)*     (2.08)**
11- President                              0.647        0.453         0.382     0.509       -0.236          -0.307     -0.180     0.185     0.146        -0.503     0.316      -0.043      -0.693      0.126
                                                  **
                                           (2.11)      (1.10)         (0.69)    (1.28)      (0.79)          (0.70)     (0.55)     (0.62)    (0.43)       (0.75)     (0.93)     (0.15)      (1.26)     (0.37)
  -
12 SEC Rule 302: no exemption              -0.223      -0.984        -0.792     -1.136      -0.923          -0.730     -1.074     -0.008    -0.343       -0.080     -0.446     -0.380      -0.117     -0.483
                                           (0.73)      (2.39)**       (1.42)   (2.85)***   (3.09)***        (1.66)*   (3.29)***   (0.03)    (1.01)       (0.12)     (1.30)     (1.34)      (0.21)     (1.41)
  +
13 Pitt suggests exemptions                0.309        0.481         0.303     0.628       0.209           0.031      0.356      0.400     0.022        -0.073     0.033      -0.427      -0.522     -0.417
                                           (1.30)      (1.51)         (0.70)   (2.03)**     (0.90)          (0.09)     (1.41)     (1.73)*   (0.09)       (0.14)     (0.12)    (1.95)*      (1.23)     (1.58)
  -
14 SEC rules 404, 406, 407 no exemptions   -0.148      -0.500        -0.096     -0.828      -0.427          -0.023     -0.755     -0.415    -0.578       -1.446     -0.425     -0.183      -1.051     -0.031
                                           (0.48)      (1.22)         (0.17)   (2.08)**     (1.43)          (0.05)    (2.32)**    (1.39)    (1.71)*     (2.17)**    (1.25)     (0.65)     (1.92)*     (0.09)
Portfolio: Level 1 & Rule 144a firms       1.101        1.263         1.353     1.193       0.196           0.287      0.127      1.159     1.069        1.509      0.945      -0.103      0.337      -0.227
                                           (42.49)     (36.37)       (28.75)   (35.49)      (7.81)          (7.72)     (4.60)     (56.05)   (45.52)     (32.60)     (40.00)    (5.24)      (8.88)     (9.60)

Number of observations                      782         782            782       782         782             782        782        782       782          782        782        782         782         782
Adjusted R2                                0.7074      0.6377        0.5242     0.6264     0.0821           0.0747    0.0422      0.8059    0.7341      0.5847      0.6819    0.0381      0.1020      0.1053




                                                                                                       46
       Table 4, continued

                                                             Equally-weighted portfolio returns                                                      Value-weighted portfolio returns

                                                                  (3)         (4)                                                                        (10)       (11)
                                          (1)       (2)                                                                          (8)       (9)
                                                                  Pre-       Rule         (5)          (6)          (7)                                  Pre-      Rule       (12)       (13)        (14)
Panel b. Condensed event dummy – all    Exch        All                                                                        Exch        All
                                                                 Rule        12h-6      Dereg –      Dereg –      Dereg –                               Rule       12h-6     Dereg –    Dereg –     Dereg –
SOX events included                     listed     Dereg                                                                       listed     Dereg
                                                                 Dereg       Dereg       Exch         Exch         Exch                                 Dereg      Dereg      Exch       Exch        Exch
                                        firms      Firms                                                                       firms      Firms
                                                                 Firms       Firms                                                                      Firms      Firms


Constant                               -0.025      -0.098        -0.122      -0.080      -0.088          -0.112    -0.070     -0.048      -0.056        -0.137     -0.032    -0.009      -0.090      0.015
                                       (1.31)     (3.77)***     (3.46)***   (3.16)***   (4.68)***    (4.02)***    (3.38)***   (2.57)**   (2.64)***     (3.25)***   (1.49)    (0.51)     (2.59)***   (0.71)
All events dummy                       -0.096      -0.249        -0.239      -0.258      -0.186          -0.175    -0.195     -0.019      0.038         0.167      0.005      0.065      0.194       0.032
                                       (1.25)     (2.42)**      (1.71)*     (2.58)**    (2.49)**         (1.59)   (2.37)**    (0.25)      (0.45)        (1.00)     (0.06)    (0.92)      (1.41)     (0.38)
Portfolio: Level 1 & Rule 144a firms    1.102      1.256         1.350       1.184       0.187           0.281     0.115       1.159      1.072         1.509      0.950     -0.099      0.338      -0.221
                                       (43.42)    (36.86)       (29.28)     (35.75)      (7.57)          (7.70)    (4.23)     (56.81)    (46.15)       (32.97)     (40.63)   (5.08)      (9.00)     (9.47)

Number of observations                   782        782           782         782         782             782       782         782        782           782        782       782         782        782
Adjusted R2                            0.7070     0.6354        0.5233      0.6213      0.0727           0.0710   0.0267      0.8054     0.7318        0.5816      0.679     0.0312      0.093      0.1016

                                                                  (3)         (4)                                                                        (10)       (11)
                                          (1)       (2)                                                                          (8)       (9)
                                                                  Pre-       Rule         (5)          (6)          (7)                                  Pre-      Rule       (12)       (13)        (14)
Panel c. Condensed event dummy –        Exch        All                                                                        Exch        All
                                                                 Rule        12h-6      Dereg –      Dereg –      Dereg –                               Rule       12h-6     Dereg –    Dereg –     Dereg –
important SOX events only               listed     Dereg                                                                       listed     Dereg
                                                                 Dereg       Dereg       Exch         Exch         Exch                                 Dereg      Dereg      Exch       Exch        Exch
                                        firms      Firms                                                                       firms      Firms
                                                                 Firms       Firms                                                                      Firms      Firms

Constant                               -0.024      -0.099        -0.125      -0.080      -0.092          -0.117    -0.072     -0.046      -0.052        -0.136     -0.027    -0.007      -0.091      0.018
                                       (1.22)     (3.83)***     (3.55)***   (3.17)***   (4.87)***    (4.22)***    (3.49)***   (2.46)**   (2.46)**      (3.24)***   (1.27)    (0.40)     (2.63)***   (0.84)
Important SOX events dummy             -0.211      -0.328        -0.242      -0.397      -0.142          -0.056    -0.211     -0.113      -0.091        0.212      -0.172     0.024      0.328      -0.056
                                       (2.17)**   (2.50)**       (1.36)     (3.12)***    (1.48)          (0.40)   (2.01)**    (1.18)      (0.84)        (0.99)     (1.57)    (0.27)     (1.87)*     (0.51)
Portfolio: Level 1 & Rule 144a firms    1.100      1.253         1.347       1.181       0.186           0.280     0.113       1.158      1.070         1.511      0.947     -0.099      0.342      -0.223
                                       (43.42)    (36.77)       (29.20)     (35.70)      (7.49)          (7.66)    (4.15)     (56.65)    (45.98)       (32.94)     (40.48)   (5.09)      (9.08)     (9.51)

Number of observations                   782        782           782         782         782             782       782         782        782           782        782       782         782        782
Adjusted R2                            0.7081     0.6356        0.5227      0.6228      0.0680           0.0681   0.0247      0.8057     0.7319        0.5816      0.6800    0.0302     0.0948      0.1018




                                                                                                    47
    Table 5. Stock-Price Reactions of Exchange-Listed Firms and Rule 12h-6 Deregistering Firms Around Rule
    12h-6 Events.
    The regression Rp,t = α + β × Rb,t + δ´Event_Dummy + εt, is estimated from Jan 1, 2005 – Dec 31, 2007.
    Event_Dummy is a vector that includes dummy variables for deregistration event dates from www.sec.gov. In (1)
    and (4), Rp is the daily U.S. dollar return on a portfolio that includes all non-U.S. firms cross-listed on U.S.
    exchanges. In (2) and (5), Rp is the return on a portfolio of firms that subsequently deregistered using Rule 12h-6 in
    2007 or 2008. In (3) and (6), Rp is the difference in returns on the portfolio of deregistering firms and the portfolio
    of exchange-listed firms that did not deregister (denoted “Dereg – Exch”). Rb is the return on the benchmark
    portfolio that includes all non-U.S. firms listed in the U.S. via Level 1 or Rule 144a ADRs. Firms with less than 260
    daily observations and firms with less than $10 million in total assets are excluded. In Panel a, coefficients are
    estimated for each dummy variable. In Panel b, a single dummy variable that equals one over all event days is
    defined. Coefficients on the constant and the event dummies are multiplied by 100. t-statistics are in parentheses. *,
    **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                           Equally-weighted portfolio returns               Value-weighted portfolio returns

                                             (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)
Panel a. Individual deregistration
                                       All exchange-   Deregistering    Dereg – Exch   All exchange-   Deregistering   Dereg – Exch
event dummies                           listed firms      firms                         listed firms      firms

Constant                                  -0.029          -0.041           -0.012         -0.015          -0.001          0.016
                                          (2.05)**       (2.49)**          (0.75)         (1.35)          (0.06)          (1.25)
1   December 14, 2005                     -0.053          -0.099           -0.038         -0.128          -0.078          0.058
                                          (0.24)          (0.38)           (0.15)         (0.72)          (0.31)          (0.29)
2   December 13, 2006                     -0.028          0.034            0.076           0.145          0.200           0.059
                                          (0.12)          (0.13)           (0.29)         (0.82)          (0.80)          (0.29)
3 March 21, 2007                           0.148          0.021            -0.136          0.140          0.019           -0.141
                                          (0.65)          (0.08)           (0.52)         (0.79)          (0.08)          (0.71)
Portfolio: Level 1 & Rule 144a firms       0.868          0.881            0.014           0.870          0.870           0.001
                                         (51.27)***     (45.37)***         (0.72)        (67.74)***     (48.15)***        (0.07)

Number of observations                      780            780              780             780            780             780
Adjusted R2                               0.7722          0.726            -0.004         0.8555          0.7491         -0.0043
                                             (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)            (6)
Panel b. Condensed event dummy         All exchange-   Deregistering    Dereg – Exch   All exchange-   Deregistering   Dereg – Exch
                                        listed firms      firms                         listed firms      firms

Constant                                  -0.029          -0.041           -0.012         -0.015          -0.001          0.016
                                          (2.06)**       (2.49)**          (0.75)         (1.35)          (0.06)          (1.26)
All events dummy                           0.022          -0.015           -0.033          0.052          0.047           -0.008
                                          (0.17)          (0.10)           (0.22)         (0.51)          (0.33)          (0.07)
Portfolio: Level 1 & Rule 144a firms       0.868          0.881            0.014           0.870          0.870           0.000
                                         (51.44)***     (45.50)***         (0.70)        (67.88)***     (48.25)***        (0.03)

Number of observations                      780            780              780             780            780             780
Adjusted R2                               0.7727          0.7266          -0.0019         0.8556          0.7495         -0.0026




                                                                   48
Table 6. Stock-Price Reactions Around Deregistration Announcements.
This table shows the cumulative abnormal returns for firms that announced deregistration between 2002 and 2008.
The sample includes 140 deregistering firms (67 firms prior to Rule 12h-6 and 73 firms after Rule 12h-6) with
returns data in Datastream around the deregistration announcement. Six firms are excluded because they released
other significant news on the same day they announced deregistration. Announcement dates are identified from
Lexis Nexis searches, from SEC filings such as Form 6K, and for firms that deregistered under Rule 12h-6, from
Form 15F. All returns are in U.S. dollars. Returns are adjusted with a market model. In Panel a, the benchmark
portfolio includes all non-U.S. firms cross-listed in the U.S. via Level 1 or Rule 144a ADRs. In Panel b, the
benchmark portfolio includes all non-U.S. cross-listed on U.S. exchanges that did not deregister. In both portfolios,
firms are required to have at least 260 daily observations and $10 million in total assets. Market model parameters
are estimated over the period from day -244 to -6. Cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) are computed over the three
day window (-1, +1) around the announcement date. Significance of average CARs is based on t-statistics that
account for cross-sectional dependence as in Brown and Warner (1985). The binomial test tests whether the
percentage of negative CARs is different from 50% (p-value reported). *, **, and *** indicate statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively. #, ##, and ### indicate that the average CAR for Rule 12h-
6 firms is significantly different from the average CAR for firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6.
                                           Panel a. Level 1 and Rule 144a          Panel b. Non-U.S. firms on U.S.
                                             ADRs as benchmark firms                exchanges as benchmark firms
                                         EW benchmark           VW benchmark      EW benchmark       VW benchmark
                                           portfolio              portfolio         portfolio          portfolio

All firms
   CAR                                       -1.26%                -1.18%             -1.11%             -1.18%
                                                     ***                    **                 **
   t-statistic                              (2.89)                 (2.66)             (2.47)             (2.64)**
   % negative                                 64%                   64%                 61%               60%
                                                     ***                  ***                 ***
   Binomial test (p-value)                   0.001                0.001               0.006              0.001***

Pre-Rule 12h-6 deregistering firms
   CAR                                       -2.15%                -2.01%             -1.94%             -1.92%
   t-statistic                               (2.53)**              (2.34)**           (2.26)**           (2.23)**
   % negative                                 68%                   65%                 62%               62%
   Binomial test (p-value)                   0.003***              0.011**            0.038**            0.038**

Rule 12h-6 deregistering firms
   CAR                                       -0.48%#              -0.44%#             -0.38%#            -0.51%
   t-statistic                                (1.14)               (1.06)              (0.87)             (1.21)
   % negative                                 61%                   63%                 61%               59%
                                                     **                    **                 **
   Binomial test (p-value)                   0.047                 0.016              0.048               0.077*




                                                           49
Table 7. Cross-Sectional Regressions of CARs Around Deregistration Announcement Dates.
This table presents cross-sectional regressions that examine the impact of firm and country characteristics on the
stock-price reaction around firms deregistration announcement dates (-1,+1). Stock market reactions are estimated in
Table 6. The sample includes 140 firms that deregistered from U.S. markets between 2002 and 2009. Six firms are
excluded because they released other significant news on the same day they announced deregistration. The
regressions include 119 firms (52 firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6 and 67 firms that deregistered after
Rule 12h-6) that have complete data on firm characteristics. Firm-level accounting data is from the Worldscope
database. All variables are measured in the year prior to deregistration. Sales growth is inflation adjusted two-year
sales growth (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails), Tobin’s q is computed as ((Total Assets – Book Equity) + Market
Value of Equity) / Total Assets (all variables are in local currency), global industry q is the median global industry
q, the financing deficit is computed as the sum of cash dividends, investments, change in net working capital less
internal cash flow, scaled by total assets (multiplied by 10 in the table for reporting purposes), total assets are in $
thousands, leverage is defined as total debt divided by total assets, ROA is the return on assets, and ownership is the
data item “closely-held shares” from Worldscope. U.S. Trading % is the percentage of the total average daily trading
volume (home market plus U.S. market) that takes place in the U.S. SOX cost is a dummy variable that equals one
for 28 firms that mentioned compliance costs associated with SOX as motivation for the deregistration decision in
press releases. Legal is anti-director × rule of law, from Djankov et al. (2008) and La Porta et al. (1998). Log of
GNP per capita ($) and stock market capitalization to GDP are from the World Bank WDI Database. t-statistics are
in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                              Panel a. Level 1 OTC/Rule 144a Firms as          Panel b. Exchange-Listed Firms as Value-
                               Equally-Weighted Benchmark Portfolio                 Weighted Benchmark Portfolio

                             Model 1     Model 2     Model 3     Model 4     Model 1     Model 2     Model 3     Model 4

Constant                     -0.1839     -0.1816     -0.0354     -0.2201     -0.1938     -0.2061     -0.0526     -0.2590
                             (2.07)**     (1.88)*     (0.23)       (1.58)    (2.25)**    (2.21)**     (0.36)      (1.92)*
Sales growth                 -0.0017     -0.0017      0.0038     -0.0505     -0.0000      0.0002      0.0011     -0.0416
                              (0.10)      (0.11)      (0.18)      (1.75)*      (0.00)      (0.01)     (0.05)       (1.48)
Tobin’s q                     0.0009      0.0009     -0.0061      0.0071      0.0030      0.0031     -0.0034      0.0081
                              (0.16)      (0.16)      (0.80)      (0.85)      (0.55)      (0.57)      (0.47)       (1.00)
Global industry q            -0.0048     -0.0050      0.0024     -0.0131     -0.0041     -0.0034     -0.0024     -0.0082
                              (0.29)      (0.29)      (0.08)       (0.63)     (0.26)      (0.21)      (0.09)       (0.41)
Financing deficit            -0.1437     -0.1437     -0.1563     -0.0390     -0.1435     -0.1437     -0.1611     -0.0561
                             (4.24)***   (4.22)***   (3.61)***     (0.61)    (4.36)***   (4.35)***   (3.92)***     (0.90)
Log(Assets)                   0.0020      0.0020      0.0008      0.0033      0.0027      0.0029      0.0018      0.0042
                              (0.94)       (0.87)     (0.20)       (1.11)      (1.27)      (1.31)     (0.52)       (1.45)
Leverage                      0.0388      0.0387     -0.0003      0.0399      0.0393      0.0400     -0.0025      0.0491
                              (1.75)*     (1.73)*     (0.01)       (1.29)     (1.83)*     (1.85)*     (0.08)       (1.64)
ROA                           0.0094      0.0091      0.028      -0.0351     -0.0034     -0.0020     -0.0065     -0.0094
                              (0.34)      (0.32)      (0.65)      (0.80)      (0.12)      (0.07)      (0.16)      (0.22)
Ownership                    -0.0013     -0.0011     -0.0040     -0.0160     -0.0003     -0.0014     -0.0043     -0.0136
                              (0.07)      (0.06)      (0.14)      (0.55)      (0.02)      (0.08)      (0.16)      (0.49)
U.S. trading %                0.0266      0.0265     -0.0317     0.0420       0.0387      0.0389     -0.0190      0.0550
                              (0.72)      (0.71)      (0.67)      (0.59)      (1.08)      (1.08)      (0.42)      (0.79)
SOX cost dummy               -0.0033     -0.0034     -0.0123      0.0002     -0.0038     -0.0033     -0.0105     -0.0010
                              (0.34)      (0.35)      (0.62)      (0.01)      (0.42)      (0.36)      (0.55)      (0.09)
Legal                        -0.0005     -0.0005     -0.0017      0.0005     -0.0005     -0.0005     -0.0020      0.0006
                              (0.99)      (0.93)     (2.20)**      (0.75)      (1.06)      (1.11)    (2.72)***     (0.94)
Stock market cap / GDP       -0.0005     -0.0005      0.0012     -0.0001     -0.0010     -0.0005      0.0022      0.0004
                              (0.06)       (0.07)     (0.06)       (0.01)      (0.14)      (0.07)     (0.12)       (0.05)
Log(GNP)                      0.0152      0.0150      0.0078      0.0146      0.0149      0.0159      0.0091      0.0153
                              (1.79)*     (1.66)*     (0.54)       (1.11)     (1.82)*     (1.82)*     (0.67)       (1.20)
Rule 12h-6 dummy                          0.0007                                         -0.0035
                                          (0.06)                                           (0.35)
Number of Observations        123           123        55          68          123          123        55          68
Adjusted R2                  0.1365       0.1285     0.3054      0.0441       0.1366      0.1296     0.3192      0.0824


                                                            50
Figure 1. Deregistration Activity Over Time.
This figure shows the number of voluntary deregistrations from 2002 through 2008 that are included in the sample.
There are 71 firms that deregistered between 2002 and March 2007 prior to Rule 12h-6. There are 73 firms that
deregistered using Rule 12h-6 between March 21, 2007 and December 31 30, 2008. See Appendices A and B for
full details.


                             60



                             50
 Number of deregistrations




                             40



                             30                                                               55



                             20


                                                                                 23
                             10                                                                           18
                                           14                          14
                                   9                     9
                              0                                                                2
                                  2002    2003          2004         2005       2006         2007        2008

                                         Pre-Rule 12h-6 Deregistra tions    Rule 12h-6 Deregistrations




                                                                      51
Figure 2. The Evolution of Sales Growth and the Cross-listing Premium.
In Panel a, the figure shows average sales growth each year from 2000 – 2007 for exchange-listed firms and for the
sample of 73 firms that deregistered from U.S. markets using Rule 12h-6. For each sample, each year, sales growth
is inflation adjusted two-year sales growth (winsorized at 1% and 99% tails). Panel b shows the estimated
coefficients for δ3 and δ4 from the regression, qi = α + δ1 × Rule 144ai + δ2 × OTCi + δ3 × Exchange-listedi + δ4 ×
Deregisteri + control variables, which is estimated each year from 2000 – 2007. Tobin’s q is computed as ((Total
Assets – Book Equity) + Market Value of Equity) / Total Assets (all variables are in local currency). Exchange-
listed is a dummy variable that equals one for firms listed on a major U.S. exchange in a given year and did not
deregister. Deregister is a dummy that equals one for the exchange-listed firms that deregistered from U.S. markets.
The sample includes non-financial firms in the Worldscope database with total assets of at least $100 million in a
given year. Between 2000 and 2007, the sample size for the exchange-listed firms ranges from 395 to 444; the
sample size for the deregistering listed firms ranges from 47 to 62 between 2000 and 2006 and is 14 in 2007.


                                               Panel a. Evolution of sales growth

                 0.35


                 0.25


                 0.15


                 0.05


                 -0.05
                            2000


                                     2001


                                                   2002


                                                            2003


                                                                    2004


                                                                             2005


                                                                                       2006


                                                                                                 2007
                 -0.15
                                       Exchange-listed firms               Deregistering firms


                                     Panel b. Evolution of the cross-listing premium

                 0.35


                 0.25


                 0.15


                 0.05


                 -0.05
                           2000



                                     2001



                                                   2002



                                                            2003



                                                                    2004



                                                                              2005



                                                                                       2006



                                                                                                 2007




                 -0.15

                                            Exchange-listed firms          Deregistering firms




                                                             52
Appendix A. Sample of Deregistering Firms.
This appendix provides the list of 144 non-U.S. firms that voluntarily delisted and deregistered between 2002 and 2008. There are 71 firms that deregistered prior
to Rule 12h-6 and 73 firms that deregistered using Rule 12h-6. The sample includes firms that listed equity securities on major U.S. exchanges. Firms that
delisted prior to Sarbanes-Oxley and firms that delisted more than two years prior to deregistration are excluded.
                                                                Deregistration       Filing     Announcement Country of
Company name                                                                                                                         Home trading market
                                                                  form type           date            date         domicile
Pre-Rule 12h-6 deregistering firms
Alliance Atlantis Communications Inc                                        15-12G     9/26/2006    9/26/2006      Canada               Toronto Stock Exchange
AT Plastics Inc                                                             15-15D     5/30/2002     5/3/2002      Canada               Toronto Stock Exchange
Autonomy Corp PLC                                                           15-12G     4/29/2005    4/29/2005       U.K.                London Stock Exchange
Banco Comercial Portugues SA                                                15-12G    10/16/2003   10/16/2003      Portugal                 Euronext Lisbon
Banco Totta & Acores SA                                                     15-12B    11/21/2003   11/21/2003      Portugal                 Euronext Lisbon
Baran Group Ltd                                                             15-12G      7/9/2004    6/25/2004       Israel             Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
Biacore International AB                                                    15-12G    12/29/2004   12/29/2004      Sweden             Stockholm Stock Exchange
Cable & Wireless PLC                                                        15-12B      6/9/2006    9/19/2005       U.K.                London Stock Exchange
Certicom Corp                                                               15-12G     6/18/2002    6/12/2002      Canada              Toronto Stock Exchange
Colt Telecom Group PLC                                                      15-12G     6/19/2006     2/3/2006       U.K.                London Stock Exchange
Completel Europe NV                                                         15-12G    10/17/2003    5/27/2002    Netherlands                 Euronext Paris
Controladora Comercial Mexicana SA de CV                                    15-15D     12/8/2006   10/20/2006      Mexico              Mexican Stock Exchange
Cristalerias de Chile SA (Glassworks of Chile)                              15-12B     7/15/2005    4/19/2005       Chile              Santiago Stock Exchange
Datalex PLC                                                                 15-12G      8/2/2002    4/15/2002      Ireland               Irish Stock Exchange
Datamirror Corp                                                             15-12G      3/1/2006    11/1/2005      Canada               Toronto Stock Exchange
Desc SA de CV                                                               15-12B      1/6/2005   10/20/2004      Mexico              Mexican Stock Exchange
Dialog Semiconductor PLC                                                    15-12G      2/7/2007    11/1/2006     Germany              Frankfurt Stock Exchange
E Machitown Co Ltd (formerly Crayfish Co)                                   15-12G     5/23/2005    8/22/2003       Japan       Mothers Market (Tokyo Stock Exchange)
Eimo OYJ                                                                    15-12G    12/13/2002   12/13/2002      Finland             Helsinki Stock Exchange
Elamex SA de CV                                                             15-12G    1/30/2006    1/27/2006       Mexico                         None
Enodis PLC (formerly Berisford)                                             15-12B     8/2/2005    5/16/2005        U.K.                London Stock Exchange
Espirito Santo Financial Group SA                                           15-15D    5/25/2006    4/28/2006     Luxembourg                 Euronext Lisbon
Esprit Energy Trust (formerly Esprit Exploration; Canadian 88 Energy)       15-12B    9/23/2002     9/20/2002      Canada               Toronto Stock Exchange
Fisher & Paykel Healthcare Corp Ltd (formerly Fisher & Paykel Industries)   15-12G     2/28/2003    12/5/2002    New Zealand        New Zealand Stock Exchange
Fletcher Building Ltd (formerly Fletcher Challenge Building)                15-12B    12/17/2002   12/17/2002    New Zealand        New Zealand Stock Exchange
FNX Mining Company Inc (formerly Fort Knox Gold Resources)                  15-12B     6/14/2006    5/23/2006      Canada               Toronto Stock Exchange
Group Iusacell SA de CV                                                     15-15D     9/14/2006    9/14/2006      Mexico              Mexican Stock Exchange
Grupo Elektra SA de CV                                                      15-15D     9/14/2006    9/14/2006      Mexico              Mexican Stock Exchange
Grupo Imsa SA de CV                                                         15-12B     6/28/2006    2/10/2005      Mexico              Mexican Stock Exchange
Hot Cable Systems Media Ltd (formerly Matav-Cable Systems Media)            15-12G     6/30/2006    2/24/2005       Israel             Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
Group Iusacell SA de CV                                                     15-15D     9/14/2006    9/14/2006      Mexico              Mexican Stock Exchange
Icos Vision Systems Corp NV                                                 15-12G     11/6/2006   10/26/2006      Belgium                 Euronext Brussels
IFCO Systems NV                                                             15-12G      3/8/2004     3/8/2004    Netherlands           Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Incam AG                                                                    15-12G     7/11/2003    7/11/2003     Germany             OTC (Berliner Freiverkehr)



                                                                                     53
Appendix A, continued.
                                                                  Deregistration        Filing   Announcement   Country of
Company name                                                                                                                   Home trading market
                                                                   form type             date        date        domicile
Inficon Holding AG                                                   15-12G           9/8/2005       9/8/2005   Switzerland       SWX Swiss Exchange
Internacional de Ceramica SA de CV                                   15-15D           2/2/2005       9/8/2004     Mexico        Mexican Stock Exchange
Intershop Communications AG                                          15-12G          3/26/2004     10/30/2003    Germany        Frankfurt Stock Exchange
ITO-Yokado Co Ltd                                                    15-12G           4/6/2004       4/9/2003      Japan          Tokyo Stock Exchange
Lastminute.com PLC                                                   15-12G         11/24/2004      7/15/2004      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Leitch Technology Corp                                               15-12G          6/27/2005      6/27/2005     Canada         Toronto Stock Exchange
LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton                                     15-15D           3/8/2004       3/8/2004     France               Euronext Paris
Metro International SA                                               15-12G         12/23/2003     12/11/2003   Luxembourg     Stockholm Stock Exchange
Mintails (formerly Gaming and Entertainment Group; Trans Global      15-12G           3/3/2003       3/3/2003    Australia     Australian Stock Exchange
Interactive)
Mitchells & Butlers PLC                                              15-12B          8/24/2006      4/13/2005      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Modern Times Group MTG AB                                            15-15D         12/23/2003     12/17/2003     Sweden       Stockholm Stock Exchange
Pioneer Corp (formerly Pioneer Electronic)                           15-12B         12/18/2006     12/18/2006      Japan          Tokyo Stock Exchange
Premier Farnell PLC (formerly Farnell Electronics)                   15-12B           7/1/2005      12/9/2004      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Provalis PLC (formerly Cortecs)                                      15-15D         12/15/2005      2/24/2005      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
QSC AG                                                               15-12G          5/13/2003      5/13/2003    Germany        Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Rank Group PLC                                                       15-12G           4/6/2006       7/1/2005      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Regus Group PLC                                                      15-12G          5/17/2004      11/6/2002      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Riverdeep Group PLC                                                  15-12G         10/16/2002     10/17/2002     Ireland          Irish Stock Exchange
Robogroup TEK Ltd (formerly Eshed Robotec 1982)                      15-12G           9/8/2005       8/4/2005      Israel       Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
RSA Insurance Group PLC (formerly Royal & Sun Alliance Group)        15-15D           1/8/2007      9/28/2006      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
SAES Getters SPA                                                     15-12G           5/8/2003       5/8/2003       Italy         Italian Stock Exchange
Scania AB                                                            15-15D          1/29/2003      1/29/2003     Sweden       Stockholm Stock Exchange
Song Networks Holding AB (formerly Tele1 Europe Holding)             15-12G          6/30/2003      6/30/2003     Sweden       Stockholm Stock Exchange
SYGNIS Pharma AG (formerly Lion Bioscience)                          15-12G          5/19/2005       8/5/2004    Germany        Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Tatneft OAO                                                          15-12B         12/15/2006      6/27/2006     Russia         London Stock Exchange
Tele2 AB (formerly Netcom AB)                                        15-12G          6/29/2006      6/30/2006     Sweden       Stockholm Stock Exchange
Telent PLC (formerly Marconi Corp)                                   15-12G          9/14/2006     10/25/2005      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Tenon Ltd (formerly Fletcher Challenge Forests)                      15-12G           6/9/2005      6/10/2005   New Zealand   New Zealand Stock Exchange
Toll NZ Ltd (formerly Tranz Rail Holdings)                           15-12G         10/28/2002     10/25/2002   New Zealand    Australian Stock Exchange
Trader Classified Media NV (formerly Trader.com)                     15-12G         12/19/2002     12/18/2002   Netherlands            Euronext Paris
Tradus (formerly QXL Ricardo PLC)                                    15-12G         3/31/2003      2/26/2003       U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Transcom Worldwide SA                                                15-12G         5/28/2003      5/14/2003    Luxembourg     Stockholm Stock Exchange
Transgene SA                                                         15-15D           4/3/2006     10/12/2005     France               Euronext Paris
TV Azteca SA de CV                                                   15-15D          9/14/2006      9/14/2006     Mexico        Mexican Stock Exchange
United Business Media PLC (formerly United News and Media)           15-12G           2/2/2006     12/22/2004      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Vero Software PLC (formerly VI Group)                                15-12G          5/12/2004      5/12/2004      U.K.          London Stock Exchange
Vivendi SA (formerly Vivendi Universal)                              15-12B         10/31/2006      1/17/2006     France               Euronext Paris
Wescast Industries Inc                                               15-12G           7/1/2005      6/16/2005     Canada        Toronto Stock Exchange



                                                                                   54
Appendix A, continued.
                                                     Deregistration        Filing   Announcement   Country of
Company name                                                                                                         Home trading market
                                                      form type             date        date        domicile
Rule 12h-6 deregistering firms
Acambis PLC (formerly Peptide Therapeutics)             15F-12G         6/7/2007      9/13/2006       U.K.             London Stock Exchange
Air France-KLM                                          15F-12B         2/7/2008      11/22/2007     France                  Euronext Paris
Akzo Nobel NV                                           15F-12G        9/28/2007      7/24/2007    Netherlands           Euronext Amsterdam
Altana                                                  15F-12G        6/21/2007       4/26/2007    Germany           Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Amcor Ltd                                               15F-12G         6/4/2007        5/2/2007    Australia        Australian Stock Exchange
Ansell Ltd                                              15F-12G         6/5/2007        5/4/2006    Australia        Australian Stock Exchange
Arcadis NV (formerly Heidemij NV)                       15F-12G         6/9/2008       5/16/2007   Netherlands           Euronext Amsterdam
Atlas South Sea Pearl LTD (formerly Atlas Pacific)      15F-12G         6/30/2008      7/11/2007    Australia        Australian Stock Exchange
Australia & New Zealand Banking Group Ltd               15F-12G         7/13/2007      6/20/2007    Australia        Australian Stock Exchange
BASF AG                                                 15F-12B          9/6/2007      7/30/2007    Germany           Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Bayer AG                                                15F-12B         9/28/2007       9/5/2007    Germany           Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Benetton Group SPA                                      15F-12B        10/22/2007      9/12/2007       Italy            Italian Stock Exchange
BG Group PLC                                            15F-12B         9/21/2007      7/25/2007      U.K.             London Stock Exchange
British Airways PLC                                     15F-12B          6/5/2007      4/25/2007      U.K.             London Stock Exchange
Bunzl PLC                                               15F-12B          6/6/2007       5/1/2007      U.K.             London Stock Exchange
Canwest Global Communications Corp                      15F-12B         6/13/2007      5/11/2007    Canada             Toronto Stock Exchange
Dassault Systemes SA                                    15F-12G        10/16/2008      7/31/2008     France                  Euronext Paris
Dorel Industries Inc                                    15F-12G          4/1/2008       4/1/2008    Canada             Toronto Stock Exchange
Ducati Motor Holding SPA                                15F-12B          6/4/2007      5/14/2007       Italy            Italian Stock Exchange
E On AG                                                 15F-12B         9/10/2007      8/21/2007    Germany           Frankfurt Stock Exchange
EDP Energias De Portugal SA                             15F-12B          6/7/2007      5/18/2007    Portugal                Euronext Lisbon
Enel SPA                                                15F-12B        12/20/2007     11/29/2007       Italy            Italian Stock Exchange
EPCOS AG                                                15F-15D        11/30/2007      11/8/2007    Germany           Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Extendicare REIT (formerly Extendicare Inc)             15F-12B          6/4/2007       6/4/2007    Canada             Toronto Stock Exchange
Fiat SPA                                                15F-12B          8/3/2007       8/3/2007       Italy            Italian Stock Exchange
Genesys SA                                              15F-12B          6/4/2007      5/10/2007     France                  Euronext Paris
Groupe Danone                                           15F-12B          7/5/2007      4/26/2007     France                  Euronext Paris
Hanaro Telecom Inc                                      15F-12B         6/28/2007      2/22/2006     Korea       Korea Securities Dealers (KOSDAQ)
Imperial Tobacco Group PLC                              15F-12B         9/12/2008      7/24/2008      U.K.             London Stock Exchange
Infovista SA                                            15F-12G         6/25/2007      6/25/2007     France                  Euronext Paris
International Power PLC (formerly National Power)       15F-12B         6/28/2007       6/6/2007      U.K.             London Stock Exchange
Koor Industries Ltd                                     15F-12B         2/11/2008      5/14/2007      Israel          Tel Aviv Stock Exchange
KPN NV (Royal KPN)                                      15F-12B          4/4/2008     12/17/2007   Netherlands           Euronext Amsterdam
Lafarge                                                 15F-12B         9/24/2007       8/2/2007     France                  Euronext Paris
LMS Medical Systems Inc                                 15F-12B          6/6/2008       6/4/2008    Canada             Toronto Stock Exchange
Macronix International Ltd                              15F-12G        10/29/2007      9/21/2007     Taiwan            Taiwan Stock Exchange



                                                                      55
Appendix A, continued.
                                                        Deregistration        Filing   Announcement   Country of
Company name                                                                                                           Home trading market
                                                         form type             date        date        domicile
MASISA SA (formerly Terranova)                             15F-12B         3/13/2008      2/20/2008      Chile         Santiago Stock Exchange
Meldex International PLC (formerly Bioprogress)            15F-12G         6/18/2007      5/29/2007      U.K.        AIM (London Stock Exchange)
Metso Corp (formerlyValmet-Rauma)                          15F-12B         9/17/2007      7/26/2007     Finland         OMX Nordic Exchange
Millea Holdings Inc (formerly (Tokyo Marine and Fire)      15F-12G        7/30/2007       7/5/2007       Japan           Tokyo Stock Exchange
Mirae Corporation                                          15F-12G        5/20/2008       3/7/2008       Korea          Korea Exchange (KRX)
Naspers Ltd                                                15F-15D         6/8/2007      5/17/2007    South Africa   Johannesburg Stock Exchange
National Australia Bank Ltd                                15F-12B        6/21/2007      5/10/2007     Australia       Australian Stock Exchange
National Telephone Co of Venezuela (CANTV)                 15F-12B        6/30/2008      5/17/2007     Venezuela        Caracas Stock Exchange
NIS Group (formerly Nissin Company)                        15F-12G         8/8/2008      7/14/2008       Japan           Tokyo Stock Exchange
Norsk Hydro ASA                                            15F-12B        11/29/2007     10/22/2007     Norway            Oslo Stock Exchange
Oce NV (formerly Oce Van Der Grinten)                      15F-12G         6/29/2007      6/29/2007   Netherlands         Euronext Amsterdam
PCCW Ltd (formerly Pacific Century Cyberworks)             15F-12B          6/4/2007      4/27/2007   Hong Kong       Hong Kong Stock Exchange
Petroleum Geo Services                                     15F-12B         7/20/2007      6/26/2007     Norway            Oslo Stock Exchange
Pfeiffer Vacuum Technology AG                              15F-12B         10/4/2007      8/30/2007    Germany         Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Publicis Groupe SA                                         15F-12B          9/7/2007       9/7/2007     France               Euronext Paris
Rhodia                                                     15F-12B         9/28/2007      7/31/2007     France               Euronext Paris
Royal Ahold NV                                             15F-12B         9/28/2007      8/29/2007   Netherlands         Euronext Amsterdam
SCOR                                                       15F-12B          6/4/2007       4/3/2007     France               Euronext Paris
SGL Carbon AG                                              15F-12B         6/26/2008      3/26/2007    Germany         Frankfurt Stock Exchange
Skyepharma PLC                                             15F-12G          6/4/2007       5/3/2007      U.K.           London Stock Exchange
Sodexho Alliance SA                                        15F-12B         7/16/2007      5/30/2007     France               Euronext Paris
Spirent Communications PLC                                 15F-12B          6/5/2007       3/1/2007      U.K.           London Stock Exchange
Stolt Nielsen SA                                           15F-12G         5/28/2008      5/28/2008      U.K.             Oslo Stock Exchange
Stora Enso Corp                                            15F-12B          1/7/2008      12/6/2007     Finland         OMX Nordic Exchange
Suez (formerly Suez Lyonnaise Des Eaux)                    15F-12B         9/21/2007      8/29/2007     France               Euronext Paris
Technip                                                    15F-12B          8/6/2007      7/25/2007     France               Euronext Paris
Telekom Austria AG                                         15F-12B          6/5/2007      4/24/2007     Austria         Vienna Stock Exchange
Telenor ASA                                                15F-12G         6/12/2007      5/22/2007     Norway            Oslo Stock Exchange
Telstra Corp Ltd                                           15F-12B          6/4/2007      3/28/2007   Netherlands         Euronext Amsterdam
TNT NV (formerly TPG NV)                                   15F-12B         6/18/2007      5/29/2007   Netherlands         Euronext Amsterdam
Trend Micro Inc                                            15F-12G         6/27/2007      4/26/2007      Japan           Tokyo Stock Exchange
United Utilities PLC                                       15F-12B         6/25/2007      5/30/2007      U.K.           London Stock Exchange
UPM Kymmene Corp                                           15F-12B         12/6/2007     10/30/2007     Finland         OMX Nordic Exchange
Vernalis PLC (formerly British Biotech)                    15F-12G          6/4/2007      4/24/2007      U.K.           London Stock Exchange
Volvo AB                                                   15F-12G        12/13/2007      6/14/2007     Sweden        Stockholm Stock Exchange
Westaim Corp                                               15F-12G        10/21/2008     10/20/2008     Canada          Toronto Stock Exchange
Wolseley PLC                                               15F-12B          1/2/2008     12/11/2007      U.K.           London Stock Exchange



                                                                         56
Appendix B. Firms Excluded From the Final Sample.
This appendix provides the list of 163 non-U.S. firms that deregistered with the SEC. We exclude 35 firms that deregistered prior to Rule 12h-6 and 128 firms
that deregistered after Rule 12h-6.
Excluded firms                                              Reason for exclusion

Pre-Rule 12h-6 period
Baltimore PLC (formerly Baltimore Technologies)             Deregistered after SOX, but delisted prior to SOX; deregistered more than two years after delisting
Cinram Income Fund (formerly Cinram International)          Deregistered after SOX, but delisted prior to SOX; deregistered more than two years after delisting
Quebecor Inc                                                Deregistered after SOX, but delisted prior to SOX; deregistered more than two years after delisting
Hilan Tech Ltd (formerly Teleweb Telegraph Comm)            Deregistered after SOX, but delisted prior to SOX; deregistered more than two years after delisting; not in Worldscope
SKF Inc                                                     Delisted in 2003, but deregistered under Rule 12h-6
Swedish Match Corp                                          Delisted in 2004, but deregistered under Rule 12h-6
Telefonica Del Peru SAA                                     Delisted in 2004, but deregistered under Rule 12h-6
Teliasonera AB                                              Delisted in 2004, but deregistered under Rule 12h-6
Electrolux AB                                               Delisted in 2005, but deregistered under Rule 12h-6
Nera ASA                                                    Deregistered more than two years after delisting
Virgin Express Holdings PLC                                 Deregistered more than two years after delisting
Carmel Container Systems                                    Not in Worldscope
Aegis Group PLC                                             Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Docdata NV                                                  Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Ecsoft Group PLC                                            Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
EPI Holdings (formerly Great Wall Cybertech / Electronic)   Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Grupo Movil Access SA de CV (formerly BIPER)                Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Israel Land Development Company Ltd                         Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Mid-States PLC                                              Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Premium Brands Inc (formerly Fletcher Fine Foods)           Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Sky Network Television Ltd                                  Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Svenska Cellulosa Aktiebolaget (SCA)                        Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Virgin Group PLC                                            Voluntarily delisted and deregistered prior to SOX
Norcen Energy Resources Ltd                                 Voluntarily delisted in 1994; acquired by Union Pacific Resources Inc in 1998 and subsequently deregistered the securities
                                                            Voluntarily delisted in 1997; press release states it applied to the SEC to deregister its ordinary shares; we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar
English China Clays PLC (formerly ECC Group)
                                                            or Thomson Research to verify deregistration; acquired by Imetal (now Imerys) in 1999
Nord Pacific Ltd                                            Voluntarily delisted in 1998; acquired by Allied Gold in 2004 and subsequently deregistered the securities
Rigel Energy Corp (formerly Total Canada Oil & Gas)         Voluntarily delisted in 1998; acquired by Talisman in 1999 and subsequently deregistered the securities
Ramco Energy PLC                                            Voluntarily delisted in 2000 and does not file anymore; we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar or Thomson Research to verify deregistration
                                                            Voluntarily delisted in 2000 and said it would deregister 90 days later, but we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar or on Thomson Research to
Russel Metals Inc (formerly Federal Industries)
                                                            verify deregistration; continued filing with the SEC in connection with U.S. registered senior notes until it deregistered them in 2007
Interactive Investor International PLC (formerly III)       Voluntarily delisted in 2001; was acquired by AMP later in 2001 and subsequently deregistered the securities




                                                                                                57
Appendix B, continued.
Excluded firms                                     Reason for exclusion

Electrochemical Industries (1952) Ltd (formerly    Voluntarily delisted in 2002; we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar or on Thomson Research to verify deregistration; in 2004, three Israeli
Electrochem Industries Frutarom)                   banks filed for Electrochemical Industries to be placed in receivership
Liquidation World Inc                              Voluntarily delisted in 2003 and does not file anymore; we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar or Thomson Research to verify deregistration
Boadwalk Real REIT (formerly Boardwalk Equities)   Voluntarily delisted in 2004 and does not file anymore; we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar or Thomson Research to verify deregistration
CSK Corp (formerly CSK Holdings)                   Voluntarily delisted in 2005 and does not file anymore; we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar or Thomson Research to verify deregistration
Kirin Brewery Company Ltd                          Voluntarily delisted in 2006 and does not file anymore; we cannot find a Form 15 on Edgar or Thomson Research to verify deregistration

Rule 12h-6 period
ASE Test Ltd                                       Acquired by ASE Inc and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Arizona Star Resource Corp                         Acquired by Barrick Gold and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Bayer Schering Pharma AG                           Acquired by Bayer and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Xenova Group PLC                                   Acquired by Celtic Pharma Development and deregistered as a result of the takeover
QUILMES Industrial SA                              Acquired by Companhia de Bebidas das Americas (AmBev) (now Anheuser-Busch InBev) and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Northern Peru Copper Corp                          Acquired by Copper Bridge Acquisition Corp and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Hawthorne Gold Corp                                Acquired by Cusac Gold Mines Ltd and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Inco Ltd                                           Acquired by CVRD and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Pacific Asia China Energy Inc                      Acquired by GREKA China Ltd and GREKA Acquisitions Ltd and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Hanson Building Materials PLC (formerly Hanson)    Acquired by HeidelbergCement AG and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Novatel Inc                                        Acquired by Hexagon Canada Acquisition Inc and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Scottish Power PLC                                 Acquired by Iberdrola and deregistered as a result of the takeover; also deregistered debt securities
Tyler Resources Inc                                Acquired by Jinchuan Group and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Merck Serono SA                                    Acquired by Merck KGaA and deregistered as a result of the takeover
TDC A/S                                            Acquired by Nordic Telephone Company and deregistered as a result of the takeover
CDG Investments Inc                                Acquired by Preo Software and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Fortel Inc                                         Acquired by QuStream and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Action Energy Inc                                  Acquired by Rolling Thunder and deregistered as a result of the takeover
SCOR Holding Ltd (formerly Converium Holding)      Acquired by SCOR and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Corporate Express NV                               Acquired by Staples and deregistered as a result of the takeover
ECI Telecom Ltd                                    Acquired by Swarth Group and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Novamerican Steel Inc                              Acquired by Symmetry Holdings Inc and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Embratel Participacoes SA                          Acquired by Telefonos de Mexico and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Protherics PLC                                     Acquired by Therapeutic Antibodies Inc and deregistered as a result of the takeover
Breakwater Resources Ltd                           Delisted by Nasdaq for violating listing standards; moved to the OTC market and subsequently deregistered
SR Telecom Inc                                     Delisted by Nasdaq for violating listing standards; moved to the OTC market and subsequently deregistered
Petsec Energy Ltd                                  Delisted by the NYSE for violating listing standards; moved to the OTC market and subsequently deregistered
Unimarc Supermarkets Inc                           Delisted by the NYSE for violating listing standards; moved to the OTC market and subsequently deregistered




                                                                                      58
Appendix B, continued.
Excluded firms                                  Reason for exclusion

Alstom                                          Delisted by the NYSE for violating listing standards; previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities
British Energy Group PLC                        Delisted by the NYSE for violating listing standards; previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities
Electrolux AB                                   Deregistered under Rule 12h-6, but delisted prior to Rule 12h-6 period; delisted more than two years before deregistration
SKF Inc                                         Deregistered under Rule 12h-6, but delisted prior to Rule 12h-6 period; delisted more than two years before deregistration
Swedish Match Corp                              Deregistered under Rule 12h-6, but delisted prior to Rule 12h-6 period; delisted more than two years before deregistration
Telefonica Del Peru SAA                         Deregistered under Rule 12h-6, but delisted prior to Rule 12h-6 period; delisted more than two years before deregistration
Teliasonera AB                                  Deregistered under Rule 12h-6, but delisted prior to Rule 12h-6 period; delisted more than two years before deregistration
Aerco Ltd                                       Deregistering debt securities only
AES Gener Inc                                   Deregistering debt securities only
Ainsworth Lumber Co Ltd                         Deregistering debt securities only
Aurelia Energy NV                               Deregistering debt securities only
BELL Canada                                     Deregistering debt securities only
Camboriu Cable System de Telecomunicacoes Ltd   Deregistering debt securities only
Cemex, SAB de CV                                Deregistering debt securities only
Commercial Cable TV Sao Paulo Ltd               Deregistering debt securities only
Concordia Bus AB                                Deregistering debt securities only
Concordia Bus Finland OY AB                     Deregistering debt securities only
Concordia Bus Nordic AB                         Deregistering debt securities only
Concordia Bus Nordic Holding AB                 Deregistering debt securities only
Gracechurch Card Funding No 6 PLC               Deregistering debt securities only
Hanson Australia Funding Ltd                    Deregistering debt securities only
Jean Coutu Group (PJC) Inc                      Deregistering debt securities only
Kowloon Canton Railway Corp                     Deregistering debt securities only
MTR Corp LTD                                    Deregistering debt securities only
Norbord Inc                                     Deregistering debt securities only
OSLO Challenger PLC                             Deregistering debt securities only
OSLO Explorer PLC                               Deregistering debt securities only
OSLO Seismic Services Inc                       Deregistering debt securities only
PGS Geophysical AS                              Deregistering debt securities only
Russel Metals Inc                               Deregistering debt securities only
Smurfit Kappa Funding PLC                       Deregistering debt securities only
Tevecap SA                                      Deregistering debt securities only
TVA Communications Ltd                          Deregistering debt securities only
TVA Parana Ltd                                  Deregistering debt securities only
Shaw Communications Inc                         Deregistration of preferred shares only; common shares are still listed on the NYSE
Third Century Bancorp                           Filing under Rule 12g-4(a), a pre-existing rule; the rule change has no bearing on the decision to deregister
ACE Aviation Holdings Inc.                      Holding from Air Canada court-supervised restructuring; was terminated and distributed its assets to shareholders




                                                                                   59
Appendix B, continued.
Excluded firms                                         Reason for exclusion

Intesa Sanpaolo SPA                                    Merger between Intesa and Sanpaolo IMI; Sanpaolo IMI's securities were deregistered as a result of the merger
East Energy Corp (fomerly Gobi Gold)                   Never listed on a U.S. exchange
Gemalto NV                                             Never listed on a U.S. exchange; successor registrant after acquiring Gemplus (registered); subsequently deregistered
Coolbrands International Inc                           Never listed on a U.S. exchange; successor registrant after acquiring Integrated Brands (registered); subsequently deregistered
Genterra Inc                                           Never listed on a U.S. exchange; successor registrant after acquiring Mirtronics (registered); subsequently deregistered
BTG PLC                                                Never listed on a U.S. exchange; successor registrant after acquiring Protherics; subsequently deregistered
Iberdrola SA                                           Never listed on a U.S. exchange; successor registrant after acquiring Scottish Power; subsequently deregistered
Vecima Networks Inc                                    Never listed on a U.S. exchange; successor registrant after acquiring Spectrum Signal Processing (registered); subsequently deregistered
Sopheon PLC (formerly Polydoc)                         Never listed on a U.S. exchange; successor registrant after acquired Teltech (registered); subsequently deregistered
                                                       Never listed on a U.S. exchange; acquired Tin.it (owned by Telecom Italia) and offered ordinary shares to Telecom Italia's shareholders in
Telecom Italia Media SPA
                                                       the US; subsequently deregistered the securities
Arcelor Brasil (formerly Belgo-Mineira Steel)          Never listed on a U.S. exchange; merger between Belgo-Mineira, Companhia Siderurgica de Tubarao, and Vega do Sul
Daiichi Sankyo Company Ltd                             Never listed on a U.S. exchange; merger between Daiichi Pharmaceutical and Sankyo Company
ETZ Lavud Ltd                                          No data in Worldscope
Eurotrust A/S                                          No data in Worldscope or Datastream
Advanced Proteome Therapeutics Corp                    OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Alamos Gold Inc                                        OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Atlanta Gold Inc (formerly Twin Mining)                OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Berkley Resources Inc                                  OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Candente Resource Corp                                 OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
CLP Holdings Ltd                                       OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Commonwealth Bank Of Australia                         OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Crew Gold Corp                                         OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
El Nino Ventures Inc                                   OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Euro Disney SCA                                        OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Evolving Gold Corp                                     OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Farallon Resources Ltd                                 OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Gentry Resources Ltd                                   OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Guildhall Minerals Ltd                                 OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Halo Resources Ltd                                     OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
J Pacific GoldInc                                      OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Kirkland Lake Gold Inc                                 OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Lund Gold Ltd                                          OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
OSI Geospatial Inc (formerly Offshore Systems Int’l)   OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
PivX Solutions Inc                                     OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Resin Systems Inc                                      OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Rolling Thunder Exploration Ltd                        OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange




                                                                                          60
Appendix B, continued.
Excluded firms                                             Reason for exclusion
Sonic Technology Solutions Inc                             OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Southwestern Resources Corp                                OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Vannessa Ventures Ltd                                      OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Wealth Minerals Ltd                                        OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Zoloto Resources Ltd                                       OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange
Cookson Group PLC                                          OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange; previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities
Pernod Ricard SA                                           OTC listed, but never listed on a U.S. exchange; previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities
Autonomy Corp PLC                                          Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Cable & Wireless PLC                                       Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Cinram International Income Fund (formerly Cinram Int’l)   Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities
Colt Telecom Group PLC                                     Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Dialog Semiconductor PLC                                   Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Enodis PLC (formerly Berisford)                            Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Fletcher Building Ltd (formerly Fletcher Challenge)        Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
ICOS Vision Systems Corp NV                                Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Mitchells & Butlers PLC                                    Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
OAO Tatneft                                                Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Premier Farnell PLC (formerly Farnell Electronics)         Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Rank Group PLC                                             Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
RSA Insurance Group PLC (formerly Royal & Sun)             Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Tenon Ltd (formerly Fletcher Challenge Forests)            Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
United Business Media PLC                                  Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Vivendi SA (formerly Vivendi Universal)                    Previously filed form 15 and deregistered the subject securities (included in Pre-Rule 12h-6 sample)
Imperial Chemical Industries PLC                           Received and rejected a takeover bid just prior to Form 15F filing; subsequently acquired by Akzo Nobel NV
Havas SA                                                   Received notice of non-compliance with listing standards from Nasdaq and then announced voluntary delisting; previously filed Form 15
Coles Group Ltd (formerly Coles Myer)                      Voluntarily delisted from the NYSE in 2006; became an acquisition target prior to deregistration; subsequently acquired by Wesfarmers




                                                                                             61
