                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DISTRIBUTIONAL EFFECTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND ENERGY POLICY:
                           AN INTRODUCTION

                                           Don Fullerton

                                       Working Paper 14241
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w14241


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 2008




This chapter is the introduction for a book to be published by Ashgate that includes 21 previously
published papers. I am grateful for comments from Tom Tietenberg, the series editor, and from authors
of papers in the book, including Trudy Ann Cameron, Ian Parry, and Kerry Smith. This paper is part
of the NBER's research programs in Public Economics (PE) and in Environmental and Energy Economics
(EEE). Any opinions expressed are my own and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Don Fullerton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Distributional Effects of Environmental and Energy Policy: An Introduction
Don Fullerton
NBER Working Paper No. 14241
August 2008
JEL No. H22,Q48,Q52

                                                 ABSTRACT

This chapter reviews literature on the distributional effects of environmental and energy policy. In
particular, many effects of such policy are likely regressive. First, it raises the price of fossil-fuel-intensive
products, expenditures on which are a high fraction of low-income budgets. Second, if abatement
technologies are capital-intensive, then any mandate to abate pollution may induce firms to use more
capital. If demand for capital is raised relative to labor, then a lower relative wage may also hurt low-income
households. Third, pollution permits handed out to firms bestow scarcity rents on well-off individuals
who own those firms. Fourth, low-income individuals may place more value on food and shelter than
on incremental improvements in environmental quality. If high-income individuals get the most benefit
of pollution abatement, then this effect is regressive as well. Fifth, low-income renters miss out on
house price capitalization of air quality benefits. Well-off landlords may reap those gains. Sixth, transition
effects could well hurt the unemployed who are already at some disadvantage. These six effects might
all hurt the poor more than the rich. This paper discusses whether these fears are valid, and whether
anything can be done about them.


Don Fullerton
Department of Finance
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
dfullert@illinois.edu
         Public economics has well developed tools for analyzing the incidence and
distributional effects of all personal taxes, payroll taxes, property taxes, and corporate
income taxes. Some of that literature looks at distributional effects of environmental or
energy taxes used to help control pollution or energy consumption. Yet most pollution
policy does not involve taxation at all. Instead, it employs permits or command and
control (CAC) regulations such as technology standards, quotas, and other quantity
constraints. Existing studies are mostly about effects on economic efficiency. This
literature addresses questions such as: how to measure the costs of reducing pollution or
energy use, how to measure benefits of that pollution abatement, what is the optimal
amount of protection, and what is the most cost-effective way to achieve it.
         Yet CAC environmental restrictions do impose costs, and an important question is
who bears those costs. Moreover, those restrictions provide benefits of environmental
protection, and another important question is who gets those benefits. Thus, full analysis
of environmental policy could address all the same questions as in the tax incidence
literature. Perhaps such analysis could use the same tools to address distributional effects
– not of taxes, but of these other policies that are used to protect the environment.
         This introduction discusses some initial literature on distributional effects of
environmental and energy policy. It uses the literature on tax incidence as a starting point,
but then goes on to point out ways in which distributional effects of environmental policy
are more interesting and difficult. For example, standard tax incidence literature would
point out general equilibrium implications of an excise tax: not only does it affect the
relative price of the taxed commodity, and thus consumers according to how they use
income (uses side), but it also impacts factors intensively used in the production of that
commodity, and thus individuals according to the sources of their income (sources side).
This literature is reviewed in Fullerton and Metcalf (2002).
         Yet an environmental mandate can have those effects and more! To identify the
major effects around which this introduction is organized, consider a simple requirement
that electric generating companies cut a particular pollutant to less than some maximum
quota. This type of mandate is a common policy choice, and it has at least the following
six distributional effects.
         First, it raises the cost of production, so it may raise the equilibrium price of
output and affect consumers according to spending on electricity (uses side).
         Second, it may reduce production, reduce returns in that industry, and place
burdens on workers or investors (sources side).
         Third, a quota is likely to generate scarcity rents. Take the simple case with fixed
pollution per unit output, so the only "abatement technology" is to reduce output. Then a
restriction on the quantity of pollution is essentially a restriction on output. Normally
firms want to restrict output but are thwarted by antitrust policy. Yet in this case,
environmental policy requires firms to restrict output. It allows firms to raise price, and
so they make profits, or rents, from the artificial scarcity of production. Just as tradable
permit systems hand out valuable permits, the non-tradable quota also provides scarcity
rents – to those given the restricted "rights" to pollute.
         Fourth, if it cleans up the air, this policy provides benefits that may accrue to
some individuals more than others. The "incidence" of these costs and benefits usually
refer to their distribution across groups ranked from rich to poor, but analysts and policy-
makers may also be interested in the distribution of costs or benefits across groups
defined by age, ethnicity, region, or between urban, rural, and suburban households.
         Fifth, regardless of a neighborhood's air quality improvement, many individuals
could be greatly affected through capitalization effects, especially through land and house
prices. Suppose this pollution restriction improves air quality everywhere, but in some
                                                    -2-

locations more than others. If the policy is permanent, then anybody who owns land in
the most-improved locations experience capital gains that could equal the present value
of all future willingness to pay for cleaner air in that neighborhood. Similar capitalization
effects provide windfall gains and losses to those who own corporate stock: capital losses
on stockholdings in the company that must pay more for environmental technology, and
capital gains on stockholdings in companies that sell a substitute product.
         Capitalization effects are pernicious. A large capital gain may be experienced by
absentee landlords, because they can charge higher rents in future years. Certain renters
with cleaner air might be worse off, if their rent increases by more than their willingness
to pay for that improvement. Moreover, the gains may not even accrue to those who
breathe the cleaner air! If households move into the cleaner area after the policy change,
then they must pay more for the privilege. The entire capital gain goes to those who
happen to own property at the time of the change, even if they sell it at the higher price
and move out before the air improves. Similarly, new stockholders in the burdened
company may be "paying" for abatement technology in name only, with the entire present
value of the burden felt by those who did own the stock at the time of enactment, even if
they sell that stock before the policy is implemented.
         Sixth, strong distributional effects are felt during the transition. If workers are
laid off by the impacted firm, their burden is not just the lower wage they might have to
accept at another firm. It includes the very sharp pain of disruption, retraining, and
months or years of unemployment between jobs. These effects are analogous to
capitalization effects, if the worker has large investment in particular skills – human
capital that is specific to this industry. If the industry shrinks, those workers suffer a
significant loss in the value of that human capital. They must also move their families,
acquire new training, and start back at the bottom of the firm hierarchy, with significant
psychological costs.
         Using these six categories in six sections below, this introduction covers research
in economics that has begun to analyze distributional effects of environmental and energy
policy.1 Particular emphasis is given to the twenty-one papers published in economics
journals that are reprinted in this book. To set the stage for that discussion, however, the
rest of this preliminary section reviews some earlier papers.
         The classic text in the economic analysis of environmental policy is the book by
Baumol and Oates (1988), which devotes a whole chapter to distributional effects. Since
they nicely review the literature prior to 1988, this book emphasizes later literature and
the current state of the art. Yet that text effectively issues two challenges to subsequent
researchers. First, because research on distributional effects was not very extensive or
well developed, the allocation of an entire chapter to it effectively challenges the field of
environmental economics to deal with this topic more seriously. This collection
examines how well recent researchers have risen to the challenge.
         A second challenge in that chapter of Baumol and Oates (1988) is related to the
idea that many effects of environmental policy are likely regressive. Consider the six
categories just listed. First, it likely raises the price of products that intensively use fossil
fuels, such as electricity and transportation. Expenditures on these products make up a
high fraction of low income budgets. Second, if abatement technologies are capital-
intensive, then any mandate to abate pollution likely induces firms to use new capital as a
substitute for polluting inputs. If so, then capital is in more demand relative to labor,
depressing the relative wage (which may also impact low-income households). Third,

1
 Another good review of recent literature on distributional effects of environmental policy is provided by
Parry, Sigman, Walls, and Williams (2006).
                                                      -3-

pollution permits handed out to firms bestow scarcity rents on well-off individuals who
own those firms. Fourth, low-income individuals may place more value on food and
shelter than on incremental improvements in environmental quality. If high-income
individuals get the most benefit of pollution abatement, then this effect is regressive as
well. Fifth, low-income renters miss out on house price capitalization of air quality
benefits. Well-off landlords may reap those gains. Sixth, transition effects are hard to
analyze, but could well impact the economy in ways that hurt the unemployed, those
already at some disadvantage relative to the rest of us.
        That is a potentially incredible list of effects that might all hurt the poor more
than the rich. The second challenge for subsequent literature, then, is to determine
whether these fears are valid, and whether anything can be done about them – other than
to forego environmental improvements!
        Following this introduction is a paper by Fullerton (2001, Chapter 2 of this
volume) which does not make an original research contribution in the usual sense.
Rather, it is a synthesis and exposition of economic analyses to compare eight pollution
control policies: taxes, subsidies, permits handed out to firms, permits auctioned by
government, CAC performance standards, CAC technology mandates, and even Coase
(1960) solutions where the "property rights" to pollute might be owned by the polluter or
by victims. It also shows which policies may equivalently affect each group. For
example, the pollution tax and auction of permits both capture scarcity rents for the
government, whereas the simple pollution quota and the handout of permits both give
those rents to firms. The eight policy alternatives are compared on multiple grounds,
including economic efficiency, administrative efficiency, political feasibility,
enforceability, and distributional effects. The paper is included here because of the
simple exposition of who gains and who loses from each environmental policy. A simple
diagram shows the burden on consumers, the gains to the owners of the right to pollute,
and the gains to those who value the environment.

I. Costs to Consumers

        To categorize the six distributional effects, consider the market for a polluting
good (such as electricity). In Figure 1, demand reflects private marginal benefits (PMB).
Yet production has private marginal costs (PMC), and the pollution externality means
that social marginal costs (SMC) include marginal environmental costs (MEC).2
        In this diagram, the private market with no policy restriction would produce to the
point where PMB=PMC, namely output Qo. The optimal output is where SMB=SMC, at
reduced output Q'. A pollution quota would effectively restrict output to Q', and we can
now categorize distributional effects. This section deals with costs to consumers.
        This environmental policy raises the equilibrium output price to a new "gross"
price, Pg, and it reduces consumer surplus by the trapezoid area A+D. The amount of this
price increase and resulting burden depend on various considerations that must be
analyzed. It is relatively large, as drawn, because the elasticity of demand for this output
is low compared to the elasticity of supply. If consumers can switch to good substitutes
more easily, then demand is flatter, consumer burden is smaller, and the loss of producer
surplus is larger. Thus the economic analysis in each case must measure both demand
and supply elasticities, and the fraction of each group's income spent on this good.

2
 For simplicity, assume that pollution per unit of electricity is fixed. Then the demand for electricity is the
"demand for pollution", and the only way to cut pollution is to cut output. The externality can be corrected
by a tax on pollution, which is equivalent in this case to a tax on output. It also can be corrected by a
permit system. The example in the text is a simple quota, or quantity constraint.
                                                      -4-


                             Figure 1: Categories of Gains and Losses




         The Clean Air Act is likely to raise the cost of electricity, gasoline, and other
products that rely on fossil fuel. Estimates suggest that such spending is a higher fraction
of total spending for low-income than for high-income families, so early studies such as
Gianessi et al (1979) find that costs of the Clean Air Act in the U.S. are regressive.3
Then, in other research, Robison (1985) assumes that all industrial pollution control costs
are passed forward into output prices, and he uses a disaggregate input-output model to
calculate the ultimate effects on all goods purchased by twenty different income groups.
He finds that burdens are very regressive, ranging from 0.76 percent of income for the
poorest group to 0.16 percent of income for the richest group.
         James Poterba (1991, Chapter 3 of this volume) looks at the gasoline tax, and he
makes two points that both tend to offset that previous finding of regressivity. First, early
studies rank families from the lowest annual income to the highest annual income. Yet
annual income fluctuates, and it varies over the life-cycle. The very young and old spend

3
  Even if the amount spent on electricity is higher for a rich family than for a poor family, that electricity
spending as a fraction of income is found to be lower for those with high income. Thus the policy is
"regressive", meaning that the burden as a fraction of income is lower for those with more income. The
burden is "proportional" if the ratio of burden to income is the same across all income groups, and it is
"progressive" if that burden ratio is higher for those with more income.
                                             -5-

more than their annual income, because they know that annual income is temporarily
low. They are not "poor" in terms of permanent or lifetime income. Poterba points out
that annual total consumption expenditure is a good proxy for permanent or lifetime
income, and so he ranks families from the lowest to the highest annual consumption.
Then, because those with low annual income tend to consume more of their income than
those with high annual income, any commodity tax appears to be more regressive on the
basis of annual income. Thus the change to annual consumption as a proxy for
permanent income makes the gasoline tax less regressive.
         The second point about the gas tax is that the very poorest households cannot
afford to own a car at all. They take public transportation. Thus, Poterba finds that the
burden of a gas tax is the highest percent of "permanent income" for those in the middle
of that spectrum. It is not strictly regressive at all. This point would not necessarily
reduce the regressivity of other taxes on energy, however, if the poorest households do
use a high fraction of total expenditures on heating fuel and electricity.
         Another two points are raised by Walls and Hanson (1999, Chapter 4 of this
volume). They also compare annual and lifetime income, but not using consumption as a
proxy for lifetime income. They start with 1,000 households from the 1990 National
Personal Transportation Survey, which includes socioeconomic and demographic data as
well as each household's vehicle make, model, and year. Then, to construct lifetime
income for each household, they use coefficients on household characteristics from the
lifetime wage-age profiles estimated by Fullerton and Rogers (1993) using longitudinal
data from the Panel Survey of Income Dynamics. Second, instead of just looking at a gas
tax, Walls and Hanson look at emission policies. For each vehicle in the NPTS cross-
section, they assign an emissions rate (using remote-sensing emissions data on 90,000
vehicles). They then calculate the effect on each household of (1) the current system of
annual registration fees based on car value, (2) basing annual fees on vehicle miles
traveled (VMT) of that vehicle, (3) a fee based on the emission rate of the vehicle, or (4)
on the estimated emissions of the vehicle (emissions per mile times miles).
         Interestingly, the current fees based on car value are only somewhat regressive:
low income families spend a high fraction of income on cars, but higher income groups
buy higher-valued cars. Yet those fees perversely charge less for the more-polluting cars
(which have lower value). The attempt to fix those incentives by placing more tax on the
low-valued polluting cars undeniably makes the fee more regressive. The VMT fee looks
a lot like the gas tax discussed above. The emissions fee is more regressive, because it is
VMT times the emission rate, but the fee based on emissions rate is the most regressive.
All such fees are less regressive when viewed in a lifetime perspective.
         Contributions come in pairs in this section, including those of Metcalf (1999,
Chapter 5 of this volume). First, instead of looking only at gas or vehicle taxes, he
considers a comprehensive environmental tax reform that includes a carbon tax, gas tax,
air pollution taxes, and a virgin materials tax. Together these would raise prices of
various energy-related goods (and revenue equal to 10% of current federal receipts in the
U.S.). He then uses an input-output model to calculate the increase in price of every
industry's output, and he calculates the effect of those price increases on a large sample of
households from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). He shows that all of those
environmental taxes are regressive when measured against annual income, to varying
degrees, but each is less regressive when measured against lifetime income.
         Second, however, he points out the importance of what is done with the revenue.
If the package were revenue-neutral, the new environmental taxes could be used for a
combination of: an exemption from payroll tax for the first $5,000 of wages, a $150 tax
credit for each exemption in the personal income tax, plus an across-the-board income tax
                                                      -6-

cut of 4%. This tax shift is still somewhat regressive when measured by annual income,
but the overall package has no effect (or is slightly progressive) when measured by
lifetime income. The key point is that environmental tax reform does not need to be
regressive; the revenue could be used in ways that are even more progressive than the
payroll and income tax cuts assumed by Metcalf.
         Sarah West (2004, Chapter 6 in this volume) studies gasoline taxes and car
policies related to emissions, as do those reviewed above, but she makes two additional
points. First, consumers have preferences over VMT, rather than gasoline per se, and so
utility-based welfare measures are best calculated from VMT demand. Yet the price of
driving a mile is endogenous. It depends on miles per gallon, which depends on the
choice of vehicle, which depends on the price of gasoline and on all of the household's
unobserved characteristics. Since the price of a mile is endogenous, a regression of VMT
demand on VMT-price would yield biased coefficients. She corrects for this bias by first
estimating discrete demand for vehicle type and then using those results in the estimation
of continuous demand for VMT. This correction is important, and most good subsequent
studies of car and gas demand have undertaken similar corrections.
         Her second major point is that groups have different price responsiveness. She
uses total consumption to classify households from poor to rich (as a proxy for permanent
income), and she estimates VMT demand for each decile separately. She finds that
poorer groups are more price-responsive, which reduces their gas tax burden. In Figure 1
above, their demand would be flatter, and so the same increase in price (from Po to Pg)
would reduce quantity more (from Qo to Q'). It would thus shrink their loss in consumer
surplus (area A+D). This effect reduces the regressivity of the gas tax.4
         The last paper included in this section is by West and Williams (2004, Chapter 7
in this volume). In their words, their "study makes two main contributions" (p. 536).5
First, they use an estimated demand system to calculate four different measures of
"burden" for each group. The simplest procedure used in early literature assumes no
price responses, but they also calculate a consumer surplus measure assuming all groups
have the same price response, a consumer surplus measure using each group's own price
response, and an additional measure based on the equivalent variation for each group.
The first of those makes the gas tax look most regressive. As in West (2004), the use of
each group's own response makes the gas tax look least regressive. The second point of
West and Williams is to calculate incidence for three different assumptions about use of
the revenue. The gas tax is most regressive with no return of revenue, it is less regressive
when revenue is used to reduce wage taxes, and the whole reform becomes progressive
when revenue is used to provide the same lump-sum rebate to each household. This last
result highlights the tradeoff between equity and efficiency, since the uniform lump-sum
rebate cannot reduce income tax distortions by cutting taxes on work effort.

II. Costs to Producers or Factors

        Energy or environmental policy may also impose burdens on producers or on
factors of production. Figure 1 shows a simple partial equilibrium model, where the loss

4
  Many of the poorest households don't own cars or buy gas, so the gas tax is somewhat progressive over
the first few deciles and then regressive over remaining deciles. The fact that the price elasticity falls with
income means that the gas tax is even more progressive over the first few deciles and less regressive
beyond that. West also calculates the incidence of a subsidy to newer cars; it may encourage the purchase
of newer cars with lower emission rates, but it is a decidedly regressive policy.
5
  Like other papers discussed above, it really makes more than two contributions. Unfortunately, however,
space constraints here preclude more than about two points from each paper included in this volume.
                                                    -7-

in producer surplus (area B+E) is relatively small because the supply curve (PMC) is
relatively elastic. These losses could be larger if instead production involves industry-
specific resources in relatively fixed supply, such as a specific type of energy, land with
specific characteristics, or labor with industry-specific skills. If so, then the cut-back in
production burdens the owners of those limited resources.
         A general equilibrium model could be used to solve for the new economy-wide
wage, rate of return, or land rents, and a more sophisticated dynamic general equilibrium
model could be used to solve for short run effects, capital deepening, and the transition to
a new balanced growth path with a new labor/capital ratio.
         The early development of this literature is exemplified by the dynamic growth
model of John and Pecchenio (1994, Chapter 8 in this volume). In this model, production
uses labor, physical capital, and natural environmental capital. Each agent's earnings
when young are allocated between savings for consumption when old, or for maintenance
of the environment. That choice takes into account that environmental maintenance can
increase welfare when old, but it does not take into account the welfare of unborn
generations. Thus the framework is useful for studying a particular kind of distributional
effect – between generations. As in other natural resource models, this economy can
have multiple equilibria: one with low environmental maintenance that leads to low
production and low investment, and the other with high physical capital and good
environmental quality. This insight also helps explain some observed distributional
differences between rich and poor countries, even poor countries that start with abundant
resources. The paper also describes alternative transition paths: one with growing capital
and degrading environment, one with both capital stocks shrinking, and one with both
growing. It also points to the importance of environmental accounting, since rising
income does not necessarily mean rising welfare for future generations.
         A different kind of general equilibrium model is in Fullerton and Heutel (2007a,
Chapter 9 in this volume). It is not a growth model, since labor and capital are both in
fixed supply, but it can be used to solve analytically for the effect of an energy tax on
multiple output prices and factor prices – including the wage for labor and the return to
capital. The "clean" sector uses only labor and capital, but the "dirty" sector uses labor,
capital, and pollution. With three inputs, any two can be complements or substitutes.
First, the "substitution effect" places less burden on whichever factor is a better substitute
for pollution (and more burden on the other one). Second, because the pollution tax
raises output price and reduces production, the "output effect" is likely to place more
burden on whichever factor is intensively used in the dirty sector.6
         They then look at special cases. Even if both factors are equal substitutes for
pollution, the intensively-used one does not always bear more burden. If the dirty sector
is capital intensive, for example, then the output effect would tend to place more burden
on capital, depending on consumers' ability to substitute between the two outputs. But if
that effect is relatively small, it can be more than offset by the fact that the dirty sector is
trying to substitute out of pollution and into both capital and labor at its current
capital/labor ratio, which means less burden on capital. Finally, these authors employ
stylized facts and plausible parameter values to conclude that "the impact of factor
intensities over the plausible range is less important than the impact of the elasticities of
substitution between pollution and capital or labor" (p.587). In other words, to know who
bears the burden of energy policy, it is important to estimate cross-price elasticities.



6
 In this model, environmental quality is separable in utility. In a more complicated model, the increase in
environmental quality itself could affect the relative demands for goods and thus returns to factors.
                                                      -8-

        In a working paper, Fullerton and Heutel (2007b) note that most environmental
policies do not use taxes. Instead, regulators have employed CAC restrictions on the
quantity of pollution (a "quota"), on pollution per unit output (a "performance standard"),
or on pollution per unit of some input (a "technology mandate"). They find the same
effects as before but identify other new effects as well. The restriction on the ratio of
pollution to output can be achieved both by reducing pollution in the numerator and
increasing output in the denominator. Thus, it involves an implicit "output subsidy".
Under plausible conditions, this effect can help any factor that is intensively used in the
polluting sector.
        In other words, actual policies can be tricky. With multiple offsetting effects on
the wage rate and return to capital, we cannot just assume that a restriction on the
polluting sector will injure whatever factor is intensively employed there.

III. Benefits via Scarcity Rents

        When the quantity of the polluting good is restricted in Figure 1, the restriction
makes the good scarce and gives rise to scarcity rents (area A+B). If the policy is a tax
on pollution or the auction of permits, then the government captures those scarcity rents
as revenue. If the policy is a handout of permits or a quantity restriction (quota), then
area A+B becomes profits to the firms that are allowed to produce and sell that newly-
restricted quantity. That simple theory may be obvious in the case of Figure 1, where
pollution is a fixed ratio to output, because then a restriction on pollution also restricts the
quantity of output. But what if firms can abate pollution per unit of output? What if the
policy requires a particular technology, and entry is permitted?
        Maloney and McCormick (1982, Chapter 10 in this volume) show how scarcity
rents can still be generated in these circumstances, and they provide empirical evidence
for two different regulations, using data on stock market returns around the time the new
regulation is imposed. First, in 1974, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
imposed new cotton-dust technology standards uniformly on all textile firms.7 Looking
at a portfolio of 14 textile stocks, they find a significantly positive abnormal return
around the time this rule is imposed. This result is not sensitive to various alterations of
the model and time period, and it is not explained by other events at the time.
        In addition, many rules do effectively restrict entry by imposing stricter regulation
on new firms only, while "grandfathering" existing firms. Maloney and McCormick also
look at the 1973 decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in favor of environmental groups
that sued the EPA to "prevent significant deterioration" of air quality in areas already in
compliance with National Ambient Air Quality Standards. Because this decision could
not be fully anticipated, it represents a good "event" to study. Only new entrants are
forced to meet stricter standards, especially those who emit sulfur oxides and particulates.
These emissions are concentrated in nonferrous ore smelting, so they look at stock prices
of existing copper, lead, and zinc smelters. Again they find significant positive abnormal
returns to existing firms in those industries.
        One might think that producers would abhor costly new regulations, in a political
battle between polluters and environmentalists, but this evidence suggests that "the
interests of environmentalists and producers may coincide against the welfare of

7
 If marginal and average costs were perfectly flat and identical for all firms, and if this regulation shifted
costs up by the same amount for all firms, then none would make profits. But if a fixed number of
competitive firms have U-shaped average cost curves, then a new technology standard may increase
marginal costs more than average costs. If so, the new intersection of demand and marginal cost
determines a price that is above average cost, generating profits.
                                                     -9-

consumers" (pp. 99-100). The implications are important not only for the political
economy of enacting environmental legislation, but for the distributional impact as well:
environmental policies impose abatement costs that must be borne by producers and
consumers, but also can provide significant benefits to others by generating profits.
         The U.S. is now contemplating a policy to limit carbon emissions that contribute
to global warming, and such a policy might have huge effects both because fossil fuel is
such a large input to production and because the policy might require large reductions.
Dinan and Rogers (2002, Chapter 11 of this volume) find that restricting emissions by
just 15%, relative to business as usual, would raise prices by 2.8%. If this policy were a
carbon tax, it might raise $128 billion (in 1998 levels and dollars). More likely, however,
U.S. policy would hand out tradable permits and $128 billion of private profits for firms.
Thus they find that "the magnitude of the wealth that would be redistributed … could
substantially exceed the actual cost to the economy" (p.200).8
         Dinan and Rogers use results from the input-output model of Metcalf (1999) on
the carbon content and price increase for each commodity, and they use a large sample of
57,247 households from the Current Population Survey matched with tax return data
from the Statistics of Income and consumption data from the CEX. They also account for
a few intricacies: first, the permit policy would exacerbate deadweight losses from taxes
that have their own distributional effect; second, the corporate tax would capture for
government some of the profits; third, the policy decision about use of that revenue
would have its own distributional effects; fourth, the higher output prices would trigger
increases in indexed transfer programs like Social Security, with further distributional
effects. With all of these intricacies, the predominant effects are still (1) low-income
households spend more of their income on carbon-intensive products, and (2) high-
income households own the corporations that receive profits. Thus, the policy is overall
highly regressive unless government captures a higher fraction of the scarcity rents and
uses that money to provide an equal lump sum amount to every individual.
         Parry (2004, Chapter 12 of this volume) addresses some of the same questions,
but uses a more stylized analytical model with less detailed calculations but with explicit
formulas that show impacts of underlying parameters. He also looks at other pollutants
(SO2 and NOX) and other policies (performance standards, technology mandates, and
taxes on dirty inputs). He finds that grandfathered permits benefit stockholders and thus
can provide gains to high-income groups while imposing large costs on the poor. This
effect is diminished with more substantial requirements for abatement. The burden on
low-income groups can be reduced by the other policies that do not provide windfall
profits to stockholders. When abatement costs differ between sources, then a permit
system can minimize the overall costs of abatement, but that gain in economic efficiency
can be offset by the social costs of adverse redistribution if the social welfare function
exhibits aversion to income inequality. In other words, social welfare might be raised
more by inefficient CAC mandates than by grandfathered permits. And the auction of
permits achieves efficiency without that handout of profits to wealthy stockholders.
         A rather contrary view is expressed in the next paper by Louis Kaplow (2004,
Chapter 13 of this volume), who suggests that evaluation of the economic efficiency of
such a reform need not account for adverse distributional effects at all! If a gas tax or
other pollution policy imposes costs on low-income groups and benefits to high income
groups, those redistributive effects could be offset by adjustments to the income tax.

8
  Theory suggests that U.S. firms could profit from the distribution of these carbon permits, but this theory
is confirmed by evidence for the European Union's Emissions Trading System. Sijm et al (2006) find that
60 to 100% of the cost of CO2 permits are passed through to consumers in Germany and the Netherlands,
even though power companies receive permits for free. Firms thus realize substantial windfall profits.
                                                    -10-

Moreover, any policy's adverse distributional effects should not be attributed to the
policy, but rather, to the failure to make those income tax adjustments. The point is that
we need not choose the less efficient environmental policy in order to avoid adverse
distributional effects, since we could instead offset those effects through income tax
adjustments. His argument is more complicated and subtle than can be stated in this short
introduction, which is a good reason to include the whole paper in this volume.9 The
interesting conceptual point is not that environmental policy can proceed regardless of
measured effects on distribution. Indeed, measures of distributional effects provided by
the various papers in this book are important, in order to know how to adjust the income
tax in a way that would neutralize these distributional effects.
        Because quotas or grandfathering of permits provides benefits to firms as well as
to environmentalists, it can create a powerful coalition that greatly increases the political
feasibility of environmental protection. Bovenberg, Goulder and Gurney (2005, chapter
14 if this volume) investigate exactly what fraction of permits or rents must be allocated
to firms to cover their losses, while other permits are sold at auction to achieve greater
efficiency by cutting distortionary taxes. They build analytical and numerical models
with perfect competition, constant returns to scale, a clean good, an intermediate good,
and a final good produced in a polluting process. All three goods use labor and capital.
If those inputs were perfectly mobile, then each industry would earn zero profits both
before and after a pollution tax or auction of permits, so the simplest case implies that no
permits need to be grandfathered to firms. Yet Bovenberg et al recognize adjustment
costs in the re-allocation of capital, so firms would indeed make losses upon imposition
of a sector-specific policy. For little abatement, they find that only about a quarter of
permits must be handed out, but higher levels of required abatement increase that fraction
– and the loss in efficiency from not cutting other taxes.

IV. Benefits of Protection

        A policy to abate pollution also provides benefits to those who breathe the air,
those who drink the water, and those who enjoy recreation. In Figure 1, these gains are
represented by area C+D+E, the sum of "marginal environmental damages" over the
range that pollution is reduced (from Qo to Q'). Who are these individuals, and what
socioeconomic groups receive most of these benefits? These questions are related to who
bears the cost of pollution (except that a proposal may not abate pollution proportionately
everywhere). A key question is whether polluters choose to locate disproportionately in
poor or minority areas. This is the question of "environmental justice."
        As a representative of early attempts to address these questions, Brooks and Sethi
(1997, Chapter 15 of this volume) employ much data from the 1988-1992 Toxic Release
Inventory (TRI) in the United States, plus 1990 census data on race, ethnicity, poverty
status, and educational attainment at the zip code level. They improve upon prior papers
by weighting different air emissions according to toxicity, and calculating for each zip
code an exposure based on the distance to various pollution sources around it. They
regress this exposure on census variables and other controls to find that exposure is
significantly and positively related to: the proportion of blacks in the community, the
proportion who are renters, the percent poor, lower voter turnout, and lower educational
attainment. Most of the paper is careful to discuss the "relationship" between exposure
and these socioeconomic variables, but some of it lapses into causal interpretations. The

9
  In particular, he assumes that leisure is separable in utility, whereas many other papers assume instead
that the environment is separable in utility.
                                                     -11-

main problem is the endogeneity of all these variables: if high pollution reduces local
land values and housing rents, and if low-income households have more need for basic
necessities than for the "purchase" of clean air, then low rents may bring them into the
area – reverse causality. If so, then estimated coefficients are biased, and pollution does
not impose disproportionate burdens on poor and minority households.
         The possibility of simultaneous location decisions by households and firms was
raised as early as Vicki Been (1994). This problem is pernicious, however, and pervades
the literature. Few have tried to model both decisions simultaneously. For example, Hite
(2000, Chapter 16 of this volume) looks at endogenous location choices of households,
given fixed locations for environmental harms. She estimates a "random utility model" of
location choices using 2,889 house sales with data on house characteristics, neighborhood
characteristics, and distance to any of the four landfill sites around Columbus Ohio. With
full information and no location constraints such as discrimination, then no household
would envy another in the sense of preferring the other's consumption bundle. Using the
model, she can calculate the probability that a household in one area with estimated
preferences would really prefer to live in a different area. If so, it could indicate
discrimination. She finds some evidence for environmental discrimination against
African American households, but not against poor households. Note that this potential
discrimination would be discrimination in housing markets. Since polluter locations are
fixed, she does not look at discrimination in location decisions of firms. 10
         A further step towards dealing with the simultaneous location decisions by both
firms and households is taken by Gray and Shadbegian (2004, Chapter 17). They look at
many determinants of air and water pollution and of enforcement actions at 409 pulp and
paper mills from 1985 to 1997, including local demographic variables. They recognize
potential for reverse causation, however, since poor households could move into dirty
neighborhoods for cheaper housing, and those with small children or elderly who are
sensitive to pollution could move out. Thus, demographics near the plant are endogenous,
and OLS regressions are biased. They do not model household location decisions
directly along with polluter location decisions, because the sample of plants is quite old.
Instead, they run a regression of those endogenous local characteristics on a set of
instruments, namely, the demographic characteristics of people living 50-100 miles away
from the polluting plant. The idea is that these "spatially lagged" variables are highly
correlated with local characteristics, but not influenced by effects of pollution from that
plant, since pollution effects decline with distance. Using predicted local characteristics
in place of actual local characteristics, they find that plants in poor neighborhoods emit
more pollution, and those near kids or elderly emit less, but surprisingly, they find that
plants in nonwhite neighborhoods also emit less pollution.
         Most of this introduction is concerned with distributional effects across income
groups, although this section has touched on effects across ethnic groups. However,
effects of environmental policy could be measured across groups defined by age, health
status, region, or other breakdown. Also, most of these studies employ various "revealed
preference" data on willingness to pay (WTP) for a cleaner environment, such as through
house prices. In contrast, Alberini, Cropper, Krupnick, and Simon (2004, Chapter 18 of
this volume) use surveys of "stated preferences" to look at WTP by different groups
defined by age and health status.
         When the U.S. EPA (1999) looks at all costs and benefits of the Clean Air Act,
they find the huge majority of benefits in the form of mortality reductions. Who benefits
10
  In a 2002 working paper, Ann Wolverton looks directly at plant location decisions and the community
characteristics at the time the plant was originally sited. She finds that the polluting plants in her sample
did not locate disproportionately in minority neighborhoods.
                                                 -12-

from these mortality reductions? Theoretical predictions are ambiguous. Older or less
healthy individuals have higher baseline mortality risk, and thus might be willing to pay
more for a reduction in the risk of dying this year. If so, environmental policy benefits
the elderly and infirm. On the other hand, they may have fewer years to live, and for that
reason be willing to pay less for a reduction in the risk of dying this year. Following
established contingent valuation techniques, Alberini et al survey 930 Canadians and
1200 Americans.11 They find an overall Value of a Statistical Life (VSL) between $1.5
and $4.8 million, somewhat less than the $6 million figure used by the EPA. Although
no statistically significant age effect is found in the U.S., the WTP falls significantly after
age 70 in Canada. The WTP rises with income in both samples, but significantly only in
the U.S. The value of risk reductions is significantly higher in both samples for those
with family history of chronic heart or lung disease and for those recently admitted to a
hospital for a heart or lung condition.
         Cameron and McConnaha (2006, Chapter 19) do not provide direct evidence on
distributional effects of environmental policy, but they shed light on whether polluters
locate in certain types of neighborhoods, whether people "come to the nuisance", or both.
They look simply at migrations between the four census measurements over three
decades (1970-2000), in response to environmental hazards and subsequent cleanups.
The units of observation are census tracts within a 12-mile radius around each of four
contaminated Superfund sites. For the vicinity around each site, they estimate changes in
the distance profile over time for the concentration of each of 22 household
characteristics (using 88 different regressions). For ten of the 22 characteristics, they find
statistically significant changes in its relative concentration near the site over time (as
these sites are identified and then cleaned up). In the first decade after the contamination
is announced, they find declines in the prevalence of "children under six" and "married
couples with children", and they find increases in seniors, married couples without
children, female-headed households without children, and non-family households. In
many cases, those migrations are reversed in the decade after a clean up is complete.
Results on nonwhites differ across their four sites.
         The implication here is not just that families with children might well be burdened
by pollution, but that they move away! Other less-sensitive groups take their place. This
evidence makes it very difficult, in the next generation of literature, for researchers to
take neighborhood characteristics as exogenous – as done by some earlier researchers.
Other evidence reviewed above makes it equally difficult to take pollution levels as
exogenous. The simultaneity of household and polluter location choices continues to be
one of the greatest challenges to economic research in this area.

V. Effects via Land Prices

        The gains and losses each period that are depicted in Figure 1 can be capitalized
into asset prices. Section III above discussed how the annual flow of "scarcity rents"
(area A+B) is capitalized into corporate stock prices, and this section discusses how the
"benefits from environmental protection" (area C+D+E) are capitalized into land prices.
If a policy provides cleaner air to a particular neighborhood, then the entire present value



11
  The protocol includes much information on changes to risk, and yes-or-no dichotomous choice questions
about whether the respondent would be willing to purchase that reduction in risk for a particular price
(chosen randomly from one of four predetermined values). Additional questions relate to income and
health status, followed by debriefing questions to check the respondent's comprehension.
                                                    -13-

of those gains can be captured by whoever owns a house site at the time of the change.12
These individuals who gain may not be the same as those who breathe the cleaner air.
Similarly, if certain households migrate into an area near a contaminated Superfund site
to take advantage of cheaper housing, then the clean up of that site does not compensate
those who suffered the losses from the environmental hazard.
         Since at least Ridker and Henning (1967), economists have estimated house price
as a hedonic function of house and neighborhood characteristics such as air quality, water
quality, or distance from a toxic waste site. The coefficient on such a variable indicates
the market's willingness to pay for improvement in that environmental measure.13 This
method will not easily reveal the distributional effects of all pollution, or all abatement
policies, but it can be used to calculate the distribution of gains from a marginal policy to
abate. Ted Gayer (2000, Chapter 20 of this volume) uses 6,562 house sales and GIS data
to calculate distance to each Superfund site around Grand Rapids Michigan. However,
the environmental risk itself may be determined in part by house prices, if polluters are
more likely to locate near inexpensive homes. If so, then the usual OLS regression of
house price on house and neighborhood characteristics and this environmental risk yields
biased coefficients. Gayer finds that this variable is indeed endogenous, and he corrects
for it using a first stage regression of that risk on exogenous instrumental variables.
Results indicate that welfare gains of risk reduction would be greater for neighborhoods
with high income and education, and lower for with more nonwhites.
         This correction for endogeneity is an improvement. Still, however, Gayer's
exogenous instruments include the neighborhood's socioeconomic variables as well as
measures of potential for collective action. Firm location or pollution decisions can help
affect environmental risks and house prices simultaneously in his model, but household
characteristics are exogenous. Thus this research does not yet solve the chicken and egg
problem regarding whether polluting firms locate in low-income and minority
neighborhoods, or poor families arrive later to take advantage of low house prices.
         Using data from 1989-91 in Southern California, Sieg, Smith, Banzhaf and Walsh
(2004, Chapter 21 of this volume) estimate the parameters of a structural model that can
be used to calculate the welfare effects of large air quality improvements, such as those
from 1990 to 1995 that reduced ozone from 3% to 33% across different neighborhoods.
They incorporate how preference heterogeneity leads some households to respond to
changes in local amenities by moving, which induces changes in house prices, which
might induce further moves until a new equilibrium is attained. The paper shows that the
general equilibrium calculation of value accounting for these house price changes is quite
different from the partial equilibrium value based on fixed house prices. In the results for
particular locations, the two measures differ much more than on average and may have
different signs. Even when a poor location experiences some improvement, house price
increases can offset that benefit. In one location where ozone fell by 24%, house prices
rise nearly 11%. Poor families may lose, while landlords gain.
         While local or regional pollutants may be capitalized into residential land prices,
global effects can be capitalized into other land prices. Mendelsohn, Nordhaus and Shaw
(1994) regress agricultural land prices on soil attributes and other local characteristics
including temperature, precipitation, and other climate variables. The use of a cross
section implies that all farmers have already adapted to their climate. This Ricardian

12
   That statement is strictly true only with inelastic supply of land. The price change is moderated if supply
is elastic, such as by the conversion of more fringe land into residential use.
13
   An excellent recent example of hedonic house price estimation is Chay and Greenstone (2005). Their
estimates could be used to study distributional effects, but they focus mostly on aggregate estimates
correcting for omitted variable bias and self selection issues.
                                            -14-

method can be used to calculate the long run gain or loss to each location from climate
change. A few such studies have been undertaken for developing countries.
        Mendelsohn, Dinar, and Williams (2006, Chapter 22 of this volume) use such
results to calibrate response functions for each sector of each country. They then employ
three different climate models to predict temperature and precipitation for a grid of points
on the globe in the year 2100, and they calculate the gain or loss to each country. They
find that poor countries suffer most of the damages from global warming. The reason is
not that those countries will experience more dramatic climate change than other
countries; indeed, results are similar when merely assuming that all experience the same
changes. Rather, poor countries suffer the most damage because they are already in
warmer locations. Poor countries near the equator become even warmer and less
productive, while richer countries in cool climates become warmer and more productive.
        This paper is also a good example of the multiple ways to define distributional
effects of environmental policy: across different countries as well as within a country
between groups defined by income, age, or ethnicity.

VI. Conclusion: Costs of Transition and Remaining Issues

        This introduction has reviewed studies of the effects of environmental policy on
consumers and on producers, through scarcity rents, and benefits of protection. Other
effects of environmental policy are not as well studied in available literature, however,
such adjustment costs and other transition costs. In Figure 1, area F represents the value
of inputs no longer employed in this industry. They are often assumed to be re-employed
elsewhere, with no loss. Yet a change in environmental policy can be very disruptive,
especially for a local economy highly dependent on the resource just protected. Logging
or mining is often a predominant occupation in a town that can be virtually annihilated by
environmental protection. Those individuals may acquire a great deal of industry-
specific human capital, the value of which is lost by the shrinking of that industry. This
human capitalization effect can imply a much larger percentage loss for individuals than
other asset price capitalization effects of environmental policy discussed above.
          The first section above describes two challenges of Baumol and Oates (1988),
so we now turn to judge progress in subsequent literature. First, they challenge
economists to deal more seriously with distributional effects of environmental policy.
While the prior literature does indeed emphasize effects on economic efficiency, the
collection of papers in this volume is ample evidence that economists are beginning to
study distributional effects. Yet much remains to be done.
        The second challenge of Baumol and Oates (1988) is to determine whether energy
or environmental policy is really as regressive as it appears, and if so, what can be done
about it. Papers in this volume show that environmental protection does likely raise the
price of goods such as electricity and transportation that constitute high fractions of low-
income budgets. In addition, pollution permits handed out to firms bestow scarcity rents
on the well-off individuals who own those firms. Yet some of the papers in this volume
show how rebates to low-income households can offset those regressive effects and allow
for environmental protection without adverse distributional consequences. This point
makes it important to use emissions taxes or the auction of permits, to raise revenue
enough to cover the cost of those rebates.
        Other papers in this volume estimate whether high income individuals get more
benefits from environmental protection, because of higher willingness to pay. Results are
mixed. Certainly high income families have more ability to pay, and thus may have
higher demand for recreation and other environmental amenities, but the actual valuation
                                           -15-

by different groups depends on what amenity is being valued. Thus, environmental
policies can be designed to provide sufficient protection to low-income neighborhoods.
Some of the most pernicious effects of environmental policy, however, are the
capitalization effects that provide windfall gains and losses. Those who own land or
corporate stock at the time of environmental damage suffer a capital loss, and they may
sell that asset before the abatement policy is implemented. It then provides gains to
others who did not suffer the loss. Capitalization effects also apply to human capital,
with even greater proportional gains and losses to individuals. These effects also are a
challenge to the economics profession.


References

Alberini, Anna, Maureen Cropper, Alan Krupnick, and Nathalie Simon, "Does the Value
       of a Statistical Life Vary with Age and Health Status? Evidence from the US and
       Canada," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 48(1), July
       2004, 769-92.

Baumol, William J. and Wallace E. Oates, The Theory of Environmental Policy, New
     York: Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 1988.

Been, Vicki, "Locally Undesirable Land Uses in Minority Neighborhoods:
       Disproportionate Siting or Market Dynamics?" Yale Law Journal 103, 1994,
       1383-1422.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, Lawrence H. Goulder, and Derek J. Gurney, "Efficiency Costs of
      Meeting Industry-Distributional Constraints under Environmental Permits and
      Taxes," RAND Journal of Economics 36(4), Winter 2005, 951-71.

Brooks, Nancy, and Rajiv Sethi, "The Distribution of Pollution: Community
      Characteristics and Exposure to Air Toxics," Journal of Environmental
      Economics and Management 32(2), February 1997, 233-50.

Cameron, Trudy Ann, and Ian T. McConnaha, "Evidence of Environmental Migration,"
      Land Economics 82(2), May 2006, 273-90.

Chay, Kenneth, and Michael Greenstone, "Does Air Quality Matter? Evidence from the
       Housing Market," Journal of Political Economy 113(2), April 2005, 376-424.

Coase, Ronald, "The Problem of Social Cost", Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1960, 1-
       44.

Dinan, Terry, and Diane Lim Rogers, "Distributional Effects of Carbon Allowance
       Trading: How Government Decisions Determine Winners and Losers," National
       Tax Journal 55(2), June 2002, 199-221.

Fullerton, Don, "A Framework to Compare Environmental Policies," Southern Economic
        Journal 68(2), 2001, 224-48.
                                         -16-

Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel, "The General Equilibrium Incidence of Environmental
        Taxes," Journal of Public Economics 91, April 2007a, 571-91.

Fullerton, Don, and Garth Heutel, "The General Equilibrium Incidence of Environmental
        Mandates," NBER Working Paper No. 13645, Cambridge, MA, 2007b.

Fullerton, Don, and Gilbert E. Metcalf. "Tax Incidence", in Alan Auerbach and Martin
        Feldstein, eds. Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 4, Amsterdam: North
        Holland, 2002.

Fullerton, Don, and Diane Lim Rogers, Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden?,
        Washington DC: The Brookings Institution, 1993.

Gayer, Ted, "Neighborhood Demographics and the Distribution of Hazardous Waste
       Risks: An Instrumental Variables Estimation", Journal of Regulatory Economics
       17(2), March 2000, 131-55.

Gianessi, Leonard P., Henry M. Peskin, and Edward Wolff, "The Distributional Effects
       of Uniform Air Pollution Policy in the United States," Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 93, May 1979, 281-301.

Gray, Wayne B., and Ronald J. Shadbegian, " 'Optimal' Pollution Abatement--Whose
       Benefits Matter, and How Much?," Journal of Environmental Economics and
       Management 47(3), May 2004, 510-34.

Hite, Diane, "A Random Utility Model of Environmental Equity", Growth and Change
       31, Winter 2000, 40-58.

John, Andrew and R. Pecchenino, "An Overlapping Generations Model of Growth and
       the Environment," The Economic Journal 104, November 1994, 1393-1410.

Kaplow, Louis, "On the (Ir)Relevance of Distribution and Labor Supply Distortion to
      Government Policy," Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(4), Fall 2004, 159-75.

Maloney, Michael T. and Robert E. McCormick, "A Positive Theory of Environmental
      Quality Regulation", Journal of Law & Economics 25(1), April 1982, 99-123.

Mendelsohn, Robert, Ariel Dinar, and Larry Williams, "The Distributional Impact of
      Climate Change on Rich and Poor Countries," Environmental and Development
      Economics 11, 2006, 159-78.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw, "Measuring the Impact of
      Global Warming on Agriculture," American Economic Review 84(4), 1994, 753-
      71.

Metcalf, Gilbert E., "A Distributional Analysis of Green Tax Reforms," National Tax
       Journal 52(4), December 1999, 655-81.

Parry, Ian, "Are Emissions Permits Regressive?", Journal of Environmental Economics
        and Management 47(2), March 2004, 364-87.
                                           -17-


Parry, Ian, Hilary Sigman, Margaret Walls, and Roberton Williams, "The Incidence of
        Pollution Control Policies," in H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg, eds., International
        Yearbook of Environmental and Resource Economics 2006/2007 , Cheltenham,
        UK: Edward Elgar Publishers, 2006.

Poterba, James, "Is the Gasoline Tax Regressive?", in D. Bradford, ed., Tax Policy and
       the Economy 5, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991, 145-64.

Ridker, Ronald G. and John A. Henning, "The Determinants of Residential Property
       Values with Special Reference to Air Pollution," Review of Economics and
       Statistics 49, May 1967, 246-57.

Robison, H. David, "Who Pays for Industrial Pollution Abatement?", Review of
      Economics and Statistics 67, November 1985, 702-6.

Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, Spencer Banzhaf, and Randall Walsh, "Estimating the
       General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated Public
       Goods," International Economic Review 45(4), November 2004, 1047-77.

Sijm, Jos, Karsten Neuhoff, and Yihsu Chen, "CO2 Cost Pass-Through and Windfall
       Profits in the Power Sector," Climate Policy 6(1), 2006, 49-72.

Walls, Margaret and Jean Hanson, "Distributional Aspects of an Environmental Tax
       Shift: The Case of Motor Vehicle Emissions Taxes", National Tax Journal 52(1),
       March 1999, 53-65.

West, Sarah, "Distributional Effects of Alternative Vehicle Pollution Control Policies,"
       Journal of Public Economics 88(3-4), March 2004, 735-57.

West, Sarah, and Roberton Williams, "Estimates from a Consumer Demand System:
       Implications for the Incidence of Environmental Taxes," Journal of
       Environmental Economics and Management 47(3), May 2004, 535-58.

Wolverton, Ann, "Race Does Not Matter: An Examination of a Polluting Plant's Location
      Decision", mimeo, US Environmental Protection Agency, National Center for
      Environmental Economics, Washington, DC, 2002.

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, "The Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act,
       1990-2010," Report to the U.S. Congress, Washington, DC, 1999.
