NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INCOME TAX PROVISIONS AFFECTING OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING:
REVENUE COSTS AND INCENTIVE EFFECTS
James M. Poterba
Todd M. Sinai
Working Paper 14253
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14253

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We are grateful to Igar Fuki for outstanding research assistance, to Alan Auerbach, Daniel Feenberg,
Edward Glaeser, Roger Gordon, Kevin Moore, Lori Stuntz, George Zodrow, and the participants in
the NBER Tax Expenditure Project for helpful comments and advice, and to the National Science
Foundation (Poterba), the Smith Richardson Foundation, and the Research Sponsors Program of the
Zell-Lurie Real Estate Center at the Wharton School (Sinai) for research support. Sections of this
paper draw on Poterba and Sinai (2008). The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by James M. Poterba and Todd M. Sinai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Income Tax Provisions Affecting Owner-Occupied Housing: Revenue Costs and Incentive
Effects
James M. Poterba and Todd M. Sinai
NBER Working Paper No. 14253
August 2008
JEL No. H2,H24,H71,R21
ABSTRACT
The mortgage interest deduction, the property tax deduction, the unique treatment of capital gains
on owner-occupied homes, and the absence of taxation on imputed rent from owner-occupied homes
all influence the effective cost of housing services. They also affect federal income tax revenues and
the distribution of income tax liabilities. We draw on household-level data from the 2004 Survey of
Consumer Finances to analyze how several potential reforms would affect incentives for housing consumption
as well as the distribution of income tax burdens. Our analysis recognizes that changing the mortgage
interest deduction would induce changes in household financial behavior. We estimate that repealing
the mortgage interest deduction in 2003 would have raised income tax revenues by $72.4 billion in
the absence of any portfolio adjustments, but by only $61.9 billion if homeowners responded by drawing
down a limited set of financial assets to partially replace their mortgage debt. The revenue effects
of changing the property tax deduction similarly depend on how state and local governments alter
their mix of revenue instruments in response to federal tax reform. Our results underscore the importance
of recognizing behavioral responses when calculating the revenue costs of income tax provisions relating
to owner-occupied housing.

James M. Poterba
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138
poterba@mit.edu
Todd M. Sinai
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
1465 Steinberg Hall - Dietrich Hall
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
sinai@wharton.upenn.edu

1
Income tax provisions related to owner-occupied housing account for several of the
largest entries in the annual tax expenditure budget. The Joint Committee on Taxation (JCT)
estimates the tax expenditure for the home mortgage interest deduction as $73.7 billion in 2007.
For the state and local property tax deduction, the tax expenditure estimate is $16.8 billion, and
for the favorable treatment of capital gains on owner-occupied housing JCT estimate is $28.5
billion. In addition to these implications for federal revenues, federal income tax policy toward
owner-occupied housing also has first-order effects on incentives for housing consumption.
This paper explores how current federal income tax provisions affect the after-tax cost of
owner-occupied housing as well as income tax revenues. While popular discussions often cite
the tax-deductibility of mortgage interest and property tax payments, and the significant tax
exemption for capital gains on owner-occupied homes, as the key tax benefits for homeowners,
academic studies emphasize the exclusion of the imputed rental income on owner-occupied
housing. We measure the tax subsidy to owner-occupied housing by comparing the last-dollar
user cost of housing under the current tax law with the last-dollar cost under a Haig-Simons
income tax that applies to a broadly-defined measure of economic income. The analysis is based
on household-level data drawn from the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances and the NBER
TAXSIM model.
The subsidy to owner-occupied housing is substantial – over twenty percent on average –
and it varies considerably by age and income. For the highest income groups the marginal cost
falls by about one-third while for the lowest income groups it declines by less than ten percent.
The differences by age are smaller and are almost all due to changing incomes, and
corresponding changes in marginal tax rates, over the life-cycle.

2
We consider the effect of eliminating the mortgage interest deduction and the property
tax deduction on the user cost of owner-occupied housing and on federal income tax receipts.
The effect of both policies is sensitive to our assumption about taxpayer behavioral response. In
the mortgage interest context, Gervais and Pandey (2008) suggest that if mortgage interest were
no longer deductible, many households would retire some of their mortgage debt by drawing
down their holdings of taxable financial assets. This would in turn reduce the income tax
collected on interest and dividends and capital gains on other real or financial assets, thereby
reducing the revenue gain from repealing the mortgage interest deduction (MID). Many earlier
studies recognize that leverage on owner-occupied homes is likely to depend on the tax treatment
of mortgage interest. We explore the sensitivity of the revenue effect of repealing the MID to
alternative assumptions about the set of assets that households might sell to replace mortgage
debt, and about the returns on those assets.
We estimate that repealing the mortgage interest deduction would raise the marginal cost
of owner-occupied housing by five percent on average if households did not change their debtto-value ratios. Under plausible assumptions, between one sixth and one third of that increase
would be undone by changes in leverage. The largest changes take place among higher-income
households who are more affected by the tax change and who have more discretion to make
portfolio adjustments. A key determinant of the portfolio reshuffling associated with a change in
the mortgage interest deduction is the cross-sectional correlation between mortgage indebtedness
and financial assets. Assuming no change in house prices or housing demand, we estimate that
tax revenues would increase by $910 per homeowner, or almost $62 billion, if the mortgage
interest deduction were repealed.

3
We also estimate that repealing the property tax deduction would raise $23.8 billion, or
$350 in revenue per household, after allowing localities to substitute away from such taxes and
toward tax-deductible income taxes. Repealing the property tax deduction has a small impact on
the marginal user cost of housing for most households. It is distributed more evenly across
taxpayers than the tax increase associated with limits on mortgage interest, because almost all
homeowners who itemize claim property tax deductions, while not all such itemizers have
substantial mortgages.
We emphasize revenue estimates and the marginal cost of housing, rather than tax
expenditures such as those estimated by the JCT, in our analysis. Tax expenditure estimates are,
by construction, “static” measures of the revenue cost of particular tax provisions. They are not
estimates of the change in revenues that would be associated with repeal of specific tax
provisions. For most deductions, the tax expenditure estimate is likely to exceed the revenue
estimate corresponding to repeal because of taxpayer behavioral response. Numerous studies,
including Altshuler and Dietz (2008), U.S. General Accountability Office (2005), and Toder
(2005), have identified conceptual difficulties with the current tax expenditure concept.
Our paper is divided into seven sections. Section one describes the user cost framework
that underlies our analysis. Section two describes the relationship between the marginal user
cost of owner-occupied housing and the tax saving associated with homeownership. While the
user cost depends on last-dollar marginal tax rates, the tax saving is affected by the standard
deduction and infra-marginal as well as marginal tax rates. The third section describes potential
behavioral responses to changes in the mortgage interest deduction, and section four presents a
brief overview of similar issues relating to the deduction for state and local property taxes.
Section five presents our estimates of the user cost of housing under several modifications to the

4
current income tax structure, restricting either the mortgage interest deduction or the property tax
deduction. Section six presents parallel calculations of the increase in tax burdens associated
with such reforms, disaggregating households by age and income. A brief conclusion suggests
directions for future work.
1. The User Cost of Capital for Owner-Occupied Housing: Conceptual Framework and
Baseline Estimates for 2003
The user cost of capital provides a conceptual framework for analyzing the effect of tax
rules on the cost of owner-occupied housing. It also helps to set the stage for analysis of the
revenue cost of current tax provisions. Poterba (1992), Gyourko and Sinai (2004), and many
others have used this approach to describe how tax policy parameters affect homeowners’
marginal costs of purchasing additional housing services. Since the user cost can be computed
under various tax policy regimes, it allows us to evaluate the relative tax subsidies to owneroccupied housing in different settings.
1.1 Conceptual Framework
We define the user cost under the current income tax regime, c, as:
(1)

c = [1 –{τded*λ + τy*(1-λ)}]*rT + (1-τy)*β + m + (1-τded)*τprop – πe

where τded is the marginal income tax rate that applies to mortgage interest and property tax
deductions, λ is the loan-to-value ratio, τy is the marginal tax rate on investment income, rT is the
risk-free interest rate, β denotes the pre-tax risk premium, m is the combined cost of depreciation
and maintenance, τprop is the property tax rate, and πe is the expected nominal house price
appreciation rate. This equation assumes that homeowners receive no benefits from property tax
payments. If, instead, property taxes were benefit taxes, with taxpayers receiving benefits valued
at 100*κ% of their property taxes, (1-τded)*τprop in (1) would be replaced by (1-κ -τded)*τprop.

5
Equation (1) distinguishes between the marginal income tax rate that applies to mortgage
interest and property tax deductions, τded, and the tax rate that applies to investment income, τy.
For taxpayers who do not itemize their deductions for federal income tax purposes, τded = 0 even
though τy is positive. Specialized tax rules that apply to some types of investment income, such
as the current reduced rates for dividend income, may also generate differences between τy and
τded. In our calculations, we measure τded as the household’s marginal federal income tax rate on
its last dollar of itemized deductions, and τy as the marginal tax rate on its last dollar of taxable
interest income. The value of τy depends on the financial asset that we define as the alternative
investment vis-à-vis owner-occupie housing.
Equation (1) assumes that capital gains on homes are untaxed. While homeowners with
gains in excess of $500,000 face taxation under current rules, the number of such taxpayers is
very small. For most taxpayers, most housing gains are likely to be untaxed.
We follow Poterba (1992) and several other studies in including a risk premium in the
user cost, but our measure of the risk-adjusted cost of funds differs from that in many previous
studies which have defined the cost of funds as a weighted average of the mortgage interest rate
and a return on an alternative asset, typically a long-dated corporate or Treasury bond.
Himmelberg, Mayer, and Sinai (2005), hereafter HMS (2005), note that mortgage interest rates
reflect the risk-adjusted required return on a housing loan as well as a premium for the
borrower’s refinancing and default options. The cost of funds for a housing investment should
not include either of these . We therefore calculate the user cost by using the risk-free rate in the
bracketed term in (1) and adding a risk premium. The user cost expressions in HMS (2005) and
Poterba and Sinai (2008) differ from those in (1) because they also include a term corresponding
to the tax benefit of deducting the cost of the default and refinancing options. We exclude this

6
second-order term, which has a minimal effect on the user cost.
1.2 Household-Level Data: Balance Sheets and Tax Returns
To estimate the last-dollar user cost of owner occupied housing under the current tax
regime, we use data from the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) and the NBER
TAXSIM model. The 2004 SCF was carried out in early 2004 and asked households about their
incomes for 2003, as well as their assets and liabilities, including owner-occupied homes and
mortgages, in 2004. The SCF sample includes 22,595 household observations, based on five
replicates for each of 4,519 underlying households. The sub-sample we analyze throughout this
study excludes 1,475 observations corresponding to households that live on a farm or a ranch or
in a mobile home, 812 additional observations for households headed by someone under the age
of 25, 64 additional observations that report having mortgages but pay no mortgage interest,
eleven additional observations with loan-to-value ratios above 1.5, and 224 additional
observations with inexplicably high or negative estimated marginal tax rates. This leaves a subsample of 20,009 observations. We estimate marginal tax rates for the 2003 tax year using the
NBER TAXSIM federal and state income tax calculators and Moore’s (2003) mapping of SCF
data to tax return items.
Our calculations of tax liabilities rely on the household’s self-reported income, asset, and
demographic characteristics. SCF households often fail to report capital income even when they
report owning financial assets that should generate that income. We use the SCF data as
reported. We have also tried imputing capital income to households based on their asset
holdings, and obtained results broadly similar to those reported below.
Some households in the SCF report that they itemize on their tax returns even when our
analysis of their income and potential deductions suggests that their taxes would be lower if they

7
claimed the standard deduction. Other households report that they do not itemize when our
TAXSIM-based calculations suggest that they should. We categorize a household as an itemizer
if TAXSIM estimates that the household’s federal income tax liability would be lower if the
household itemized than if it claimed the standard deduction. In our data, 16,288 observations,
corresponding to 74.1 million households, self-report the same itemization status in the SCF as
we calculate using TAXSIM. However, 3,721 observations, corresponding to 22 million
households, differ. In the SCF, more households report that they itemize than actually do in
Treasury Department statistics. In the 2004 SCF, 52.7 million households self-report that they
itemize. The U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service (2005) reports 43.9
million itemizers filed tax returns in 2003. Our sample, expanded to population size, includes
just 44.5 million TAXSIM-estimated itemizers.
We calculate last dollar marginal tax rates by adding $1000 separately to each of the
mortgage interest deduction and the property tax deduction, subtracting $1000 from taxable
interest income, and using TAXSIM to compute the resulting change in tax liability in each case.
These tax differentials are then divided by $1000 to find the last-dollar tax rates. We measure
the pre-tax cost of funds as the risk-free medium-term interest rate plus a risk premium, and we
use the ten-year Treasury bond rate as the riskless rate (rT). We assume a pre-tax risk premium
(β) of 200 basis points, a value that follows earlier studies but is admittedly not well grounded in
a calculation of risk and return trade-offs. The effective property tax rate, τprop, is assumed to be
1.04 percent, which is the population-weighted average of self-reported property taxes paid
divided by self-reported house value for each household in our SCF sample. Gravelle (2007)
finds higher average property tax rates, on the order of 1.50 percent, which would raise our
estimated user cost. We assume a depreciation and maintenance rate (m) of 2.5 percent.

8
In 2003, the 10-year Treasury yield was 4.01 percent and the average mortgage interest
rate was 5.82 percent. The Livingston Survey showed expected CPI inflation of 1.4 percent.
Real house price inflation between 1980 and 2002, measured by averaging state-level inflation
rates computed from the OFHEO index, was 0.73 percent. We therefore assume an average
nominal house price inflation rate of 2.13 (= 0.73 + 1.40) percent.
Table 1 reports last dollar user cost calculations for households in four different age
groups, divided on the basis of the age of the household head, and in five different income
categories based on 2003 annual household income. Household income is defined as Adjusted
Gross Income plus income from non-taxable investments, an estimate of employer contributions
for FICA, payments from unemployment insurance and workers compensation, gross Social
Security income, and any AMT preference items that can be estimated from the SCF.
We compute each household’s last-dollar user cost and take the average across all
households in each of the various age and income categories. The table shows estimates
corresponding to the actual 2003 tax law. The average user cost is 6.0 percent, but the values for
various sub-samples range from 4.8 to 7.1 percent. Those with the highest household incomes –
more than $250,000 – display an average user cost of 4.8 percent, compared with 5.6 percent for
households with incomes of $75,000-125,000 and 6.8 percent for households with incomes
below $40,000. The user cost for the high-income households with the lowest user cost is about
two thirds as great as the user cost for the lower-income households who, as a result of their
lower marginal income tax rates and lower probability of itemization, face higher user costs.
With plausible estimates of the price elasticity of demand for housing services, the variation in
the user cost of housing in Table 1 would result in substantial tax-induced differences in housing
consumption across income groups.

9
1.3 The User Cost of Owner-Occupied Housing under Haig-Simons Taxation
The extent to which the current U.S. income tax system subsidizes homeownership
depends on the alternative tax system to which it is compared. We consider a Haig-Simons
broad economic income tax base, which would include the rental value of a home as well as any
accruing capital gains while allowing deductions for economic depreciation and maintenance
expenses as well as interest and property tax payments. While the Haig-Simons tax base has a
long history as a point of reference, it seems unlikely that the U.S. would ever adopt such a broad
income tax base. In Poterba and Sinai (2008) we consider another alternative tax system in
which homeowners are subject to tax rules similar to those that apply to landlords – receiving a
deduction for maintenance and depreciation and facing taxation on their rental income, but
remaining untaxed on their accruing capital gains.
Under the Haig-Simons tax system, homeowners would be taxed on rental income and
capital gains but they would receive more deductions than at present. The equilibrium condition
for consuming housing services is
(2)

(1–τy)*(R/P) = (1–τy)*(rT + m + τprop + β– πe).

In this expression R is the marginal rental value of a unit of housing services, and P is the market
price of one unit of owner-occupied housing. The net-of-tax value of the rental services
provided by a house, on the left side of the equality, equals the after-tax cost of providing these
services. We can define the user cost in the Haig-Simons setting, cHS, implicitly from the
relationship cHS = R/P:
(3)

cHS = rT + m + τprop + β – πe.

This user cost is independent of the household’s marginal tax rate, because the same tax rate
applies to rental income flows as to the costs of providing rental services. For the parameter

10
values we described in the last section, cHS equals 7.4 percent for all households. The differences
between 0.074 and the entries in Table 1 measure the net last-dollar subsidy to owner-occupation
under the current tax system relative to Haig-Simons taxation. Averaged over all homeowners,
the net subsidy is 1.4 percentage points, 7.4 – 6.0, or almost twenty percent. The net subsidy is
largest, on average, for high income households with the highest marginal tax rates. For
households with incomes between $125,000 and $250,000, for example, the subsidy is 2.2
percentage points, or almost thirty percent. For those with incomes less than $40,000, it is 0.6
percentage points, an eight percent decrease.
The difference between the current user cost and that under the Haig-Simons tax base can
be decomposed into three components that provide some insight on the source of the tax subsidy.
(4)

cHS - c = τded*λ* rT + τded*τprop + {τy*(1–λ)*rT + τy*β}.

The first term is due to mortgage interest deductibility: τded*λ*rT. The second is due to property
tax deductibility: τded*τprop. The third is due to the untaxed return on the equity invested in the
house: τy*(1–λ)*rT + τy*β. The relative importance of the components due to mortgage interest
deductibility and due to the tax treatment of housing equity depends on λ, the loan-to-value ratio.
This decomposition of the difference between (1) and (3) sheds some light on the
frequent claim that the principal source of the tax subsidy to owner-occupied housing is the
failure to tax net imputed rent. If the current tax treatment of owner-occupied housing was
modified by creating a new tax on imputed rent and allowing deductions for maintenance and
economic depreciation, the current equilibrium condition, R/P = c, would be replaced by
(R/P)*(1-τy) = c - τy*m, so the effective user cost would be (c−τy*m)/(1−τy). Defining cIR as the
user cost with “current tax rules plus a tax on imputed rent and a deduction for depreciation and
maintenance” we find:

11
(5)

cIR = [1 –{τded*λ + τy*(1-λ)}]/[1- τy]*rT + β + m + [(1-τded) /(1- τy)]*τprop – [1/(1- τy)]*πe.

The difference between (5) and the user cost under the current tax system is
(6)

cIR – c = [τy/(1- τy)]* [1 –{τded*λ + τy*(1-λ)}]*rT + τy*β
+ [(1-τded)* τy/(1- τy)]*τprop – [τy/(1- τy)]*πe.

For a taxpayer who itemizes, and for whom τded = τy, equation (6) becomes
(6’)

cIR – c = τy*rT + τy*β + τy*τprop – [τy/(1- τy)]*πe.

Under the same simplification, (4) becomes
(4’)

cHS - c = τy*rT + τy*β + τy*τprop.

The difference between these two expressions is [-τy/(1- τy)]* πe. The user cost is higher under
Haig-Simons taxation because homeowners are taxed on their housing capital gains, but they
would not be taxed on these gains if the current tax law were modified to tax net imputed rental
income without any change in the capital gains tax rules.
1.4 Components of the User Cost
The progressive structure of the income tax and variation in itemization rates generate
non-trivial differences across age and income sub-categories in the user cost that we observe in
Table 1, and in the corresponding subsidy relative to the Haig-Simons user cost of 0.074. Table
2 presents information on the average last-dollar tax rate on taxable interest income, τy, the
average last-dollar tax rate at which mortgage interest is deducted, τded, the fraction of
homeowners who itemize on their income tax returns, and the average loan-to-value ratio, λ.
The first panel shows that the average last-dollar tax rate on the assets that represent the
alternative investment relative to mortgage debt rises with income, generating a higher average
subsidy per dollar of housing equity for higher-income households. There is also important
variation by age, with households headed by someone between the ages of 35 and 65 facing

12
average tax rates about two percentage points higher on average than those for households under
the age of 35. The average income tax rate for households headed by someone over the age of
65 is about nine percentage points lower than that for households between the ages of 50 and 65.
The average last-dollar tax rate applicable to mortgage interest and property tax
deductions, in the second panel, follows a similar, but more exaggerated, pattern. In addition to
the income-driven variation in the underlying tax rate, the subsidy rate on deductions is affected
by whether the household itemizes. It is worthwhile for a household to itemize when its
deductions exceed the standard deduction. If total deductions are below the standard deduction,
an additional dollar of deductions does not provide any marginal tax saving. Whether a
household’s deductions exceed the standard deduction is determined in part by its housingrelated deductions, and in part by the household’s other potential deductions such as charitable
giving and state taxes. The third panel of Table 2 reports the fraction of homeowners in each
age/income cell who itemize. Poorer and older households are less likely to itemize. More than
98 percent of homeowners with income in excess of $125,000 were predicted to itemize in 2003,
compared with only 23 percent of those with incomes below $40,000. Among households
headed by someone over the age of 65, the itemization rate at incomes below $75,000 is about 38
percent. It is much lower, only about four percent, for the over-65 households with family
income below $40,000.
The subsidy to owner-occupied housing depends in part on how much of the house is
financed with mortgage debt. Debt finance saves τded per dollar while home equity foregoes a
market return that would have been taxed at τy. The tax rate at which interest can be deducted
can be different from the rate that would apply to returns on foregone home equity. The relative
weighting on these two tax rates is determined by the loan-to-value ratio (LTV). The last panel

13
of Table 2 reports average loan-to-value ratios in our various age-income cells. LTVs decline
with age across the income spectrum, with an average value of 68.9 percent for households
headed by someone between the ages of 25 and 35 and a value of 11.6 percent for households
headed by someone over the age of 65. The average LTV in our sample is 38.7 percent. The
effect of the LTV on the overall tax subsidy to housing is complex, and depends on other
parameters. The fact that the LTV is lower at older ages, for example, means that the low value
of the mortgage subsidy rate at those ages has only a modest impact on the user cost.
2. User Cost Differentials vs. Tax Savings
While marginal user cost calculations provide some evidence on the potential demand
effects associated with current income tax rules, they may not provide a very good guide to the
distribution of tax savings associated with these rules. Follain and Ling (1991) and many
subsequent studies have observed that the infra-marginal after-tax cost of housing services may
differ from the last-dollar cost because tax rates can change between the first and last dollars of
housing spending due to nonlinearities in the tax schedule, particularly those associated with the
switch from the standard deduction to claiming itemized deductions. Thus the tax saving for a
household that claims the mortgage interest deduction may not equal the last-dollar tax rate
applicable to the mortgage interest deduction times the amount of interest paid, because the loss
of the standard deduction may reduce the total tax saving. For taxpayers who itemize their
deductions under the current tax system, the comparison of the last-dollar user cost under the
status quo and the Haig-Simons income tax does not depend on the size of the standard
deduction – but the difference in total tax payments under the two systems does. Similarly,
whether we assume the presence of a standard deduction in the Haig-Simons setting only affects
the user costs for those who would not itemize, while it affects the tax consequences of

14
homeownership for all taxpayers who do itemize.
2.1 Differences in Income Tax Payments: Status Quo vs. Haig-Simons Income Tax
The first panel of Table 3 shows the average difference in homeowners’ income tax
liability under the current tax system and the Haig-Simons income tax without a standard
deduction, while the second panel shows the difference when the Haig-Simons tax includes the
standard deduction. The difference between the two cases, as a share of the increased tax
liability, is greater at lower than at higher incomes, because the amount of housing equity taxed
at higher incomes is greater. We compute current tax liability for each household using
TAXSIM and self-reported mortgage interest and property tax payments. We also use TAXSIM
to estimate tax liability under a Haig-Simons income tax. We set the mortgage interest and
property tax deductions to zero and assume the household would have earned a 6.01 percent
return, comprising a 4.01 percent yield on 10-year Treasury bonds in 2004 and a two hundred
basis point risk premium, on their home equity, and that this income would be taxed as interest
income. Home equity is measured as the self-reported house value less self-reported housing
debt and can be negative.
The entries in the first panel of Table 3 show that the average tax subsidy within our age
and income cells ranges from $1,742 per household to $30,474, and averages almost $5,700 per
homeowner. Higher-income households enjoy larger tax subsidies than poorer households, with
the average subsidy approximately doubling for each income category. For example, households
earning between $75,000 and $125,000 receive less than 60 percent of the average subsidy
($5,862) of households earning between $125,000 and $250,000 ($10,704). In general, within
income category, the average subsidy rises with age. However, in some income categories, the
subsidy falls for the oldest households. This same pattern is reflected in the overall means by

15
age in the last column of the table: the oldest households receive about half as much subsidy as
do 50 to 65-year-olds, reflecting their overrepresentation in the lowest-income groups. Three
factors – higher marginal tax rates, higher itemization rates, and higher home values at the higher
income levels – contribute to the greater average value of the tax subsidy for those in the higher
income brackets. Gyourko and Sinai (2004) find that the distribution of subsidy also varies
considerably across states, cities, and towns, but the lack of geographic identifiers that are finer
than large census regions makes studying this issue with the SCF virtually impossible.
The second panel of Table 3 shows parallel estimates assuming that the Haig-Simons
income tax retains the standard deduction at current levels. The average value of the tax savings
declines from $5696 to $4869. The difference is largest in the middle income range, when it
averages nearly one thousand dollars. The elimination of the mortgage interest and property tax
deductions is less onerous when the standard deduction provides a backstop. We have also
computed the tax savings for homeowners using a modified version of the current income tax
code, in which we suppress the standard deduction. In that case, the average subsidy under the
current tax system versus the Haig-Simons system would be $5,504.
Aggregating the household-level subsidy to homeownership across all the nearly 68
million homeowners in the SCF, we estimate that the total tax subsidy was about $387 billion if
the benchmark Haig-Simons tax does not include a standard deduction, and $331 billion if it
does. Our estimates are substantially larger than the sum of the Joint Committee on Taxation
(2003) estimates for the tax expenditures from the mortgage interest, property tax, and capital
gains treatments of owner-occupied housing, and that sum is itself an over-estimate of the static
revenue effect of the three provisions since it neglects the interactions among them. The JCT
analysis does not consider the failure to tax imputed rent on owner-occupied homes, and it does

16
not recognize that the required return – and hence the amount of imputed income – is higher
when capital gains on owner-occupied homes are taxed. This point follows from the capital
market equilibrium condition: when capital gains on housing are taxed more heavily, owneroccupiers demand a greater “dividend,” more rental income, on their investment. Our estimate
of the total tax subsidy is somewhat smaller than Gyourko and Sinai’s (2004) estimate of $420
billion, which was based on Census data from 2000.
2.2 Components of Tax Savings
The distribution of subsidies by age and income in Table 3 is more skewed than the
distribution of last-dollar user costs in Table 1. The underlying reasons can be deduced from the
distributions of some of the inputs to the tax saving, which are shown in Table 4. The first panel
reports the average tax rates on interest income. The distribution looks much like that of the
analogous last-dollar tax rates, reported in Table 2. To compute average tax rates for the various
components of the current tax subsidy, we calculate measures of tax saving as the difference
between the household’s tax bill with a deduction item, such as mortgage interest, set to zero,
and the household’s actual tax bill. We then find an average tax rate applicable to mortgage
interest, which equals this tax difference divided by the total amount of mortgage interest. For
interest income, we calculate the average tax rate starting with the current reported interest
income and then adding the interest income that would be received on the equity invested in the
house if it were instead invested in taxable bonds.
There is a larger difference between average and last-dollar rates when we consider the
tax rate applicable to mortgage interest and property tax deductions. The second panel of Table
4 presents the average rate. In every cell, the average rate is significantly lower than the lastdollar rate reported in the second panel of Table 2, but especially for lower-income households

17
and older households. That is because many of these households would not itemize in the
absence of the mortgage interest and property tax deductions. Some of their property tax and
mortgage interest payments do not generate incremental tax savings, because they are “used up”
before the household reaches a level of deductions at which itemization is warranted.
The last panel of Table 4 reports average home values, which are another key source of
differences across age and income groups in the value of current tax subsidies. Average house
value rises with age and income, ranging from $119,400 to $1,153,000. There is a strong
positive relationship between household income and house value. Home value averages
$201,700 for families with incomes of $40-75,000, compared with $428,300 for those with
incomes between $125,000 and $250,000. The sole exception is in the highest-income category,
where the oldest households own slightly less valuable houses than do 50 to 65-year-olds.
Because older households are overrepresented in the lower income categories, house values drop
for households over the age of 65 when we do not condition on income. Because of the positive
relationships between average tax rates and income and house values and incomes, the total
subsidy, which is determined by the average tax rate times the house value, has an even stronger
positive relationship with income than do any of the individual components.
2.3 The Alternative Minimum Tax
The alternative minimum tax (AMT) has almost no effect on our estimates of marginal
tax rates and tax savings. If we compute the current and baseline taxes with and without the
AMT, as in Table 3, our estimate of the average tax subsidy to owner-occupiers rises from $5696
to $5,740. This is because in 2003, the reach of the AMT was limited by an AMT “patch”
enacted by Congress. Our TAXSIM-based calculations suggest that 5.4 percent of taxpayers in
2003 faced the AMT, although for those with household incomes over $250,000, the percentage

18
was over 70 percent. Conditional on paying the AMT, AMT liability averaged $1,177. Since
mortgage interest is deductible under the AMT as well as the income tax, the most important
housing-related deduction is still available in the AMT.
3. Behavioral Response to Repeal or Limitation of the Mortgage Interest Deduction
While the Haig-Simons baseline is a useful way of calibrating the total subsidy to owneroccupied housing, most policy discussions focus on more modest deviations from the current tax
code such as repealing or limiting the mortgage interest deduction or repealing the deduction for
property taxes. We apply the user cost framework to compute changes in the marginal cost of
housing services for such proposals. We also examine the potential revenue effects of these
reforms, which depend on how these changes affect taxpayer and local government behavior.
This section considers changes in the mortgage interest deduction; the next section considers
changes in the property tax deduction. Our analysis is a partial equilibrium study of these policy
changes; Gervais (2002) addresses related issues in a general equilibrium setting.
Dunsky and Follain (2000), Follain and Dunsky (1997), Ling and McGill (1998), and a
number of other studies suggest that households adjust their mortgage borrowing in response to
changes in the after-tax cost of mortgage debt. The price elasticity of demand for mortgage
borrowing appears to be close to -1.0; households adjust on the margin of drawing down other
financial assets to build housing equity rather than borrowing. This margin of adjustment is
particularly important for middle-aged and older households, many of whom accumulate
financial assets while also incurring substantial mortgage debt. In light of the sensitivity of
household balance sheets to the tax treatment of mortgage debt, it seems implausible to hold the
loan-to-value ratio fixed when examining the revenue effects of eliminating the deductibility of
mortgage interest. Without such deductibility, households with both financial assets and

19
mortgages would be borrowing at the pretax rate of return but investing at the after-tax rate of
return. Those with substantial financial asset holdings might draw down those assets and repay
part of their mortgage debt.
Gervais and Pandey (2008) observe that this behavioral response implies that “static”
analysis of the mortgage interest deduction may substantially overstate the revenue gains that
would be associated with eliminating this deduction. They analyze data from the 1998 SCF and
suggest that the actual revenue cost of the mortgage interest deduction is likely to fall well below
the usual estimates. While conventional analysis applied to the 1998 SCF suggests that the tax
expenditure for mortgage interest is $50 billion in 1998, Gervais and Pandey’s (2008) preferred
set of balance sheet adjustments suggest a revenue cost of $29 billion. This calculation assumes
that households draw down liquid financial assets, tax-exempt bonds, money market funds,
business equity, and residential assets other than owner-occupied homes, and it assigns a single
rate of return to all of these assets. A more inclusive measure of the assets that could be drawn
down yields an even lower revenue estimate. Jones (1995) presents empirical evidence
suggesting important effects of non-housing asset choices on mortgage debt; this suggests that
reshuffling of assets and liabilities across the balance sheet is likely to be one response to
changes in the mortgage interest deduction.
From the standpoint of revenue estimation, the two key questions about portfolio
adjustment are which assets households will adjust, and what rate of return they would have
earned on those assets. Gervais and Pandey (2008) consider three sets of assets that might be
subject to adjustment. All assets yield 7.3 percent per year in their analysis. We allow different
assets to yield different returns, and in particular recognize that many more liquid assets generate
relatively little income tax revenue because their yields are low. We also examine the

20
distribution of the tax burdens associated with limiting the mortgage interest deduction under
various assumptions about portfolio adjustment in response to such policies, and we update the
analysis by using the 2004 SCF.
Our starting point for the analysis of portfolio adjustment is a comparison of household
ownership of financial assets and current patterns of mortgage indebtedness. If households were
to fully draw down their holdings of taxable financial assets to increase their home equity and
avoid borrowing at the pre-tax rate of return, this comparison indicates the share of deductible
mortgage debt that could be replaced by balance sheet adjustments.
Table 5 presents data on the ratio of financial assets to mortgage debt for three different
sets of assets that households might choose to liquidate if mortgage interest were no longer
deductible. The denominator, “mortgage debt,” is the same in all three cases: the minimum of
the household’s outstanding mortgage debt and $1 million, which is the current cap on mortgage
interest deductibility. The numerator in each corresponds to the minimum of the household’s
financial assets in a given category and “mortgage debt.” The ratio for each household is
bounded above by unity.
Households in the 2004 SCF had $6.2 trillion in mortgage debt with potentially taxdeductible interest. The first column of Table 5 shows that using only liquid financial assets,
such as checking and savings accounts, money market funds, and brokerage call accounts,
households could pay down about 16 percent of this debt. This would reduce the aggregate
liquid financial assets held by the repaying households by just over one third. Households with
small mortgages tend to have larger financial asset holdings, and vice versa, which contributes to
the relatively modest amount of mortgage debt pay-down in this case.
The second and third columns of Table 5 consider what happens if households shifted not

21
just liquid financial assets, but other assets as well, to repay mortgage debt. In column two, we
consider shifting from all non-retirement financial assets to repay mortgage debt, and in this case
31.2 percent of deductible mortgage debt could be repaid. This amounts to a $1.9 billion shift of
mortgage debt -- 31 percent of outstanding mortgage indebtedness. While households with large
mortgages do not have enough liquid financial assets to replace all of their mortgage
indebtedness with equity, including their less liquid assets in the balance sheet adjustment
increases the share of mortgage debt that could be retired. Households as a whole can use only
16.6 percent of their non-retirement financial assets to pay down their mortgage debt, but for the
average household it comprises more than 62 percent of their assets. In the third column, we
assume households are willing to use all non-housing, non-retirement assets to pay down
mortgage debt. This includes vehicle equity and net business equity. Now we find that
households would repay 56.1 percent of their deductible mortgage debt.
There are two ways to evaluate the degree of portfolio substitution that might follow
changes in the tax treatment of mortgage interest. One is to use the elasticity estimates
mentioned above. Table 2 shows that the average last-dollar tax rate on mortgage interest,
averaged across households, is 14.1 percent. This makes the average after-tax cost of mortgage
interest 0.859 times the pre-tax cost; eliminating the deduction would raise the cost of borrowing
by 16.4 percent. If the elasticity of demand for mortgage borrowing is -1.0, then there would be
a 16.4 percent decline in mortgage debt, financed by changes in other assets on the household
balance sheet. This calculation could be refined by using household-level data on tax rates and
mortgage holdings.
The other approach to estimating the potential degree of portfolio substitution in response
to a change in the tax rules affecting mortgage interest deductions is to assume that households

22
would draw down all of the assets they could in some portfolio categories. This is the approach
used in Gervais and Pandey (2008). We apply this approach as well, recognizing as noted above
that different asset categories produce different amounts of taxable income. Gervais and
Pandey’s (2008) “preferred” estimate of the potential to repay mortgage debt using other assets
implies a 42 percent reduction in the revenue cost of the mortgage interest deduction, relative to
the no-behavioral-response scenario. In our baseline analysis, we assume that all non-retirement
financial assets, but no non-financial assets, would be sold to replace mortgage borrowing. This
is likely to overstate the actual portfolio adjustment, since it is unlikely that households would
choose to set their liquid asset holdings to zero. This calculation suggests that 31 percent of the
current mortgage debt would be replaced by housing equity. If this reduction in financial assets
had the same average yield as all assets held in the household sector, the resulting revenue gain
from eliminating the mortgage interest deduction would be 69 percent of the static estimate.
However, because households would liquidate assets with below-average yields first, and
because high-tax-rate households tend have more equity available to pay down housing debt, we
estimate that the actual revenue gain will be just 85.4 percent of the static estimate.
Households differ in their capacities to replace mortgage debt by drawing down financial
assets. For various age and income categories, Table 6 reports the fraction of deductible
mortgage debt that could be replaced by selling non-retirement financial assets. The population
average in each panel of Table 6 corresponds to the second row of Table 5. When we limit
attention to liquid financial assets, in Panel 1 of Table 6, high income and older households are
best able to substitute equity for mortgage debt. Older households usually have very little
mortgage debt. In both cases, liquid financial assets are more likely to be large relative to
mortgage debt. For example, households headed by someone over the age of 65 and making

23
more than $250,000 per year can pay off half of their deductible mortgage debt using liquid
financial assets alone. By contrast, young, poorer households can cover less than five percent of
their mortgage debt by drawing down their financial assets. The potential for asset reshuffling
rises with age and income no matter the asset category. It also expands with the size of the asset
category. When we expand the set of balance sheet components that we consider drawing down
to repay mortgage debt, we find that households with incomes above $250,000 could repay
between 68 and 96 percent of their mortgage debt by drawing down these assets.
4. Behavioral Responses to Eliminating the Deductibility of Property Taxes
Recognizing household portfolio adjustments in response to changes in the mortgage
interest deduction can have an important effect on estimates of both the change in the user cost
and the revenue gain associated with such a policy. The same point applies to changes in the
deductibility of state and local property taxes. Feldstein and Metcalf (1987) find that sub-federal
governments alter their mix of revenue sources in response to federal income tax changes.
Metcalf (2008) reviews the subsequent literature and presents new empirical results that are
broadly consistent with those findings. If local governments shift from property taxes to sales
taxes, for example, then the user cost of owner-occupied housing will decline. From the
standpoint of a household considering the purchase of another unit of housing capital, the key
question is what taxes will be triggered by such a purchase.
We assume that the elasticity of property tax payments with respect to their net-of-federal
income tax cost to the taxpayer, their tax price, is -1.0, so when the deductibility is eliminated,
the use of property taxes falls. For our calculations, we assume that the marginal voter has a 20
percent tax rate and itemizes, so eliminating tax deductibility of property taxes increases the netof-tax-rate by 25 percent, from 0.80 to 1.0. The -1.0 elasticity implies that localities would shift

24
one quarter of their property tax base to other tax instruments. Since state sales taxes, which
appear to be the most likely alternative revenue source, do not enter the user cost of owner
occupied housing, the revenue shift away from property taxation alters the user cost.
5. User Cost Estimates with Modified Mortgage Interest and Property Tax Deductions
We apply the user cost framework to compute the increases in the marginal cost of
housing services when the deductions from mortgage interest and property taxes are restricted or
eliminated. The corresponding increases in the user costs translate into long-run changes in the
demand for housing services, which can be absorbed through lower house prices, which reduce
housing expenditures for a given bundle of housing services, or by a contraction in the quantity
of housing consumed. In principle both effects may operate.
5.1 Modifications to Mortgage Interest Deductibility (MID)
If mortgage interest were no longer deductible but the loan-to-value ratio remained at its
current value, then the user cost would be
(7)

c’ = (1 – τy*(1-λ))*rT + (1-τy)*β + m + (1-τded)*τprop – πe.

Estimates of this user cost are reported in the top panel of Table 7. The results suggest an
increase in the user cost of about five percent, from 6.0 to 6.3 percent. The effect would be
largest on the high-income, young homeowners with high loan-to-value ratios.
The next panel in Table 7 assumes that housing leverage responds to repeal of the MID,
as discussed above. When 31 percent of mortgage debt (on average) is replaced with home
equity, drawn from the sale of financial assets, the user cost change is smaller than the change in
the case without behavioral response. We estimate that the user cost would rise, on average, by
0.2 percentage points in this case, compared with 0.3 percentage points (0.063 − 0.060) in the
case with no adjustment. Changes in the loan-to-value ratio partly offset the tax-induced

25
increase in the after-tax cost of mortgage borrowing.
Comparison between the first and second panels of Table 7 suggests that the balance
sheet adjustment has its largest effect on user cost for young, high-income households. For 3550 year olds with household income of over $250,000, the average user cost in Table 1 was 4.8
percent. The first panel of Table 7 shows that with no portfolio adjustment, this user cost rises to
5.3 percent. When we allow for balance sheet adjustments, the user cost rises to 5.0 percent –
less than half of the increase in the no-behavioral-response case. This difference would reduce
the magnitude of the housing demand effects of this policy change.
5.2 Modifications to Property Tax Deductibility
The third panel of Table 7 considers elimination of the property tax deduction. The
average impact on the user cost is an increase of two-tenths of one percentage point, from 6.0 to
6.2 percent. There is less variation across subgroups for this tax reform than for elimination of
the mortgage interest deduction because property taxes as a share of the cost of the last dollar of
housing do not vary much with age or income whereas the mortgage interest payments’ share of
the cost varies with the loan-to-value ratio. The effects of repealing either the mortgage interest
deduction or the property tax deduction are greater at higher income levels than at lower levels,
because of these taxpayers’ higher marginal income tax and itemization rates. For those with
incomes of $250,000 and above, for example, the average user cost rises from 4.8 percent to 5.2
percent when the property tax deduction is repealed.
The last panel of Table 7 reports user cost calculations when the property tax deduction is
repealed and there is a behavioral response on the part of state and local governments, as
discussed in the last section. We now replace (1-τded)*τprop by .75*τprop. The effect is small – for
many cells the behavioral response does not make a measurable difference. For the highest

26
income category, however, the user cost after accounting for the behavioral response is 0.002
lower. This difference could translate into a four percent increase in housing demand.
6. Revenue Calculations with Modified Mortgage Interest and Property Tax Deductions
We now consider the revenue effects of changing both the mortgage interest deduction
and the property tax deduction, with and without behavioral response.
6.1 Eliminating the Mortgage Interest Deduction
Table 8 describes the effects of various changes to the mortgage interest deduction. The
first panel shows the effect of repealing the mortgage interest deduction without considering the
possibility that households would adjust their debt levels when the deductibility of mortgage
interest was eliminated. The average tax increase in this case is $1065. This is about twice the
product of the mean house value ($266,000), the mean loan-to-value ratio (.387), the mean
mortgage rate (0.0582), and the mean mortgage interest subsidy rate (0.097). The product is
$581; the difference reflects the positive correlation between marginal tax rate, the size of the
house owned by a household, and the amount of deductible mortgage interest.
Table 8 displays the heterogeneity across groups. Not surprisingly, the largest tax
payment effects are on young, high-income households. For 25-35 year olds with income
between $125,000 and $250,000, for example, the tax increase averages $7736. We estimate
that in the absence of any behavioral response, eliminating the mortgage interest deduction
would raise $72.4 billion. By comparison the Joint Committee on Taxation (2003) estimated the
tax expenditure for mortgage interest deductibility to be $69.9 billion for FY 2003.
The next panel in Table 8 considers the effect of portfolio adjustment on the revenue cost
of the mortgage interest deduction. The calculations assume that households would shift all
available paper and liquid assets to pay down mortgage debt, up to the current cap of $1 million,

27
if deductibility was eliminated. We assume that households whose available assets exceed their
mortgage debt would liquidate assets in order of yield – lowest to highest – when retiring their
mortgage debt. We estimate that if all available liquid assets were drawn down to repay
mortgage debt, the average loan-to-value ratio would fall from 38.6 to 30.7 percent. When
households liquidate their taxable financial assets to retire mortgage debt, they no longer earn
taxable income on those assets. We assume the lost taxable income equals the dollar value of the
asset that is reshuffled times the median yield on that asset as reported by all SCF households
with that asset. This approach avoids using a household’s actual self-reported yields on each
asset type, which may be subject to measurement error. Our broadest definition of assets that
might be sold to repay mortgage debt allows the possibility of a household selling a highyielding business to pay off low-cost mortgage debt. Our more limited asset substitution
analysis admits more limited substitution possibilities. We ignore any capital gain tax revenue
consequences from selling assets to pay down mortgage debt.
The second panel of Table 8 shows that our estimate of the average tax increase allowing
for portfolio adjustment is $910, about 85 percent of the tax increase when we do not consider
portfolio substitution. The aggregate estimate of the revenue cost of the mortgage interest
deduction is $61.9 billion. The relatively modest impact of portfolio substitution is due to the
fact that only 16.2 percent of mortgage debt can be paid down using liquid financial assets. The
average tax increase varies substantially by age and income group. Among households between
the ages of 50 and 65 with incomes between $125,000 and $250,000, for example, the average
tax increase that we associate with eliminating the mortgage interest deduction is roughly $1780.
For 25-35 year old homeowners with over $250,000 in income, the tax increase is nearly four
times greater ($5,654). Reflecting the lower housing tax benefits among the elderly, the average

28
tax increasing from eliminating the mortgage interest deduction for homeowners over 65 is only
$105, and even among those with incomes of $250,000 or more it is only $1046.
6.2 Capping the Mortgage Interest Deductions
We next consider the tax increases associated with a cap of $500,000 per household, and
$250,000 per household, on mortgage indebtedness. Anderson, Clemens, and Hanson (2007)
discuss fixed nominal caps like these, as well as several other limits on the mortgage interest
deduction. Table 9 provides information on the share of households with mortgage debt above
various thresholds, and it demonstrates that substantial reductions in the current mortgage
interest cap would be required before this cap would affect significant numbers of households.
At present, taxpayers can deduct interest on up to $1 million of mortgage debt that is used to
purchase, construct, or renovate a house. In addition, interest on up to $100,000 of housing debt
is also deductible, even if the loan proceeds were used for non-housing purposes. This cap is
binding for only 0.2 percent of households. Even among those with income above $250,000, it is
binding for no more than 6.5 percent of any age category. Reducing the cap to $500,000 would
affect 1.6 percent of households, very few of whom have incomes below $125,000. At this level
the cap would only affect about 20 percent of the highest-income households.
A cap of $250,000 would bind for almost seven percent of homeowners, assuming no
behavioral responses. It would be more likely to bind on younger, high-income homeowners.
Among households headed by someone between the ages of 25 and 35, for example, with
incomes above $250,000, 65 percent have mortgage debt in excess of $250,000. Even
eliminating the mortgage interest deduction would only affect 68.5 percent of homeowners. For
younger households, however, the effect would be widespread. Almost 95 percent of 25-35 year
old homeowners have mortgages, compared with 28 percent of homeowners over age 65.

29
Returning to Table 8, the bottom four panels present revenue estimates from the two
mortgage cap proposals, both with and without changes in household balance sheets. Because
the mortgage caps that we consider affect relatively few households, they have a much more
modest effect on average tax payments than the repeal of the mortgage interest deduction,
although once again the pattern shows larger effects for young, high-income households. The
second-to-last and last panels in Table 8, for example, show that a $250,000 cap on the size of
mortgages that could generate deductible interest would raise taxes on average by $2,566 without
portfolio adjustment, and $2,032 with such adjustment, for households with income above
$250,000, and by $586 and $518 respectively for households with incomes between $125,000
and $250,000. For lower income households the average tax increase is less than $150. We
estimate the aggregate revenue gain after portfolio adjustment from the $250,000 cap to be $13.6
billion. We estimate that the revenue gain from the $500,000 cap is $6.8 billion, again
recognizing portfolio adjustment.
6.3 Eliminating the Property Tax Deduction
Table 10 considers eliminating the deductibility of property taxes. While the average
income tax saving from the property tax deduction varies across age and income categories, the
variation is less pronounced than that from eliminating the mortgage interest deduction. The
upper panel shows the distribution of tax increases assuming that local governments do not
change their property tax rates in response to the elimination of federal tax deductibility. The
average income tax saving from this deduction peaks for middle-aged homeowners, rising from
$415 for households under the age of 35 to nearly $600 for those between 35 and 65. For those
over 65, the average tax saving from the property tax deduction falls to $205, reflecting both a
decline in the deductions among older relative to younger households within each income group

30
as well as a shift in composition of the households toward lower income categories. For this
over-65 group, the tax savings from the property tax deduction substantially exceed those from
the mortgage interest deduction. The bottom panel of Table 9 repeats the estimation assuming
that localities reduce their use of property tax revenue by 25 percent. The revenue cost falls
commensurately, from an average of $468 to an average of $350. A similar reduction is seen
across all age and income categories. Because property taxes are not deductible under the AMT,
our results on repeal of the property tax deduction are more sensitive to assumptions about the
presence or absence of the AMT than our results about the mortgage interest deduction. In the
absence of the AMT, the revenue cost of eliminating the property tax deduction averages $518
assuming no behavioral response, and $393 with behavioral response. The difference between
the AMT and no-AMT cases is larger for higher-income households, for whom the AMT is more
often binding. For example, for households with incomes of $250,000 or more, the revenue cost
assuming a behavioral response is just $1696 with the AMT in place and $2414 in its absence.
Our estimates of the aggregate revenue gains associated with repeal of the property tax
deduction are larger than the tax expenditure estimates reported by Joint Committee on Taxation
(2002). The estimate of the 2003 tax expenditure for the property tax deduction was $22.1
billion; our static revenue cost estimate is $31.8 billion.
4. Conclusion and Future Directions
This paper examines the revenue cost of the income tax provisions relating to owneroccupied housing, notably the deductibility of mortgage interest and property tax payments, and
their effect on the marginal cost of housing. Using data from the 2004 Survey of Consumer
Finances and the NBER TAXSIM model, it presents new evidence on the distribution of the tax
saving associated with these deductions across age and income categories. It also explores the

31
sensitivity of estimates of these tax savings to the extent of behavioral response by taxpayers, in
the case of the mortgage interest deduction, and local governments, in the case of the property
tax deduction. We find that the extent to which homeowners draw down their holdings of other
assets when mortgage interest is no longer deductible, and replace debt finance with housing
equity, is an important determinant of the revenue impact of changing this tax expenditure. The
standard assumption of no behavioral response that underlies tax expenditure analysis is likely to
overstate the revenue effects of repealing or limiting the mortgage interest deduction.
Age- and income-related patterns of mortgage indebtedness are important for
understanding the distributional effects of restricting the mortgage interest deduction. Mortgage
debt is concentrated among younger homeowners, and many older homeowners do not even have
a mortgage. Consequently, many homeowners would face only a modest tax increase, if any at
all, if mortgage interest were no longer deductible. In contrast, the vast majority of homeowners
claim property tax deductions.
Our analysis unfortunately makes a rather ad hoc set of assumptions about the set of
assets that households might liquidate to replace mortgage borrowing. Our findings suggest that
portfolio substitution effects can be an important factor in the revenue cost and the distributional
burden of changes in current housing-related deductions, and they underscore the need for more
empirical work measuring the key behavioral parameters related to portfolio substitution.
Our analysis focuses on how various income tax provisions affect the user cost of owneroccupied housing. We have only discussed potential effects of tax changes on housing demand
in passing. Many estimates, for example those reviewed in Rosen (1985), suggest that the
demand elasticity for owner-occupied housing is between -0.75 and -1.0. Our findings suggest
that particularly for high-income households in high marginal tax brackets, the user cost increase

32
associated with eliminating the mortgage interest deduction, and to a lesser extent with
eliminating the property tax deduction, would lead to a substantial decline in the demand for
owner-occupied housing. These changes might lead to changes in housing demand conditional
on choosing to own not rent, and to changes in the likelihood of renting versus owning. For
lower- and middle-income taxpayers, the user cost changes and the associated changes in
housing demand are more modest. We have not incorporated changes in housing demand into
our analysis of the revenue consequences of limiting the mortgage interest and property tax
deductions. Extending the analysis to allow for such demand effects is a natural next step in
analyzing these tax code provisions.

33
References
Altshuler, Rosanne and Robert Dietz, 2008, “Reconsidering Tax Expenditure Estimation:
Challenges and Reforms,” mimeo, Rutgers University.
Anderson, John E., Jeffrey Clemens, and Andrew Hanson, 2007, “Capping the Mortgage Interest
Deduction,” National Tax Journal 60, 769-786.
Bucks, Brian, Arthur Kennickell, and Kevin Moore. 2006, “Recent Changes in U.S. Family
Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal
Reserve Bulletin (March 22), 1-38.
Dunsky, Robert M. and James R. Follain, 2000, “Tax-Induced Portfolio Reshuffling: The Case
of the Mortgage Interest Deduction,” Real Estate Economics 4, 683-718.
Feldstein, Martin and Gilbert Metcalf, 1987, “The Effect of Federal Tax Deductibility on State
and Local Taxes and Spending,” Journal of Political Economy 95, 710-736.
Follain, James and R. M. Dunsky, 1997, “The Demand for Mortgage Debt and the Income Tax,”
Journal of Housing Research 8, 155-200.
Follain, James and David Ling, 1991, “The Federal Tax Subsidy to Housing and the Reduced
Value of the Mortgage Interest Deduction,” National Tax Journal 44, 147-168.
Gervais, Martin, 2002, “Housing Taxation and Capital Accumulation,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 49, 1461-1489.
Gervais, Martin and Manish Pandey. 2008. “Who Cares about Mortgage Interest Deductibility.”
Canadian Public Policy. 34, 1-24.
Gravelle, Jennifer, 2007, “Determinants of Statewide Variations in Effective Property Tax
Rates,” mimeo, U.S. Government Accountability Office.

34
Gyourko, Joseph and Todd Sinai. 2004. “The (Un)Changing Geographic Distribution of
Housing Tax Benefits, 1980-2000.” In J. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy 18,
175-208.
Himmelberg, Charles, Christopher Mayer, and Todd Sinai. 2005. “Assessing High House
Prices: Bubbles, Fundamentals, and Misperceptions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
19:4, 67-92.
Jones, Lawrence D., 1995, “Net Wealth, Marginal Tax Rates, and the Demand for Home
Mortgage Debt,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 25, 297-322.
Ling, David C. and Gary A. McGill, 1998, “Evidence on the Demand for Mortgage Debt by
Owner-Occupants,” Journal of Urban Economics 44, 391-414.
Metcalf, Gilbert, 2008, “Tax Expenditures for State and Local Tax Payments,” mimeo, Tufts
University.
Moore, Kevin. 2003. “The Effects of the 1986 and 1993 Tax Reforms on Self-Employment.”
Mimeo, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2004-05. Washington: Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Poterba, James. 1992. “Taxation and Housing: Old Questions, New Answers.” American
Economic Review 80:2, 237-242.
Poterba, James and Todd Sinai, 2008, “Tax Expenditures for Owner-Occupied Housing:
Deductions for Property Taxes and Mortgage Interest and the Exclusion of Imputed
Rental Income,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 98:2, 84-89
Rosen, Harvey, 1985, “Housing Subsidies: Effects on Housing Decisions, Efficiency, and
Equity,” in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein, eds., Handbook of Public Economics, Volume
1 (Amsterdam: North Holland), 375-420.

35
Toder, Eric, 2005, “Tax Expenditures and Tax Reform: Issues and Analysis,” National Tax
Association – Proceedings of the 98th Annual Conference. Washington: National Tax
Association, 472-479.
U.S. Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation, 2002, Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures for
Fiscal Years 2003-2007. JCS-5-02. Washington: Joint Committee on Taxation.
U.S. Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation, 2007, Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures for
Fiscal Years 2007-2011. JCS-3-07. Washington: Joint Committee on Taxation.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service, 2005, Individual Income Tax
Returns, 2003. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. General Accountability Office, 2005. Tax Expenditures Represent a Substantial Federal
Commitment and Need to be Re-Examined. GAO-05-690. Washington, D.C.

36

Table 1: Last-Dollar User Cost of Owner-Occupied Housing, 2003
Age of Household
Annual Household Income
Head
<40K
40-75K
75-125K
125-250K 250+
All
25-35
0.066
0.062
0.056
0.052
0.048
0.060
35-50
0.066
0.061
0.056
0.052
0.048
0.058
50-65
0.066
0.059
0.056
0.052
0.048
0.058
> 65
0.071
0.059
0.057
0.053
0.049
0.065
All
0.068
0.060
0.056
0.052
0.048
0.060
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF and Moore’s (2003) interface between NBER
TAXSIM program and the SCF. Averages are weighted using the SCF’s replicate weights. See
text for sample construction.
Table 2: Determinants of the User Cost of Homeownership, by Household Age and Income
Annual Household Income
Age of Household Head
<40K
40-75K
75-125K
125-250K 250+
All
Average Last-Dollar Tax Rate on Interest Income
25-35
0.144
0.201
0.261
0.323
0.384
0.216
35-50
0.129
0.201
0.265
0.335
0.395
0.241
50-65
0.116
0.226
0.272
0.328
0.389
0.242
> 65
0.044
0.241
0.272
0.310
0.384
0.130
All
0.084
0.215
0.268
0.329
0.390
0.210
Average Last-Dollar Mortgage Interest Deduction Subsidy Rate
25-35
0.062
0.132
0.233
0.277
0.339
0.159
35-50
0.071
0.134
0.208
0.290
0.359
0.183
50-65
0.051
0.128
0.188
0.281
0.350
0.168
> 65
0.005
0.065
0.108
0.235
0.334
0.048
All
0.032
0.120
0.193
0.280
0.350
0.141
Fraction of Home Owners Who Itemize
25-35
54.3%
74.4%
97.3%
95.7%
100.0%
78.5%
35-50
52.4
77.8
91.7
99.9
100.0
82.6
50-65
33.7
64.2
83.1
98.7
100.0
70.6
> 65
3.8
37.5
55.8
92.0
99.6
22.9
All
23.4
66.0
85.5
98.4
99.9
63.1
Loan-to-Value Ratio
25-35
60.5%
72.8%
71.2%
67.3%
57.7%
68.9%
35-50
51.8
60.0
55.3
53.2
36.7
55.1
50-65
29.3
29.6
37.3
34.8
29.5
32.5
> 65
9.8
13.5
18.4
12.7
7.2
11.6
All
26.0
44.9
47.4
42.6
29.4
38.7
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances and Moore’s (2003)
interface between NBER TAXSIM program and the SCF. Averages are weighted using the
SCF’s replicate weights. See text for sample construction.

37
Table 3: Difference in Tax Liability Under Haig-Simons Income Tax and Current Income Tax
Annual Household Income
Age of Household Head
<40K
40-75K
75-125K
125-250K 250+
All
Haig-Simons Tax Base without Standard Deduction
25-35
1,742
2,639
5,815
8,861
19,935
4,025
35-50
2,016
3,391
5,763
10,747
27,985
6,236
50-65
2,173
4,073
5,875
10,718
30,474
7,054
> 65
1,906
5,463
6,207
11,585
27,340
4,188
All
1,971
3,844
5,862
10,704
28,838
5,696
Haig-Simons Tax Base with Standard Deduction
25-35
1,023
1,640
4,639
8,147
19,141
3,059
35-50
1,365
2,402
4,718
10,136
27,563
5,378
50-65
1,565
3,194
4,923
10,133
30,114
6,307
> 65
1,252
4,331
4,911
10,878
26,840
3,369
All
1,322
2,859
4,796
10,088
28,422
4,869
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF and Moore’s (2003) interface between NBER
TAXSIM program and the SCF. Averages are weighted using the SCF’s replicate weights. See
text for sample construction.
Table 4: Determinants of Homeowners’ Tax Savings, by Household Age and Income
Annual Household Income
Age of Household Head
<40K
40-75K
75-125K
125-250K 250+
All
Average Tax Rate on Interest Income
25-35
0.190
0.205
0.270
0.325
0.387
0.232
35-50
0.191
0.208
0.276
0.339
0.394
0.257
50-65
0.143
0.232
0.283
0.337
0.390
0.254
> 65
0.086
0.263
0.277
0.322
0.384
0.161
All
0.126
0.224
0.277
0.336
0.390
0.228
Average Mortgage Interest Deduction Subsidy Rate
25-35
0.034
0.078
0.165
0.258
0.315
0.109
35-50
0.038
0.086
0.154
0.271
0.307
0.141
50-65
0.027
0.073
0.126
0.218
0.268
0.115
> 65
0.001
0.023
0.045
0.096
0.076
0.017
All
0.016
0.069
0.133
0.232
0.253
0.097
Mean Value of Owner-Occupied Home (000s)
25-35
$119.4
$147.5
$259.1
$343.3
$674.7
$194.6
35-50
127.8
188.1
253.7
423.3
991.1
274.2
50-65
156.1
208.0
264.6
428.2
1153.3
313.3
>65
159.8
266.8
283.5
504.5
1059.2
233.7
All
149.9
201.7
261.8
428.3
1070.3
266.2
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF and Moore’s (2003) interface between NBER
TAXSIM program and the SCF. Averages are weighted using the SCF’s replicate weights. See
text for sample construction.

38

Table 5: Overlap between Financial Asset Holdings and Mortgage Indebtedness
Total financial
All non-housing,
Liquid financial
assets excluding
non-retirement
assets
retirement assets
assets
Holdings of non-housing
assets that can be sold to
$1,003 billion
$1,927 billion
$3,466 billion
replace qualified mortgage
debt
Fraction of outstanding
deductible mortgage debt that
16.2%
31.2%
56.1%
can be replaced with other
assets
Fraction of assets in category
that would have to be sold to
34.1
16.7
13.3
pay down mortgage debt
Household-weighted average
share of assets needed to pay
67.0
62.5
54.9
down mortgage debt
Notes: Aggregate deductible mortgage debt (amount of qualified debt under $1million) equals
$6.18 billion. Non-housing, non-retirement assets include all assets in the SCF (including net
equity in businesses, vehicles, etc.) but exclude first and second residences, retirement accounts,
cash value of life insurance, and trusts and annuities. Total financial assets excluding retirement
leave exclude retirement accounts, cash value of life insurance, and trusts and annuities from the
SCF’s definition of financial assets as described in Bucks, Kennickell, and Moore (2006).
Liquid financial assets include checking, savings, money market, and brokerage call account
holdings. See text for sample construction.

39
Table 6: Fraction of Outstanding Deductible Mortgage Debt that Homeowners Could Replace
by Liquidating Other Assets, by Household Age and Income
Age of Household Head
Annual Household Income
<40K
40-75K
75-125K 125-250K 250+
All
Liquidation of liquid financial assets
25-35
2.2%
9.9%
9.9%
20.3%
42.3%
11.1%
35-50
5.7
9.0
11.0
17.9
37.0
14.8
50-65
11.1
11.8
17.9
17.8
31.1
19.2
> 65
18.9
18.7
32.6
33.9
50.1
26.2
All
8.9
10.4
13.7
18.6
34.6
16.2
Liquidation of all financial assets excluding retirement assets
25-35
5.7
14.5
17.2
22.4
68.0
17.0
35-50
13.3
13.6
19.0
36.0
74.3
27.9
50-65
23.0
26.8
32.1
39.8
74.6
41.9
> 65
29.2
29.7
44.7
66.4
96.1
42.8
All
17.3
17.5
23.3
37.2
75.0
31.2
Liquidation of all non-housing, non-retirement assets
25-35
20.8
38.1
41.4
40.7
94.8
39.1
35-50
32.6
41.7
45.9
61.4
93.6
53.2
50-65
44.9
54.4
62.3
69.5
93.8
68.2
> 65
49.7
50.9
71.9
95.4
97.5
64.6
All
36.6
44.1
50.5
63.5
93.9
56.1
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF. Non-housing, non-retirement assets include all
assets in the SCF (including net equity in businesses, vehicles, etc.) but exclude first and second
residences, retirement accounts, cash value of life insurance, and trusts and annuities. Total
financial assets excluding retirement leave out retirement accounts, cash value of life insurance,
and trusts and annuities from the SCF’s definition of financial assets as described in Bucks,
Kennickell, and Moore (2006). Liquid financial assets include checking, savings, money market,
and brokerage call account holdings. See text for sample construction.

40

Table 7: Last-Dollar User Cost of Owner-Occupied Housing When Mortgage Interest or
Property Tax Deduction is Restricted
Age of Household Head
Annual Household Income
<40K
40-75K
75-125K 125-250K
250+
All
Repeal of Mortgage Interest Deduction
25-35
0.068
0.066
0.063
0.059
0.056
0.065
35-50
0.068
0.065
0.061
0.058
0.053
0.063
50-65
0.068
0.061
0.059
0.056
0.052
0.061
> 65
0.071
0.060
0.058
0.055
0.050
0.066
All
0.069
0.063
0.060
0.057
0.052
0.063
Repeal of Mortgage Interest Deduction, Full Portfolio Adjustment
25-35
0.068
0.066
0.061
0.058
0.051
0.064
35-50
0.068
0.064
0.060
0.056
0.050
0.061
50-65
0.067
0.061
0.058
0.054
0.050
0.060
> 65
0.071
0.059
0.057
0.054
0.049
0.066
All
0.069
0.062
0.059
0.055
0.050
0.062
Repeal of Property Tax Deduction
25-35
0.067
0.064
0.058
0.055
0.052
0.062
35-50
0.067
0.063
0.059
0.055
0.052
0.060
50-65
0.068
0.061
0.059
0.055
0.052
0.060
> 65
0.072
0.062
0.060
0.057
0.052
0.067
All
0.069
0.062
0.059
0.055
0.052
0.062
Repeal of Property Tax Deduction, with Behavioral Response by
Local Governments
25-35
0.067
0.063
0.058
0.054
0.050
0.062
35-50
0.067
0.062
0.058
0.054
0.050
0.060
50-65
0.067
0.061
0.058
0.054
0.050
0.059
> 65
0.071
0.060
0.058
0.055
0.050
0.066
All
0.069
0.062
0.058
0.054
0.050
0.061
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF and Moore’s (2003) interface between NBER
TAXSIM program and the SCF. Averages are weighted using the SCF’s replicate weights. See
text for sample construction.

41
Table 8: Change in Income Tax Liability from Restricting the Mortgage Interest Deduction
Age of Household Head
Annual Household Income
<40K
40-75K
75-125K
125-250K 250+
All
Eliminate Mortgage Interest Deduction, No Portfolio Adjustment
25-35
219
570
1,793
3,467
7,736
1,141
35-50
250
745
1,522
3,549
6,582
1,646
50-65
160
490
1,028
2,108
5,780
1,196
> 65
5
149
312
955
1,413
149
All
101
535
1,256
2,704
5,444
1,065
Eliminate Mortgage Interest Deduction, Allowing for Portfolio
Substitution Using Non-Retirement Financial Assets
25-35
213
528
1,683
3,169
5,654
1,046
35-50
237
693
1,374
3,051
5,119
1,432
50-65
134
427
881
1,777
4,433
986
> 65
1
115
189
701
1,046
105
All
90
485
1,117
2,309
4,184
910
Cap Deductible Mortgages at $500,000, No Portfolio Substitution
25-35
14
22
92
252
1,317
72
35-50
11
25
91
322
1,794
171
50-65
7
33
58
174
1,371
148
> 65
1
9
36
154
269
20
All
5
24
74
241
1,340
114
Cap Deductible Mortgages at $500,000, Allowing Portfolio Substitution
25-35
14
22
90
247
1,179
69
35-50
11
25
90
294
1,445
151
50-65
7
34
57
171
1,092
129
> 65
1
8
38
137
206
18
All
5
24
73
225
1,076
100
Cap Deductible Mortgages at $250,000, No Portfolio Substitution
25-35
14
33
254
891
3,114
189
35-50
11
61
163
889
3,178
365
50-65
7
51
119
299
2,740
282
> 65
1
9
42
260
566
33
All
5
44
148
586
2,566
234
Cap Deductible Mortgages at $250,000, Allowing Portfolio Substitution
25-35
14
30
245
828
2,663
176
35-50
11
58
153
785
2,531
315
50-65
6
51
108
265
2,153
234
> 65
1
8
43
208
430
27
All
5
43
139
518
2,032
200
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF and Moore’s (2003) interface between NBER
TAXSIM program and the SCF. Averages are weighted using the SCF’s replicate weights. See
text for sample construction.

42
Table 9: Share of Households with Home Acquisition Debt above Various Thresholds, By Age
and Household Income
Annual Household Income
Age of Household Head
<40K
40-75K
75-125K
125-250K 250+
All
Home Acquisition Debt > $1,000,000
25-35
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.013
0.000
35-50
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.065
0.003
50-65
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.001
0.052
0.004
> 65
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.005
0.005
0.000
All
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.047
0.002
Home Acquisition Debt > $500,000
25-35
0.000
0.000
0.014
0.043
0.113
0.009
35-50
0.001
0.005
0.000
0.068
0.233
0.024
50-65
0.000
0.000
0.007
0.014
0.212
0.018
> 65
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.015
0.042
0.002
All
0.000
0.002
0.005
0.039
0.190
0.015
Home Acquisition Debt > $250,000
25-35
0.020
0.012
0.121
0.362
0.654
0.078
35-50
0.014
0.046
0.087
0.239
0.444
0.105
50-65
0.006
0.023
0.065
0.121
0.490
0.078
> 65
0.000
0.003
0.028
0.051
0.094
0.009
All
0.005
0.026
0.078
0.179
0.420
0.069
Home Acquisition Debt > $0
25-35
0.852
0.957
0.989
1.000
0.995
0.945
35-50
0.855
0.920
0.910
0.957
0.848
0.910
50-65
0.564
0.683
0.746
0.739
0.749
0.686
> 65
0.236
0.329
0.431
0.339
0.212
0.281
All
0.472
0.751
0.810
0.811
0.708
0.685
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF. Averages are weighted using the SCF’s
replicate weights. See text for sample construction.

43
Table 10: Tax Increase from Repeal of State and Local Property Tax Deduction
Age of Household
Annual Household Income
Head
<40K
40-75K
75-125K
125-250K 250+
All
No Change in Local Government Behavior
25-35
134
266
612
1,108
1,781
415
35-50
129
304
603
1,132
2,456
604
50-65
117
271
526
988
2,362
569
>65
60
205
273
828
2,289
205
All
91
270
539
1,043
2,362
468
Assuming Local Governments Shift Sources of Revenue
25-35
103
201
463
825
1,285
313
35-50
98
234
456
836
1,785
451
50-65
87
212
402
725
1,685
423
> 65
43
161
212
636
1,628
153
All
68
209
410
771
1,696
350
Source: Authors’ calculations using 2004 SCF and Moore’s (2003) interface between NBER
TAXSIM program and the SCF. Averages are weighted using the SCF’s replicate weights. In
the second panel, the elasticity of property tax revenues with respect to the net-of-tax price is
assumed to be -1. We assume localities either do not spend the lost revenue or raise it with nondeductible tax instruments. See text for sample construction.

