NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LEARNING FROM PRICES:
PUBLIC COMMUNICATION AND WELFARE
Manuel Amador
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Working Paper 14255
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14255

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We'd like to thank, for fruitful discussions and suggestions, George-Marios Angeletos, Andy Atkeson,
Gadi Barlevy, Doireann Fitzgerald, Christian Hellwig, Narayana Kocherlakota, Nir Jaimovich, Kei
Kawakami, Pat Kehoe, Ivan Werning, Randy Wright; and seminar participants at the Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland Summer Workshops in Money, Banking and Payments, Stanford Junior Faculty
Lunch, University of Pennsylvania, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, MIT, NBER EFG Meeting,
Queens University, Universite de Montreal, Washington University at St. Louis, UC Irvine, Rice University,
Cal Poly, Paris X Nanterre and Paris School of Economics. We thank Marcello Miccoli for research
assistance. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Manuel Amador and Pierre-Olivier Weill. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Learning from Prices: Public Communication and Welfare
Manuel Amador and Pierre-Olivier Weill
NBER Working Paper No. 14255
August 2008
JEL No. D83,E40,E58,E61
ABSTRACT
We study the effect of releasing public information about productivity or monetary shocks when agents
learn from nominal prices. While public releases have the benefit of providing new information, they
can have the cost of reducing the informational efficiency of the price system. We show that, when
agents have private information about monetary shocks, the cost can dominate, in that public releases
increase uncertainty about fundamentals. In some cases, public releases can create or eliminate multiple
equilibria. Our results are robust to adding velocity shocks, imperfectly observable prices, large idiosyncratic
shocks, and introducing a bond market.

Manuel Amador
Stanford University
Department of Economics
Landau Economics Building
579 Serra Mall, Room 330
Stanford , CA 94305-6072
and NBER
amador@stanford.edu
Pierre-Olivier Weill
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Bunche Hall 8283
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and NBER
poweill@econ.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

Economic statistics are noisy. For example, the first estimates of GDP in the U.S., published
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, are very imprecise. Only half of the data required to
compute it, is known completely at the time of the first release; and the original numbers are
subsequently subject to significant revisions.1 Some economic statistics are even considered
too noisy to be published: a recent example is the monetary aggregate M3 that the Federal
Reserve Board stopped reporting in March 2006.
Should one be concerned that releasing noisy statistics may create confusion and lead
the private sector to act on incorrect information? At first pass, the notion that more public
information leads to more uncertainty and therefore worse decisions is unwarranted. Indeed,
if we treat other sources of information as exogenous, a rational Bayesian decision maker
will always be better informed after having observed a public signal, however noisy. But,
in reality, not all sources of information are exogenous: households and firms learn through
their interactions in markets and from observing variables such as prices. Our contribution in
this paper is to show that when the information structure of an economy is endogenous, the
release of public signals about aggregate fundamentals can actually lead to more confusion
and greater uncertainty than no release at all. Moreover, public releases can create multiple
Pareto-ranked equilibria, and consequently even modest announcements can result in large
changes in equilibrium outcomes and uncertainty.
We provide a full characterization of the effects of public information releases in a monetary model inspired by that of Lucas (1972). In our cash-in-advance economy, households
are uncertain about two aggregate disturbances, a monetary shock and a productivity shock.
Households inhabit different locations and are asymmetrically informed regarding the two
aggregate shocks. This dispersed private information about shocks is aggregated through
the publicly observable equilibrium nominal prices prevailing every location. The nominal
prices are affected not only by the underlying productivity shock but also by the unknown
monetary shock, and, for that reason, households care indirectly about the monetary shock:
knowledge about it helps them extract productivity information from nominal prices.
Our results are based on the following two observations. The first is that publicly observable prices not only generate new public information about productivity, they also generate
1

See, for instance, the article “Why America’s advance GDP figures do not paint the whole picture”
published by The Economist on January 31st , 2008.

2

new private information. This is because households extract productivity information from
nominal prices by filtering out the monetary shock in two ways. On the one hand, they use
their public knowledge about the monetary shock, which effectively generates an endogenous
public signal about productivity. On the other hand, they use their private knowledge about
the monetary shock, which generates an endogenous private signal about productivity.
The crucial decision for a household is choosing how much weight to give to its private
versus its public information. Our second observation concerns the relationship between this
optimal weighting decision and the two endogenous signals: the endogenous private signal
tends to make households’ weighting decisions strategic complements, while the endogenous
public signal tends to make their weighting decisions strategic substitutes. The intuition
for this second observation is the following. When other households put more weight on
their private information, the two endogenous signals generated by prices become more
informative about productivity, as more private information gets fed into the prices. Since
the endogenous private signal is now more informative, an individual household will find
it optimal to put more weight on it, a force for complementarity. At the same time, the
endogenous public signal has become also more informative, and a household will then put
more weight on it, and less weight on the private ones, a force for substitutability.
What is, then, the effect of releasing partial information about the monetary shock, the
productivity shock, or both at the same time? As stated at the beginning, everything else
equal, such releases have a direct beneficial effect of providing new information. There is,
however, a countervailing equilibrium effect: households put more weight on the newly released public information and less on their private information. This change in behavior tends
to reduce the endogenous informational content of prices. The strategic complementarities
play the crucial role of amplifying this initial negative effect: households put less weight on
the endogenous private signal, making prices less informative, prompting households to put
even less weight on the endogenous private signal, making prices even less informative, and
so on. In fact, due to this amplification mechanism, in equilibrium the negative effect can
dominate the positive effect, increasing households’ uncertainty and reducing welfare. Such
amplification is necessary for the result: in its absence we show that public information is
always beneficial.
Because of the strategic complementarities created by the endogenous private signal, our
model can feature multiple Pareto-ranked equilibria differing in the degree of informativeness

3

of nominal prices. For instance, in the high-informativeness, high-welfare equilibrium, other
households put a large weight on their private information. The endogenous private signal
generated by prices is thus more informative, making it optimal for an individual household
to put a large weight on its private information. We also uncover another effect of public
announcements: a release of sufficiently precise information about either the productivity
or the monetary shock can guarantee a unique equilibrium. However, a mild release can,
instead, generate multiplicity.
In our basic model we do not take a stand on the sources of the monetary shock and the
reasons why the policy maker does not posses complete information about it. Subsection 5.1
addresses this question explicitly in an extension of the model with two different monetary
shocks. The first shock is a change in a narrow monetary aggregate, which is assumed to
perfectly observed by a Central Bank. The second shock is an aggregate velocity shock,
representing changes in general credit conditions in the economy that are assumed to be
imperfectly observed by a Central Bank and not known to the households. We also allow
for a public noise component in the observation of nominal prices. We then proceed to show
that the results from the basic model generalize to this multidimensional case, and obtain a
general characterization of whether public releases are welfare reducing or not.
One may argue that the introduction of a financial market that could aggregate information might eliminate the non-fully revealing equilibrium that we obtain, which is necessary
for the negative welfare results. In the subsection 5.2, we show that the basic model is robust
to the introduction of a financial market where a nominal bond is traded.
There is a recent and influential literature documenting that, at the firm-level, prices and
quantities are an order of magnitude more volatile than their corresponding aggregate (see,
among others, Bils and Klenow, 2004). As such, a possible criticism of our analysis is that the
economic agents are not too concerned about forecasting underlying macroeconomic shocks,
but instead they are mainly responding to idiosyncratic shocks. We discuss in Subsection 5.3
that those criticisms are unwarranted. We present a simple modification of our baseline model
with idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Although agents face arbitrarily volatile idiosyncratic
shocks, social welfare is still driven by their uncertainty about the macroeconomic shocks:
that is, the component that is affected by public announcements and the publication of
economic statistics.

4

Literature Review
Relative to the vast existing literature on public communication in macroeconomics, our main
contribution is to show formally that more public information can lead to an overall increase
of uncertainty about fundamentals. Although this effect has been conjectured before, it is
not present in previous models of welfare reducing public information.
The basis of our analysis is a learning externality: agents respond to new public information by relying less on their own private information, which can reduce the informational
content of prices. This externality has been noted and studied before, and our paper builds
on the work of Vives (1993), Morris and Shin (2005), and Amato and Shin (2006). In these
papers, however, the net effect of public information remains positive: it reduces agents
uncertainty about fundamentals. Relative to this literature, our contribution is threefold.
First, we uncover an amplification mechanism for the learning externality to generate, on its
own, an increase in uncertainty about fundamentals: we show that some of the endogenous
information gathered by agents has to be private. Second, we formalize the argument in a familiar macroeconomic model which allows for a micro-founded welfare analysis. And finally,
we show that this private information gathering arises naturally from the public observation
of prices. This last step is important since prices arguably constitute the most important
channel of information aggregation and are publicly observed.
A variant of the basic result also appears in our contemporaneous paper, Amador and
Weill (2006). However, the focus of Amador and Weill (2006) is on transitional and long-run
information dynamics in an abstract learning model; which lacking micro-foundations, is not
well suited for welfare analysis.
We have chosen to develop our theoretical argument with a model in the spirit of Lucas
(1972). This framework is familiar to most macro-economists and is a canonical example of
imperfect information. However, most of our results are easily generalizable to other settings,
as long as agents are learning from an endogenous source of information, such as in the noisy
rational expectations models of Grossman (1975) and Hellwig (1980). One advantage of
our flexible price setup is to clearly separate our mechanism from the ones based on pricing
complementarities, which have been the center of the macroeconomic literature building on
Morris and Shin (2002) (as described in the next paragraph). That said, one could make the
model more realistic by adding real rigidities or other sources of complementarities, but at
the cost of making the results less transparent.

5

In a recent influential work, Morris and Shin (2002) have proposed a different, coordinationbased mechanism of the welfare cost of public information releases. Agents desire to achieve
coordination in their actions, but such behavior is socially undesirable. For that reason a
public signal, by allowing agents to coordinate their actions, can be socially harmful, even
though it reduces agents’ uncertainty about fundamentals. Whether such a trade-off is relevant or not for policy (and in particular monetary policy) has been the subject of much
discussion. It is now known that in the coordination-based neo-keynesian models of Hellwig
(2005), Roca (2006), and Lorenzoni (2007), there is no trade-off: releases of public information are socially beneficial. More generally, Angeletos and Pavan (2007) have found the
conditions on linear-quadratic preferences under which public information releases are socially harmful, and have shown that the negative welfare results are very sensitive to the
preference structure. Similarly to Morris and Shin (2002), our results are driven by the impact of public information on agents’ relative weighting of private versus public information.
Differently, in our model, agents do not suffer from a socially harmful desire to coordinate:
public information releases are welfare reducing because they increase agents’ uncertainty
about fundamentals. Our model also has the positive implication that the publication of
economic statistics can result in less accurate forecasts, a prediction which is amenable to
empirical work. The virtue of this prediction is its simplicity: testing it does not require the
econometrician to make additional assumptions on preferences parameters, or on the social
value of coordination.
Lastly, several authors have studied the interactions of public communication with public
policy (see Moscarini, 2007; Atkeson et al., 2007; Eusepi and Preston, 2007; Taub, 1997).
Our approach here applies to the publication of economic statistics as well as communication
of economic outlook, taking all other aspects of public policy as given.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 starts by presenting the basic
model set up, and proceeds by defining and characterizing its linear equilibria. The second
main result on welfare effects is analyzed in Section 4. Section 5 studies three extensions.
Subsection 5.1 introduces velocity shocks and imperfect observability of the price level, and
studies optimal announcements of narrow versus broad monetary aggregates. We obtain
a simple characterization of whether a release of marginal public information about any
shock is welfare reducing: it occurs if the ratio of public to private knowledge about that
particular shock is sufficiently small. Subsection 5.2 shows that the opening of a bond market

6

that could aggregate more information does not change the results. Subsection 5.3 shows
that our results are robust to the introduction of idiosyncratic productivity shocks. Section
6 concludes. All omitted proofs are in the appendix.

2

The Model

We consider a standard cash-in-advance model modified to allow for three features of interest.
First, we introduce a real shock that affects the cost of producing that, initially, is imperfectly
and differentially known by households. Second, we allow for differential information among
households regarding the monetary shock (such heterogeneity is naturally generated by idiosyncratic initial money holdings). Finally, as in Townsend (1983), even though there is no
trade across locations, every household observes the economy-wide distribution of nominal
prices and learns from them.
Preferences and Technology
Time is discrete. Although the model is essentially static, we let time be infinite so that
money is valued. The economy is composed of a [0, 1]-continuum of locations. In each
location there are competitive firms operating a linear technology, transforming one unit of
labor into one unit of the consumption good. Firms hire labor in a competitive local labor
market and sell their output in a competitive local goods market. Because labor and goods
are immobile, the relative wage in terms of the consumption good is unity in all locations.
At each time t ∈ {1, 2, . . .} in location i ∈ [0, 1] a representative household chooses its
effort supply, Lit , consumption, Cit , and money balance, Mitd , in order to maximize
"
Ei1

∞
X



β t−1 log(Cit ) − ΘLit

#
,

(1)

t=1

where Θ represent an aggregate permanent effort cost and subject to sequence of budget and
cash-in-advance (CIA) constraints,
Cit +

Md
Mitd
≤ Lit + it−1
Pit
Pit
d
M
Cit ≤ it−1 ,
Pit

7

(2)
(3)

where Pit denotes the nominal price level in location i at time t. The initial money balance
of the representative household of location i is Mi0d = Mi .
Exogenous Information about Money
At time t = 1, an aggregate monetary shock causes households to be uncertain about the
aggregate money supply: they share the common prior that the logarithm of the aggregate
money supply is m + m̄, where m is a normally distributed monetary shock with mean zero,
precision Ψm , and m̄ is some constant known to everyone.
In practice, how could households be uncertain about the money supply? First, although
the Federal Reserve Board publishes weekly data on money aggregates M1 and M2, the
estimates are subsequently revised as depository institutions either report new data or revise
the data they previously reported.2 In addition, one may argue that even error-free measures
of M1 and M2 remain noisy estimates of the “true” measure of aggregate liquidity that enters
the quantity equation and directly influences the price level. This measure of aggregate
liquidity may include some less liquid assets omitted in M1 and M2 and could be influenced
by unobserved velocity shocks. We formalize this argument in Section 5.1 by adding velocity
shocks to the model.
The initial money endowment of the representative household of location i ∈ [0, 1] is
log Mi ≡ m̂i = m + εmi ,

(4)

where εmi is normally distributed across locations with mean zero and precision ψm . Thus,
the logarithm of the aggregate money supply is log M ≡ m + (2ψm )−1 .3
Note that the initial money endowment constitutes private information about the aggregate money supply. This initial private information will be the key driver of our result.4
2
See the December 2006 “Performance Evaluation of the Statistical Release about Money Stock Measures”
on the Federal Reserve Board website:
http://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h6/perfeval2006.htm
3
Hence, m̄ = (2ψm )−1 . We could shift the mean of m̂i up and down by any constant to obtain a different
m̄, without changing any of our results.
4
In all what follows, “private information” refers to a piece of information that is known solely by households in a given location.

8

Exogenous Information about Productivity
A key timing assumption of our model is that the cost of effort, Θ, is unknown as of time
t = 1 but is revealed to everyone at t = 2. The objective of this timing assumption is to
introduce a risky investment in the model. Indeed, in the first period of our equilibrium,
households will choose the amount of effort, Li1 , to put in their work, but the return on their
investment will have a random component, −ΘLi1 . While there are, of course, other and
perhaps more standard models of risky investment, our timing assumption has the advantage
of keeping the analysis tractable and transparent. We assume that all households share the
common prior that log(Θ) ≡ θ is normally distributed with a mean of zero and precision Ψθ ,
and is independent of the aggregate money supply. Households also observe a private signal
about the effort cost:
θ̂i = θ + εθi ,

(5)

where εθi is normally distributed with mean of zero and precision ψθ .
We assume that the random variables θ, m, εθi and εmi , are all pairwise independent.5
In what follows, we will use uppercase Ψ (lowercase ψ) to denote the precisions of public
(private) information about aggregate variables. As is standard in the literature, we measure
the amount of information in precision units. For instance, the amount of public information
about money is measured by Ψm . The overall precision structure is summarized in Table 1.
Importantly, public releases of exogenous information about m and θ translate into increases
in Ψm and Ψθ .6 Hence, in order to study the effect of public information releases, it suffices
to conduct comparative static exercises with respect to the exogenous parameters Ψm and
Ψθ .
5

Sun (2006) provides the precise construction of a probability space where the exact law of large numbers
holds for a continuum of pairwise independent random variables.
6
For example, suppose households start with a common prior has precision Ψθ and receive a public
signal θ + u, where u is normally distributed and independent from everything else, with a mean of zero
and a precision of ∆θ . Then, the households’ posterior precision is equal to Ψθ + ∆θ , and releasing public
information amounts to increasing Ψθ . Importantly, in this comparative static exercise, one should keep
constant the precision Ψθ of the common prior: indeed, increasing Ψθ at the same time would reduce
fundamental volatility, which may have a confounding impact on ex ante welfare. The proof of Proposition 5
shows that we do not need, however, to be explicit about holding Ψθ constant: welfare turns out to depend
only on the posterior precision Ψθ = Ψθ + ∆θ and on the prior mean of log Θ, which is equal to zero.

9

Table 1: Precision structure.
Money supply: m

Effort shock: θ

Public Information

Ψm

Ψθ

Private Information

ψm

ψθ

Endogenous Information from Nominal Prices
The only way the locations are connected is informationally: households observe the distribution of nominal prices of the entire economy when making their labor supply and consumption
decisions. Let us denote by pt the average logarithmic price across locations:
Z
pt =

pit di.

(6)

As we will show later on, the average price level will become a sufficient statistic of the entire
price distribution in equilibrium.
Market Clearing Conditions
We assume that goods and labor cannot flow across locations, so that the goods market must
clear locally:
Cit = Lit

(7)

for all i ∈ [0, 1] and t ∈ {1, 2, . . .}. Also the money markets are in equilibrium:7
Mitd = Mi .

2.1

(8)

Equilibrium

An equilibrium is made up of a sequence of distributions of consumption, labor and money
holdings across locations, together with a distribution of prices in the economy such that, at
each time,
(i) given the information conveyed by the distribution of prices in the economy and given
the local price, households choose consumption, labor and money holdings to maximize
7

R
We could instead impose an aggregate money market clearing condition: Mitd di = M . Indeed, the fact
that goods and factors are immobile will, by applying Walras’ Law in each location, imply condition (8).

10

their expected utility;
(ii) every local goods market clears.
Before characterizing an equilibrium formally, it is convenient to first analyze the household’s problem.
Solving the Household’s Problem
Consider the representative household of location i ∈ [0, 1] and let β t−1 λit and β t−1 µit be
the non-negative Lagrange multipliers of its budget constraint (2) and CIA constraint (3).
Then, the first-order conditions for consumption, labor and money balances are
1
= λit + µit
Cit

(9)

Eit [Θ] = λit

(10)




λit
λit+1 + µit+1
= βEit
,
Pit
Pit+1

(11)

where the expectation operator, Eit [ · ], is conditional on all the information available to
household i as of time t.
d
/Pit , it follows
Anticipating that the CIA constraint binds at all times, that is Cit = Mit−1
d
. In addition, plugging the goods market clearing condition (7)
that λit + µit = Pit /Mit−1

into the binding budget constraint (2), we obtain
d
Mitd = Mit−1
,

implying that a household’s money holdings must stay equal to its initial money endowment
at each time, i.e. Mitd = Mi (the money market is clearing). Now, together with equations
(10) and (11), these manipulations show that8
Pit = β −1 Mi Eit [Θ] .

(12)

Plugging this back into the binding CIA constraint, we obtain an inverse relationship between
8

The price level in each location is uniquely determined by the expectations of Θ and the money holdings:
there are not multiple monetary equilibria (a common occurrence in monetary models). This determinacy
is due to our log preference specification.

11

consumption and the expected effort cost,
Cit = βEit [Θ]−1 .

(13)

Plugging this into equation (9), we obtain that Ei [Θ]/β = λit + µit . Together with (10), this
implies that µit = (1 − β)Eit [Θ] /β is strictly positive, confirming our guess that the CIA
constraint is binding at all times.
Note that the households are concerned only with the cost parameter Θ. Because the
goods markets clear locally and the local money supply is constant and known, uncertainty
about the aggregate money supply does not directly affect the households’ problem. However,
as seen in equation (12), nominal prices in the economy combine local expectations about
the cost parameter and local money supplies. Thus, information about money will affect
households’ ability to extract information about Θ from observing the economy-wide prices.
Equilibrium After the Second Period
From period t = 2 onwards, households know the exact realization of Θ. Hence, we have
from equation (12) that, in equilibrium
Pit = β −1 Mi Θ
Cit = Lit = βΘ−1
for all t ≥ 2. So quantities and prices are determined from t = 2 onwards.
Linear Equilibrium in the First Period
As we proceed to study the competitive equilibrium in the first period, and given that the
economy is stationary from t = 2 onwards, we simplify notations by removing the time
subscript from all first-period variables.
Borrowing from the literature on noisy rational expectations in financial markets (see,
among many others, Grossman, 1975; Hellwig, 1980), we restrict ourselves to linear equilibria:
Definition 1 (Linear Equilibrium). A linear equilibrium is a cross-sectional distribution of
nominal prices, Pi , consumption, Ci , effort supplies, Li , and expectations about Θ, Ei [Θ],
such that

12

i) conditional on the realization of (m, θ), the distribution of prices is log-normal with
constant dispersion and a mean parameter
p = α0 + α1 θ + α2 m

(14)

for some constants α0 , α1 and α2 ;
ii) households’ expectations are rational; that is, after observing their private signals
(m̂i , θ̂i ) and the distribution of nominal prices in the economy,
h
i
Ei [Θ] = E Θ | θ̂i , m̂i , p ;

(15)

iii) households decisions are optimal and markets clear:
Ci = Li = βEi [Θ]−1

(16)

Pi = β −1 Mi Ei [Θ] .

(17)

To understand our rational expectations condition (15), note the following: even though
households observe the entire cross-sectional distribution of nominal prices, it is sufficient
for them to condition expectations with respect to only one moment of the distribution, the
average price level p. Indeed, in the equilibria we consider, the distribution of prices in the
economy is log-normal and, hence, is uniquely parameterized by its mean and its dispersion.
Given the additional requirement in part (i) that the dispersion does not depend on the
realization (m, θ), the mean parameter, p, conveys all the information embedded in the price
distribution.

3

Equilibrium Characterization

In this section we proceed to characterize the set of equilibria.

3.1

The Household’s Information Updating Problem

The analysis of the household’s updating problem is based on the following insight: although
prices are publicly observable, they also generate private information about productivity.

13

A Transformation of the Household’s Information Set
We start by noting that observing the average log-price, p, is informationally equivalent to
a signal ẑ, such that
ẑ = θ + m/A,

(18)

where A = α1 /α2 , given that α0 , α1 and α2 are constant. A simple transformation of
households’ information set implies:
Lemma 1. The joint observation of θ̂i = θ +εθi , m̂i = m+εmi and ẑ = θ +m/A is equivalent
to the joint observation of
θ̂i = θ + εθi

(19)

ẑ = θ + m/A

(20)

ẑi ≡ ẑ − m̂i /A = θ − εmi /A.

(21)

Proof. This follows immediately by replacing m̂i by ẑi ≡ ẑ − m̂i /A in a household’s information set, while keeping the two other observations, θ̂i and ẑ, the same.
Observing the price level, p, generates two independent signals about θ. There is first
a public signal of precision A2 Ψm , given by (20), which intuitively follows from extracting
productivity information from the price level, based on the public information about the
money supply. Second, the price also generates a private signal about θ of precision A2 ψm ,
given by (21), which follows from extracting productivity information from the price level,
based on the private information, m̂i , about the money supply. The finding that the publicly
observable price level also generates a private signal is the main insight of the lemma, and
will be a key driver of our results.
Information Updating
Given the three signals of Lemma 1, a household proceeds to calculate its posterior beliefs about Θ. In order to build intuition, we decompose the household’s posterior-belief
calculation in the following three steps.
First, conditional on its private information, θ̂i and ẑi , and given a fully diffuse prior, a
household forms a private posterior belief that Θ is log-normally distributed with a mean

14

and precision:


E θ | θ̂i , ẑi =

A2 ψm
ψθ
θ̂
+
ẑi
i
ψθ + A2 ψm
ψθ + A2 ψm

ψθ0 = ψθ + A2 ψm .

(22)
(23)

Equation (22) is the standard Bayesian updating formula for independent signals and normal
distribution: the private posterior belief about θ is a convex sum of the two private signals,
with convex weights reflecting the signals’ relative precisions. The posterior private precision,
ψθ0 , is obtained by adding up the precisions of the two private signals.
Secondly, conditional on the public signal, ẑ, and given the common prior that Θ is lognormally distributed with mean zero and precision Ψθ , a household forms the public posterior
belief that Θ is log-normally distributed with mean and precision


E θ | ẑ =

A2 Ψm
ẑ
Ψθ + A2 Ψm

Ψ0θ = Ψθ + A2 Ψm .

(24)
(25)

Finally, a household combines the private and the public belief together to form their fullinformation posterior belief. Namely, conditional on both the private and the public signals,
a household’s posterior beliefs is that Θ is log-normally distributed, with a mean given by




Ei [θ] = aE θ | θ̂i , ẑi + (1 − a)E θ | ẑ ,

(26)

which is a convex combination of the private posterior belief and the public posterior belief.
The convex weight a reflects, as usual, the relative precision of the private and the public
information:
ψθ + A2 ψm
ψθ0
.
=
a =
ψθ0 + Ψ0θ
ψθ + A2 ψm + Ψθ + A2 Ψm

(27)

The household’s full-information posterior precision about Θ is equal to ψθ0 + Ψ0θ , the sum of
the private and public precision.

15

3.2

Information Aggregation

Having solved for the household’s beliefs given the information structure, we proceed now to
characterize the equilibrium distribution of prices. We verify our guess that the average log
price is observationally equivalent to observing a signal ẑ = θ + m/A. Importantly, we show
that, in an equilibrium, the A parameter must be equal to the weight a that an individual
household puts on its private information.
Equilibrium Prices
From the logarithms of (17) it follows that
log(Pi ) = pi = − log β + m̂i + Ei [θ] +

2(ψθ0

1
,
+ Ψ0θ )

(28)

where the last term appears because of Jensen’s inequality. Taking the cross-sectional average, we obtain that the average log price is
Z

Z

Z

 
1
pi di = − log β + m̂i di + Ei θ di +
0
2(ψθ + Ψ0θ )
Z




1
= − log β + m + a E θ | θ̂i , ẑi di + (1 − a)E θ | ẑ +
0
2(ψθ + Ψ0θ )


1
.
= − log β + m + aθ + (1 − a)E θ | ẑ +
0
2(ψθ + Ψ0θ )

p=

(29)

The second line follows from substituting equation (26) into the first line. The third line,


(29), follows because, by equation (22), the private beliefs E θ | θ̂i , ẑi are independent and


centered around θ. Now, given that the public belief E θ | ẑ is known to everyone, the only
part of the average log price that is unknown to households is m + a θ. Hence, observing
the average log price is equivalent to observing m + a θ or, after dividing by a, observing
θ + m/a. Comparing with our guess (18), we obtain the equilibrium condition
A = a.

(30)

Taken together, the best reply (27) and the above equilibrium condition (30) imply that
A must solve the fixed-point equation
A=

ψθ + A2 ψm
.
ψθ + A2 ψm + Ψθ + A2 Ψm
16

(31)

The right hand side of this fixed-point equation is a continuous mapping from the real line
into [0, 1]. It follows, then:
Proposition 1. There exists at least one solution to the fixed-point equation (31). And there
is a one-to-one correspondence between solutions of this equation and linear equilibria.

3.3

Complementarities and Substitutabilities in Actions

Before proceeding into the characterization of the equilibria, in this subsection we make
an observation that is important for understanding our results: the endogenous private
information generated by prices is shown to make households’ actions strategic complements,
while the endogenous public information is shown to make them strategic substitutes.
Recall that a household’s posterior belief about θ can be written as the convex combina



tion a E θ | θ̂i , ẑi + (1 − a) E θ | ẑ of its private and public beliefs. The convex weight a thus
represents the weight a household puts on its private information. The individually optimal
weight is given by the best-reply function (27), which can be written

a = H (ψθ0 , Ψ0θ ) = H ψθ + A2 ψm , Ψθ + A2 Ψm ,

(32)

where H(ψθ0 , Ψ0θ ) ≡ ψθ0 /(ψθ0 + Ψ0θ ). Furthermore, in (32), A can be interpreted as the weight
chosen by all other households: the “aggregate weight.”
When the aggregate weight A increases, that is when other households rely more on their
private information, prices aggregate more new private information. This increases both the
precision A2 ψm of the private signal and the precision A2 Ψm of the public signal generated
by prices. These increases have two opposite effects on the individually optimal weight, a.
The first effect, which follows because ∂H/∂ψθ0 > 0, tends to increase a. Indeed, when A
goes up, the precision of the private signal generated by prices goes up, and an individual
household’s total private information, ψθ0 = ψθ +A2 ψm , increases. Holding public information
Ψ0θ the same, an individual household will find it optimal to rely more on this improved
private information, i.e., to increase a. Therefore, the endogenous private signal generated
by prices tends to make households’ weighting decisions strategic complements.
Because ∂H/∂Ψ0θ < 0, there is also an opposite effect. When A increases, the precision
of the public signal generated by prices increases as well, and an individual household’s total
public information, Ψ0θ = Ψθ + A2 Ψm , increases. Holding private information ψθ0 constant, an
17

individual household will find it optimal to rely more on this improved public information
and less on its private information, i.e., to decrease a. Therefore, the endogenous public
signal generated by price tends to make households’ actions strategic substitutes.
Which of the two effect dominates depends on parameter values. To see this, note that
H(ψθ0 , Ψ0θ ) = H(ψθ0 /Ψ0θ , 1) is homogenous of degree zero in (ψθ0 , Ψ0θ ). Since H increases in its
first argument, it follows that the best reply (32) is increasing in A if and only if the ratio
ψθ0 /Ψ0θ is increasing in A, that is,
Lemma 2. The best reply function, H, increases in A if and only if
1 ∂ψθ0
1 ∂Ψ0θ
> 0
ψθ0 ∂A
Ψθ ∂A

⇐⇒

ψm
ψθ
>
.
Ψm
Ψθ

That is, if and only if, when A increases, the total precision of private information grows
faster than the total precision of public information.
Proof. Follows directly from taking derivatives and rearranging.
The lemma provides an intuitive condition for households’ actions to be strategic complements. When ψm is large or when Ψm is small, the private channel generates proportionally
more information than the public one. In this case, an increase in the aggregate weight, A,
increases the precision of the private signal proportionally more than the public one, a force
for complementarities. Also, when ψθ is small or Ψθ is large the public prior information before observing prices is more precise than the private: this implies that the posterior private
precision, ψθ + A2 ψm , is proportionally more affected by an increase in A than the public
posterior precision, Ψθ + A2 Ψm . This is, again, a force for complementarities.

3.4

Public Information and Multiplicity

This subsection explains how the complementarities identified above may create multiple
equilibria. We also explain the impact on multiplicity of changing the public information as
given by (Ψm , Ψθ ).
To that end, we start by fixing the private information parameters (ψm , ψθ ) and we let
M(ψm , ψθ ) be the set of (Ψm , Ψθ ) such that there are multiple (more than one) equilibria.
We start by three elementary properties:

18

Proposition 2. The set function M(ψm , ψθ ) has the following properties: (i) it is empty
if and only if ψm /ψθ ≤ 27, (ii) it is homogeneous of degree one, i.e., for all µ > 0,
M(µψm , µψθ ) = µM(ψm , ψθ ), and (iii) it is bounded.
The first point of the proposition simply says that, if ψm /ψθ ≤ 27, then there exists
a unique equilibrium for any pair (Ψm , Ψθ ), and otherwise, there exists multiple ones for
some (Ψm , Ψθ ). The second point of the proposition follows directly from the fact that the
equilibrium equation (31) is homogenous of degree zero in the precision parameters: scaling
all precision parameters (ψm , ψθ , Ψm , Ψθ ) up and down by the same constant won’t change
the set of equilibrium weights, A. This means that multiplicity does not depend on the
absolute level of information, but on how the information is divided among the different
sources. What does matter for multiplicity is the relative amount of public information,
(Ψm , Ψθ ), versus private information, (ψm , ψθ ). Indeed, as shown in the third point of the
proposition, for each (ψm , ψθ ), the set M(ψm , ψθ ) is bounded; that is, holding (ψm , ψθ ) fixed,
if the amount (Ψm , Ψθ ) of public information is sufficiently precise, there exists a unique
equilibrium.
Ψθ

The set M

Ψm
Ψ̄m

Figure 1: The set M and its boundaries.
To simplify notations, from now on we suppress the dependence of M on the private
information vector (ψm , ψθ ).
19

Proposition 3. For all (ψm , ψθ ) such that ψm /ψθ > 27, the set M is delimitated by continuous, strictly positive, strictly decreasing upper and lower boundaries
U (Ψm ) = max{Ψθ : (Ψθ , Ψm ) ∈ M}
L(Ψm ) = min{Ψθ : (Ψθ , Ψm ) ∈ M},
defined for 0 ≤ Ψm < Ψ̄m ≡

p
ψm /(27ψθ ) − 1, and satisfying L(Ψ̄m ) = U (Ψ̄m )

This proposition is illustrated in Figure 1, which shows the set M in the (Ψm , Ψθ ) plane.
Multiple equilibria arise when (Ψθ , Ψm ) lies in between the two boundaries. The boundaries
are strictly positive. Thus, when (Ψm , Ψθ ) is small enough, there is a unique equilibrium
and a mild increase in the public information vector may create multiplicity.
Figure 2 shows graphically how changing public information distorts the fixed-point equation and can create multiple equilibria. For a low value of Ψm , complementarities are strong
and the right-hand-side of the fixed-point equation, (31), has a sharply increasing S-shape; it
has a unique intersection with the 45-degree line in the upper branch of the S. For a middle
value of Ψm , the S-shape rises more slowly and three intersections arise. When Ψm is large,
the S becomes decreasing and a unique intersection is obtained. A similar graphical analysis
applies to changes in Ψθ .

H(A)
Low Ψm
Middle Ψm

High Ψm

A

Figure 2: The impact of changing Ψm on the fixed-point equilibrium equation.

20

The following proposition accounts for all equilibria:
Proposition 4. Given (ψm , ψθ ) such that ψm /ψθ > 27, then:
(i) for all (Ψm , Ψθ ) in the interior of M, there are three equilibria, AL < AM < AH ;
(ii) for all (Ψm , Ψθ ) either on the upper or lower boundaries of M, there are two distinct
equilibria, AL < AH ; for (Ψ̄m , U (Ψ̄m )), there is only one;
(iii) as (Ψm , Ψθ ) approaches the lower boundary from below, the unique equilibrium converges to AH ;
(iv) as (Ψm , Ψθ ) approaches the upper boundary from above, the unique equilibrium converges to AL .
Thus, in the interior of the multiple equilibrium region, M, there are three equilibria.
Note that there are two distinct equilibria on the boundaries of M but, just outside M,
there is a unique equilibrium. Hence, as one enters M, at least one “new” equilibrium must
appear. This is what is demonstrated by the third and fourth points of the proposition: a
strictly lower equilibrium, AL , appears as one enters M from below, and a strictly higher
equilibrium, AH , appears as one enters M from above.

4

Public Information and Welfare

This section analyzes the welfare impact of public information releases about m and θ.
Public information has a direct beneficial effect: taking the aggregate weight, A, as given,
it increases the total knowledge of the households and allows for more informed decisions.
However, it also has the negative effect of reducing the weight that households put on their
private information, which reduces the endogenous informational content of nominal prices.
If ψm > 0, so that prices generate private information, then the second effect can dominate.

4.1

Welfare Criterion and Equilibrium Selection

We take our criterion to be utilitarian welfare: the ex ante utility of a representative household. In our model, it turns out to be an increasing function of households’ equilibrium
posterior precision about θ:

21

Proposition 5. In a linear equilibrium, ex-ante utilitarian welfare is an increasing function
of the posterior precision, ψθ0 + Ψ0θ = ψθ + A2 ψm + Ψθ + A2 Ψm , about θ.
Households’ ex-ante welfare goes up with the total precision of their first-period beliefs,
ψθ0 + Ψ0θ . This simply means that households are better off if they know more about θ
when they make their labor supply decisions. Although intuitive, this result is not a forgone
conclusion: as it is well known, information does not necessarily have a positive social value.9
Multiple equilibria introduce a standard difficulty for welfare analysis. Indeed, one has
to decide which equilibrium households coordinate on, and different equilibria often admit
opposite comparative statics. In this section we focus on the highest welfare equilibrium,
so that we abstract from the negative welfare impact of coordination failure. Also, as will
become clear later, our main welfare result does not depend on multiplicity: it also holds in
regions of the parameter space where the equilibrium is unique. Proposition 5 immediately
implies:
Lemma 3. The highest welfare equilibrium corresponds to the largest solution, A? , of the
equilibrium fixed-point equation (31).

4.2

A U-Shaped Welfare Function

Recall first that, in equilibrium, the total posterior precision of a household is
ψθ0 + Ψ0θ = ψθ + A2? ψm + Ψθ + A2? Ψm .
One sees that, holding A? constant, both Ψθ and Ψm increase public knowledge. This is
the intuitive direct beneficial effect of public information: it directly increases knowledge
about θ, or it increases knowledge about money, m, which allows households to extract more
information about θ from nominal prices.
There is, however, a countervailing equilibrium effect: following an increase in public
information about either θ or m, households put less weight on their private knowledge,
reducing the equilibrium weight A? . This indirect effect tends to decrease the informational
content of prices:
9

Perhaps the best known example is from Hirshleifer (1971), who shows that information destroys insurance opportunities. See, also, the first chapter of Brunermeier (2001) and the references therein.

22

Lemma 4. In the highest welfare equilibrium, the equilibrium weight, A? : (i) is strictly
decreasing in Ψm and Ψθ , and goes to zero as either Ψm or Ψθ go to infinity and (ii) is
continuous in (Ψm , Ψθ ) everywhere except at the upper boundary of M, Ψθ = U (Ψm ), where
it jumps downwards (when moving from the interior of the set M to a point outside).
Note that, as Ψm and Ψθ increase smoothly, when the negative jump in A? occurs, society
incurs a discrete welfare loss. Now, from the fixed-point equation, (31), one can write that,
ψθ + A2? ψm + Ψθ + A2? Ψm =

ψθ
+ A? ψm ,
A?

where the left-hand side is the total posterior precision of households’ beliefs. A change in
Ψm or Ψθ affects the right hand side only through the effect on equilibrium A? . Hence, we
can evaluate the welfare effect of an increase in Ψm and/or Ψθ by taking derivatives of the
right hand side with respect to A? :

∂
ψθ
ψθ + A2? ψm + Ψθ + A2? Ψm = − 2 + ψm ,
∂A?
A?
which is positive if and only if A? >

p
ψθ /ψm . Keeping in mind that A? is strictly decreasing

in (Ψm , Ψθ ), we obtain:
Lemma 5. Suppose households coordinate on the highest welfare equilibrium and fix some
(ψm , ψθ ). Then, when Ψθ =
6 U (Ψm ), welfare decreases continuously in (Ψm , Ψθ ) if and only
p
if A? > ψθ /ψm . When Ψθ = U (Ψm ), a marginal increase in (Ψm , Ψθ ) causes welfare to
jump down.
Equipped with this lemma, we can precisely characterize the region of the (Ψm , Ψθ ) plane
where welfare is decreasing in (Ψm , Ψθ ). Let’s define, for all Ψm ≥ 0, the boundary
s

(
Γ(Ψm ) ≡ sup Ψθ ≥ 0 : A? >

ψθ
ψm

)

= 0 if the set is empty.
Then, because A? is decreasing and left-continuous in (Ψm , Ψθ ), it follows that A? ≥

p
ψθ /ψm

if and only if Ψθ ≤ Γ(Ψm ). So welfare is decreasing when (Ψm , Ψθ ) falls below the boundary
Ψθ = Γ(Ψm ). Precisely, by Lemma 5, when Ψθ 6= U (Ψm ), welfare is continuously decreasing
if and only if Ψθ < Γ(Ψm ). When Ψθ = U (Ψm ), welfare jumps down.
23

In the appendix, we demonstrate that Γ(Ψm ) > 0 for some Ψm , so that the region below
the boundary, Ψθ < Γ(Ψm ), is in general not empty. In addition, we provide a parametric
description of Γ(Ψm ):
Proposition 6 (U-Shaped Welfare). Suppose that households coordinate on the highest wel
√
fare equilibrium and fix some (ψm , ψθ ). Let ∆(Ψm ) = 2 ψθ ψm − ψθ − (ψθ /ψm )Ψm and
Γ(Ψm ) = max {0, ∆(Ψm ), U (Ψm )}
= max {0, ∆(Ψm )}

whenever U (Ψm ) is defined
otherwise,

and where ∆(Ψ̄m ) ≥ U (Ψ̄m ). Then, when Ψθ 6= U (Ψm ), welfare decreases continuously in
(Ψm , Ψθ ) if and only if Ψθ < Γ(Ψm ). When, Ψθ = U (Ψm ), welfare jumps down.
The boundary Γ(Ψm ) is shown in Figure 3. Along any increasing curve in the (Ψm , Ψθ )
plane that passes through the origin, welfare will have a U shape: it will decrease first, reach
a minimum when crossing the boundary Ψθ = Γ(Ψm ) from below, and increase thereafter.
Note also that the curve may cross the boundary Ψθ = U (Ψm ) before or at the same time
as the boundary Ψθ = Γ(Ψm ). At that crossing point, the high equilibrium disappears and
welfare will have a negative jump.
One may suspect that the negative welfare result only arises when there are multiple
equilibria coupled with that fact that we have arbitrarily chosen to focus on the high welfare
equilibrium. The proposition clarifies that it is not the case: welfare can decrease when
increasing (Ψm , Ψθ ) even in regions where the equilibrium is unique. For example, if ψθ <
ψm < 27ψθ , then the equilibrium is unique and the region of the (Ψm , Ψθ ) plane where
welfare decreases is non-empty.
Another implication of the proposition is that an optimal communication policy is bangbang:
Corollary 1 (Bang-Bang Communication). Suppose the government has multidimensional
information about m and θ that would permit an increase of public precisions. Then, the
optimal communication policy is to announce all or none of the information.
This means that, in this setup, either full transparency or full opacity is optimal: selectively picking the information to announce, or revealing only part of the available information, will always be suboptimal. In Section 5.1, we qualify this results in an economy where
24

Ψθ
Γ(Ψm)

Ψm
Ψ̄m

Figure 3: The solid line is the boundary Ψθ = Γ(Ψm ) above which welfare decreases in
(Ψm , Ψθ ). The dotted line shows the boundaries of the set M.
the shock m is the sum of three components: a shock to a narrow monetary aggregate, a
velocity shock, and an observational noise. We show that, for small releases of public information, the bang bang result only applies “component-by-component”. For instance, it
can be optimal to release public information about the narrow monetary aggregate, and not
about the velocity shock.
The next proposition studies some conditions for transparency and opacity to be optimal:
Proposition 7. A sufficiently large release of public information about Ψm or Ψθ will always
increase welfare. On the other hand, for any given finite increase of public precisions, there
exists (ψm , ψθ ) such that this increase is welfare decreasing.
The first point of the proposition intuitively arises from the fact that, if Ψm goes to
infinity, then households are no longer confused about monetary shocks and they can extract
a signal of arbitrarily high precision about Θ from the observation of prices; their posterior
precision goes to infinity and welfare is maximized. Of course, if Ψθ goes to infinity, then
the posterior precision goes to infinity as well (as information can never be destroyed).
The second point of the Proposition follows from the parametric form of Γ(Ψm ) given in
Proposition 6: in particular, if ψm is large enough, then Ψθ < ∆(Ψm ) ≤ Γ(Ψm ), so that an
increase of public information up to (Ψm , Ψθ ) decreases welfare.
25

Explaining the Negative Welfare Result: The Role of Complementarities
Recall that Lemma 5 showed that, in order for public information to reduce welfare, it is
p
necessary and sufficient that A? > ψθ /ψm . Since A? ≤ 1, it follows that a necessary
condition for public information to reduce welfare is that ψm ≥ ψθ . In particular, we must
have that ψm > 0, meaning that the distribution of price must generate private information.
In Amador and Weill (2006), we obtained a similar result in an abstract model of information
diffusion: private learning from other agents’ actions is necessary for public information to
be welfare reducing.
In order to clarify this point and highlight the importance of the endogenous private
information generated by prices, we first show that, in the absence of an effect on endogenous
private information, public information is always beneficial:
Lemma 6. Holding ψθ0 ≡ ψθ + A2? ψm the same,
(i) the equilibrium weight A which solves
A = H(ψθ0 , Ψθ + A2 Ψm )
is a decreasing function of Ψm and Ψθ : ∂A /∂Ψm < 0 and ∂A /∂Ψθ < 0, and
(ii) the posterior precision ψθ0 + Ψθ + A2 Ψm is an increasing function of Ψm and Ψθ .
The lemma shows that, when ψθ0 is held constant, although public information about
m or θ reduces the equilibrium sensitivity A , it always increases the posterior precision
ψθ0 + Ψθ + A2 Ψm . The intuition for this result is as follows. The posterior public precision,
Ψθ + A2 Ψm , cannot decrease with an increase in (Ψm , Ψθ ) given that ψθ0 remained constant.
Indeed, if the posterior public precision had decreased, households would find it optimal to
rely more on their private information, so the equilibrium A would have to increase. This
implies, in turn, an increase in Ψθ + A2 Ψm , contradicting the assumed decrease in public
knowledge.
It follows also from the above lemma that, for public information to be welfare reducing,
a higher reduction in the equilibrium A? needs to be generated. This is where the complementarities provide a powerful amplification mechanism. Consider, for instance, an increase
in Ψm . This causes A to decrease, which always decreases the amount A2 ψm of private

26

information generated by price. This prompts households to rely less on their private information, i.e., to lower A, which decreases A2 ψm further, prompts households to lower A, and
so on.
Informally, by applying the implicit function theorem (while assuming differentiability) to
the equilibrium fixed-point equation (31), we find that the marginal change in the equilibrium
weight when Ψm increases is given by
A2? HΨ0θ
A2? HΨ0θ
∂A?
∂A
=
<
=
< 0,
∂Ψm
1 − 2A? (HΨ0θ Ψm + Hψθ0 ψm )
1 − 2A? HΨ0θ Ψm
∂Ψm
where Hψθ0 > 0 and HΨ0θ < 0 are the partial derivatives of H with respect to ψθ0 and Ψ0θ ,
respectively. Because of the complementarities in actions created by the endogenous private
information, the equilibrium sensitivity A? falls by more than if ψθ0 had remained constant.
This can reduce the total amount A2 ψm + A2 Ψm of information generated by prices, even if
Ψm increases.

4.3

Related Results from the Literature

Perhaps the best known related result is that of Morris and Shin (2002), who have shown, in
the context of a beauty contest game, that public information can reduce welfare. Although
reminiscent of their result, ours does not arise from agents’ socially wasteful desire to coordinate their actions, but instead from the endogenous aggregation of information through
prices. In particular, in Morris and Shin (2002), public information always reduces agents’
uncertainty about fundamentals, while in our model it can have the opposite effect (and this
is the driver of our welfare result).
Morris and Shin (2002) emphasize that releases of public information are welfare decreasing when the precision of the private information about the aggregate state of the economy
is sufficiently large. In our economy, where the aggregate state has two dimensions, m and
θ, this result does not always hold. For instance, consider the case when Ψθ = 0. Then, the
equilibrium is unique and an increase in Ψm reduces welfare if and only if
s
Ψm ≤ 2ψm

27

!

ψm
−1 .
ψθ

One sees that, as in Morris and Shin (2002), a larger ψm increases the range where public
announcements are welfare decreasing. A larger ψθ , however, has the opposite effect.
In Svensson’s (2006) critique of Morris and Shin (2002), it is proposed that a conservative
benchmark of how likely it is that public information is welfare reducing is when the precision
of the public and the private signals are the same. Indeed, in practice, one would expect the
monetary authority to know at least as much about economic shocks as the private sector.
When imposing this restriction in Morris and Shin (2002)’s model, Svensson (2006) finds
that public information is welfare increasing. He concludes that Morris and Shin (2002)
are, in fact, pro-transparency. In our multidimensional economy, let us interpret Svensson’s
restriction as letting Ψm = ψm and Ψθ = ψθ . From Proposition 6, in order for a public release
of information to reduce welfare, it is sufficient that Ψθ ≤ ∆(Ψm ) or, after rearranging:
Ψm
Ψθ
+
<
2ψm 2ψθ

s

ψm
− 1,
ψθ

which, when Ψm = ψm and ψθ = Ψθ , is equivalent to ψm > 4ψθ . If this condition is satisfied,
then, public information about m decreases welfare even though the precision of the public
and private signals about m are the same.
Some recent papers have shown the reappearance of multiple equilibria in global games
if information is publicly aggregated through prices (see Angeletos and Werning (2006) and
Hellwig, Mukherji and Tsyvinski (2006)). It is worth noticing that, differently from these
papers (and global games in general), in our current model multiplicity is generated even
though there are no payoff externalities and, under full information, our model will always
feature a unique equilibrium. Also, the focus of our analysis is not to study the multiplicity
in itself, but instead to understand the role of public information releases on welfare and
uncertainty.
Lastly, our paper is related to the recent work of Ganguli and Yang (2007) who study
information acquisition in a noisy rational expectations financial market model. Under
the assumption that investors have private information about the amount of noise trading,
they also find that their model may admit multiple equilibria. This is formally similar to
our assumption that households have private information about the money supply. Note
however, that our main results do not concern the multiplicity itself, but welfare analysis
(which include situations where the set of equilibria is a singleton) and how multiplicity is

28

affected by public announcements.

5

Extensions

In this last section, we provide three extensions of our model. In Subsection 5.1, we add a
velocity shock to the model in order to demonstrate that M can indeed be interpreted as a
broad monetary aggregate. Also, we show how our model can easily accommodate multiple
shocks. In Subsection 5.2, we open a centralized financial market for a one-period nominal
bond and show that all our results go through. In Subsection 5.3 we introduce an large
idiosyncratic component to the agents’ decisions, and show that our results are not affected.

5.1

Narrow versus Broad Monetary Aggregates

The objective of the exposition so far has been to clarify the forces at play and to gain an
understanding of the mechanism through which public information can be welfare reducing.
For that reason, we have been imprecise about what the monetary shock m stands for.
In this section, we provide an extension of our model where the shock m is the sum of
three underlying shocks: a shock to a narrow monetary aggregate, a velocity shock that
represents uncertainty about credit conditions, and an observational noise to capture the
noise in preliminary price level statistics. We then proceed to derive a general condition for
the marginal release of information regarding either one of these three shocks to be welfare
increasing: we find that the release of marginal public information about a shock is welfare
increasing if the ratio of public to private knowledge about that particular shock is sufficiently
small. Thus, for small release of public information, our bang-bang communication result
applies component by component: for instance, it can be optimal to release information
about the narrow monetary aggregate, but not about the velocity shock.
The Model
We begin by distinguishing between narrow and broad monetary aggregates through the
introduction of velocity shocks: we let the price level in every location not only depend
on the local money endowment Mi , but also on some level of velocity, Vi . Precisely, in
the equilibrium to be described, the amount of liquidity that enters the quantity equation
is not Mi , but the product Mi Vi , which we interpret as a broad monetary measure. We

29

assume that the monetary authority has complete information about the distribution of
money endowments, Mi . This represents disaggregated information that the Central Bank
collects about narrow measures of money, such as the monetary base. On the other hand,
we assume that the Central Bank has imperfect information about the velocity shocks, Vi .
These could represent, for instance, partial information about overall credit conditions in
the economy.
The representative household in location i faces a CIA constraint of the form:

Cit ≤ Vi

d
Mit−1
+ Tit
Pit


,

(33)

where Tit are nominal transfers made by the government to household i at the beginning
of period t, and Vi represent a local velocity parameter. A standard interpretation of this
velocity parameter is that a household can use credit to purchase a fraction (1 − 1/Vi ) of its
consumption goods, but has to purchase the rest of the goods with cash. According to this
interpretation, Vi is positively related to the amount of inside money created in location i.
The budget constraint of a household is
Cit +

M d + Tit
Mitd
≤ Lit + it−1
.
Pit
Pit

(34)

For tractability, we assume that the Central Bank implements the Friedman rule10 by
shrinking the money supply at rate β: we assume that at time t, households in location i have
to pay a lump sum tax Tit = −(1−β)β t−1 Mi . We let the Central Bank know the distribution
of the initial cash holdings so it has sufficient information to implement this policy. Note as
well that the Friedman rule is optimal in this economy from period 2 onwards.11
Finally, the goods market clearing conditions are, as before, (7), but the money market
clearing condition becomes
Mitd = β t Mi ,
10

(35)

It is possible to solve for an equilibrium under the assumption that the money supply is constant. We
would need to modify the distributional assumptions on the velocity shocks to guarantee that the model
remains log-normal. These changes would not affect the bottom-line of the results that follow. The details
of this exercise are available from the authors upon request.
11
Whether the Friedman rule is optimal in period 1 remains to be shown. The difficulty relates to footnote 10: changes in the monetary rule require changes in distributional assumptions for the model to remain
log-normal.

30

so that

R

Mitd di = β t M = β t

R

Mi di, the initial aggregate money stock, which accounts for

the ever shrinking aggregate money supply.
Each of the households is initially endowed with the same information about Θ and M
as before.
The velocity parameter in each location is given by log Vi ≡ v̂i = v + εvi , where εvi
is normally distributed with a mean of zero and a precision ψv , and where v captures an
aggregate velocity shock. In addition, households share the common prior that the average
velocity, v, is normally distributed12 with a mean of zero and a precision Ψv .
Households do not observe the aggregate values m or v, which are assumed to be uncorrelated. However, they imperfectly observe the average price level in the economy; that is,
they observe p + εp , where p is the log average price and εp is a normal noise with mean zero
and precision Ψp , and independent of everything else.
As before, public releases of information boil down to increases in the public precisions
Ψm , Ψv , and Ψp . If the Central Bank releases its perfect information about m, then it can
increase the corresponding public precision, Ψm , towards infinity. The monetary authority,
however, does not have full information regarding the velocity shock: it can only increase
Ψv up to some finite amount.
Optimization by the households, together with the market-clearing conditions, implies
that in equilibrium
Lit = Cit = Eit [Θ]−1

(36)

Pit = β t Eit [Θ]Vi Mi

(37)

Mitd = β t Mi .

(38)

Once Θ is revealed in period 2, the equilibrium is deterministic, so the only interesting
behavior occurs in period 1 (as in the baseline model). The definition of equilibrium is the
same as in Definition 1, except that we now require that the average log price be
p = a0 + a1 θ + a2 m + a3 v + a4 ε p ,

(39)

that the conditional expectations include vi as part of the information sets and that equa12

Since Vi is log-normally distributed in the cross section, Vi can be smaller than 1, implying that the
fraction of credit goods, 1 − 1/Vi , may be less than zero. However, by choosing the mean of Vi large enough,
we can make this happen with arbitrarily small probability.

31

tions (16) and (17) are replaced by equations (36) and (37). In the appendix, we guess that
observing the price with noise is observationally equivalent to p̂ = θ + m/A + v/B + εp /C,
and show that:
Proposition 8. There exists a linear equilibrium. In a linear equilibrium, the total precision
of the posterior about θ solves the following equation:


1
1
1
κ = G(κ) ≡ ψθ + Ψθ +
+ 2
+ 2
2
A (ψm + Ψm ) B (ψv + Ψv ) C Ψp

−1
,

where
A=

ψθ 1 − (ψθ + Ψθ )/κ
ψθ 1 − (ψθ + Ψθ )/κ
ψθ
+
;B =
+
;C =
.
κ
1 + Ψm /ψm
κ
1 + Ψv /ψv
κ

Conversely, every solution where κ ∈ (ψθ + Ψθ , ∞) corresponds to a linear equilibrium.
It can be shown that the linear equilibria in this model converge to the ones in our baseline
model as Ψv and Ψp tend towards infinity. Similarly as in the baseline model, there is the
possibility of multiple equilibria. We focus, as before, then on characterizing the equilibrium
corresponding to the highest fixed point κ? of G(κ), which delivers the highest welfare.
Optimal Communication
By analyzing how the function G(κ) varies with the public precisions Ψm , Ψv , and Ψp , we
can show that,
Proposition 9. A marginal release of information about shock i ∈ {m, v, εp } is welfare
reducing at the best equilibrium, κ? iff
Ψi
κ? − Ψθ
<
− 2.
ψi
ψθ
The release of marginal public information about a shock is welfare increasing if the ratio
of public to private knowledge about that particular shock is sufficiently small. A direct
corollary is that it is always beneficial to release public information about shocks that the
households have no private information about. This implies that improving the observation
of the price, by increasing the precision of the noise εp , always increases welfare.
Another result that follows is that if a benevolent public agency has full information
about any shock, it should announce it:
32

Proposition 10. Revealing the realization of any shock i ∈ {m, v, εp } increases the precision
of households’ beliefs about θ and increases welfare.
Hence the Central Bank should announce the state of the narrow monetary aggregate.
Also the Central Bank should try to ensure that the aggregate price level is observed as
efficiently as possible by the agents. Given this, whether the publication of a signal about
the nominal output (or equivalently, about the velocity shock) is welfare improving or not
depends on the conditions stated in Proposition 9. In particular, if Ψp = ∞, so the price
level is observed without noise, the model thus converges to our baseline model, with only
two shocks: θ and v.

5.2

A Bond Market: No Trade and No Information

A familiar way in which an economy aggregates dispersed private information is through
financial markets. One might wonder, then, how robust the results regarding the social
value of public announcements that we have obtained are to the introduction of a financial
market where households from different locations can interact. To answer this question,
we introduce what we believe is a natural financial market in our economy: households are
allowed to trade a nominal bond in zero net supply. Our main result is that the equilibrium
nominal interest rate in that market does not provide any new information to the households
and that the allocation obtained by a competitive equilibrium when the bond market is closed
remains the allocation of a competitive equilibrium once it is opened.
Thus, suppose that any household at period t can buy a bond that pays a unit of the
currency in the following period, t + 1, and let us denote by Qt its nominal price. The budget
constraint of the household i in period t is now given by
Cit +

Md
Mitd Bit
Bit−1
+
Qt ≤ Lit + it−1 +
,
Pit
Pit
Pit
Pit

(40)

where Bit is the amount of the bond held by household i in period t. As before, the household
is subject to a cash-in-advance constraint.
The bond market clearing condition is, at all times:
Z
Bit di = 0.

33

(41)

In an equilibrium, from the Euler equation of household i, we obtain that

 0
u (Cit+1 ) Pit
.
Qt = βEit
u0 (Cit ) Pit+1
We now check that the allocation without a nominal bond market remains an equilibrium
once the nominal bond market opens. Because the CIA constraint binds at all times, Pit Cit =
Mi , and hence,

Qt = βEit


Cit Pit
= β,
Cit+1 Pit+1

which is the same for all agents. Note as well that the price of the bond does not reveal
any information: it is just equal to the discount factor. Thus, any equilibrium allocation
when the bond market is closed remains an equilibrium when the bond market is open with
Bit = 0 and Qt = β.
Our result is obtained because our economy satisfies the conditions for a no-trade equilibrium that Constantinides and Duffie (1996) famously pointed out in their incomplete market
model. First, households have homothetic utility and second, in equilibrium, the logarithm
of local consumptions and local prices
log Cit = −Eit [θ] + log β −

1
2vart [θ]

log Pit = m̂i − log Cit
follow identically distributed random walks with drifts. Indeed, the first term is a martingale,
because it is the conditional expectation of a fixed random variable, θ. The drift, given by
the second and the third term, is the same across locations because all households share the
same posterior precision. Taken together, these imply that the expectation of the nominal
stochastic discount factor, (Pit+1 /Pit ) (Cit+1 /Cit ), is constant across locations.

5.3

Large idiosyncratic variations in price

In the model we have described so far, idiosyncratic variation in prices is generated from
the private information regarding the aggregate disturbances. A recent literature has documented that the variation in the idiosyncratic component of prices (and other quantities)
is an order of magnitude bigger than the variation of the aggregate components. Hence,
one may argue that the main concern of economic agents is not forecasting macroeconomic
34

shocks, but instead responding to idiosyncratic shocks. In this section, we address this concern explicitly by introducing idiosyncratic shocks into the model, and showing that our
welfare results are consistent with arbitrarily large levels of idiosyncratic volatility.
Suppose that the productivity parameter now includes a perfectly observed idiosyncratic
component. That is, let the utility of household in location i be given by
"
Ei1

∞
X



β t−1 log(Cit ) − Θ̂i Lit



#

t=1

where now Θ̂ = Θegi is a combination of an aggregate component Θ, which is as before,
and an idiosyncratic component gi , generated from a normal distribution with mean zero
and constant variance, and independent across locations. We assume that the individual
realization of gi is observed perfectly by households in location i.
Following the same steps as in the previous sections, we obtain an optimality condition:

−1
Cit = Lit = β Eit Θ̂i
= βe−gi (Eit Θ)−1
Substituting this into the ex-ante (per period) welfare function:




E0 log(Cit ) − Θ̂i Lit = E0 log Eit [Θ] + E0 [gi ] + log β − β = E0 log Eit [Θ] + log β − β
which delivers the same welfare function as the one obtained in section 4. The equilibrium
prices are then given by:
log Pit = − log β + m̂i + log Eit [Θ] + gi = − log β + m̂i + gi + Ei [θ] +

2(ψθ0

1
+ Ψ0θ )

Given that gi is idiosyncratic, its effect disappears in the aggregate, and the average log price
in the economy is the same as the obtained in the baseline model. This implies that the
equilibrium has not changed; and the results of Propositions 6 and 7 hold unmodified.
Note that according to the price equation we have obtained above, any level of idiosyncratic variation can now be added to the model by changing the variance of gi without
affecting the welfare results. We interpret this as following: the fact that there is a large
idiosyncratic component to the individual decisions do not imply that the welfare effects
of announcements regarding the underlying aggregate shocks are necessarily trivialized. In
particular, in the present example, idiosyncratic volatility does not affect at all the welfare
35

calculations.

6

Conclusions

We have characterized the conditions under which public announcements about real and
nominal aggregate shocks reduce the informativeness of prices and may actually increase
uncertainty about fundamentals and lower welfare. Although we focus on the case where
households observe nominal prices, we think it is reasonable to conjecture that a similar
outcome will prevail in the presence of financial markets that also aggregate dispersed information in the economy.
Our model is basically static (the infinite horizon was just necessary for money to have
value). However, similar techniques as the ones developed here may prove useful in studying
the dynamic effects of information releases, and also in answering the timing question: when
to make public announcements. This is all left for future research.

36

A
A.1

Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1

The right hand side of the fixed point equation (31) is strictly positive when A = 0 and
strictly less than 1 when A = 1. Hence, it follows that equation (31) has at least one solution,


A? . Plugging E θ | ẑ = ẑ = A2? Ψm /(Ψθ + A2? Ψm ) (θ + m/A? ) back into equation (29), we see
that our linear guess that p = α0 + α1 θ + α2 m is verified for α0 = − log β + 1/2(ψθ0 + Ψ0θ ),
α1 = (A? Ψθ + A2? Ψm )/(Ψθ + A2? Ψm ), and α2 = α1 /A? . Also, A = A? uniquely determines
the cross-sectional distribution of log prices, which is normal with a constant dispersion, as
can be seen from equation (28) after substituting in for equations (26), ψθ0 = ψθ + A2? ψm and
Ψ0θ = Ψθ + A2? Ψm . Also, A? determines the cross-sectional distribution of mean beliefs as
implied by (26). Finally this determines a unique distribution for consumption and labor
supplies, according to (16). This proves that A? determines a unique equilibrium.

A.2

Proof of Propositions 2, 3, and 4

We start from the equilibrium equation (31):

⇔
⇔
⇔
⇔
⇔

ψθ + A2 ψm
A=
ψθ + A2 ψm + Ψθ + A2 Ψm
3
A (ψm + Ψm ) − A2 ψm + A(ψθ + Ψθ ) − ψθ = 0
ψθ
A2 (ψm + Ψm ) − Aψm + (ψθ + Ψθ ) −
=0
A


1
Ψθ
Ψm
ψm
2 ψm
= −A
−1+
1+
+A
ψθ
ψθ
ψm
ψθ
A
1
ρθ = λ(−A2 (1 + ρm ) + A) + − 1
A
ρθ ≡ G(A, ρm ),

where λ ≡ ψm /ψθ , ρθ ≡ Ψθ /ψθ , ρm ≡ Ψm /ψm , and G(A, ρm ) depends implicitly on λ.
Straightforward calculations show that
(R1) G(A, ρm ) goes to infinity when A goes to zero;
(R2) G(A, ρm ) is negative when A < 0 and A ≥ 1.

37

After taking derivatives, we find that ∂G/∂A = D(A, ρm )/A2 , where
D(A, ρm ) = −2λ(1 + ρm )A3 + λA2 − 1
∂D
= 2λA [1 − 3A(1 + ρm )] .
∂A
It thus follows that D(A, ρm ) is a hump-shaped function of A, is negative when A = 0 and
A = 1, and achieves a maximum at A = 1/[3(1 + ρm )]:

max D(A, ρm ) = D

A∈[0,1]

1
, ρm
3(1 + ρm )


= −1 +

λ
.
27(1 + ρm )2

It then follows that the function G(A, ρm ) is strictly decreasing in A ∈ (0, 1) if and only if
the maximum of D(A, ρm ) is negative. Precisely:


p
(R3) If λ ≤ 27 or λ > 27 and ρm ≥ λ/27 − 1 , then G(A, ρm ) is strictly decreasing in
A ∈ (0, 1).
(R4) If λ > 27 and ρm <

p
λ/27 − 1, then there exists
0 < a1 (ρm ) <

1
< a2 (ρm ) < 1
3(1 + ρm )



such that G(A, ρm ) is decreasing in A ∈ 0, a1 (ρm ) , increasing in A ∈ a1 (ρm ), a2 (ρm ) ,

and decreasing again in a ∈ a2 (ρm ), 1 .
We also have:
(R5) The function a1 (ρm ) is increasing in ρm and the function a2 (ρm ) is decreasing in ρm .
(R6) As ρm approaches ρ̄m ≡

p
λ/27 − 1, both a1 (ρm ) and a2 (ρm ) tend to 1/[3(1 + ρ̄m )].

Result (R5) follows from an application of the Implicit Function Theorem (IFT). To prove
(R6), note first that, by (R5), since ai (ρm ) is monotonic and bounded, it must have a limit
āi as ρm approaches ρ̄m . By continuity of D(A, ρm ), we must have that D(āi , ρ̄m ) = 0. Now,
note that when ρm = ρ̄m , this equation has the unique solution A = 1/[3(1 + ρ̄m )]. Thus, we
must have that āi = 1/[3(1 + ρ̄m ], which proves the claim.
Now let us combine results (R2)-(R6) to find all solutions of the equation G(A, ρm ) = ρθ ).
First note that (R1) and (R2) show that there exists at least one solution, and that all
solutions lie in the open interval (0, 1). In case (R3), the function G(A, ρm ) is strictly
38

decreasing in A, so the solution is unique. To analyze the second case, (R4), we start by


defining B (1) (ρm ) ≡ G a1 (ρm ), ρm and B (2) (ρm ) ≡ G a2 (ρm ), ρm . We have
(R7) The function B (i) (ρm ) is strictly decreasing in ρm , for i ∈ {1, 2}.
Indeed, since by construction ∂G/∂A(ai , ρm ) = 0, it follows that, for i ∈ {1, 2}:
∂G
dB (i)
=
(ai ) = −λa2i < 0.
dρm
∂ρm

(42)

G(A, ρm)
a value of ρθ for which
there are multiple equilibria

B (2)(ρm)

ρθ

B (1)(ρm)
0

A

0

1

Figure 4: The function G(A).
Now the set of equilibria can be described graphically, as follows. Figure 4 shows a plot
of G(A, ρm ) as a function of A. The local minimum is achieved at A = a1 and is equal to
B (1) (ρm ), and the local maximum is achieved at a2 and is equal to B (2) (ρm ). The figure
makes it clear that
(R8) if ρθ < B (1) (ρm ), then there is a unique equilibrium, which is greater than a2 (ρm );
(R9) if ρθ = B (1) (ρm ), then there are two equilibria, AL = a1 (ρm ) < a2 (ρm ) < AH ;
(R10) if B (1) (ρm ) < ρθ < B (2) (ρm ), then there are three equilibria AL < a1 (ρm ) < AM <
a2 (ρm ) < AH ;
(R11) if ρθ = B (2) (ρm ), then there are two equilibria, AL < a1 (ρm ) < a2 (ρm ) = AH ;
39

(R12) if ρθ > B (2) (ρm ), then there is a unique equilibrium, which is smaller than a1 .
Replacing ρm = Ψm /ψm , ρθ = Ψθ /ψθ and λ = ψm /ψθ in the above, we find that the set M
is described parametrically by:
0 ≤ Ψm < Ψ̄m
and L(Ψm ) ≤ Ψθ ≤ U (Ψm ),
where:

ψm
−1
Ψ̄m = ψm
27ψθ


Ψm
(1)
L(Ψm ) = ψθ B
ψ
 m
Ψm
U (Ψm ) = ψθ B (2)
.
ψm


Note that L(Ψm ) and U (Ψm ) are implicit functions of (ψm , ψθ ). By (R7), the boundaries
L(Ψm ) and U (Ψm ) are decreasing functions of Ψm . Also, because a2 (ρm ) is decreasing, it
follows from (42) that B (2) (ρm ) is convex. Lastly, by (R6), we have that L(Ψ̄m ) = U (Ψ̄m ).
Now the first two points of Proposition 4 follow from (R8)-(R12). The last two points
follow from an application of the IFT on the boundaries. Namely, on the upper boundary, one
applies the IFT at A = AL , because ∂G/∂A(AL ) < 0. This shows that the unique equilibrium
above the boundary converges towards AL as (Ψm , Ψθ ) approaches the boundary from above.
Note that the reasoning does not apply to the other equilibrium, AH : indeed, because
∂G/∂A(AH ) = 0, one cannot apply the IFT at A = AH . Similarly, on the lower boundary,
one applies the IFT to A = AH , but cannot apply it at A = AL because ∂G/∂(AL ) = 0.

A.3

Proof of Proposition 5

The ex ante time-t flow welfare of a household is
h
i
E0 [log Cit − ΘLit ] = E0 Eit [log Cit ] − Eit [Θ]Lit = −E0 log Eit [Θ] + log β − β,
where we used that Cit = Lit = βEit [Θ]−1 together with the law of iterated expectations.
From period 2 onwards, Eit Θ = Θ. And we know that E0 [log Θ] = 0 by the prior distribution assumption. So, E0 log Eit [Θ] = E0 [log Θ] = 0. In the first period, we have that
40

E0 log Ei1 [Θ] = E0 [Ei1 log Θ] + vari1 [log Θ]/2. Using the law of iterated expectations and that
vari1 [log Θ] = (ψθ + A2 ψm + Ψθ + A2 Ψm )−1 , and adding up through time, the result follows.

A.4

Proof of Lemma 4

We will be using the notations and functions defined in the proof of Appendix A.2. We first
note at the highest equilibrium A, the best reply H(ψθ + A2 ψm , Ψθ + A2 Ψm ) must cross the
45-degree line from above. Since, at the same time, the best reply decreases in both (Ψθ , Ψm ),
the result follows. Continuity follows from the IFT, which we can apply everywhere except
on the upper boundary Ψθ = U (Ψm ), because ∂G/∂A(AH , ρm ) = 0.
Fix Ψθ and let Ψm go to infinity. Given that A? decreases in Ψm and is bounded below
by 0, A? converges to a finite limit as Ψm tends to infinity. Clearly, this limit cannot be
positive, or else equation (31) cannot be satisfied for sufficiently high Ψm . Hence A? tends
to 0 as Ψm tends to infinity.
From the equilibrium equation (31), it follows that
0 ≤ A? = H(ψθ + A2? ψm , Ψθ + A2? Ψm ) ≤ H(ψθ + ψm , Ψθ ) =

ψθ + ψm
.
ψθ + ψm + Ψθ

The first inequality follows from the fact that H(ψθ0 , Ψ0θ ) is increasing in ψθ0 and decreasing
in Ψ0θ , together with the observation that A? ∈ [0, 1]. Now, letting Ψθ go to infinity, one sees
that A? must go to zero.

A.5

Proof of Proposition 6

We will be using the notations and the functions defined in the proof of Appendix A.2. First,
recall that, using the fixed-point equation, the posterior precision can be written
Π = ψθ + Ψθ + A2? ψm + A2? Ψm =

ψθ
+ A? ψm .
A?

Taking derivatives with respect to A? , one finds that
∂Π
−ψθ + A2? ψm
,
=
∂A?
A2?
Now recall that A? is decreasing in both Ψm and Ψθ . By proposition 4, along an increasing
path of Ψm and Ψθ , A? is continuous except at the upper frontier where it jumps down. It

41

then follows that,
(R13) If A? is continuous, then a marginal increase in public information reduces welfare if
p
and only if A? > 1/λ.
Where, keeping the notations of the previous proof, λ = ψm /ψθ . Now we show:
(R14) Suppose there is a unique equilibrium. Then, a marginal increase in public information
decreases welfare if and only if
ρθ < 2

√


λ − 1 − ρm ≡ C(ρm ).

Indeed, recall that if there is a unique equilibrium, A? is continuous, and the best reply is
above the 45-degree line for all A < A? and below the 45-degree line for all A > A? . Thus,
p
p
1/λ < A? if and only if, when A = 1/λ, the best reply is above the 45-degree line.
p
Plugging A = 1/λ in the inequality H(ψθ + A2 ψm , Ψθ + A2 Ψm ) > A and rearranging, one
obtains the condition (R14).
Now consider parameters λ and Ψm such that there are multiple equilibria. We start by
showing:
p
p
(R15) Suppose λ > 27 and ρm < λ/27 − 1. Then, a1 > 1/λ.
p
Indeed, note that, if A ≤ 1/λ, then D(A, ρm ) < 0. Since D(a1 , ρm ) = 0, it thus follows
p
that a1 > 1/λ. Next, we prove:
p
(R16) Suppose λ > 27 and ρm < λ/27 − 1. Then, for all ρθ < B (2) (ρm ), welfare decreases
continuously with public information.
Indeed, first recall from (R8) that for all ρθ < B (1) (ρm ), there is a unique equilibrium, A? ,
that is larger than a2 , and thus larger than a1 . Then, for all B (1) (ρm ) ≤ ρθ < B (2) (ρm ),
the largest equilibrium, A? , is also larger than a1 . Because of (R15), it follows that for all
p
ρθ < B (2) (ρm ), A? > 1/λ. Thus, from (R13), we know that, for all ρθ < B (2) (ρm ), a
marginal increase in public information reduces welfare.
Taken together, (R14) and (R16), we can generalize to:
(R17) Welfare decreases continuously with public information if and only if
ρθ < max{B (2) (ρm ), C(ρm )}
ρθ < C(ρm )
42

whenever B (2) (ρm ) is defined
otherwise.

Welfare jumps down with public information if and only if ρθ = B (2) (ρm ).
Indeed if B (2) (ρm ) is not defined then this is the same as (R14). If B (2) (ρm ) is defined,
let’s start with the “only if” part. If public information decreases welfare, then either
(i) ρθ < B (2) (ρm ) or (ii) ρθ > B (2) (ρm ), the equilibrium is unique and by (R14), ρθ <
C(ρm ). Either way, ρθ < max{B (2) (ρm ), C(ρm )}. For the “if” part, suppose that ρθ <
max{B (2) (ρm ), C(ρm )}. Then, either ρθ ≤ B (2) (ρm ) and by (R17) a marginal increase in
public information decreases welfare. Or ρθ > B (2) (ρm ) and ρθ < C(ρm ), the equilibrium
is unique, and a marginal increase in public information decreases welfare. The last point
follows directly from the fact that, when ρθ = B (2) (ρm ), the aggregate weight A? jumps
down.
The result of the Proposition 6 then follows directly by plugging in the above ρθ = Ψθ /ψθ ,
ρm = Ψm /ψm and λ = ψm /ψθ . The following additional result further characterizes the shape
of the boundary, showing among other things that U (Ψ̄m ) ≤ ∆(Ψ̄m ).
An Additional Result
We now characterize further the shape of the boundary. Namely, we show
Lemma 7. Suppose that 0 ≤ ρm <

p

λ/27 − 1. Then, B (2) (ρm ) < C(ρm ) if and only if

o
n √ 
√ 
ρm > max 0, λ 3 − 2 2 − 1 .
Note that

√

p
p
√
λ(3 − 2 2) − 1 is less than λ/27 − 1; thus, when ρm = λ/27 − 1, C(ρm ) >

B (2) (ρm ).
√
In words, the lemma says that B (2) (ρm ) is above C(ρm ) when ρm is less than max{0, λ(3−

√
2 2) − 1} and below C(ρm ) after. So the boundary of result (R17) coincides with B (2) (ρm )

for low values of ρm , and with C(ρm ) for high values. Also, it can be that λ > 27 and
√
√
λ(3 − 2 2) − 1 < 0; in that case, C(ρm ) > B (2) (ρm ) all along. We now proceed to prove
the lemma, starting with
(R18) Suppose that 0 ≤ ρm <

p
λ/27 − 1. Then, B (2) (ρm ) < C(ρm ) if and only if, when

ρθ = C(ρm ), there is a unique equilibrium.
Consider first the “only if” part. Suppose that B (2) (ρm ) < C(ρm ) and let ρθ = C(ρm ).
Then, ρθ > B (2) (ρm ) so there is a unique equilibrium by (R12). Thus, there is a unique
43

equilibrium. We proceed with the “if” part. Suppose that, when ρθ = C(ρm ), there is a
unique equilibrium. Thus, (ρm , ρθ ) could be either above the upper boundary, ρθ > B (2) (ρm ),
or below the lower boundary, ρθ < B (1) (ρm ). But, if (ρm , ρθ ) were below the lower boundary,
then, by (R16), an increase in ρθ would decrease welfare, which is impossible because ρθ =
C(ρm ).
Now consider the equilibrium equation G(A, ρm ) = ρθ , when ρθ = C(ρm ). Straightforward algebraic manipulation shows that it can be written:
 √


λ A3 (1 + ρm ) − A2 + A 2 λ − (1 + ρm ) − 1 = 0.
One sees that A =

p
1/λ is a solution of this equation, so that it can be factorized:

 √
h

i
√
√ 
A λ − 1 A2 (1 + ρm ) λ + A 1 + ρm − λ + 1 = 0.
Clearly, A =

√

λ is the unique solution if and only if the discriminant of the second multi-

plicative term is negative, i.e., if and only if
√
(1 + ρm )2 − 6(1 + ρm ) λ + λ < 0.
This second-order polynomial has two roots:
√

√
λ(3 − 2 2) − 1
√
√
=
λ(3 + 2 2) − 1

ρm =
ρm
p

λ/27 − 1; the second root is greater. Note that the first root
p
may be less than zero. It then follows that, when 0 ≤ ρm < λ/27 − 1, the discriminant is
n √
o
√ 
negative if and only if ρm > max 0, λ 3 − 2 2 − 1 , which, together with (R18), proves
The first root is smaller than

the lemma.

A.6

Proof of Corollary 1
(1)

(1)

(2)

(2)

(3)

(3)

(3)

Consider three vectors Ψ1 = (Ψm , Ψθ ), Ψ(2) = (Ψm , Ψθ ) and Ψθ = (Ψm , Ψθ ) such that
(2)
(3)
Ψ(1)
m ≤ Ψm ≤ Ψm
(1)

(2)

(3)

Ψθ ≤ Ψθ ≤ Ψθ ,
44

and let W (Ψ(i) ) be the level of utilitarian welfare associated with Ψ(i) . Now, there are only
two possibilities: If Ψ(2) lies below the boundary Ψθ = Γ(Ψm ), so does Ψ(1) and it follows
that W (Ψ(2) ) ≤ W (Ψ(1) ). If, on the other hand, Ψ(2) lies above the boundary Ψθ = Γ(Ψm ),
then so does Ψ(3) , and W (Ψ(2) ) ≤ W (Ψ(3) ). Taken together, we obtain
W (Ψ(2) ) ≤ max{W (Ψ(1) ), W (Ψ(3) )}.
Now suppose the government has information that would allow an increase in the exogenous
public knowledge from Ψ(1) up to Ψ(3) . The last inequality shows that any intermediate
announcement, Ψ(2) , will always be dominated by either saying nothing at all, Ψ(1) , or
releasing all the information, Ψ(3) .

A.7

Proof of Proposition 7

As shown in the text, the posterior precision can be written:
ψθ
+ ψm A? .
A?
As Ψm or Ψθ go to infinity, A? goes to zero and so posterior precision goes to infinity. Thus,
a sufficiently large increase in Ψm or Ψθ will increase posterior precision, and thus welfare.
The second point of the proposition is shown in the text.

A.8

Proof of Propositions 8 to 10

Let us define A ≡ a1 /a2 and B ≡ a1 /a3 and C ≡ a1 /(a4 − 1). The observing the price plus
noise is equivalent to observing
p̂ = θ + m/A + v/B + εp /C.
The household observes then p̂ together with θi , mi and vi . One can then show that the
household’s posterior about θ is normal with a mean


ψθ
κ − ψθ − Ψθ
ψm
mi
ψv vi
Ei [θ] =
θi +
p̂ −
−
κ
κ
ψm + Ψm A
ψv + Ψv B

45

and precision κ given by


1
1
1
+ 2
+ 2
κ = ψθ + Ψθ +
2
A (ψm + Ψm ) B (ψv + Ψv ) C Ψp

−1
(43)

Now, aggregating across consumers and ignoring all terms that are common knowledge, we
obtain that
Z
p + εp =

Ei [θ]di + m + v + εp




ψθ
(κ − ψθ − Ψθ )ψm /A
(κ − ψθ − Ψθ )ψv /B
m+ 1−
+ εp .
=
θ+ 1−
κ
(ψm + Ψm )κ
(ψv + Ψv )κ

After identifying the unknown coefficient A, B, and C, we obtain:

−1
(κ − ψθ − Ψθ )ψm
1
= κ ψθ +
A
ψm + Ψm

−1
(κ − ψθ − Ψθ )ψv
1
= κ ψθ +
B
ψv + Ψ v
κ
1
=
C
ψθ
Let us define G(κ) to be the right hand side of equation 43 after substituting in for
the above values of A, B, and C. Existence of an equilibrium follows by noticing that
G(ψθ + Ψθ ) > ψθ + Ψθ and limκ→∞ G(κ) < ∞. This finishes the proof of the result in
proposition 8.
In order to prove Proposition 9, we first take derivative of G(κ) with respect to Ψi . We
obtain that, for a given κ, the function G(κ) decreases with a marginal increase of Ψi only if
Ψi
κ? − Ψθ
<
− 2.
ψi
ψθ
Since, at κ = κ? , the function G(κ) crosses the 45 degree line from above, it follows that if
the above inequality is satisfied, a marginal increase in Ψi lowers κ? , and vice versa if the
reverse inequality is satisfied.
Finally to proof Proposition 10, note that if Ψm = ∞, then the fixed point equation
converges to


1
1
κ = Ḡ(κ) = ψθ + Ψθ +
+ 2
2
B (ψv + Ψv ) C Ψp
46

−1

Note that Ḡ(κ) > G(κ) for κ > ψθ + Ψθ , implying that the highest fixed point of Ḡ(κ) is
larger than the highest fixed point of G(κ). A similar argument applies to Ψv = ∞. The
case of Ψp = ∞ follows more directly as marginal increases are always beneficial in this case.

47

References
Amador, Manuel and Pierre-Olivier Weill, “Learning from Private and Public Observations of Others’ Actions,” 2006. Working Paper, Stanford University and UCLA. 5,
26
Angeletos, George-Marios and Alessandro Pavan, “Policy with Dispersed Information,” 2007. Working Paper, MIT and Northwestern University. 6
and Ivan Werning, “Crises and Prices: Information Aggregation, Multiplicity and
Volatility,” American Economic Review, December 2006, 96, 1721–1737. 28
Atkeson, Andrew, V.V. Chari, and Patrick Kehoe, “On the Optimal Choice of a
Monetary Policy Instrument,” 2007. Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
6
Bils, Marc and Peter Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112, 947–985. 4
Brunermeier, Markus K., Asset Pricing under Asymmetric Information, Oxford Univeristy Press, 2001. 22
Constantinides, George and Darrell Duffie, “Asset Pricing with Heterogenous Consumers,” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104, 219–240. 34
Eusepi, Stefano and Bruce Preston, “Central Bank Communication and Expectations
Stabilization,” 2007. Working Paper, Department of Economics, Columbia University. 6
Ganguli, Jayant V. and Lyian Yang, “Complementarities and Multiplicity with a Common Endowment Shock,” 2007. Working Paper, Cornell University. 28
Grossman, Sanford J., “On the Efficiency of Competitive Stock Markets Where Trades
Have Diverse Information,” Journal of Finance, 1975, 31, 573–585. 5, 12
Hellwig, Christian, “Heterogeneous Information and the Welfare Effects of Public Information Disclosures,” 2005. 6
, Arijit Mukherji, and Aleh Tsyvinski, “Self-Fulfilling Currency Crises: The Role of
Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, December 2006, 96, 1769–1787. 28
48

Hellwig, Martin, “On the aggregation of information in competitive markets,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 1980, 22, 477–498. 5, 12
Hirshleifer, Jack, “The private and social value of information and the reward to incentive
activity,” American Economic Review, 1971, 61, 561–574. 22
Lorenzoni, Guido, “New Shocks and Optimal Monetary Policy,” 2007. Working Paper,
MIT. 6
Lucas, Robert E. Jr., “Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,” Journal of Economic
Theory, 1972, 4, 103–124. 2, 5
Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin, “The Social Value of Public Information,”
American Economic Review, 2002, 92, 1521–1534. 5, 6, 27, 28
Moscarini, Guiseppe, “Competence Implies Credibility,” American Economic Review,
2007, 97, 37–63. 6
Roca, Mauro, “Transparency and Monetary Policy with Imperfect Common Knowledge,”
2006. Working Paper, Columbia University. 6
Sun, Yeneng, “The exact law of large numbers via Fubini extension and characterization
of insurable risks,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2006, 126, 31–69. 9
Svensson, Lars, “Social Value of Public Information: Morris and Shin (2002) Is Actually
Pro Transparency, Not Con,,” American Economic Review, 2006, 96, 448–451. 28
Taub, Bart, “Optimal Policy in a Model of Endogenous Fluctuations and Assets,” Journal
of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1997, 21. 6
Townsend, Robert M., “Forecasting the Forecasts of Others,” Journal of Political Economy, 1983, 91, 546–588. 7

49

