NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BALANCING COST AND EMISSIONS CERTAINTY:
AN ALLOWANCE RESERVE FOR CAP-AND-TRADE
Brian C. Murray
Richard G. Newell
William A. Pizer
Working Paper 14258
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14258

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

The research was supported in part by a grant from the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Environmental
Research (MISTRA). The authors acknowledge Joseph Aldy, Jon Anda, Jason Grumet, Suzanne Leonard,
Tim Profeta, Nicole St. Clair, Robert Stavins, Tracy Terry, an anonymous referee, and participants
at the Resources for the Future workshop, "Managing Costs in a U.S. GHG Trading Program," (Pizer
and Tatsutani 2008) for their insights and suggestions on this issue. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Brian C. Murray, Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Balancing Cost and Emissions Certainty: An Allowance Reserve for Cap-and-Trade
Brian C. Murray, Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer
NBER Working Paper No. 14258
August 2008
JEL No. D8,L51,Q54,Q58
ABSTRACT
On efficiency grounds, the economics community has to date tended to emphasize price-based policies
to address climate change -- such as taxes or a "safety-valve" price ceiling for cap-and-trade -- while
environmental advocates have sought a more clear quantitative limit on emissions. This paper presents
a simple modification to the idea of a safety valve: a quantitative limit that we call the allowance reserve.
Importantly, this idea may bridge the gap between competing interests and potentially improve efficiency
relative to tax or other price-based policies. The last point highlights the deficiencies in several previous
studies of price and quantity controls for climate change that do not adequately capture the dynamic
opportunities within a cap-and-trade system for allowance banking, borrowing, and intertemporal arbitrage
in response to unfolding information.

Brian C. Murray
Duke University
Box 90328
Durham, NC 27708
bcmurray@duke.edu
Richard G. Newell
Nicholas School of the Environment
Duke University
Box 90227
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
richard.newell@duke.edu

William A. Pizer
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
billy.pizer@gmail.com

Balancing Cost and Emissions Certainty: An Allowance Reserve for
Cap-and-Trade
Brian C. Murray, Richard G. Newell, and William A. Pizer
Introduction
The economic debate over using taxes versus cap-and-trade to control pollution
emissions revolves around the relative merits of using prices versus quantities as the policy
instrument. A cap-and-trade system fixes the quantity of emissions allowed but leaves the market
price of emissions rights uncertain. In contrast, a tax fixes the price of emissions at the tax rate
but leaves the quantity of emissions uncertain. This trade-off raises essential questions for policy
design: which form of uncertainty is a greater burden to society? What can be done to minimize
that burden or maximize net benefits? A sizable economics literature has addressed these
questions, dating back to Weitzman (1974) and others.
Taxes and cap-and-trade are, in some sense, extreme examples of the alternative marketbased approaches that are available to correct an emissions externality. The government
stipulates that emitters must obtain the “right to emit.” These rights (typically called allowances
or permits) are either supplied with infinite elasticity at a fixed price (the tax) or with zero
elasticity at a fixed supply (the cap). A key alternative—initially suggested by Roberts and
Spence (1976) and later developed in the context of climate policy by Pizer (2002)—is the idea
of a “safety valve,” in which a cap-and-trade system is coupled with a price ceiling at which
additional allowances can be purchased (in excess of the cap). So long as the allowance price is
below the safety-valve price, this hybrid system acts like cap-and-trade, with emissions fixed but
the price left to adjust. When the safety-valve price is reached, however, this system behaves like
a tax, fixing the price but leaving emissions to adjust. Given the importance attached by many
stakeholders and policymakers to containing the costs of any U.S. climate policy, this approach
has received considerable attention in the U.S. debate over climate change regulation (e.g.,
Samuelsohn 2008), and has come to be known as the “cost-containment” issue (Pizer and
Tatsutani 2008).
Cap-and-trade with a safety valve represents one of many possible mechanisms that lie
between the two extremes of a pure price or a pure quantity instrument. It offers a more
malleable supply curve for emissions allowances, containing both vertical and flat segments.
This paper discusses a second mechanism that includes features of both price and quantity
instruments. We believe this approach, which we call an allowance reserve, is particularly

1

promising. The basic idea goes one step beyond the safety valve: while the safety valve stipulates
that an unlimited number of allowances be made available at the specified safety-valve price, the
allowance reserve stipulates both a ceiling price at which cost relief is provided and a maximum
number of allowances to be issued in exercising that relief. Much like a safety-valve mechanism
can mimic either a pure price or pure quantity control, depending on how the cap and safetyvalve price are set, an allowance reserve can mimic a pure price, pure quantity, or safety-valve
approach, depending on how the ceiling price and volume are set.
Three motivations underlie our interest in this mechanism. The first two are largely
practical in nature, while the third hints at a new twist on the conditions underlying optimality, in
contrast to the traditional “prices versus quantities” perspective. The first motivation is simple: as
we describe below, the safety valve represents a special case of the allowance reserve where the
volume of available allowances is very large or unlimited. Thus, an allowance reserve has the
capacity to do as well if not better than the safety valve in terms of matching public interest
described below as a blend of economic efficiency and political feasibility. That is, political
economy conditions suggest that public interest may be better served with an allowance reserve
because it is more likely to sustain a coalition that will enable welfare-enhancing policy to be
enacted.
Second, the reserve mechanism addresses one problem with a safety valve. Although
most cap-and-trade programs permit allowance banking, which can help equilibrate present value
prices across different time periods and increase dynamic efficiency, allowance banking coupled
with a safety valve creates a dynamic problem. Suppose the cap needs to be tightened and as a
result the safety-valve price is expected to increase dramatically at some point in the future. With
an ordinary safety valve, an expectation of much higher prices in the future would lead rational
firms to buy as many allowances as possible at the current, low safety-valve price in order to
save them for use later when prices are high. Absent a mechanism to limit such purchases, they
could effectively overwhelm efforts to tighten the future cap, thereby undermining long-term
environmental policy goals. An allowance reserve would address this potential problem by
placing an upper limit on the available number of extra allowances.
Finally, and most importantly at a fundamental level, most economic analysis of price
and quantity controls under uncertainty does not adequately capture the dynamic nature of the
regulatory process suggested by the preceding paragraph. In particular, as new information
arises—about the benefits, costs, or global commitment to solving the problem of climate
change—expectations about the likely long-term emissions level and emissions price will evolve.
Therefore, in order to achieve dynamic efficiency, prices need to adjust regularly so that current
2

prices continue to reflect discounted expected future prices. A cap-and-trade program with
banking, borrowing, and eventual adjustment of the cap can achieve that result if economic
agents have sufficient foresight and capacity to form rational expectations about the longer term
(Newell et al. 2005). This factor alone identifies an important advantage of dynamic cap-andtrade with banking and borrowing over other approaches. Nonetheless, these conditions may not
hold—or at least are not assured—particularly in the early years of a program when cost
uncertainty would be high, a significant bank would not yet have developed, and market actors
would still be struggling to understand the new market. An allowance reserve could be used to
help the market toward such an equilibrium by anchoring initial prices near or below the ceiling
price.
We focus here on the importance for climate policy design of uncertainty in the costs and
benefits of greenhouse gas mitigation. There are of course other important design factors to
consider, including the degree to which the policy raises revenue (e.g., through taxes or
allowance auctions), how those revenues are used (e.g., reducing other taxes, additional
spending), and the stringency of the policy (i.e., the cap or tax level). Nonetheless, most of these
other elements can be designed largely independently of the instrument choice of cap-and-trade
versus a tax.
The remainder of this paper is organized into several sections. The next section provides
background on market-based emissions regulation, including the current policy debate about
price versus quantity instruments, and discusses the allowance reserve idea in more detail. This is
followed by a discussion of the advantages of a reserve-based approach and how it addresses
some key practical problems with the current suite of alternatives. We then discuss the issue of
optimality in a dynamic context where policies evolve over time, making the case that (1) capand-trade with banking and borrowing could approach optimality with sufficient intertemporal
flexibility, and (2) absent the institutions or foresight necessary for such optimality, the
allowance reserve may be a useful way to help move market outcomes in the correct direction.
We end with a discussion of the remaining issues that surround practical implementation of the
allowance reserve, including establishing the ceiling price, reserve size, and release mechanisms.
We present conclusions in the final section.
Market-Based Emissions Regulation and the Reserve-based Approach
Market-based emissions regulation works by requiring emitters to hold emissions
allowances and then establishing a mechanism for supplying those allowances. The two simplest
supply mechanisms are (1) a tax that fixes the price associated with purchasing allowances and
3

(2) cap-and-trade, which establishes a fixed supply of allowances, either auctions or gives them
away for free, and then allows trading until the allowances are used to cover emissions. The tax
is typically referred to as a price-based approach and cap-and-trade as a quantity-based approach
to emissions control.1
A key point, highlighted by Weitzman (1974), is that price and quantity controls lead to
distinctly different outcomes when there is uncertainty about costs. While emissions are constant
under cap-and-trade, price varies; in contrast, under a tax, price is constant but emissions vary.
Weitzman (1974) derived conditions under which one or the other policy is preferred in expected
efficiency terms based on the relative slopes of the curves for the marginal cost and marginal
benefits of emissions control. Since then, many papers have found that for climate change
policies, the marginal benefits of mitigation (or marginal damages from emissions) are relatively
flat over the relevant range of annual emissions, and, using a somewhat modified Weitzman
argument, that price-based policies are therefore preferred in terms of economic efficiency
(Kolstad 1996; Pizer 2002; Hoel and Karp 2002; Newell and Pizer 2003). Note that the quantity
policy (i.e., cap-and-trade) modeled in these papers corresponds to annual emissions targets
without banking or borrowing, a matter we return to below.
Of course, the perfectly inelastic (cap-and-trade) and perfectly elastic (tax) emissions
allowance supply curves are the two simplest extremes of a wide range of policies the
government could use to provide emissions allowances to the market. Roberts and Spence (1976)
examined one alternative: coupling cap-and-trade with a price floor and ceiling. This approach
generates three types of outcomes depending on the realized demand: (1) when demand is low,
the price is set by the floor, and the quantity of allowances is below the cap; (2) when demand is
moderate, the quantity of allowances is determined by the cap, and the price is somewhere
between the floor and ceiling; and (3) when demand is high, the price is set by the ceiling, and
emissions are above the cap.2 Depending on the choice of design parameters (i.e., cap, floor,
ceiling), the policy also has the ability to mimic either a tax (if the price ceiling or cap level is
sufficiently low) or pure cap-and-trade (if the floor is low and the ceiling high). Owing partly to
the previously mentioned authors’ emphasis on price-based policies and partly to the politics of
wanting to have both certainty about prices and stringent emissions limits, there has been a
1

These two allowance supply approaches are shown in Appendix Figure 1 along with two alternative outcomes for
emissions demand.
2

These outcomes are shown, respectively, as e, f, and g in Appendix Figure 2.

4

significant emphasis on policy with a relatively low, stringent cap level and low price ceiling.
This approach, where the price ceiling is referred to as a “safety valve,” has garnered
considerable attention and political support over the past five years as climate policy proposals
have made their way to Congress (Samuelsohn 2008). The price floor, though it has received less
attention in the federal policy debate, is being implemented in the Regional Greenhouse Gas
Initiative cap-and-trade program in the Northeastern U.S. states.
Representing the allowance reserve idea requires only a slight adjustment to the Roberts
and Spence (1976) supply schedule (see the right panel of Appendix Figure 2). The price ceiling
that previously allowed an unlimited volume of allowances to be purchased now also has a
quantitative limit, which is the “allowance reserve.” Basically, we have simply added another
kink in the allowance supply schedule and made it more flexible in its ability to balance price
and quantity goals. Indeed, the first-best policy would be to specify an allowance supply
schedule that mimicked the marginal damages from higher emissions. In this sense, the
allowance reserve offers a well-defined improvement over the alternative policies developed so
far, each of which remains a special case. In essence, the reserve can be deployed in a way that
reflects something closer to the increasing marginal social cost of emissions.
When implemented, all market-based policies require us to identify a group of regulated
entities whose direct emissions or embodied emissions (for upstream regulation of fuels) are
measured and reported on a regular basis, typically annually. Under a tax policy, those entities
are then required to pay a specified tax ($/ton) applied to the measured amount of emissions.
Under cap-and-trade, they are required to acquire and surrender allowances.
A key feature in virtually all proposed greenhouse gas cap-and-trade programs is
banking, under which unused allowances in one year can be used in subsequent years. With
banking, there can be an incentive to reduce emissions early—particularly during a gradual
phasedown of emissions targets—and it is not necessary for the market to meet the target exactly
each year. If that were the case, there would be a danger that requiring emissions to match the
number of allowances exactly would result in either too few allowances—causing the price to
skyrocket— or too many allowances—causing the price to plummet. The former occurred in the
California NOx RECLAIM market; the latter occurred in Phase I of the EU Emissions Trading
Scheme (ETS) for greenhouse gases. Both systems significantly restricted banking and
borrowing across compliance periods. In the EU ETS, the main culprit was that banking was not
allowed between Phase I (pre-Kyoto) and Phase II (Kyoto). That, combined with a generous
allocation, eventually led to an excess supply of allowances and drove the price to zero at the end
of Phase I. In contrast, systems that have allowed banking (and possibly borrowing) have tended
5

to have much smoother price behavior as the price at the end of one period tends to match the
price at the beginning of the next due to allowance fungibility across periods and market
arbitrage.
What about more complex policies? The price floor in the Roberts and Spence (1976)
hybrid policy could be implemented in two ways. If the allowances associated with the cap are
all distributed for free, the only alternative is for the government to agree to buy any allowances
that regulated entities are willing to sell at the specified floor price. If, however, some of the
allowances are auctioned, the price floor could be implemented by specifying a minimum price
in the auction. In this way, allowances only enter the market if the price meets or exceeds the
floor; otherwise, less than the full volume of allowances are sold.
The price ceiling, or safety valve, could be implemented by having the government agree
to sell additional allowances at the specified ceiling price. However, there has been a wrinkle in
such legislative proposals (e.g., S. 1766 in the 110th Congress, the “Bingaman–Specter” bill);
that is, unlike ordinary allowances, these additional allowances are not bankable and must be
used in the year they are released. This places an implicit limit on the volume of safety-valve
allowances that might be sold in any year, namely the total volume of emissions for that year.
Thus, under such proposals, one could in principle use safety-valve allowances to meet all of
one’s current-year emissions obligations and bank ordinary allowances for the future. Another
wrinkle in the safety-valve provision of S. 1766 is that the safety valve is only available during
one month each year, while firms are doing final balancing of their emissions and allowance
holdings. This avoids a potential run on the safety valve while Congress might be debating
whether to raise the level or remove the safety valve altogether in the future—a debate that
would hopefully be completed during the eleven-month period when the safety valve is
unavailable. We return to this issue below, as it is not obvious that such a sequence of events is
likely.
The allowance reserve takes the price ceiling idea a step further. As just described, an
unlimited nonbankable safety-valve could allow the release of up to one year’s worth of
emissions at any one time. The allowance reserve, however, could limit the use of this safety
valve to a significantly smaller amount. The appropriate size of the reserve will ultimately
depend on the stringency of the cap, the ceiling price, and the degree of remaining price volatility
that is acceptable. A reserve of perhaps ten to twenty percent of the annual cap would reflect the
range of emissions reductions sought by many current proposals over the first decade, coupled
with varying assumptions about the price ceiling. The issue of how to choose the reserve size is
further addressed later in this paper.
6

This raises an important question: how does the government allocate the extra allowances
from a reserve if demand exceeds reserve supply at the ceiling price? There are several ways to
do this. These are outlined in detail below, but perhaps the most compelling is analogous to the
price-floor approach, but instead auctions the reserve allowances with a minimum price that is
equal to the ceiling price (versus the floor price). The result would be: (1) no sales, (2) sales less
than the limit, at the ceiling price, or (3) sales equal to the limit, at or above the ceiling price.
Thus, the allowance reserve does not guarantee the ceiling price in the same way as an explicit
price ceiling or safety valve. On the other hand, as discussed in the next section, it has several
practical and theoretical advantages.
Advantages of an Allowance Reserve
Representing Marginal Damages Across Cumulative Emissions
Based on analyses of marginal damages from emissions, the research cited above finds
that the allowance supply schedule for emissions should be roughly flat over the relevant range
of annual greenhouse gas emissions. This would seem to suggest that the allowance reserve idea
offers no efficiency improvement over either a tax-based or safety-valve approach. Yet that
research does not consider the marginal benefit function over cumulative greenhouse gas limits
(or in turn the shape of the associated allowance supply schedule) over longer time horizons.
Indeed, it seems almost certain that when viewed over many decades of cumulative emissions,
the marginal damage of the first ton abated would be higher than the marginal damage of the last.
In this case, the additional kink in allowance supply represented by the reserve approach,
cumulated over many years, should be able to better represent an upward sloping marginal
damage function and deliver an outcome that is more efficient than the tax-based and safetyvalve approaches.
Of course, given the tremendous uncertainty and time scale concerning climate change
(Weitzman 2008), we must be cautious about economic analyses of the level and shape of the
climate mitigation benefit function. Moreover, we believe there are yet other reasons to expect
that traditional price and quantity comparisons are problematic in a dynamic setting—an issue
we return to in the next section.
Expanding Political-Economic Flexibility
Another important concern is that most environmental advocates have opposed any pricebased approach, including the safety-valve variant. In an October 8, 1997, letter to the President

7

in advance of negotiations on the Kyoto Protocol, seventeen environmental advocacy groups
indicated their opposition to a safety valve mechanism.3 More recently, however, these groups
have expressed openness to the idea of a quantity-limited safety valve captured in the allowance
reserve approach. Leading environmental advocacy groups, including some of those who signed
the 1997 letter opposing a safety valve, supported an amended version of the America’s Climate
Security Act (S. 3036) in 2008, which included the allowance reserve idea (Eilperin and Mufson
2008). In this way, a simple interpretation of the allowance reserve—that its additional flexibility
can better represent public interest—may be the most relevant argument when “public interest”
includes not just economic views of optimality but also the perspective of key stakeholders. In
other words, one very practical advantage of the allowance reserve idea is that it may be able to
bridge differences between environmental advocates seeking a cap on emissions and industrial
interests concerned about costs, in much the same way that some viewed the safety valve more
than a decade ago (Kopp et al. 1997). Operating under the presumption that failure to enact a
climate policy at all would lower social welfare, all else equal, a design element such as an
allowance reserve that can break an impasse,can enhance overall efficiency relative to the status
quo.
Addressing Concerns over Ability to Achieve Long-term Targets
There is a second practical reason for considering the allowance reserve over the pure
safety-valve idea: How would one otherwise deal with evolving expectations of stricter targets
and higher prices? That is, despite the attempt to structure current proposals with targets through
2050, it seems almost inevitable that revisions will occur after a decade or so. In anticipation of
tightening future caps, current prices would rise assuming that current allowances could be
banked for future compliance obligations, which are now anticipated to be more expensive. For

3

See Samuelsohn (2008) and link to letter at
http://www.eenews.net/features/documents/2008/02/21/document_cw_01.pdf. Specifically, they stated “this
proposal would weaken, if not eliminate any incentive for private sector innovation and investment in clean
technologies.” Although one can understand the reluctance of environmental groups to embrace policies allowing
greater emissions, the argument against the safety valve based on innovation incentives is flawed. Curtailing the
possibility of very high allowances prices would not “eliminate” the incentive for clean technology innovation and
adoption, although it would curtail the incentive to do so for very expensive technologies that would only be
competitive above the safety valve price. Assuming the safety valve price is set appropriately, however, this is
desirable because environmental policies should not, from an economic perspective, seek to promote technology at
any cost. Rather policies should induce an efficient amount of innovation and adoption, consistent with societal
willingness to pay (Kerr and Newell 2003).

8

example, the U.S. sulfur dioxide trading program was revised in 2005—fifteen years after
passage of the 1990 amendments establishing the program—in a way that lowered allowed
emissions by fifty percent in 2010 and seventy percent in 2015 (U.S. EPA 2005). In response, as
shown in Figure 1, the price of allowances began a significant run-up in 2004 as debate began in
earnest over tightening the emissions cap under the program through the Clean Air Interstate
Rule. By 2005, the rules were finalized, with a halving of the emissions limit set to begin in
2010. Allowance prices peaked soon after. By 2008, the prices had settled down to roughly
double their predebate level, with a May decline in part reflecting legal challenges to the
rulemaking (Argus Media 2008) or possibly expectations that climate change regulation will
depress future SO2 allowance prices. All of this has happened years in advance of the actual
change in emissions limits. So clearly market participants do act in anticipation of future target
stringency.
All of this points to a potential problem with the ordinary safety valve when it is coupled
with banking and evolving expectations of stricter targets. Under these circumstances, as firms
and individuals become convinced that future prices will be well above the current safety valve,
they will want to make use of the safety valve as much as possible, acquiring emissions
allowances cheaply now that will quickly become more valuable in the future. Or, if safetyvalve allowances cannot be banked, will allow regulated entities to preserve more valuable
ordinary allowances for the future. That is, even without the ability to bank safety-valve
allowances, there is a real possibility of accumulating multiple years’ worth of allowances if
people become convinced of the impending change many years in advance. The SO2 trading
program, for example, saw more than a year’s worth of allowances accumulated early in the
program without a safety valve, owing to the relatively easy targets from 1995 through 1999 and
anticipation of stricter targets legislated for 2000.
The accumulation of a large bank of allowances—perhaps more than an entire year’s
worth of allowances—poses two related problems. The first is superficial: from an appearance
standpoint, people may see a run on the safety valve, and a large accumulation of allowances
from it, as a systemic failure. The second is related, but more substantive: a particularly large
bank could begin to thwart efforts to cut emissions in the future. This is not an issue in the SO2
program because emissions reductions are relatively large compared with historic emissions—
fifty percent in the 1990 amendments, starting in 2000, and fifty percent again in 2010 under the
Clean Air Interstate Rule. One year’s worth of banked allowances would be used up in two years
following a fifty percent cut (were facilities to try avoiding their fifty percent cut in emissions).
In contrast, CO2 emissions reductions are anticipated to occur more slowly as entirely new

9

technologies cutting across many sectors must be brought into use. A relatively tough target
might mean a ten to twenty percent reduction from baseline within the first decade, in which case
a bank on the order of one year of allowances could delay such a change for five to ten years
without reducing emissions. We emphasize only that this could (but not necessarily would) be a
problem because, even in the worst case, the tougher target could be designed with the bank in
mind, in much the same way that programs with offset credits from uncapped sources often seek
a tougher target than would be practical if those offset opportunities did not exist. Further, there
is little evidence concerning how large of an allowance bank firms might accumulate (it could, in
fact, be much larger than one year’s worth of allowances), how fast they might spend it down,
and in turn how much this might affect any future tightening of the cap.
The allowance reserve tackles both potential problems head on by simply limiting the
volume of extra allowances entering the market and therefore limiting the potential for these
extra allowances to contribute to an excessively large bank. As noted above, existing legislative
proposals for a safety valve limit the released volume to the annual emissions level. With
emissions reductions of perhaps ten to twenty percent per decade, this seems far more than is
necessary to deal with anything except the desire to bank. In this case, an annual allowance
reserve limit of about ten to twenty percent of the cap should be sufficient to address short-term
uncertainty while leaving longer-term expectations free to drive near-term prices.
Optimal Policy in a Dynamic Setting
Most of the literature comparing price and quantity policies has ignored the
aforementioned dynamic feature: that policies will inevitably be revised as new information
arises and policymakers revisit the issue—what we might call dynamic price and quantity
policies (i.e., policies that are updated over time). Newell et al (2005) emphasize that such
revisions can be used to make a dynamic quantity policy mimic an unadjusted price policy. Here
we suggest that a dynamic quantity policy might do better, even when the price policy is
dynamic as well, particularly in a world where future damages depend only on cumulative
emissions and not on their time path, as is roughly true for greenhouse gases. The key is
intertemporal flexibility coupled with foresight about these revisions. As we elaborate below,
the allowance reserve may in turn help foresight to drive near-term prices—in this case a
desirable, even optimal, feature.
To illustrate this point that dynamic quantity policies may do better than dynamic prices,
let’s imagine a simple world with three time periods: when current policy is set (period 0), when
that policy takes effect and firms respond (period 1), and some period in the future when policy
10

can be revised (period 2). Importantly, improved information on costs, benefits, and participation
is arriving each period, so that there is a better notion of the optimal policy in period 1 (when no
policy adjustment is possible) and an even better notion in period 2. For simplicity, we could
assume that period 2 involves complete knowledge of costs and benefits and is also the last
period of relevant activities. In any case, with better information in period 2, one can revise
either a price or quantity policy to deliver improved outcomes in period 2 because there will be a
better sense of how to balance costs and benefits compared to period 0.
Assuming revised price and quantity controls are equally efficient in period 2, the
question of comparing various policies hinges on what happens in period 1 when firms respond
to policies set in period 0, but with improved knowledge about costs and benefits as well as
foresight about period 2. Consider the first-best outcome. Based on the working assumption that
damages depend only on cumulative emissions, efficiency would lead us to minimize the
expected present value of the total emissions abatement costs associated with achieving the
cumulative emissions limit decided in period 2. This leads to a simple efficiency condition that
the marginal cost (i.e., emissions price) each period should equal the present value of expected
long-run marginal costs (see the Technical Appendix for a mathematical formulation of this firstorder condition and the arguments that follow.) That is, it would be optimal to choose period 1
emissions such that marginal costs in period 1 are equal to the (discounted) expected marginal
costs of meeting the cumulative target through the revised period 2 cap. Given the limited
information available when period 1 emissions must be chosen, the cumulative cap will not be
known exactly, but with additional information relative to period 0, expectations of the period 2
cap should be revised from the expectations in period 0 when the policy is set. Now that we
understand the first-best outcome conditional on available information, we can examine how
dynamic price and quantity policies compare in period 1.
Specifically, consider two policies set in period 0 and revised in period 2: a tax and a capand-trade program, where the cap-and-trade program allows banking (and borrowing, if
necessary).
Performance of a Tax Program
An optimizing government that is setting the period 1 tax in period 0 would choose a tax
level that equates the present value of expected marginal costs across the periods given the
information it has at the time, thereby minimizing expected total costs as seen in period 0. The
important point is that in period 1, firms would then choose to emit an amount such that their
marginal costs—given the resolution of cost uncertainty in period 1—are equal to the tax which
11

was set in period 0. Firms will not match their marginal costs to the expected period 2 marginal
costs (updated with new information on both costs and mitigation benefits in period 1) because
there is no incentive to do so. Specifically, there is no ability to shift compliance obligations
from the period with high (expected, discounted) costs to the one with low (expected,
discounted) costs in a tax-based system. The emissions outcome in the first period would
therefore not generally satisfy the previously mentioned efficiency condition because
expectations about period 2 marginal costs will have changed between periods 0 and 1, but no
responsive action will be taken by the affected parties.
This type of result is inherent in the classic Weitzman framework where policies are fixed
prior to uncertainty being revealed. Neither a price nor (a nonbankable) quantity policy is
optimal ex post because neither exactly matches realized (or updated expectations about)
marginal costs and marginal benefits. Both instruments are generally inefficient in such a setting,
so the issue becomes one of choosing the instrument with the lowest deadweight loss. Even when
period 1 brings about expected changes in period 2 tax rates, there is virtually no incentive to
deviate from the otherwise standard behavior setting period 1 marginal costs equal to the fixedin-period-0 tax. The only possible incentive to deviate arises if changed expectations about future
tax rates affects investment in long-lived emissions abatement capital that would be subject to
the future tax.
Performance of a Cap-and-Trade System
The question is can cap-and-trade in a dynamic setting with banking and borrowing do
any better? To find out, let’s imagine that instead of a tax the government sets a period 1 cap in
period 0, firms decide how much to emit during period 1 and bank or borrow until period 2, and
everyone expects that in period 2 the government will set a period 2 cap to deliver the ultimate,
optimized-with-complete-information-in-period-2, cumulative emissions target (or, more
generally, a cap based on better information in period 2). Note that in period 2 the government
can enforce any emissions level by accommodating or absorbing the bank or allowance debt
acquired by firms in period 1. With this information in period 1, a cost-minimizing firm would
form its best expectation of period 2 marginal costs and choose period 1 emissions such that
marginal costs in period 1 would equal the discounted value of the expected period 2 marginal
cost, regardless of the first period cap.
Thus, a cap-and-trade system with banking, borrowing, and an expectation of eventual
adjustment of the emissions target can achieve the best possible outcome given the information
that is known in period 1 even though policy is set in period 0. What drives this result?
12

Why Dynamic Cap-and-Trade Can Deliver a Better Outcome
The key is intertemporal flexibility and foresight. Through dynamic market arbitrage,
whereby firms equate (present value) prices in periods 1 and 2 for the perfectly fungible
allowances, the cap-and-trade system allows the information revealed about benefits, costs, and
future expected targets to be transmitted to markets today. That is, knowing that new information
on costs and benefits gained during the first period of the policy will lead to adjustment of future
caps, firms have an incentive to adjust emissions during period 1 so that they can bank (or
borrow) more (or less) now in order to equate marginal costs over the two periods. The existence
of an intertemporal market for emissions allowances—something that is absent with a tax—
provides the vehicle for doing this. Note that in terms of the efficiency condition, benefit
information is transmitted through expectations about the cumulative target, while cost
information is transmitted through both the cost function itself and expectations about the
cumulative target.
The tax instrument, in contrast, only provides market incentives for adjusting emissions
in response to information revealed about period 1 costs in a simple way that keeps marginal
costs equal to the fixed-in-period-0 tax (and does not respond at all to changes in expectations
about benefits or future targets). With a tax instrument, even if firms correctly anticipate a higher
marginal cost or tax in the future, they cannot arbitrage against this outcome by overcomplying
now and banking residual allowances for use in the future. This undermines their ability to
efficiently manage costs. Taxes (like the cap) can of course be adjusted over time, but during the
period between adjustments there will be inefficiently high or low levels of abatement and costs.
Interestingly, this incentive structure differs in a fundamental way from the classic
Weitzman setting. In that static setting, only the tax (or price) policy provides incentives for
firms to change behavior, only in response to new cost information, and only in a simple way
that keeps marginal costs constant. The quantity policy in that case does not transmit any new
information—firms must simply meet the target and have no flexibility to adjust by banking or
borrowing. Neither policy transmits any new information about benefits or future targets. In
contrast, in the dynamic cap-and-trade setting that is relevant here, firms do have an incentive to
adjust under the quantity policy in response to both new cost and new benefit information
because of adjusted expectations about future targets and marginal costs. While both policies can
eventually be adjusted to achieve the desired target, the dynamic cap-and-trade policy provides a
mechanism for firms to respond during the first period, when policy is fixed, while the tax does
not.

13

All of this suggests that for a cumulative emissions problem like greenhouse gases, a capand-trade program with sufficient banking and borrowing can in principle deliver a better
outcome than taxing emissions. This conclusion has been recognized to some degree for some
time (Jacoby and Ellerman 2003). Extending prior research on optimal banking and borrowing
(Rubin 1996, Kling and Rubin 1997) to a stochastic instrument choice context, Newell et al.
(2005) rigorously showed how intertemporal banking and borrowing would allow firms to
smooth abatement costs across time, thereby offsetting the traditional disadvantage of cap-andtrade relative to taxes. They also suggested several practical mechanisms for implementing such
an approach, including an allowance reserve. What is new here, we believe, is that this is the first
time conventional economics has suggested cap-and-trade can be better than tax-based
approaches based on Weitzman-like efficiency grounds, with appropriate dynamic modifications.
The key, as discussed above, is that most previous analyses have either ignored or
underappreciated both the evolution of information and the dynamic nature of policymaking that
are core features of a long-term problem like climate change—as well as the common feature of
banking in most trading programs.
How Can an Allowance Reserve Enhance Efficiency?
The discussion and results above raise the question: why do we need an allowance
reserve at all if cap-and-trade with sufficient banking and borrowing can be optimal (given
available information)? There are at least three reasons. First, the allowance reserve does
nothing to upset this result. Indeed, the main point is that the period 1 cap does not really matter
so long as there are rational expectations about future caps. Second (and somewhat countering
the first point), it may be important for the government to send signals concerning its current
expectations about the long-term cap and expected price. This means that not only is the period 1
cap important; so are expectations (in period 0) of future marginal costs and allowance prices in
period 2, which also depend on future targets and benefits. The ceiling price in the allowance
reserve mechanism is one way the government can signal an initial expectation about the correct
current and future prices.
A third and important reason for considering an allowance reserve is the concern that
borrowing—a key mechanism for dealing with unexpectedly high costs in the short-term—may
not work as we have assumed. Borrowing may not be implemented or it may be constrained in
ways that limit its usefulness. To date, market-based policies have included only limited
borrowing mechanisms. For example, the corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) program for
light-duty vehicles allows a firm to undercomply in a given model year if it repays the borrowed

14

credits within the subsequent three model years. Meanwhile, there are examples of exceptionally
high prices early in a borrowing-constrained cap-and-trade program as market participants
anticipated or experienced a shortage of allowances. These include both the NOx State
Implementation Plan (SIP) Call in the United States and the EU ETS. In the context of an
emissions phasedown of the type discussed for greenhouse gas policy, a well-designed allowance
reserve would change the market dynamics so that high prices tap the reserve and alter the
market from tending to borrow allowances in the short term to either meeting demand or
potentially banking allowances.
Implementation Issues
We turn next to a number of important practical issues surrounding the implementation of
an allowance reserve. Most immediate are determining the appropriate ceiling price at which the
reserve can be drawn down and the size of the reserve. Additional issues include whether the
reserve expands or attempts to maintain the cumulative cap, how reserve allowances are
introduced to the market, and whether the reserve design parameters would be managed by an
executive board or decided through legislation.
Ceiling Price and Reserve Size
The most challenging implementation questions are the ceiling price at which the reserve
can be tapped and the size of the reserve. In principle, the ceiling price should be related to the
marginal benefit of emissions reduction to ensure that allowance prices—an indicator of
marginal abatement costs—stay in line with marginal benefits. As noted early on, however, the
marginal benefits of greenhouse gas reduction are not likely to be well-defined and are affected
by some factors beyond policymakers’ control, including the extent to which other countries
undertake emissions reductions. Thus policymakers may be more likely to focus on choosing a
target ceiling price that is simply “not too high,” meaning that it does not create seemingly
excessive hardship for the overall economy. Or, if there is a range of likely allowance prices and
economic impacts associated with a chosen emissions limit, the ceiling price might be set at the
upper end of the predicted range, assuming policymakers and stakeholders are comfortable with
both the cap and the price range.
If the allowance reserve is intended to credibly meet near-term demand at the ceiling
price, then the ceiling price and the size of the reserve are inter-related. A low ceiling price will
require a larger reserve to credibly deliver that price. A greater number of near-term events (e.g.,
weather, economic fluctuations) would be likely to come up against a low ceiling price and

15

therefore require a larger reserve to meet that near-term demand. Alternatively, if the ceiling
price is set high, the reserve plays a lesser role and can be smaller, as the circumstances under
which it is likely to be used become more rare. The size of the reserve essentially determines its
power to keep the allowance price at or below a given ceiling price; a larger reserve is necessary
to ensure lower prices. A distinct issue—not directly addressed here—is whether the allowance
reserve might be capped not only annually, but also cumulatively over time and/or phased out.
One might argue that if the reserve is going to work as advertised—by providing strong
and reliable relief against a run-up in prices driven by near-term events—it should be large
enough to meet demand at the specified ceiling price under most foreseeable circumstances. The
reserve could be set up to accommodate, for example, all conceivable demand shifts and still
maintain the ceiling price by providing enough additional allowances to meet demand at that
price. This could be informed by a convincingly large number of modeling scenarios that
exogenously set the allowance price equal to the candidate ceiling price. The possible shortfall of
allowances at that price (the difference between the emissions projected at that price and the
proposed cap) would provide an estimate of the reserve size necessary to maintain that price and
cover potential shortfalls.
Another possibility—if the program is expected to lean heavily on offsets (i.e., emissions
reductions from outside capped sources) to achieve the cap—is to size the reserve to match the
expected offset supply in the event that such offsets fail to materialize. The Regional Greenhouse
Gas Initiative, for example, allows additional use of offsets at certain allowance price thresholds.
However, the availability of cost-effective offset opportunities is only one source of cost
uncertainty, so its importance would have to be evaluated alongside other sources of uncertainty.
Finally, in determining an upper bound for the size of the allowance reserve, it would not
make sense to have the allowance reserve be larger than the difference between the target and the
highest business-as-usual emissions forecast. An indefinite reserve of that size would be capable
of lowering allowance prices to zero under the most pessimistic conditions, and therefore in
practice it would go underused since reserve allowances would only be released at a price at or
above the ceiling price.
Maintaining the Cumulative Cap vs. Establishing a Range
Because uncertainty about costs and allowance demand is likely to be highest at the
beginning of a cap-and-trade program, we presume the reserve would be in place from the
program’s inception. Before trading can begin, the government must allocate allowances to

16

regulated entities either through free allocation or an auction. The existence of a reserve means
that a separate allocation must also be made to a reserve account. There are two options for
creating this reserve account: (1) create it from future allocations that, if never used, go back to
the future allocation, which would maintain the cumulative cap over time; or (2) create it from
allowances that, if never used, would vanish, which would establish a range of possible
cumulative emissions outcomes that depend on the degree to which the reserve is tapped. It is
also possible to construct a combination of these two options, with some reserve allowances
drawn from the future and others not. If the cap-and-trade policy includes a price floor, as
suggested above, reserve allowances could also come from any allowances that remained unused
in prior periods. And, revenue from the sales of reserve allowances could finance offset
purchases. Both of these options are variants that lie somewhere between maintaining the
cumulative cap and creating a range of possible cumulative emissions outcomes.
Based on recent policy proposals, a U.S. cap-and-trade program would likely establish an
allowance cap that starts in the near term with allowance quantities that are perhaps five to ten
percent below current emissions levels. The cap would then be scheduled to decline over several
decades until a substantial reduction in annual emissions is achieved. Recent proposals have
called for reductions on the order of fifty to eighty percent below current levels by 2050, or about
ten to twenty percent per decade. It is unlikely that all of the allowances over an almost fortyyear period would be allocated up front. Therefore, the unallocated future allowances could serve
as a source of reserve allowances. Again, if the objective is to maintain the long-term cap, and if
these reserve allowances are in fact drawn down, this implies that future caps (unless modified in
the future) will be that much tighter.
A policy that seeks to maintain the same cumulative cap, even as the allowance reserve is
tapped, would likely create expectations of higher future prices if the reserve allowances are used
now to lower current prices (rather than banked to comply with the now tighter future cap). Such
behavior would make sense if current prices are high compared to long-term expectations
because borrowing—which would be desired to arbitrage long-term low prices against shortterm high prices—is either constrained or unpalatable. However, most recent economic
modeling of cap-and-trade proposals shows a strong tendency toward allowance banking in the
early years of a program (EIA 2008, EPA 2008, Murray and Ross 2007, Paltsev et al 2007). In
this case, allowances from the reserve should not be necessary to offset near-term shocks (which
the banked allowances can address) and, if the reserve is tapped, it should not depress current
prices. With allowances already being banked to reflect future scarcity, any allowances moved
from the future to the present via the reserve would tend to be added to the current bank and

17

returned to the future. It is only in the situation when firms are constrained in some way that is
not well-captured by the referenced modeling results—particularly by a near-term shock before a
bank can be built coupled with an explicit or implicit limit on individual borrowing—that
system-wide borrowing from future allocations would represent a relaxation of that constraint,
thereby lowering prices and containing costs.
An alternative approach would be to establish the reserve with allowances that, if unused,
would vanish. Here, the cumulative cap is a range and tapping the reserve more clearly loosens
the emissions constraint. The lower bound of the cumulative cap defines the aspirational target of
the policy if the reserve is never tapped and the price remains below the ceiling price. The upper
end of the range, defined by the cumulative effect of tapping the reserve, reflects the maximum
allowable cumulative emissions. Based on the earlier discussion of how one would set the size
of the reserve, this should be sufficient to maintain the ceiling price unless future expectations
drive prices higher.
Just as the approach of system-wide borrowing from future allocations may make more
sense if there is strong societal commitment to a specific cumulative cap (and a willingness to
accept the cost consequences), the cap-range approach may make more sense if there is strong
societal commitment to maintaining incremental costs below the ceiling price (and a willingness
to accept the emissions consequences). Of course, in either case the long-term cap will
undoubtedly be adjusted in the future; the main issue here is how the specification of a default
cumulative cap (be it larger or smaller) may affect future expectations and indeed future action.
Both approaches address short-term constraints with an appropriately chosen ceiling price and
reserve size. However, the future borrowing approach, which maintains a predetermined
cumulative cap, may create higher future price expectations and induce more mitigation than the
range approach with the same aspirational cap. On the other hand, the caps are not exogenous to
the choice of design; a range approach where the aspirational cap is significantly more
aggressive than the cap under the future borrowing approach could create even higher price
expectations.
Introducing Reserve Allowances to the Market
Given the structure of the allowance reserve approach, use of the reserve must involve, at
a minimum, payment to the government of the ceiling price for any tapped reserve allowances.
Otherwise there can be no assurance that the cap only expands when the ceiling price is reached
as there is no other way to ensure that the market is really willing to pay that much. More
generally, there are a variety of ways to increase the cap in response to high prices. Newell et al.
18

(2005) mention several approaches, including the announcement of an allowance split that makes
each outstanding allowance worth more than one ton. However, this and other approaches that do
not require payment to the government of the ceiling price have trouble maintaining the ceiling
price without issuing too many or too few allowances. We therefore focus on two other options,
which are somewhat equivalent.
The first approach, described briefly above, introduces reserve allowances into the
market via a supplemental reserve auction prior to the end of the period when firms must balance
their emissions and allowances (i.e., the true-up period). Here the government offers a fixed
number of allowances (i.e., the reserve size) to the market via an auction with a minimum price
equal to the ceiling price. If, at the time of the supplemental auction, the market expects the
ordinary allowances to meet demand at a market price below the ceiling price, then presumably
the allowances would remain in the reserve unsold. If, on the other hand, allowance demand is
sufficient to push prices up to or above the ceiling price, then there should be some willingness
to purchase reserve allowances at the ceiling price. If the reserve size is sufficient to meet
demand at the ceiling price, then there should be enough allowances for both the allowance
market price and the reserve auction price to equilibrate at the ceiling price.
However, if the demand for additional allowances at the ceiling price exceeds the reserve
auction quantity, the auction process would lead to prices being bid up until the market clears at
some price above the ceiling price. In this case, the allowance reserve does not guarantee a
ceiling price in the same way as an explicit price ceiling or an unlimited safety valve. It puts only
so much weight on addressing cost concerns, leaving some guaranteed maximum level of
emissions intact. As noted earlier, the case when the ceiling price is exceeded should correspond
to a situation when (discounted) long-term price expectations exceed the ceiling price, not when
there is only a near-term disruption or shortage (unless the reserve size is too small).
Another approach, based on well-known financial instruments, is to have the government
provide financial contracts (call options) that would give the holder the right, but not the
obligation, to buy a certain quantity of allowances at the ceiling price (i.e., the strike price)
during the true-up period each year.4 In fact, as pointed out by Unold and Requate (2001), a

4

If the execution date is not constrained in this way, it would create a very important difference: the effective annual
reserve could accumulate over time if options accumulate, unexercised, year- after- year. If options can be executed
well before the true-up period, reserve allowances could enter the system based on early expectations of high prices
which, by the time the true up period arrives, have been revised.

19

series of such options—of different size and with different strike prices—could be used to
replicate any known marginal damage function or desired allowance supply function. Such
options could be auctioned (like ordinary allowances) or they could come attached to ordinary
allowances on a pro rata basis.5 The option’s value, whether auctioned or given away, would be
determined by the ceiling (strike) price and expectations of whether, when, and with what
eventual market price it would be exercised. In the event that allowance prices exceeded the
ceiling (strike) price level, options holders would begin to exercise their option rights, but would
stop once prices fell back below the ceiling price level. One substantive difference with the
reserve auction discussed above is the timing of the allocation of reserve allowances or options
for reserve allowances, with the allocation of options most likely occurring sooner. Whether this
would be an advantage or disadvantage requires further analysis. Another difference is that under
the option approach, the difference between the market and ceiling price—if there is one—goes
to the option holder, and options could be either auctioned or allocated for free. This feature
suggests that options could be allocated in a way to help ensure that legislation passes, but can
also create wasteful rent-seeking behavior.
An Allowance Reserve Board or Legislative Specification?
While some envision a reserve or other cost-containment program with key design
parameters specified in legislation, an alternative is to delegate that responsibility to an
independent executive board. Specific reserve design elements might be better managed by an
independent executive board because, over time, there would be a clear need to update policy in
response to new information and Congress may not respond in a timely manner. Indeed, part of
the motivation for the reserve in the first place is a recognition that the drivers of long-term
prices will evolve over time, that policymakers will be slow to adjust parameters, and that
borrowing may not be a fully effective or implemented element, which is required for dynamic
efficiency. While a suitably designed mechanism would, in principle, allow the market to operate
for long periods of time without revision (driven by the expectation of an eventual revision), it is
certainly possible that Congressional inaction might challenge that capacity. Therefore,
governance by an independent board may be useful.

5

See presentation by Jon A. Anda at the Carbon Market Insights Americas Conference. October 29–31, 2007, New

York, NY. Available at: www.pointcarbon.com/events/recentevents/cmiamericas07.

20

As discussed in Newell et al. (2005), an important remaining issue would be the precise
governing mandate for such a board, the tools available to it, and the degree to which it operated
subject to legislated rules versus having complete discretion. There has been a tendency to draw
an analogy with the U.S. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, along with parallels
between its dual mandate of managing growth versus inflation and the dual objectives of climate
protection versus containing costs. However, there are a variety of differences (Pizer and
Tatsutani 2008), and this remains an active area of discussion.
Conclusions
While much of the debate in the literature on the economics of climate change regulation
has focused on comparing pure price and pure quantity mechanisms—i.e., taxes versus cap-andtrade—these policies are increasingly being viewed as too extreme to meet both practical and
political needs. This paper has presented recent and perhaps provocative new arguments
suggesting that a sufficiently flexible cap-and-trade system can in theory do at least as well as
and potentially better than a tax (despite previous literature pointing the other direction).
However, it is unlikely that the required flexibility to borrow allowances from the future and the
associated requirement for rational expectations in dynamic allowance markets would be ensured
in practice. All of this recommends a hybrid mechanism. Roberts and Spence (1976) first
suggested the idea of a cap-and-trade system with both a floor and ceiling price. We have taken
their idea one step further and suggest that the ceiling price could come with a quantitative limit:
what we call the allowance reserve.
We have argued that the allowance reserve addresses certain shortcomings of the Roberts
and Spence idea, including the need for more flexibility in the elements of policy design to
balance competing political interests. It also solves a possibly thorny technical problem that
arises when the Roberts and Spence idea is applied in a dynamic world that includes banking and
a need to update policies—which has the potential to lead to a run on the price ceiling. But
perhaps most fundamentally, it supports the idea of a flexible cap-and-trade system that seeks to
achieve an intertemporal optimum.
A number of additional details remain to be resolved, most notably setting the ceiling
price and reserve size and how an allowance reserve would be institutionalized. Other issues tend
to be primarily cosmetic or of a more general nature applicable to any market-based policy. In
summary, the allowance reserve may help solve several previously insurmountable challenges in
the current debate over climate policy design. This paper demonstrates that the notion of capand-trade with an allowance reserve is more than simply a political solution. Rather given the
21

considerable uncertainties we face now over the costs and benefits of greenhouse gas mitigation,
the institutional difficulties faced by firm-level borrowing mechanisms, and the need for marketbased institutions that will react to the unfolding of new information over time, a cap-and-trade
system with an allowance reserve is well supported by an economic view of efficient long-term
climate policy.

22

References
Argus Media. 2008. Markets Slowed by CAIR Concerns. Argus Air Daily, May 30, 15 (104).
Eilperin, Juliet, and Steven Mufson. 2008. Climate Bill Underlines Obstacles to Capping
Greenhouse Gases. Washington Post, June 1, A12.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2008. Energy Market and Economic Impacts of S.
2191, the Lieberman–Warner Climate Security Act of 2007. April. Report
SR/OIAF/2008-01. Washington, DC: EIA.
Hoel, Michael, and Larry Karp. 2002. Taxes versus Quotas for a Stock Pollutant. Resource and
Energy Economics 24: 367–384.
Jacoby, H.J., and A.D. Ellerman. 2003. The Safety Valve and Climate Policy. Energy Policy
32(4): 481–491.
Kerr, Suzi and Richard G. Newell. 2003. Policy-Induced Technology Adoption: Evidence from
the U.S, Lead Phasedown. Journal of Industrial Economics 51(3):271-343.
Kling, C., and J. Rubin. 1997. Bankable Permits for the Control of Environmental Pollution.
Journal of Public Economics 64(1): 101–15.
Kolstad, C.D. 1996. Learning and Stock Effects in Environmental Regulation: The Case of
Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
31(1): 1–18.
Kopp, Raymond, Richard Morgenstern, and William Pizer. 1997. Something for Everyone: A
Climate Policy that Both Environmentalists and Industry Can Live With.Weathervane.
Washington, DC: Resources for the Future.
http://www.weathervane.rff.org/SomethingForEveryone.pdf.
Murray, Brian, and Martin Ross. 2007. The Lieberman–Warner America’s Climate
Security Act: A Preliminary Assessment of Potential Economic Impacts. Policy Brief NI
PB 0704. Durham, NC: Nicholas Institute for Environmental Policy Solutions, Duke
University.

23

Newell, Richard G., and William A. Pizer. 2003. Regulating Stock Externalities under
Uncertainty. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 45: 416–432.
Newell, Richard G., William A. Pizer, and Jiangfeng Zhang. 2005. Managing Permit
Markets to Stabilize Prices. Environmental and Resource Economics 31: 133–157.
Paltsev, Sergey, John M. Reilly, Henry D. Jacoby, Angelo C. Gurgel, Gilbert E. Metcalf,
Andrei P. Sokolov, and Jennifer F. Holak. 2007. Assessment of U.S. Cap-and-Trade
Proposals. Report 146. Cambridge, MA: MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of
Global Change.
Pizer, William A. 2002. Combining Price and Quantity Controls to Mitigate Global Climate
Change. Journal of Public Economics 85(3): 409–434.
Pizer, William A. and Marika Tatsutani. 2008. Managing Costs in a U.S. Greenhouse Gas
Trading Program: A Workshop Summary. Discussion paper 08-23. Washington, DC:
Resources for the Future.
Roberts, M.J., and M. Spence. 1976. Effluent Charges and Licenses under Uncertainty. Journal
of Public Economics 5(3–4): 193–208.
Rubin, J.D. 1996. A Model of Intertemporal Emission Trading, Banking, and Borrowing.
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 31: 269–286.
Samuelsohn, Darren. 2008. Behind “Safety Valve” Debate Resides 30+ Years of History.
ClimateWire, March 11.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2005. Rule to Reduce Interstate Transport of Fine
Particulate Matter and Ozone (Clean Air Interstate Rule); Revisions to Acid Rain
Program; Revisions to the NOX SIP Call. Federal Register 70(91): 25162–25405.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2008. EPA Analysis of the Lieberman–Warner Climate
Security Act of 2008: S. 2191 in 110th Congress.
http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/downloads/s2191_EPA_Analysis.pdf.
Unold, Wolfram, and Till Requate. 2001. Pollution Control by Options Trading. Economics
Letters 73: 353–358.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1974. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41(4): 477–491.

24

Weitzman, Martin L. 2008. On Modeling and Interpreting the Economics of Catastrophic
Climate Change. Forthcoming Review of Economics and Statistics.

25

Technical Appendix
Consider an effort to seek: min C1 ( q1 ) + C2 ( Q − q1 ) , where qt is the emissions each
period t, Q is the ultimate cumulative emissions goal (unknown until period 2), Ct is the cost of
emissions level qt (which, unknown until period t, is positive if qt is below some baseline level
and zero otherwise), and the cost functions include adjustment for discounting to the present.
Given the ultimate resolution of uncertainty in period 2, we know costs in period 2
are C2 ( Q − q1 ) and it would therefore be optimal to choose q1 such that C1′ ( q1 ) = C2′ ( Q − q1 ) .
With the information available when q1 has to be chosen, the best practical outcome would be
C1′ ( q1 ) = E1 ⎡⎣C2′ ( Q − q1 ) ⎤⎦ , where E1 reflects the expectation formed in period 1 about the costs
and target set in period 2.
An optimizing government setting a period 1 tax, t1, in period 0 would choose
t1 = E0 ⎣⎡C1′ ( qˆ1 ) ⎦⎤ where q̂1 satisfies E0 ⎡⎣C1′ ( qˆ1 ) ⎤⎦ = E0 ⎡⎣C2′ ( Q − qˆ1 ) ⎤⎦ , thereby minimizing expected

costs as seen in period 0. Firms would then choose to emit q1 such that t1 = C1′ ( q1 ) , given the

resolution of cost uncertainty in period 1. This outcome for q1 would not generally satisfy the
efficiency condition, C1′ ( q1 ) = E1 ⎡⎣C2′ ( Q − q1 ) ⎤⎦ because E1 [C 2′ (Q − q1 )] will not generally equal
E 0 [C 2′ (Q − q1 )] = t1 = C1′ (q1 ) under the tax.

Now imagine the government instead sets a cap q1 in period 0 and a second period cap
q2 to deliver the ultimate objective Q = q1 + q2 . Note that with second period cap q2 , if firms
have banked q1 − q1 at the end of period 1, in period 2 emissions would be Q – q1 and marginal

costs would be C2′ ( Q − q1 ) . In this setting, a cost-minimizing firm would choose q1 such that
C1′ ( q1 ) = E1 ⎡⎣C2′ ( Q − q1 ) ⎤⎦ regardless of the first period cap.

26

$1,800.00

allowance price ($/ton SO2)

$1,600.00
$1,400.00
$1,200.00
Final CAIR

$1,000.00

FIP released

$800.00
Supplemental proposal

$600.00
$400.00
$200.00

Proposed CAIR
(more stringent cap in 2010)

$0.00
Jan-94 Jan-96 Jan-98 Jan-00 Jan-02 Jan-04 Jan-06 Jan-08

Figure 1: Historic Prices in the Sulfur Dioxide Allowance Market

Note: CAIR: Clean Air Interstate Rule; FIP: Federal Implementation Plan.

27

cap-and-trade

emission
price

emission
price

b
emission fee

c

demand
outcome #2

a

d

demand
outcome #1

demand
outcome #2
demand
outcome #1

emissions

emissions

Allowance supply under cap-and-trade

Allowance supply under emissions fee

Appendix Figure 1. Emissions and Price Outcomes under Cap-and-Trade versus
Emissions Fee/Tax

emission
price

emission
price

g

g

e
demand
outcome #3

f

demand
outcome #2

e

demand
outcome #1

demand
outcome #3

f

allowance
reserve

demand
outcome #2
demand
outcome #1

emissions

emissions
Allowance supply based on Roberts and Spence (1976)

Allowance supply with allowance reserve

Appendix Figure 2. Emissions and Price Outcomes under Hybrid Price–Quantity Policies

28

