                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      THE STATE OF MACRO

                                          Olivier J. Blanchard

                                         Working Paper 14259
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w14259


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 2008




Prepared for the "Annual Review of Economics". Thanks to Daron Acemoglu (one of the editors),
Ricardo Caballero, V.V. Chari, Laura Feiveson, Ben Friedman, Jordi Gali, Anil Kashyap, Jaewoo
Lee, N.Greg Mankiw, Marianna Riggi, Julio Rotemberg, Robert Shimer, Andrei Shleifer, and Harald
Uhlig for their very useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2008 by Olivier J. Blanchard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
The State of Macro
Olivier J. Blanchard
NBER Working Paper No. 14259
August 2008
JEL No. E0,E2,E3,E4,E50

                                             ABSTRACT

For a long while after the explosion of macroeconomics in the 1970s, the field looked like a battlefield.
Over time however, largely because facts do not go away, a largely shared vision both of fluctuations
and of methodology has emerged. Not everything is fine. Like all revolutions, this one has come with
the destruction of some knowledge, and suffers from extremism and herding. None of this deadly however.
The state of macro is good.

The first section sets the stage with a brief review of the past. The second argues that there has been
broad convergence in vision, and the third reviews the specifics. The fourth focuses on convergence
in methodology. The last looks at current challenges.


Olivier J. Blanchard
MIT
Department of Economics
E52-357
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
blanchar@mit.edu
The editors of this new Journal asked me to write about “The Future of Macro-
economics”. Nobody should accept such a task. One can forecast the near future
with some confidence: Research technology is largely Austrian in nature, with
output following inputs later in time. One can see the various teams at work, and
thus be confident that, sooner or later, they will succeed. But it is nearly im-
possible to forecast beyond that: Think of what somebody would have predicted
for the future of macro circa 1970, before Lucas, Sargent, and Prescott came
to the scene. One can, however, take stock, show evolutions, point to strengths
and weaknesses of the current state of knowledge, and express hopes without
disguising them as forecasts. This is what I shall do in this paper.
Let me continue with more caveats. I shall focus on only part of macro, namely
fluctuations. I shall leave aside work on growth, where much action and much
progress have taken place; this is not a value judgment, just a reflection of com-
parative advantage.1 I shall also make no attempt to be either encyclopedic,
balanced, or detached. The bibliography will be largely random. In short, this is
not a handbook chapter, but rather the development of a theme.
The theme is that, after the explosion (in both the positive and negative meaning
of the word) of the field in the 1970s, there has been enormous progress and
substantial convergence. For a while—too long a while—the field looked like a
battlefield. Researchers split in different directions, mostly ignoring each other, or
else engaging in bitter fights and controversies. Over time however, largely because
facts have a way of not going away, a largely shared vision both of fluctuations and
of methodology has emerged. Not everything is fine. Like all revolutions, this one
has come with the destruction of some knowledge, and suffers from extremism,
herding, and fashion. But none of this is deadly. The state of macro is good.2

1. I shall even leave out a topic close to my heart, the “medium run,” the low frequency
evolutions reflected in movements in capital/labor ratios, the labor share and so on. One reason
is that not much (not enough) has happened on this front.
2. Others, I know, disagree with this optimistic assessment (for example, Solow (2008)). To
check whether I was totally delusional, I organized a session at the 2008 AEA meetings on the
theme “Convergence in Macro”. Robert Shimer, Michael Woodford, and V.V. Chari together
with Pat Kehoe and Ellen McGrattan, all wrote papers—which will be published in the first
issue of the new journal of the American Economic Association, the AEJ-macro, and are already
available on the journal’s web site. I read the papers as indeed suggesting substantial but not
full convergence; the readers can judge for themselves.

                                                                                              2
The paper is organized in four sections. The first sets the stage with a brief review
of the past. The second argues that there has been broad convergence in vision,
with the third looking at it in more detail. The fourth focuses on convergence in
methodology, and the current challenges. One could argue that convergence in
methodology is more obvious than the convergence in vision, and should therefore
have come first. It is probably true, but, in the end, what matters is how we
explain facts, and this is the reason for my choice of organization.




1      A Brief Review of the Past
When they launched the “rational expectations revolution”, Lucas and Sargent
(1978) did not mince words:

That the predictions [of Keynesian economics] were wildly incorrect, and that
the doctrine on which they were based was fundamentally flawed, are now sim-
ple matters of fact, involving no subtleties in economic theory. The task which
faces contemporary students of the business cycle is that of sorting through the
wreckage, determining what features of that remarkable intellectual event called
the Keynesian Revolution can be salvaged and put to good use, and which others
must be discarded.

They predicted a long process of reconstruction:

Though it is far from clear what the outcome of this process will be, it is already
evident that it will necessarily involve the reopening of basic issues in mone-
tary economics which have been viewed since the thirties as “closed” and the
reevaluation of every aspect of the institutional framework within which mone-
tary and fiscal policy is formulated in the advanced countries. This paper is an
early progress report on this process of reevaluation and reconstruction.

They were right. For the next fifteen years or so, the field exploded. Three groups
dominated the news, the new-classicals, the new-Keynesians, and the new-growth
theorists (no need to point out the PR role of “new” here), each pursuing a very
different agenda:


                                                                                   3
The new-classicals embraced the Lucas-Sargent call for reconstruction. Soon,
however, the Mencheviks gave way to the Bolcheviks, and the research agenda
became even more extreme. Under Prescott’s leadership, nominal rigidities, im-
perfect information, money, and the Phillips curve, all disappeared from the ba-
sic model, and researchers focused on the stochastic properties of the Ramsey
model (equivalently, a representative agent Arrow-Debreu economy), rebaptized
as the Real Business Cycle model, or RBC. Three principles guided the research:
Explicit micro foundations, defined as utility and profit maximization; general
equilibrium; and the exploration of how far one could go with no or few imper-
fections.

The new-Keynesians embraced reform, not revolution. United in the belief that
the previous vision of macroeconomics was basically right, they accepted the need
for better foundations for the various imperfections underlying that approach.
The research program became one of examining, theoretically and empirically,
the nature and the reality of various imperfections, from nominal rigidities, to
efficiency wages, to credit market constraints. Models were partial equilibrium,
or included a trivial general equilibrium closure: It seemed too soon to embody
each one in a common general equilibrium structure.

The new-growth theorists simply abandoned the field (i.e. fluctuations). Lucas’
remark that, once one thinks about growth, one can hardly think about some-
thing else, convinced many to focus on determinants of growth, rather than on
fluctuations and their apparently small welfare implications. Ironically, as the
Ramsey growth model became the workhorse of the new-classicals, much of the
progress on the growth front was made by examining the implications of various
imperfections, from the public good nature of knowledge and the nature of R&D,
to externalities in capital accumulation.

Relations between the three groups—or, more specifically, the first two, called
by Hall “fresh water” and “salt water” respectively (for the geographic location
of most of the new-classicals and most of the new-Keynesians)—were tense, and
often unpleasant. The first accused the second of being bad economists, clinging to
obsolete beliefs and discredited theories. The second accused the first of ignoring
basic facts, and, in their pursuit of a beautiful but irrelevant model, of falling

                                                                                 4
prey to a “scientific illusion.” (See the debate between Prescott and Summers
(1986)). One could reasonably despair of the future of macro (and, indeed, some
of us came close (Blanchard 1992)).

This is still the view many outsiders have of the field. But it no longer corresponds
to reality. Facts have a way of eventually forcing irrelevant theory out (one wishes
it happened faster). And good theory also has a way of eventually forcing bad
theory out. The new tools developed by the new-classicals came to dominate.
The facts emphasized by the new-Keynesians forced imperfections back in the
benchmark model. A largely common vision has emerged, which is the topic of
the next section.




2      Convergence in Vision
2.1    The role of aggregate demand, and nominal rigidities

It is hard to ignore facts. One major macro fact is that shifts in the aggregate
demand for goods affect output substantially more than we would expect in a
perfectly competitive economy. More optimistic consumers buy more goods, and
the increase in demand leads to more output and more employment. Changes in
the federal funds rate have major effects on real asset prices, from bond to stock
prices, and, in turn, on activity.

These facts are not easy to explain within a perfectly competitive flexible-price
macro model. More optimistic consumers should consume more and work less,
not consume more and work more. Monetary policy should be reflected primarily
in the prices of goods, not lead Wall Street to react strongly to an unexpected 25
basis points change in the federal funds rate.

Attempts to explain these effects through exotic preferences or exotic segmented-
market effects of open market operations, while maintaining the assumption of
perfectly competitive markets and flexible prices, have proven unconvincing at
best. This has led even the most obstinate new-classicals to explore the possibility
that nominal rigidities matter. Present nominal rigidities, movements in nominal


                                                                                   5
money lead to movements in real money, which lead in turn to movements in the
interest rate, and the demand for goods and output. And, with nominal rigidities,
movements in aggregate demand are not automatically offset by movements in
the interest rate, and thus can translate into movements in output.

The study of nominal price and wage setting is one of the hot topics of research
in macro today. It has all the elements needed to make for exciting research: It
has newly available micro data sets on prices, either from CPI data bases or from
large distributors themselves (see the survey by Maćkowiak and Smets (2008)).
It faces delicate aggregation issues: Depending on the specific way prices are
set, individual stickiness may build up or instead disappear as we look at more
aggregate price indexes. The cast of characters involved in that research nicely
makes the point that the old fresh water/salt water distinction has become largely
irrelevant: While research on the topic started with new-Keynesians, recent re-
search has been largely triggered by an article by Golosov and Lucas (2007), itself
building on earlier work on aggregation of state-dependent rules by Caplin and
by Caballero, among others.


2.2     Technological shocks versus technological waves

One central tenet of the new-classical approach was that the main source of
fluctuations is technological shocks. The notion that there are large quarter-to-
quarter aggregate technological shocks flies however in the face of reason. Except
in times of dramatic economic transition, such as the shift from central planning
to market economies in Eastern Europe in the early 1990s, technological progress
is about the diffusion and implementation of new ideas, and about institutional
change, both of which are likely to be low-frequency movements. No amount
of quarterly movement in the Solow residual will convince the skeptics: High
frequency movements in measured aggregate TFP must be due to measurement
error.3

3. (Too) many papers are still written with high-frequency productivity shocks as the only
source of fluctuations in the model. I suspect that most of the authors use these shocks as
a convenient stand-in, rather than out of conviction as to their actual existence. For some
purposes, the assumption may be innocuous; if the focus is on understanding labor supply for
example, the source of shifts in labor demand—whether it is technological shocks, or shifts in

                                                                                            6
This does not imply, however, that technological progress does not play an impor-
tant role in fluctuations. Though technological progress is smooth, it is certainly
not constant. There are clear technological waves. Think of the high TFP growth
of the post WW-II era, the low TFP growth of the 1970s and 1980s, the higher
TFP growth since the mid-1990s. These waves clearly determine movements in
output in the medium and long run. But, combined with the role of anticipations
on demand, and the role of demand on output, they may also determine the
behavior of output in the short run. This is my next point.


2.3     Towards a general picture, and three broad relations

The joint beliefs that technological progress goes through waves, that perceptions
of the future affect the demand for goods today, and that, because of nominal
rigidities, this demand for goods can affect output in the short run, nicely combine
to give a picture of fluctuations which, I believe, many macroeconomists would
endorse today.

Fifty years ago, Samuelson (1955) wrote:

In recent years, 90 per cent of American economists have stopped being “Key-
nesian economists” or “Anti-Keynesian economists.” Instead, they have worked
toward a synthesis of whatever is valuable in older economics and in modern the-
ories of income determination. The result might be called neo-classical economics
and is accepted, in its broad outlines, by all but about five per cent of extreme
left-wing and right-wing writers.

I would guess we are not yet at such a corresponding stage today. But we may
be getting there.

These joint beliefs are often presented in the form of three broad relations (I
shall concentrate on a specific, more tightly specified, version, the so-called new-
Keynesian model, below): An aggregate demand relation, in which output is

aggregate demand under sticky prices—may be unimportant. For other purposes however—
for example, joint movements in employment, output, and real wages—it is not, and leads to
artificial “puzzles”, which are puzzles only under the maintained and incorrect assumption. For
a nice discussion, see for example Rotemberg (2008)

                                                                                             7
determined by demand, and demand depends in turn on anticipations of both
future output and future real interest rates. A Phillips-curve like relation, in
which inflation depends on both output and anticipations of future inflation.
And a monetary policy relation, which embodies the proposition that monetary
policy can be used to affect the current real interest rate (a proposition that
would not hold absent nominal rigidities).
In such an economy, anticipations obviously play a major role. Take anticipations
of future productivity. The belief that a technological wave may be about to
start may lead to a large increase in demand, and, in turn, to a boom; think
about the second half of the 1990s, and the talk of a “new economy” and of an
“IT revolution”. Conversely, the realization that what looked like the start of a
technological wave turns out to have been just a series of good draws, may lead
to a large decrease in demand, and a recession (see, for example, Beaudry and
Portier (2006), Lorenzoni (2008), or (I cannot resist), Blanchard, L’Huillier, and
Lorenzoni (2008)). Or take anticipations of inflation: The belief that inflation
is well anchored limits actual movements in inflation; conversely, worries about
inflation in the future may well lead to higher inflation today.


2.4    A toy model; the new-Keynesian model

Within this broad picture, a specific model, the so-called new-Keynesian (or NK)
model, has emerged and become a workhorse for policy and welfare analysis (two
references here are Clarida et al (1999), and, for the application to monetary
policy, the book by Woodford (2003)).
The model starts from the RBC model without capital, and, in its basic incarna-
tion, adds only two imperfections. It introduces monopolistic competition in the
goods market. The reason is clear: If the economy is going to have price setters,
they better have some monopoly power. It then introduces discrete nominal price
setting, using a formulation introduced by Calvo, and which turns out to be the
most analytically convenient. Within this frame, the three equations described
earlier take a specific form.
•      First, the aggregate demand equation is derived from the first-order con-
       ditions of consumers, which give consumption as a function of the real in-

                                                                                8
       terest rate and future expected consumption. As there is no other source
       of demand in the basic model, consumption demand is the same as ag-
       gregate demand. And given the assumption that, so long as the marginal
       cost is less than the price, price setters satisfy demand at existing prices,
       aggregate demand is equal to output. Putting these three assumptions to-
       gether, the first relation gives us output as a function of the real interest
       rate and future expected output.
•      Second, under the Calvo specification, the Phillips curve-like equation
       gives inflation as a function of expected future inflation, and of the “out-
       put gap”, defined as actual output minus what output would be absent
       nominal rigidities.
•      Third, the monetary policy rule is formalized as a “Taylor rule”, a reaction
       function giving the real interest rate chosen by the central bank as a func-
       tion of inflation and the output gap. (Nominal money does not explicitly
       appear in the model: The assumption is that the central bank can adjust
       the nominal money stock so as to achieve any real interest rate it wants.
       And, what matters for activity is the real interest rate, not nominal money
       per se.)
The model is simple, analytically convenient, and has largely replaced the IS-LM
model as the basic model of fluctuations in graduate courses (although not yet
in undergraduate textbooks). Like the IS-LM model, it reduces a complex reality
to a few simple equations. Unlike the IS-LM model, it is formally rather than
informally derived from optimization by firms and consumers. This has benefits
and costs. The benefits are the ability to study not only activity, but also welfare,
and thus to derive optimal policy based on the correct (within the model) welfare
criterion. The costs are that, while tractable, the first two equations of the model
are patently false (more obviously so than those in the more loosely specified IS-
LM model)... The aggregate demand equation ignores the existence of investment,
and relies on an intertemporal substitution effect in response to the interest rate,
which is hard to detect in the data on consumers. The inflation equation implies
a purely forward looking behavior of inflation, which again appears strongly at
odds with the data. Still, the model yields important lessons, which could not be
derived in the IS-LM model, and which are very general. Let me mention what I

                                                                                   9
see as the main three:
•     Fluctuations in output are not necessarily bad. This was the main message
      of the basic RBC model, in which, indeed, all fluctuations were optimal. It
      remains true in the NK model. It may be best for the economy to respond
      to changes in technology, or changes in preferences, through some fluc-
      tuations in output and employment. Trying to smooth those fluctuations
      through the use of policy would be wrong.
      How relevant this argument is for rich, diversified, economies, remains un-
      clear to me, and I suspect that the argument for keeping output on a
      smooth path is still a strong one. It is, however, surely relevant to emerg-
      ing economies, affected by terms of trade shocks if they are commodity
      exporters, or sudden shifts in capital flows. Trying to achieve a smooth
      path in the face of such shocks is likely, from a welfare viewpoint, to be
      counterproductive.
•     In thinking about policy, one must think about three different concepts of
      activity: First, the actual level of output. Second, the level of output which
      would prevail in the absence of nominal rigidities, often called the natural
      level of output (as it corresponds to the natural rate of unemployment,
      introduced by Friedman and Phelps), but which I prefer to call second-
      best. Third, the level of output which would prevail in the absence of
      nominal rigidities and other imperfections (in the basic NK model, the
      monopoly power of firms); call it the constrained efficient level of output,
      which, in the basic NK model, is also the first-best level of output.
      In the basic NK model, the monetary policy which keeps the inflation
      rate constant (where the price index used to measure inflation is that
      corresponding to the set of prices set by price setters) will automatically
      keep output at its second best level, even in response to shocks to the
      supply side, such as technological shocks or oil price shocks. Is it optimal
      to do so? This depends on how the second best and the first best levels
      of output move in response to the shock. In the basic NK model, they
      move in unison, so it turns out that it is indeed optimal to keep inflation
      constant, and let output equal its second best level.
•     This leads to a strong policy conclusion: Strict inflation targeting is good,

                                                                                 10
        both for inflation, and for output (a result Jordi Gali and I have baptized
        the “divine coincidence”). This result serves as an important benchmark.
        In the presence of further imperfections however, it may no longer hold.
        To take a very topical example, suppose labor market imperfections lead
        to more real wage rigidity than would be implied by a competitive labor
        market. Then, an increase in the price of oil—which requires a decrease
        in the real wage—may lead to a large decrease in the second-best level of
        output: Very low output, and thus a large increase in unemployment may
        be needed to make workers accept the real wage cut. First-best output,
        which is defined as what output would be without real wage rigidities, may
        move much less. In this case, it may be better to allow for some inflation,
        and a deviation of output above its second best level for some time, rather
        than to stick to constant inflation.4


2.5     Building on the toy model
Implications of the NK model for policy, in particular monetary policy, have
proven extremely rich.5 The role of anticipations in the model has allowed us to
study the implications of time consistency for optimal policy, to examine the use
of rules versus discretion, to discuss the role of anchoring expectations, to think
about the role of communication. Woodford’s work, and his book mentioned
earlier, shows the enormous progress which has been made, and this body of
work has literally changed the way central banks think about monetary policy.6
This being said, it is clear that the NK model, even extended to allow, say, for

4. As the reader may guess from the heavier prose, I am trying to present informally some
results from my own research (Blanchard and Gali (2007))... My excuse is that I see these
results as a good example of what can be learned from the NK model that could not be learned
from the IS-LM model, or its textbook extension, the AD-AS model.
5. Because the model is clearly well designed to look at monetary policy, and also perhaps
because central banks are rich institutions with large research departments and conference
money, there has been substantially more work on monetary policy than on fiscal policy. A
good normative theory of fiscal policy in the presence of nominal rigidities remains largely to
be done.
6. Another slightly cynical remark: The embrace of inflation targeting by central banks may
not entirely come from their deep understanding of the new monetary theory, but also from
the coincidence of theoretical results with their long-standing desire to keep inflation low and
constant.

                                                                                             11
the presence of investment and capital accumulation, or for the presence of both
discrete price and nominal wage setting, is still just a toy model, and that it lacks
many of the details which might be needed to understand fluctuations. The next
section reviews developments on these fronts.




3      Extensions and Explorations
Much of the current research on macro fluctuations can be thought of an ex-
ploration of the implications of various imperfections: Beyond nominal rigidities,
what are the imperfections which matter the most for macro? How do they affect
the dynamic effects of shocks? How do they introduce at least the possibility
of additional shocks? What do we know about these dynamic effects, and how
important are these shocks? This is how I shall organize this section, going mar-
ket by market (from labor markets, to credit and financial markets, to goods
markets), and then taking up some issues which cut across markets and I see as
largely unresolved.


3.1    Labor markets. Introducing unemployment

One striking (and unpleasant) characteristic of the basic NK model is that there
is no unemployment! Movements take place along a labor supply curve, either
at the intensive margin (with workers varying hours) or at the extensive margin
(with workers deciding whether or not to participate). One has a sense, however,
that this may give a misleading description of fluctuations, in positive terms,
and, even more so, in normative terms: The welfare cost of fluctuations is often
thought to fall disproportionately on the unemployed.

The first question is then how to think about and introduce unemployment in a
macro model. Here, fortunately, we can build—and are building—on a parallel
effort, developed over the past twenty years by, in particular, Peter Diamond,
Chris Pissarides, and Dale Mortensen (thus, the name “DMP model”. For a pre-
sentation, see, for example, Pissarides (2000)). In this approach, unemployment
arises from the fact that the labor market is a decentralized market, where, at

                                                                                  12
any time, some workers are looking for jobs, while some jobs are looking for
workers. This has two implications. The first is that, by necessity, there is al-
ways some unemployment—and, symmetrically, some vacancies. The second is
that, as it takes time for a worker to find another job, and for a firm to find
another worker, both the worker and the firm have some bargaining power. This
implies that the wage—and by implication, the cost of labor, employment, and
unemployment—depends on the nature of bargaining.

This approach has proven extremely productive on its own. In contrast to the
representative agent approach, it makes one think of the labor market as a mar-
ket characterized by large flows, flows of job destruction and creation, flows of
workers between employment, unemployment, and non-participation. It allows
one to think about the effects of labor market institutions on the natural rate
of unemployment. It allows one to think about whether and how fluctuations
affect reallocation, and whether some of the fluctuations themselves may be due
to variations in reallocation intensity. The model is sufficiently realistic in its de-
scription of the labor market that it can be confronted to the data, be it micro
data on workers, or micro data on firms, or, even better and increasingly available,
matched panel data on workers and firms.

The central question however, whenever we explore the implications of a specific
imperfection for macro fluctuations, is twofold: First, how does it affect the dy-
namic effects of shocks on activity? Second, does it lead to the presence of other
shocks, which may themselves be an important source of fluctuations in activity?
In the context of labor markets, we are just starting to explore the answers. Cru-
cial to the answer is the response of real wages to labor market conditions (see
for example, Shimer (2005), and Hall (2005)):

Decentralized wage setting implies the existence of a wage band, within which
both the firm and the worker are willing to continue their relationship. The ex-
istence of such a band implies that, so long as it stays within the band, the real
wage may move less than the boundaries of the band. In less formal terms, the
presence of a band allows for more real wage rigidity than would be implied by
a competitive labor market. This real wage rigidity does not by itself implica-
tions for existing matches, which remain profitable so long as the wage remains

                                                                                    13
within the band. If (a big if, and clearly an additional assumption), however, the
same real wage is also paid to new hires, then real wage rigidity has important
implications for fluctuations: Combined with nominal rigidities, more real wage
rigidity implies less pressure of activity on inflation; this in turn implies stronger
and more persistent effects of shifts in aggregate demand, and stronger and more
persistent effects of supply shocks such as increases in the price of oil, on activity.

The presence of a wage band implies that real wages can be more rigid than their
competitive counterparts. The question, however, is whether real wages, and in
particular, the real wages of new hires, which are the ones that determine the
hiring decisions of firms, are indeed more rigid, and if so why. This is also a hot
topic of research. Theoretical work, based on the exploration of constraints across
workers’ wages within a firm, and empirical work, based on micro evidence on the
wages of existing workers and new hires, are proceeding apace. The next stage
appears to be an integration of the market frictions that characterize the DMP
model, with efficiency wage models, which can explain wage setting within firms
and, in particular, the relation between wages paid to existing workers and to
new hires.


3.2    Credit and financial markets

The current financial crisis makes it clear that the arbitrage approach to the
determination of the term structure of interest rates and asset prices implicit
in the basic NK model falls short of the mark: Financial institutions matter,
and shocks to their capital or liquidity position appear to have potentially large
macroeconomic effects.

The main imperfection around which thinking about credit markets is built is
asymmetric information. Owners/managers of an investment project (call them
the entrepreneurs) have a better knowledge of the distribution of returns on
the project and of their own effort, than outside investors. As a result, outside
investors are only willing to participate under some conditions, typically that the
entrepreneurs put some of their own funds into the project, or put up enough
collateral.


                                                                                    14
This has two direct implications for macro fluctuations. First, these constraints
are likely to amplify the effects of other shocks on activity. To the extent that
adverse shocks decrease profits, and thus reduce the funds available to the entre-
preneurs as well as the value of the collateral they can put up, they are likely to
lead to a sharper drop in investment than would happen under competitive mar-
kets. Second, shifts in the constraints can themselves be sources of shocks. For
example, changes in perceived uncertainty which lead outside investors to ask
for more guarantees may lead entrepreneurs to reduce their investment plans,
leading to lower demand in the short run, and lower supply in the medium run
(two standard references are Bernanke and Gertler (1989) who first introduced
this mechanism in an RBC model, and Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), who showed
the role of asset prices and collateral.)

To the extent that entrepreneurs are not financed directly by the ultimate in-
vestors but rather by financial intermediaries, who in turn get financed by the
ultimate investors, these intermediaries may face the same problems as entre-
preneurs. To make sure that the intermediaries have the proper incentives, the
ultimate investors may want intermediaries themselves to contribute some of
their own funds. Thus, decreases in those funds will force intermediaries to cut
on lending to entrepreneurs, leading again to decreases in investment (a standard
reference here is Holmstrom and Tirole (1997)). Thus, capital constraints are
likely to affect both borrowers and lenders.

Furthermore, to the extent that investment projects have horizons longer than
those of the ultimate investors, financial intermediaries may hold assets of a longer
maturity than their liabilities. Because financial intermediaries are likely to have
specific expertise about the loans they have made and the assets they hold, they
may find it difficult or even impossible to sell these assets to third parties. This in
turn opens the scope for liquidity problems: A desire by the ultimate investors to
receive funds before the assets mature may force the intermediaries to sell assets
at depressed prices, to cut lending, or even to go bankrupt—all possibilities the
current financial crisis has made vivid. (The standard non-macro reference here
is Diamond and Dybvig (1983), which has triggered a large literature.) These
mechanisms may again amplify the effects of adverse shocks, and shifts in the


                                                                                    15
distribution of funds, or in the ultimate investors’ impatience or perceptions of
uncertainty, can have major macroeconomic effects.


Even in centralized markets, asset prices do not always seem to be determined
by their fundamental valuation. Many investors care about resale value, rather
than just the expected discounted value of expected payoffs on the asset. The
idea that, when this is the case, infinitely long lived assets may be subject to
speculative bubbles, is an old one, sustained by many apparent examples in his-
tory. A standard theoretical result is that, in the absence of other imperfections,
rational speculative bubbles can only exist under dynamic inefficiency, a condi-
tion that does not appear to be satisfied in the real world. Recent research has
explored whether, in the presence of other credit market imperfections, ratio-
nal bubbles may exist even when the economy is dynamically efficient (Ventura
(2003), Caballero et al, 2006). The conclusion is that they can.

A very different approach to the same set of issues has explored the implications
of limits to arbitrage (an argument initially formalized by Shleifer and Vishny
(1997)): While it is easy to accept the notion that some participants in financial
markets may not act rationally, the more difficult question is why others do not
come to take advantage of the implied profit opportunities. The answer that has
been explored in the literature is that, again because of asymmetric information
between ultimate investors and potential arbitragers, the arbitragers may not
have access to sufficient funds to arbitrage and return prices to fundamentals.

Yet another approach has explored the role of public and private information in
the determination of asset prices, and has shown that prices may respond too
much to public information and too little to private information, opening the
scope for large swings in prices in response to weak public signals (for example,
Morris and Shin (2002), Angeletos and Werning (2006)). The reason: In the pres-
ence of complementarities, investors will respond to public signals, not necessarily
because they strongly believe them, but because, in contrast to private signals,
they know other investors observe them as well and may thus respond to them.

To the extent that there can be large deviations of prices from fundamentals,


                                                                                 16
these can clearly be sources of shocks to activity.7 And to the extent that they are
more likely to emerge in some economic environments, for example, when interest
rates are low and investors are “searching for yield”, or when the economy goes
through a long boom and investors become steadily too optimistic, (two widely
held beliefs about the behavior of investors among financial market participants),
such deviations will affect the dynamics of other shocks, for example amplifying
booms and increasing subsequent slumps.

All these dimensions of credit and financial markets are also the focus of active
research. Given the urgency of understanding the current financial crisis, one can
be confident that progress will happen rapidly. The same is not true, however, of
the next topic I take up.


3.3     Goods markets and markups

In the basic NK model, the desired markup of price over marginal cost is constant.
This comes from the assumption that the elasticity of substitution in utility
between the differentiated goods sold by monopolistically competitive firms is
constant.

Reality suggests that this assumption also is wide off the mark. First, for an in-
creasing number of goods, from software to drugs, fixed costs rather than marginal
costs are the main component of cost, with the implication that the price reflects
mostly the markup rather than the marginal cost. Second, desired markups ap-
pear to be all but constant. As neither marginal cost, nor the desired markup is
directly observable, the evidence here is more controversial. To my mind, perhaps
the most convincing evidence comes from the evidence on pass-through effects (or
the lack of) of exchange rate movements. Recent empirical work on the United
States, using disaggregated prices, shows that, when import prices are denomi-
nated in dollars at the border, exchange rate movements have barely any effect on
the prices for these imports in the United States, while, if they are denominated

7. Interestingly however, the so called “Great moderation”, i.e. the decline in aggregate output
volatility since the early 1980s, has not been associated with a decline in aggregate stock price
volatility. So far, the same is true of the current financial crisis. While volatility has increased
in financial markets, it has not yet led to increased volatility in activity.

                                                                                                 17
in foreign currency at the border, exchange rate movements lead to nearly one-
for-one effects on prices for those imports (Gopinath et al (2007)). It also shows
that these differences survive long after importers have had a chance to reprice
goods, and thus cannot be attributed to nominal rigidities. Put another way,
exchange rate movements have large and heterogenous effects on the markups
charged by importers.
How markups move, in response to what, and why, is however nearly terra incog-
nita for macro.8 We have a number of theories. One of the most plausible may
be that of consumer markets, developed and introduced in a macro model by
Phelps (1994), in which firms think of the stock of consumers as an asset, and
choose prices accordingly. We have others, based on games between imperfectly
competitive firms. Some of these theories imply pro-cyclical markups, so that an
increase in output leads to a larger increase in the desired price, and thus to
more pressure on inflation. Some imply, however, counter-cyclical markups, with
the opposite implication. We also have some empirical evidence (for example Bils
and Chang (2000)). But we are a long way from having either a clear picture or
convincing theories, and this is clearly an area where research is urgently needed.


3.4     Some unsettled issues. Shocks, anticipations
Having reviewed progress market by market, let me now slice the research another
way, and take up two issues I see both as central and unsettled. The first is the
nature and number of major shocks behind fluctuations. The second is the actual
role of anticipations.
In thinking about fluctuations, an important question is whether they result from
a few major sources of shocks, or from many different sources, each of them with
their own dynamic effects. The nature of optimal policy, the welfare implications
of fluctuations, depend very much on the answer.
In the traditional Keynesian interpretation of fluctuations, shocks to aggregate
demand, “animal spirits”, played a major role. In the RBC interpretation, it was

8. I have found IO economists to be reluctant to help us on this front: They seem to find the
notion that one could reliably measure movements in markups over time, or the notion that
one could trace and explain the evolution of an aggregate markup, both naive and doomed...

                                                                                          18
instead shocks to aggregate supply, i.e. technological shocks. The quick survey of
imperfections above suggests there may be many others.9 One can approach the
question in two ways:

The first is to use a structural model, and get estimates of the shocks, and of their
dynamic effects. This is, for example, the approach taken by Smets and Wouters
(2007), using a state of the art DSGE model for the U.S. economy (more on
DSGE models in the next section). Their results (examined and discussed in the
article by Chari et al (2008) referred to earlier), is that many shocks contribute
to fluctuations, with no particular shock emerging as dominant. The problem,
however, is that the answer depends very much on the specific model used to
examine the data—a remark that is always true, but is particularly relevant
in this context. To take a trivial example, if we specify the slope of a supply
curve incorrectly, we shall interpret movements along the true supply curve as
deviations from our assumed supply curve, thus as shocks to supply. The tight
parametrization of the DSGE models, together with the use of strong Bayesian
priors, makes this risk particularly high.

The second is to use a less structural approach, and use a factor model. Factor
models allow one to explore whether the movements of a large number of variables
can be well explained as the dynamic effects of a few underlying factors. We can
then think of these factors as linear combinations of the major structural shocks.
Work using factor models to interpret macro fluctuations is, I believe, just starting
in earnest, and the second step, going from factors to underlying shocks (a step
similar from going from VARs to structural VARs) is still largely to be taken. But
I find some of the results we already have intriguing. Work for example by Stock
and Watson (2005) gives the following picture: While their formal tests find seven
factors are needed to explain most of the movements in the 130 macroeconomic
time series they look at, three factors (which are orthogonal by construction)
play a dominant role. The first explains most of the movements in quantities, but

9. The use of “shocks” is fraught with philosophical, but also with practical, difficulties: Tech-
nological shocks, animal spirits, changes in perceived uncertainty, and so on, all have deeper
causes, which themselves have even deeper causes, and so on. An operational definition is that
shocks are the unexplained residuals of behavioral equations, and that, as a result, different
patterns of such residuals have different effects on fluctuations.

                                                                                               19
little of the movements in prices or asset prices. The second explains some of the
movements in asset prices, but little of the movements in quantities. The third
explains some of the movements in prices, but little of the movements in quantities
or asset prices. There is a tempting but slightly worrisome interpretation for these
results: That shocks to aggregate demand, which indeed move most quantities
in the same direction, have little effect on prices, and thus on inflation. That
shocks to prices or wages, and thus to inflation, explain most of the movements in
inflation, with little relation to or effect on output. And that asset prices largely
have a life of their own, with limited effects on activity. This is not the only
interpretation, nor is the work by Stock and Watson the last word, but, if so, it
makes one uneasy about the control of inflation through monetary policy implied
by the basic model, an assumption which underlies much of modern monetary
policy.10

The second issue is the role of anticipations. Anticipations play a crucial role
in the basic NK model: Other things equal, anticipations of future consumption
affect current consumption one-for-one. Anticipations of future inflation affect
current inflation nearly one-for-one as well. Under rational expectations, these
imply a very large role for anticipations of future events, or of future policy.

That anticipations matter a lot is obviously true. That people and firms look into
the future, directly or by relying on the forecasts of others, in forming anticipa-
tions is also obviously true. Whether the basic model does not overstate the role
of anticipations cum rational expectations is however open to question. Surely,
various credit constraints limit the ability of people and firms to spend in antici-
pation of good news about the future. Surely, there is a lot of adaptive learning,
with people and firms looking at past evidence to update their beliefs (a route
explored by Sargent—for example Sargent (2001)—and used by him to explain

10. The reason why this is not the only interpretation: Finding in a given market that quantity
and price are uncorrelated (and thus each can be explained by a separate factor, with both
factors being orthogonal) is indeed consistent with a fully elastic supply curve, an inelastic
demand curve, and uncorrelated demand and supply shocks (the interpretation I have implicitly
given here). But it is also consistent with upward sloping supply and downward sloping demand
curves, and the right relation between slopes and variances of the underlying supply and demand
shocks.

                                                                                            20
the evolution of the Phillips curve over time). Surely, also, bounded rationality
and processing abilities limit the ability of firms and households to take into ac-
count what will happen in the future (see for example the work by Sims (2006),
and, with a slightly different formalization, an exploration of macro implications
by Reis (2008).

One reason to worry is, for example, the central role given to the anchoring
of medium-term inflation expectations by central banks. The basic NK model
implies that, if the central bank is able to credibly anchor medium-term expec-
tations of inflation, then the trade-off between inflation and output will be more
favorable. The formal argument relies very much on the Calvo-like specification
of price setting, which implies that inflation today depends nearly one-for-one
on inflation next year, which in turn depends on inflation in the more distant
future. One may reasonably ask, however, whether a price setter, choosing prices
for the next month or the next quarter, will change his decision depending on
what his expectation of inflation is, say, in five years. Put another way, while we
very much want to believe it, I am not sure we actually understand whether and
how anchoring of inflation expectations is so important.




4      Convergence in Methodology
That there has been convergence in vision may be controversial. That there has
been convergence in methodology is not: Macroeconomic articles, whether they
be about theory or facts, look very similar to each other in structure, and very
different from the way they did thirty years ago. The changes can be traced in part
to a reaction against some of the errors of the past, but mostly to technological
progress: We can solve and estimate models we just could not solve then. These
evolutions have been, I shall argue, largely but not entirely for the best.


4.1    From small to larger models

Small models are essential communication and exposition devices. When suc-
cessful, they reduce a complex issue to its essence. They can either embody the

                                                                                21
wisdom of larger, more explicit micro-founded models, or they can instead trig-
ger the development of such models. Dornbusch’s model of overshooting comes
to mind as an example of the latter.

It is nevertheless true that much of the work in macro in the 1960s and 1970s
consisted of ignoring uncertainty, reducing problems to 2x2 differential systems,
and then drawing an elegant phase diagram. There was no appealing alternative—
as anybody who has spent time using Cramer’s rule on 3x3 systems knows too
well. Macro was largely an art, and only a few artists did it well.

Today, that technological constraint is simply gone. With the development of
stochastic dynamic programming methods, and the advent of software such as
Dynare—a set of programs which allows one to solve and estimate non-linear
models under rational expectations—one can specify large dynamic models and
solve them nearly at the touch of a button. And, in many cases, larger models,
even if they cannot be solved analytically, can serve the same role as the 2x2
models of lore, namely communicate a basic point, or show the implications of
a basic mechanism. They can deal with uncertainty without relying on certainty
equivalence, allowing us to think about such issues as precautionary saving or
the behavior of investment under irreversibility. To a large extent, technological
progress has reduced the required artistic component of research, and this is for
the best.


4.2    From equation-by-equation to system estimation

In the 1960s and early 1970s, empirical work in macro proceeded along two tracks.
The first was equation-by-equation estimation of behavioral equations, be it the
consumption function, or the money demand equation, or the Phillips curve. The
other was the development of large econometric models, constructed by putting
together these separate equations. Much was learned from this double-headed
effort, but, by the mid-1970s, the problems of these models were becoming clear.
They were best identified by Sims (1980): There was little reason why the aggre-
gate dynamics of models put together in that way would replicate actual aggregate
dynamics. Putting zeros in an equation might be a good approximation for the
equation as such, but not necessarily for the system as a whole.

                                                                               22
Today, macro-econometrics is mainly concerned with system estimation. Again,
this is due to the availability of new technology, namely more powerful computers.
Systems, characterized by a set of structural parameters, are typically estimated
as a whole. Because the likelihood function is often poorly behaved (more on this
below), the standard approach is to rely on Bayesian estimation. Bayesian estima-
tion in this context can be seen as a compromise between calibration—which dom-
inated the early RBC work—and maximum likelihood—which appears, in most
cases, to ask too much of the data. Vector autoregressions (VARs), or structural
VARs (SVAR)—that is VARs with a minimal set of identification restrictions
which allow one to trace the effects of at least some of the structural shocks—are
used in various ways: Before estimation, they are used to get a sense of the data.
After estimation, they are used to compare the impulse responses to shocks im-
plied by the structural model to those obtained from the SVAR interpretation of
the data.

Because of the difficulty of finding good instruments when estimating macro
relations, equation-by-equation estimation has taken a back seat—probably too
much of a back seat (for estimation and discussion of the Phillips-curve like
relation, see for example Gali et al (2005), and the associated discussion in the
corresponding issue of the Journal of Monetary Economics). Another form of
limited information estimation has appeared: The estimation and fitting of a
subset of impulse response functions—for example the impulse response functions
of various macroeconomic variables to an oil price shock—rather than estimation
and fitting of the whole set of impulse response functions implied by the model.
The rationale is that we may have more confidence in the estimated impulse
responses to oil price shocks than in other aspects of the data, and thus may
prefer to use only this information to estimate the underlying parameters of the
model.


4.3    DSGEs

The most visible outcomes of this new approach are the “dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium models (or DSGEs). They are models derived from micro
foundations—that is utility maximization by consumers-workers, value maximiza-

                                                                               23
tion by firms, rational expectations, and a full specification of imperfections, from
nominal rigidities to some of the imperfections discussed earlier—and typically
estimated by Bayesian methods. The result of estimation is a set of structural
parameters fully characterizing the model. The number of parameters has been
steadily increasing with the power of computers: Smets and Wouters (2007) for
example estimate 19 structural parameters and 17 parameters corresponding to
the variances and the first order autocorrelation coefficients of the underlying
shock processes.

DSGE models have become ubiquitous. Dozens of teams of researchers are in-
volved in their construction. Nearly every central bank has one, or wants to have
one. They are used to evaluate policy rules, to do conditional forecasting, or even
sometimes to do actual forecasting. There is little question that they represent
an impressive achievement. But they also have obvious flaws. This may be a case
in which technology has run ahead of our ability to use it, or at least to use it
best:
•       Macroeconomic data can only deliver so much. The mapping of structural
        parameters to the coefficients of the reduced form of the model is highly
        non linear. Near non-identification is frequent, with different sets of para-
        meters yielding nearly the same value for the likelihood function—which is
        why pure maximum likelihood is nearly never used (on non-identification
        or weak identification, see for example Canova and Sala 2006, or Iskrev
        2008). The use of additional information, as embodied in Bayesian priors,
        is clearly conceptually the right approach. But, in practice, the approach
        has become rather formulaic and hypocritical. The priors used often re-
        flect the priors of others, and, after backward recursion has traced their
        origins, have little basis in facts. Partly for the same reason, models are
        also more similar in their structure than would seem desirable: Roughly
        the same models are used both in rich and in emerging economies, despite
        their very different structures and their very different shocks.
•       Current theory can only deliver so much. One of the principles underly-
        ing DSGEs is that, in contrast to the previous generation of models, all



                                                                                  24
        dynamics must be derived from first principles.11 The main motivation is
        that only under these conditions, can welfare analysis be performed.
        A general characteristic of the data, however, is that the adjustment of
        quantities to shocks appears slower than implied by our standard bench-
        mark models. Reconciling the theory with the data has led to a lot of un-
        convincing reverse engineering. External habit formation—that is a spec-
        ification of utility where utility depends not on consumption, but on con-
        sumption relative to lagged aggregate consumption—has been introduced
        to explain the slow adjustment of consumption. Convex costs of chang-
        ing investment, rather than the more standard and more plausible convex
        costs of investment, have been introduced to explain the rich dynamics
        of investment. Backward indexation of prices, an assumption which, as
        far as I know, is simply factually wrong, has been introduced to explain
        the dynamics of inflation. And, because, once they are introduced, these
        assumptions can then be blamed on others, they have often become stan-
        dard, passed on from model to model with little discussion.
        This way of proceeding is clearly wrong-headed:
        First, such additional assumptions should be introduced in a model only
        if they have independent empirical support. The fact that an additional
        assumption helps fit the aggregate dynamics in a model which is surely
        misspecified elsewhere is not convincing.
        Second, it is clear that heterogeneity and aggregation can lead to aggre-
        gate dynamics which have little apparent relation to individual dynamics
        (see for example Chang et al (2008) on the relation of the aggregate labor
        supply relation to individual labor supply, when individual labor supply
        decisions are taken both at the intensive and the extensive margin, and
        workers have limited access to insurance). Progress is being made, both
        theoretically and empirically, in deriving aggregate dynamic implications
        from individual behavior (for a recent review and exploration, see for ex-
        ample Caballero and Engel 2007). Until we get there however, it may well
        make more sense to recognize our ignorance, and to allow part of the

11. This is not as clean a position as it sounds, as shocks are typically allowed to have their
own, unexplained, dynamics, for example to follow AR(1) processes.

                                                                                            25
       dynamics of our DSGE models to be data determined. True, this would
       make formal welfare analysis impossible. But welfare analysis based on the
       wrong interpretation of the data is clearly worse. For example, it matters
       very much for the assessment of the welfare costs of fluctuations whether
       the slow adjustment of consumption is attributed to habit formation, or
       instead to aggregation, or to slowly adjusting expectations. Ad-hoc wel-
       fare functions, in terms of deviations of inflation and deviations of output
       from some smooth path may be the best we can do given what we know.



5      In Guise of a Conclusion
I have argued that macroeconomics is going through a period of great progress
and excitement, and that there has been, over the past two decades, convergence
in both vision and methodology.

There is, however, such a thing as too much convergence. To caricature, but only
slightly: A macroeconomic article today often follows strict, haiku-like, rules: It
starts from a general equilibrium structure, in which individuals maximize the
expected present value of utility, firms maximize their value, and markets clear.
Then, it introduces a twist, be it an imperfection or the closing of a particular set
of markets, and works out the general equilibrium implications. It then performs
a numerical simulation, based on calibration, showing that the model performs
well. It ends with a welfare assessment.

Such articles can be great, and the best ones indeed are. But, more often than not,
they suffer from some of the flaws I just discussed in the context of DSGEs: In-
troduction of an additional ingredient in a benchmark model already loaded with
questionable assumptions. And little or no independent validation for the added
ingredient. Thus, I want to end this review with three related hopes/pleas.12

The first is for the rehabilitation of partial equilibrium modeling in macroeco-
nomics. While it can obviously only be a first step, it is important to understand

12. Andrei Shleifer has pointed out to me that my three pleas are, to borrow an expression
from computer design, for a more “open architecture” of the field.


                                                                                       26
the implications of a particular imperfection on its own, i.e. taking as given a large
part of the macroeconomic environment. Forcing oneself to examine the implica-
tions of this imperfection in general equilibrium from the start typically creates
unattractive trade-offs. For example, many imperfections lead to heterogeneity
of income and wealth across agents; a general equilibrium closure requires the in-
troduction of various auxiliary assumptions, such as counterfactual assumptions
about the existence of various forms of insurance, making it difficult to assess
the relative roles of the central and the auxiliary assumptions. Better in this case
to proceed in two steps, with partial equilibrium first, and with the—admittedly
much tougher—general equilibrium problem second.13

The second is that no additional ingredient should be introduced in a general
equilibrium model without some independent validation. We have increasing ac-
cess to large micro-data sets, which allow us to learn about aspects of individual
behavior. We are steadily deriving theories of aggregation, which allow us to de-
rive the dynamic aggregate implications of individual behavior (for an example,
in the case of investment, see Caballero et al (1995)). To the extent possible,
this should be how we proceed. Introducing these more realistic descriptions of
aggregate behavior in a DSGE model should be a last step, not a first step.

The third is for the re-legalization of shortcuts and of simple models. DSGE
models tend to be very complex. Approximating complex relations by simple
ones helps intuition and communication. The shortcuts of the past may have been
potentially dangerous, to be used only by the masters of the trade. But the job
is now potentially much easier. We can start from fully articulated models, and
see whether we can capture their essence through simpler relations. We can check
whether and when the implications of the shortcut fit the main characteristics
of the full fledged model (a nice example in this context is Krusell and Smith
(1998)). We should be willing to do more of this than we are today.




13. To quote Solow (2008): “My general preference is for small, transparent, tailored models,
often partial equilibrium, usually aimed at understanding some little piece of the (macro-)
economic mechanism.”


                                                                                          27
Literature Cited
Angeletos, M., Werning I, 2006, Crises and Prices: Information Aggregation, Mul-
tiplicity, and Volatility, American Economic Review, 96(5), 1720-1736.
Bernanke, B., Gertler, M., 1989, Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluc-
tuations, American Economic Review, 79(1), 14-31.
Beaudry, P., Portier, F., 2006, Stock Prices, News, and Economic Fluctuations,
American Economic Review, 96(4), September, 1293-1307.
Bils, M., Chang, Y., 2000, Understanding How Price Responds to Costs and
Production, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 52(1), 33-
77.
Blanchard, O., 1992, For a Return to Pragmatism, Federal Reserve Bank of Saint
Louis Conference on Business Cycles, Proceedings, 121-132.
Blanchard, O., Gali, J., 2007, Real Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model”,
February 2007, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Proceedings of the Con-
ference on “Quantitative Evidence on Price Determination, 35-66.
Blanchard, O., L’Huillier, J.P, Lorenzoni, G., 2008, News, Noise, and Fluctua-
tions, mimeo MIT, August.
Caballero, R., Engel, E, Haltiwanger, J., 1995, Plant Level Adjustment and Ag-
gregate Investment Dynamics, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (2), 1-54.
Caballero, R., Farhi, E., Hammour, M., 2006, Speculative Growth: Hints from
the US Economy, American Economic Review, 66(4), 1159-1192.
Caballero, R., Engel, E, 2007, Price Stickiness in Ss models; New Interpretations
of Old Results, Journal of Monetary Economics, 54.
Canova, F., Sala L., 2006, Back to Square One: Identification Issues in DSGE
Models, Working Paper 583, European Central Bank.
Chang, Y.S., Sungbae, A., Sun-Bin, K., 2008, Can a Representative Agent Model
Represent a Heterogeneous Agent Economy?, mimeo, March.
Chari, V.V, Kehoe, P., McGrattan E. , 2008, New-Keynesian Models Are Not Yet
Useful for Policy Analysis, mimeo, Minneapolis Fed, forthcoming AEJ-Macro.

                                                                              28
Christiano, L, Eichenbaum, M., Evans, C, 2005, Nominal Rigidities and the Dy-
namic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy, Journal of Political Economy,
113(1).

Clarida, R., Gali, J, Gertler, M, 1999, The Science of Monetary Policy: A New-
Keynesian Perspective, Journal of Economic Literature, December, 1661-1707.

Diamond, D., Dybvig, P.H., 1983, Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,
Journal of Political Economy, 91(3), 401-419.

Dornbusch, R., 1976, Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics, Journal of
Political Economy, 84, 1161-1176.

Dynare, Simulation software, www.cepremap.cnrs.fr/dynare/

Gali, J., Gertler, M., López-Salido, 2005, Robustness of the Estimates of the
Hybrid New Keynesian Phillips Curve, Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 1107-
1118.

Golosov, M., Lucas, R., 2007, Menu Costs and the Phillips Curve, Journal of
Political Economy, 115(2), 171-199.

Gopinath, G. , Rigobon, R., Itskhoki O., 2007, Currency Choice and Exchange
Rate Passthrough, mimeo Harvard.

Hall, R., 2005, Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness”,
American Economic Review, 95(1), 50-64.

Holmstrom, B., Tirole, J., 1997, Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and
the Real Sector, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91(3), 401-419.

Iskrev, N., 2008, How Much Do We Learn from the Estimation of DSGE Models?
A Case Study of Identification Issues in a New Keynesian Business Cycle Model,
mimeo, Michigan, May.

Krusell, P. and A. Smith, 1998, Income and Wealth Heterogeneity in the Macro-
economy, Journal of Political Economy, 106(5), 867-896.

Lorenzoni, G., 2008, A Theory of Demand Shocks”, mimeo MIT, January, Amer-
ican Economic Review, forthcoming.


                                                                           29
Lucas, R., Sargent T, 1978, After Keynesian Economics, After the Phillips curve:
Persistence of high inflation and high unemployment, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston Conference volume.

Maćkowiak, B., Smets, F., 2008, On the Implications of Micro Price Data for
Macro Models, mimeo, ECB.

Morris, S., Shin, H., 2002, Social Value of Public Information, American Economic
Review, 52(5), 1521-1534.

Pissarides, C., 2000, Equilibrium Unemployment Theory, Cambridge University
Press.

Phelps, E., 1994, Structural slumps, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Prescott, E. , 1986, Response to a Skeptic, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Quarterly Review, Fall.

Reis, R., 2008, Optimal Monetary Policy Rules in an Estimated Sticky-Information
Model’, mimeo Princeton.

Rotemberg, J., 2008, Cyclical Wages in a Search-and-Bargaining Model with
Large Firms, International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2006, L. Reichlin and K.
West (eds), U. of Chicago Press, 65-114

Samuelson, P., 1955, Economics, 3rd ed, New York: McGraw-Hill.

Sargent, T., 2001, The Conquest of American Inflation, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Shimer, R., 2005, The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Va-
cancies”, American Economic Review, 95(1), 25-49.

Shimer, R., 2008, Convergence in Macroeconomics: The Labor Wedge, mimeo,
Chicago, forthcoming AEJ-Macro.

Shleifer, A., Vishny R, 1997, The Limits of Arbitrage, Journal of Finance, 52(1),
35-55.

Sims, C., 1980, Macroeconomics and Reality, Econometrica, 48(1), 1-48.

Sims, C., 2008, Rational Inattention: A Research Agenda, mimeo Princeton.

                                                                              30
Smets, F. , Wouters, R., 2007, Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A
Bayesian DSGE Approach, American Economic Review, 97(3), 586-606.

Solow, R., 2008, The State of Macroeconomics, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
forthcoming.

Summers, L., 1986, Some Skeptical Observations on Real Business Cycle Theory,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall.

Ventura, J., 2003, Economic Growth with Bubbles, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
CREI Economics Working Paper 848.

Woodford, M., 2003, Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press.

Woodford, M., 2008, Convergence in Macroeconomics, mimeo, Columbia, forth-
coming AEJ-Macro.




                                                                            31
