                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                UNOBSERVABLE FAMILY AND INDIVIDUAL
                CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE DISTRIBUTIONS
                      OF INCOME AND WEALTH


                          J. R. Kearl
                        Clayne L. Pope



                     Working Paper No. 1425




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                           August 1984




Prepared for the Smith Conference on Economics and Public Policy.
Research supported by the National Science Foundation Grant #SES
8218799 NSF and by the College of Social Science, Brigham Young
University. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Development of the American Economy. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #1425
                                         August 1984




           Unobservable Family and Individual Contributions
              to the Distributions of Income and Wealth

                              ABSTRACT
     This paper uses a data set composed of combinations of
full brothers, half brothers as well as fathers and sons to

measure the effect of common family background on households'
income and wealth. While the data is drawn from a nineteenth
century population, the intra—class correlation (after the effects

of age, occupation, nativity, residence and duration in the

economy have been removed) for income ranges from .13 to .18

which is similar to that found in modern samples. Intra—class
correlations for wealth are significantly higher (.18 to .35)
than those for income. The addition of fathers' observed charac-
teristics to the sweeping regressions reduces the unobserved
common background effect shared by brothers by about twenty

percent.
     The intra—class correlations of half brothers were lower

than those observed for full brothers though the small differences

between the two groups suggest that fathers played a dominant
role in the transmission of the common family effect. Unobserved
background was decomposed into individual and family effects

by a variance components procedure. The individual effect was
dominant for income while the family effect was dominant for

wealth.



J. R. Kearl                          Clayne L. Pope
Department of Economics              Department of Economics
184 Faculty Office Building          184 Faculty Office Building
Brigham Young University             Brigham Young University
Provo, UT 84602                      Provo, UT 84602
                                      1


   Family members, except perhaps spouses, are certainly genetically and highly

likely to be environmentally more similar than unrelated individuals. This

unobserved common background may very well make family members more similar

in measured socioeconomic position than would be expected for unrelated individuals

with comparable observable individual characteristics. In addition, if parents

are egalitarian within the family, they may make compensatory transfers in

response to differences among siblings. Parental choices of this sort would

also make siblings more similar than comparable unrelated individuals in terms

of socioeconomic outcomes. In the first instance, family members are more

socioeconomically alike because of similarities in backgrounds and characteristics.

 In the second instance family members are more socloeconornically alike because

dissimilarities in sibling characteristics trigger compensatory activities

by parents.

   On the other hand, efficient parental human capital transfers to children

would not ameliorate the economic effects of ability differences among siblings

assuming ability enhances human capital acquisition. The effect of the family

on the distribution of socioeconomic rewards depends, then, on the variation

in individual characteristics within and between families, market rewards

for those characteristics and the rules of family allocation of parental resources

among children (see Becker and Tomes; Behrman, Pollak and Taubman; Ishikawa;

Loury; and Sheshinskj and Weiss). Behrman, Pollak and Taubman distinguish

two allocational models: the wealth model and the separable earnings—bequest

model. If there are positive material wealth transfers, the former predicts

that such transfers fully compensate for earnings differences. The separable

earnings—bequest model predicts equal transfers. Children may, in either
                                        2

case, have different expected earnings if they have different abilities even

if parents have equal concern for their children.

   Failure to account for common family background effects may bias estimates

of the effects of measured individual characteristics (e.g. the return to

education). Considerable effort has been devoted to this problem using sibling

data although Sheshinski and Weiss argue that the importance of the bias depends

upon the family resource allocation rule. Moreover, whether the use of sibling

data lessens or amplifies bias problems depends on whether the common family

effect fully accounts for all ommitted effects and on the possibility of measure-

ment error and simultaneity problems.       (See Griliches, 1979.) Common family

background effects are, however, interesting in their own right precisely

because of the importance of the family resource allocation rule and its embedded

parental preferences. In addition, failure to account for such effects would

lead one to overestimate the degree to which the variance in observable socio-

economic indicators is truly stochastic, unless common family background is

completely reflected in the observable characteristics that individuals have

or choose to acquire. If the potential effects of family background are not

completely reflected in observable individual characteristics, ignoring family

background may cause one to overlook important aspects of the creation and

perpetuation of economic differences among individuals and across generations.

Even where the effects are fully or partially reflected in observable individual

characteristics, we may view these individual characteristics differently

knowing that, in part, they embody a family background shared with other individ-

uals. Finally, if common family background effects are substantial, they

may affect greatly policy development aimed at changing the distribution of

socioeconomic rewards among individuals since the family then becomes an important
                                      3

social institution affecting the distribution of socioeconomic rewards in

addition to the government.

   In this paper we explore the degree to which family background, whose source

may be genetics environmental and/or behavioral, explains the variance in

indicators of socioeconomic position for individuals from an economy that

would appear to be quite different from the economy from which modern data

are drawn —— 19th century Utah. Our data allow us to consider two different

kinds of family relationships that between fathers and their sons and that

between brothers. For the latter, we have samples of full brothers raised

in the same home sharing a common father and mother and half brothers raised

in separate homes sharing only a common father. We use two indicators of

socioeconomic position, wealth holdings and income.

   We focus on those aspects of common family background that are not measured

directly but whose presence can be inferred from correlations between the

observed socioeconomic positions of family members when the effects of individual

characteristics have been factored out. We also consider the differences

between measured and unmeasured common background by accounting for the observed

individual characteristics of a common father, including the father's income

or wealth, and for the characteristics of the common family such as family

size.

   Families can, of course, influence individual choices about individually

acquired characteristics. However, in a series of studies over the past several

years, it has been found that when the effects of individual characteristics

have been accounted for there remains an unmeasured component of the variance

in measures of socioeconomic position that can be attributed to membership

in a common family by siblings. That is, residuals are correlated when individuals
                                      4

are ordered by family membership. For example, Table 1, combined from the

summary work of Jencks and his associates and from a survey by Griliches,

provides the intraclass correlation coefficients for eight recent studies

using sibling data. The intraclass correlation coefficient, which measures

the degree of association between individuals who share the attribute of belonging

to the same family, also measures the percentage of the variance in the socio-

economic indicator that can be attributed to the common characteristic, in

this case family membership. The indicator in these studies is the logarithm

of income or earnings although many of the studies also use occupational status

as an indicator.

   For each of the samples of brothers, there is a residual correlation that

is significant. That is, brothers are unlike randomly paired individuals

in their economic position as measured by income. In addition, the variance

that can be explained by sibling membership in a common family exceeds that

which can be explained by observable individual characteristics —— common

family background dominates other measured determinants of a brother's income.

Jencks argues that the NORC sample provides the best estimate of the intraclass

correlation (r=.129) and that the range of raw estimates of r Is likely to

be .12 to .28. That is, family background explains 12 to 28 percent of the

variance in the logarithm of income. When suitable adjustments are made for

sample and measurement bias, Jencks et al. argue that family background probably

explains between 15 and 35 percent of the variance of log income —— a significant

addition to the variance explained by observable individual characteristics.

   Brittain, using a small sample of brothers from Cleveland, finds a much

higher intraclass correlation for log income than any of the studies summarized

by Jencks et al. He estimates an intraclass correlation in the .35—.45 range
                                      5

but his is the only study with estimates this high. The intraclass correlation

for occupational status measured by the Duncan scale is still higher around

.48. This may be attributable, in part, to the way that the status measure

is created. But in any event, the correlation attributable to family background

again exceeds that explainable by individual characteristics CR2 is usually

in the .20 to .35 range for occupational status).

   The substantial difference that Taubman finds between monozygote and dizygote

twins has ld him and his associates to explore models that separate the common

family background effect into genetic and environmental components. Goldberger

has been skeptical of th? assumptions necessary to pursue this approach but

potential problems in modelling the nature of the family background effect

do not call into question the presence of the family effect itself.

   Chamberlain, Griliches and others have explored the possibilites that there

is a common factor accounting for the family effect in a structural model

of ability schooling, occupational status and log income, taking advantage

of the identifiability properties of multiple indicators for latent variable

models. Chamberlain and Taubman et al. have extended the latent variable model

so that the unobserved factor has a variance components structure. These efforts

have been quite successful in changing the estimates of the returns to schooling

but less successful In pushing the various estimates toward a common point.

Chamberlain and Griliches have also explored extensions of these models to

include the possibility that there are two factors that account for the family

effect.

   Our aim is initially more modest: Using single equation models, we estimate

the variance component or the intraclass correlation attributable to individuals

sharing a common family background and explore how the estimates differ with
                                                                                 6

the nature of the socioeconomic indicator, the nature of the family relation-

ship and the nature of family background measures available. We also consider

differences between unobserved individual and family effects.



II THE DATA

       Our data are drawn from some or all of the following sources: census manu-

scripts of 1850, 1860, 1870, 1880 and 1900; tax assessment records of 1870,

1QC
£ LI LI LI
             1QC)fl
             S            ,.,,, Cflfl.
               ¼) J .J U I I i.J   a. J ¼) ¼!   I   lU II'... I U I   I ¼. ¼) I ¼1 0 LI I   4-k1.
                                                                                            LII U L. LII..IrC
                                                                                                            LI I('k..,-k
                                                                                                                              c-I 1QLE
                                                                                                                 U I ¼.. II I ¼)   .1.. 'J.J .J 1QI7
                                                                                                                                                .5. LI.J I


1859, 1861, 1866, 1870, 1875, 1880, 1885, 1890, 1895, 1900; and family vital

records from the Genealogical Library of the LDS Church.

       Estimates of wealth were obtained from the Census manuscripts of 1850,

1860 and 1870 and from tax assessment records for 1870, 1880, 1890 and 1900.

We sampled from both records in 1870 in order to splice the wealth series

from 1850 to 1900 at decade intervals. Both tax assessment and census records

provide estimates of gross rather than net wealth.

        Income estimates are obtained from the financial records of the LDS Church

for the 12 years noted earlier. Essentially we cover five year intervals

from 1855 to 1900. LDS financial records indicate the contribution an individual

made to the Church. Church members accepted the moral obligation to contribute

a tithe——ten percent of one's income. In eight of the twelve sample years

we have a record of the percentage that an individual's contribution was relative

to this full tithe. These assessments of tithing paid versus tithing owed

were made by local Church leaders who would personally know the individual

contributor. The individual would also be consulted as to the percentage

of a full tithe that he or she paid. Families usually made their contribution

under the name of the male spouse if there was one although some young men
                                       7

contributed independently to the Church. The combination of the amount contributed

with the percentage of this amount relative to a full tithe yields an estimate

of income. We made adjustments for who those reported income in a particular

year but for whom we did not have percentages by averaging the percentage

paid from other years.

   Occupational data have been collected from each census manuscript, available

from 1850 to 1900. Occupations were transcribed into a three—digit code that

combined occupations that were essentially the same, e.g. lawyer and attorney.

We did not create an occupational status scale. Rather, for purposes of analysis,

these codes were aggregated into four categories: white collar workers, managers,

and proprietors (W); farmers, ranchers, dairy owners, etc. (F); craft workers

(C); laborers, farm laborers and other unskilled occupations (L). This left

a heterogeneous mixture of occupations that were largely service oriented,

such as hotel clerks, policemen, lower level clerks, etc. which we classified

in a fifth group as service workers (S).

   Both census and genealogical records provide place of birth and age. When

these sources disagreed the genealogical record was used. From these two

records we could obtain most of the vital statistics of interest, including

birth, death and marriage information as well as the implied Information about

household location at particular times, family size and family structure.

These records also provide sibling names (linking brothers) and multiple marriage

information (linking half brothers).

   We used place information to provide a record of residence and internal

migration and to provide an estimate of the length of time a household had

been within the economy (T). For analysis purposes, we consider only rural

(R) and urban (U) residence where urban is defined as Salt Lake County.
                                      8

  We have linked individuals through time and across records and we have

linked these individual histories by family relationship. The core of the

sample was created by linking census wealth records using name, location,

age and birth place data. We then added a random sample of the households

from each census year that did not appear in more than one of these censuses.

We separately coded links that were "certain" from those for which there were

some discrepancies in name spellings or age estimates between census years,

"uncertains". We were, however, conservative in our efforts and subsequent

analysis has shown no statistically significant differences between "certains"

and "uricertains" and hence we no longer carry the coding distinguishing the

two. To this core of linked and randomly sampled individuals, we added as

many LDS financial records as we could, linked by name across the records

and through the years from 1855 to 1900. We then reversed the procedure: first

linking households in the Church financial records and then adding as much

census information as was possible.

   We added to this samples now linked through time and between census and

church financial records, records from either the censuses or financial records

that were potentially fathers and sons. We verified these father—son links

using the family vital statistic records from the Genealogical Library. We

then searched the family vital statistic records for those in the core sample

creating pointers linking those within the sample who were either fathers

and sons or brothers. In addition, we added any records from the population

data for those we could identify as sons or brothers of those in the sample

by using the family vital statistic information.

   Not all family links between brothers occur with a link to a father. Since

we searched the family vital statistic records for those in our samples we
                                         9

would often find brothers without finding fathers, who might have been dead

or who might not have migrated to Utah with their sons. This particular aspect

of the sample means that the sibling connections cover the full age range

in each year of the sample and are not restricted to be young in the early

years. We also found a number of new households that were formed over the

fifty year period where we observed the father for a some years and then observed

the father and son. Because of the extended period over which we sampled

we also observe fathers and sometimes sons who die and a small group of three

generation links.

  We added to this linked data additional wealth data from the tax assessments

and probates as well as occupational data from the 1880 and 1900 censuses.

For these records we have neither population data nor random samples from

population data. Rather we sought out only those records for individuals

already in our sample. Otherwise, however, we have population data for wealth

from 1850 to 1870 and income from 1855 to 1900.

   When we added data, anomolies would appear. At each point we purged from

the data those links that became questionable with the new information. Obvious

checks included: records past death or for an individual who was "too old";

records prior to birth or for an individual who was "too young"; the same

name on multiple records from the same source in the same year; substantial

age inconsistencies.

   We   bel ieve that we have been fairly conservative at each point but we should
note that all linking is   by   names with the attendant problems of mispelling
and same names for different Individuals. We tried to avoid both problems

by not selecting or subsequently eliminating those with common names where

the probability was high that there would be several individuals with the
                                      10

same name (e.g. John Jones, James Green). We have differentially coded "certain"

family links from those that were "less certain".

    The completed data set is essentially a panel, although an individual need

not appear in each year either because the individual migrated in or formed

a household later in the period; because the individual migrated out or died

during the period; or because we could not make a link in a particular year.

It Is a panel with the unique characteristic that it Is drawn from a fifty

year history of an economy and that it has immediate family links. Tables

2 and 3 provide means and variances by year for fathers, Sons and brothers.



III FAMILY EFFECTS AND INDIVIDUAL INCOME

    We test for unobserved family background effects by first estimating several

variations of the now standard human capital specification for Individual

I n come,




(1) ln (Yjj) =                 +
                        XjjB
where i indexes sibs and j indexes families and



            =       +
(2) ejj         u       Wjj.
u   is the family component of the variance. For some specifications we pooi

the data over all or part of the 50 year period and in these instances impose

a fixed effects model on the aggregate yearly effects. The complete set of

regressions that serve as a basis for our analysis is found in the appendix.

The general properties of the regression results can be seen in the following

    pooled regression for brothers taken from Table Al in the appendix:
                                              11

(3)        ln(y) =    4.50 +.062 A -.00068 A2 +.009 T -.23 R +.043 FB
                      (.121)(.005)     (.00006)    (.002) (.029) (.025)

             +.56 W —.06 C +.02 S —.19 L +.58 D55 +.57 057 +.47D59
              (.039) (.037) (.06)  (.04)  (.08)    (.05)    (.06)

            +.55 D61 +.48 D66 +.27 D70 +.28 D75 +.24 080 +.27D85
              (.04)      (.05)       (.05)    (.05)    (.05)    (.04)

            +.16 D90 +.002 D95
              (.04)       (.05)

      R2=.11
      #OBS=5580

      The regressions are normalized on farmers living in Salt Lake County in

1900 who are U.S. born. Elsewhere we have discussed the properties of these

regressions at length, focusing on the effects of time within the economy

(T), life cycle patterns (A and A2) and changes in residence (R) and occupation

(W,C,S,L,F) in separate papers. (Kearl, Pope and Wimmer, 1980; Kearl and

Pope, 1983a; Kearl and Pope, 1983b.) We note here that virtually all of the

individual characteristics that we measure have the expected statistically

significant effects on ln(y) but that like comparable analysis on modern data

these individual characteristics do not explain a large percentage of the

variance in log income.

      Briefly, we find a pronounced concave life cycle in income with the peak

occurring around age 45. Time within the economy (1) has a positive effect

on a                   income while those living in the rural areas (R) have lower

incomes, ceteris paribus. Whitecollar workers (W) have higher incomes than

do farmers while craft (C) and service (5) workers have incomes that are not

significantly different from those of farmers. Laborers (L) have incomes

substantially lower than farmers and those in other occupational categories.

We find that foreign born have incomes a bit higher than comparable US born

households. Finally, the pattern of year effects for income essentially accounts
                                     12

for price changes and growth and parallels the price decline over the 50 year

period in the rest of the United States. While the relative magnitudes and

significance of the coefficients change somewhat with specification and sample,

the patterns are essentially the same for all the regressions reported in

the appendix.

   We used these estimates to sweep from individual incomes the effects of

measured individual characteristics. Rather than estimating the variance component

directly, we then estimated the intraclass correlation for related pairs using

the resulting residuals. The residuals were stacked so that a member of the

related pair appears as both a dependent and independent variable in a simple

regression of residuals on residuals. This is equivalent to randomly ordering

the observations. The resulting coefficient (the intercept should be zero

since It is the expected value of the residuals) is an estimate of the intraclass

correlation coefficient. A nonzero coefficient indicates that a common omitted

effect links the paired observations that does not link observations of individuals

who are not related. It therefore provides evidence that there is a "family"

effect on individual income that is shared by the related individuals.

   We find a significant unobserved family background effect for brothers,

Table 4. Sharing a common family background explains around 20 percent of

the variance In the logarithm of income. Brothers incomes are simply unlike

those of randomly selected unrelated paris of individuals even when we account

for similarities between brothers that are observable, including ages nativity

and occupational choices. Part of the correlation between the economic position

of brothers could be explained by the correlation in the ages (compare specific-

ations 1 and 2, Table 4) reflecting "closer" positions on the income life
                                        13

cycle than those shared by randomly paired unrelated individuals. In fact,

this effect is unimportant.

   While age, residence and birthplace correlations between brothers affect

the intraclass correlation estimate very little (compare specifications 1

or 2 with 3), it is clear that part of the influence of family is reflected

in occupational choices that brothers make. The intraclass correlation falls

about 10 precent when the effect of occupational choice is swept out, implying

that brothers' occupational choices are correlated. This is, of course, consistent

with the considerable contemporary evidence on unobserved family effects and

occupational choices.

   The size of the estimated family background effect for brothers' incomes

is at the midpoint of the            range. The importance of the unobserved

family background variable(s) relative to that of the observable individual

characteristics is also consistent with modern data. Hence, in terms of the

size of the estimated family background effect, the importance of this effect

relative to observed individual characteristics and the partial transmission

of the family effect through occupational choices made by siblings, our data

reveal similar patterns to those in modern data even though our sample was

created differently and drawn from a dissimilar economy——one that is poor,

agrarian with little emphasis on formal education. Differences among families

appear to be an important and robust determinant of the variance in the distrib—

ution of income among individuals.

   In the following sections we consider evidence from our data about the

nature of the unobserved family background effect that is not available in

contemporary data. We first consider the effect for wealth holdings for essent-

ially the same households for which we have estimated the family effect on
                                          14

income. Using both income and wealth as indicators of socioeconomic position,

we then consider differences between full and half brothers. This is followed

by a section where we use a subsample of the data to explore family effects

for brothers and half brothers when we observe the socioeconomic position

of their father. Using a different subsample with multiple observations for

each sib, we then differentiate between unobserved family and unobserved individual

effects.




IV FAMILY EFFECTS AND WEALTh HOLDINGS

   We begin with an econometric specification for the logarithm of wealth

holdings comparable to specification (1) for log income:



(4) ln(w) =   4.62 +.089 A —.0008 A2 +.O14 T —.147 FB —.368 R
              (.16) (.007) (.00008) (.0024) (.034)    (.038)

            +.24 W —.39 C —.17 S —.53 L +43 D60 +40 070
              (.06)  (.05)  (.08) (.05) (.05)    (.05)

            +.07 DD7O —.05 080 +.48 D90
              (.06)     (.05)    (.04)

           R2= .22
           #OB S=3944

Again the full set of equations used in the estimation of the intraclass

correlation coefficient is found in the appendix. While the relative magnitudes

change somewhat with specification and samples specification (4) provides

a general qualitative summary of the results for the wealth specifications

and the relationship between the estimates for wealth and those for income.
                                     15

   There is a pronounced concave lifecycle pattern to wealth holdings in our

sample with a peak at age 58 (the comparable age—income peak is at age 45).

Duration within the economy (T) substantially increases wealth holdings and

those who are foreign born or living in the rural area have wealth positions

substantially below US born or those residing in the urban area. For income

we also found a large positive effect for duration and a substantial negative

effect for rural residence. However the effect of foreign birth was positive

for income while it is negative for wealth. White collar workers have wealth

holdings substantially above those for farmers, an effect also seen in income.

However, while service and craft workers have incomes that are not significantly

different from those of farmers, they have wealth holdings that are significantly

lower than those of farmers. Common laborers have substantially lower wealth

holdings and incomes than farmers.

   The pattern of year dummies for wealth is more difficult to interpret since

we essentially use them to splice the wealth series in 1870. Hence they reflect

both economic growth and changes In the measured variable between census and

tax assessment records.

   Table 5 provides estimates for the intraclass correlation coefficient using

the logarithm of wealth as an indicator of socioeconomic position and when

the effects of the observed individual characteristics have been swept from

ln(W). We find that unobserved family background explains about 30 percent

of the variance in the log of wealth compared to 20 percent of the variance

in the log of income.

   The larger intraclass correlation for wealth is consistent with what would

be expected If individual consumption behavior were determined by permanent

rather than observed income. Transitory elements should be a relatively larger
                                     16

component of income than of wealth and hence more of the variance in Income

should be truly stochastic. If individual consumption were determined by

permanent Income, savings would fluctuate with transitory income as would

wealth holdings but the differences in the means between wealth and income

would imply that these fluctuations contributed relatively less to the variance

of wealth. Put differently, differences in family backgrounds are relatively

more important in determining the variance in a more permanent measure of

economic position, wealth, than they are in explaining a measure with a larger

transitory component, income. This suggests that family differences tend to

be associated more closely with permanent differences rather than transitory

differences in the distribution of economic outcomes.

   In addition, however, if parents make efficient investment decisions relative

to the human capital accumulation of their children, thereby differentially

investing in siblings in response to differing individual abilities, but want

to be egalitarian within the family, they would compensate those with lesser

ability by engaging in differential intra vivos wealth transfers or provide

compensatory bequests. This compensatory behavior would imply a larger family

background effect on wealth than on income. Indeed, if there were no important

constraints on parental ability to differentially invest according to sib

ability, the intraclass correlation for earnings would be nonzero only if

 sibling ability had an unobserved common family component. However, the

transitory elements noted earlier, the likely constraints on parental compensatory

behavior as well as income from capitals do not allow us to interpret the

intraclass correlation for Income as measuring only the unobserved family

element of Individual ability (See Behrman, Pollack and Taubman or Sheshinski

and Weiss). We note that recent attempts to test for efficient human capital
                                       17

intergenerational transfers suggest that bequests do not appear to compensate

for differences in ability (Menchik; Tomes).

   For both income and wealth, we used a Chow test for differences in the

intraclass correlation by wealth and household size. In neither case did

we find significant evidence which would indicate that, for example, the intraclass

correlation was higher for brothers with wealthy fathers than for brothers

with poor fathers or that family background effects differed systematically

and substantially between "large" families and "small" families. The latter

is a little surprising since, while common backgrounds differ among families,

it would seem that the differences might be correlated with family size. When

we examine these results in a slightly different way below we do find some

family size effect. We also considered systematic variation in the intraclass

correlation with birth order but also failed to find evidence that birth order

systematically affected the intraclass correlation. In this area, however,

our data present some problems since we have a large number of half brothers

which make sib ordering problematic.

   These results are based on data pooled from the full fifty year period

covered by our sample. It is possible that the estimates change with time

as, for example, the economy matures, or that our results reflect a compositional

effect. We have estimated comparable intraclass correlations using only cross

sections of sib pairs and, while the estimates vary somewhat, there are no

systematic patterns different from those of the pooled data set. Another

area of concern about reported intraclass correlations is the possiblity of

correlation between observed characteristics and errors such that E(UiX)

  0 so that a random effects specification would involve mismeasurement.

Hausman (1978) proposed a specification test which we have applied to some
                                     18

of our equations. While the overall X2 test based on the decrease in residual

sums of squares with augmented transformed variables (p. 1269, Hausman, 1978)

is failed with a random effects specification; the problems seem to be centered

on the age variables and the life cycle. Further work will be needed to gauge

the importance of the relationship between U. and some of the X..

   Perhaps the most serious concern, at present, is the omission of education

from the sweeping regressions. If formal education has a positive influence

on income and wealth as expected the lack of educational data reduces the

variance explained by the regression and increases the measured common background

effect if the education of siblings is correlated. The mismeasurement of

the intraclass correlation in the sweeping regressions such as occupation,

nativity and place of residence proxy for part of the effect of education.

While virtually all of the Utah population was classified as literate on the

census manuscript, formal education was relatively limited in the nineteenth

century Utah. Nevertheless, further work is needed to bound the effect of

omission of education from the sweeping regressions on the measurement of

the family background effect.



V HALF VERSUS FULL BROThERS

   We can separate the contribution of the father to the unobserved family

effect from that of being raised in a common home by considering the differences

between full brothers raised in the same home and half brothers who share

a common father but who, in our samples would not have been raised in a common

home. Table 6 provides estimates when the sample is split this way.

   Half brothers, on averages share fewer genes than do full brothers. (Expected

excess homozygosity would be 50% for full brothers and 25% for half brothers.)
                                     19

They also, in our sample, do not share a common home since polygynous families

were usually maintained in separate houses or living areas for each wife.

Therefore, half and full brothers would only have similar intraclass correlations

if the dominant component of the family background effect was the contribution

of the father to his children. That is, if the intraclass correlations for

brothers do not differ from those for half brothers, the unobserved family

effects must be primarily non—genetic and primarily attributable to the father's

role in creating a common environment for his sons. Conversely, if half brothers

are no more similar than randomly selected unrelated individuals, then neither

genetics nor the father's role matter and the common family effect would be

attributed solely to the environment shared within a common home. However,

if there are unobserved family background effects for both half and full brothers,

the source of the differences could be both genetic and environmental since

brothers and half brothers differ on both dimensions in our sample.

   We clearly do not find that half brothers raised in separate homes are

like randomly selected unrelated individuals. Rather, we find significant

unobserved family background effects for half brothers for both wealth holdings

and for income. Sharing a common father explains about 26 percent of the

variance in log wealth and about 19 percent of the variance in log income

(we continue to find that the common family effect is larger for log wealth

than it is for log income by about 50 percent). Sharing both a common father

and a common mother explains about 30 percent of the variance in log wealth

and about 19 percent of the variance in log income. There is surprisingly

little difference between full brothers and half brothers in this respect

suggesting that in this economy, the father's contribution to the economic
                                      20

success of his children dominates other aspects of the unobserved family variable.

The results cast some doubt on a simple genetic explanation.

   We note that a relatively larger share of the family effect appears to

be transmitted through correlated occupational choices for half brothers than

for brothers. That is, when individual occupational choices are accounted

for (specification 4), the intraclass correlation for half brothers, still

significant and maintaining the spread between income and wealth, is relatively

smaller than the comparable intraclass correlations for full brothers. That

is, when we account for occupational choices, sharing a common father explains

15 percent of the variance in log income and 23 percent of the variance in

log wealth. This compares with 29 percent and 18 percent, respectively for

those who share a common father and a common mother. It makes sense, of course,

that an important element in the environment shared by half brothers is the

occupational choice of their common father which may very well influence their

occupational choices. However, there remains a substantial correlation in

the economic position of those raised in separate homes even when we account

for this element of their common environment.




VI OBSERVED AND UNOBSERVED COMMON FAMILY BACKGROUNDS

   Brothers share attributes of their common father, including those that

are observable such as father's age, occupation, income or wealth. We now

consider the degree to which the common family background effect present in

our data is adequately accounted for by the observed characteristics of the

sibs' father. The observed socioeconomic position of the father might directly

affect sibs because of the advantages or disadvantages the socioeconomic position
                                      21

allowed the father to confer on his children. Usually interest in this area

centers on income or wealth transfers but there may be more general direct

effects such as access, information or nepotism. Of course there may be indirect

effects for which the observed socioeconomic position of the father proxies.

These might include home environments if such environments differ systematically

with father's socioeconomic status. Finally, to the degree that there are

capital market imperfections that impede intergenerational human capital transfers,

it would be expected that higher income or wealthier parents would be able

to transfer "more" human capital to all sibs and, of course, having made efficient

investment decisions be more capable of providing differential material wealth

transfers.

   Tables A.9 and A.1O provide a summary of regressions with log income and

log wealth as dependent variables using the subsample of brothers for whom

we observe the relevant data for their fathers. The parameter estimates for

the individuals own characteristics do not differ much from the regressions

we discussed earlier and the qualitative properties of the regressions do

not change with the extended specification. To these own characteristics

we have appended those noted in the table for the individual's father and

family.

   With the exception of white collar for wealth and white collar and craft

for income, father's occupational choice does not directly affect a son's

income or wealth. A son's income and wealth are also statistically unaffected

by the father's age, time within the economy, birth place or place of residence.

Each of these, as we noted earlier, affect a person's own income or wealth

position and hence each indirectly affects the son's position to the degree

that there is a relationship between a father's income or wealth and his son's
                                       22

income or wealth. However, even when we account for the substantial effect

of being a white collar worker on an              income or wealth, there

is an additional substantial advantage conferred on the sons of white collar

workers in this economy. This cannot be skill transmittal or else we would

expect also to see significant positive effects froni fathers who were craftsmen

and perhaps significant negative effects from fathers who were unskilled,

common laborers. We observe neither of these, rather there is no significant

relationship between fathers who are unskilled and their son's income or

wealth and the relationship between fathers who are craftsmen and their sons

is negative for income but not significant for wealth.

   A father's income positively affects his son's Income as does a

wealth his son's wealth. A ten percent increase in wealth would yield a 1.5

percent increase in a son's wealth. Put differently, a ten percent deviation

between          wealth would cause a 1.5 percent deviation between the wealth

of sons. The corresponding elasticity for income is about .1. Both of these,

while statistically significant, would indicate substantial regression toward

the mean if there were no other avenues through which fathers affected sons.

   For household size, we find that a son in a larger family will have lower

wealth, ceteris paribus. The sign is also negative for income but the coefficient

is not significant. If the family resource allocational rule first allocated

parental resources for human capital accumulation and then compensated with

differentially allocated material wealth among sibs, family size would be

expected to have negative effects on both income and wealth but a larger effect

on wealth so long as families have different material resources.

   We used these regressions to once again purge from the dependent variable

the effects of those individual and family characteristics that were observable
                                     23

and then estimated the intraclass correlation for brothers as shown in Table

7. We continue to find a significant unobserved family effect, with unobserved

family background explaining 10 percent of the variation in log income and

19 percent of the variation in log wealth. These compare with 13 and 23 percent

when the observable common background effects are not directly estimated but

are treated as part of the unobservable. Hence, observable common background

characteristics account for only a little over 20 percent of the family effect.

The remaining family affect is not effectIvely proxed by the father's own

socioeconomic position as measured by income, wealth or occupation. This

finding is also consistent with much contemporary work (see Taubman, et al.

for a survey) but most contemporary studies do not have the rich set of charac-

teristics that we have for fathers and hence this finding strengthens somewhat

those drawn from contemporary data. While, as noted above, these results

are roughly consistent with an efficient investment —cum—compensatory transfer

allocational rule, the substantial unobserved family background effect when

observed parental income and wealth are accounted for, suggests that resources

other than material wealth or income are important in intergenerational links.

   We can look at the common family effect in a slightly different way by

treating fathers and sons as we have brothers, purging the effects of own

characteristics and then considering the possibilities of correlated residuals

when the individuals are paired by family relationship. Table 8 provides

estimates of the intraclass correlation for log income and wealth of fathers

and sons. It should be noted that the fathers were quite old at the time

the income or wealth was observed contemporaneously with their son's income

or wealth.
                                     24

   The low intraclass correlation in specification 1 is to be expected given

the pronounced life cycle pattern in both income and wealth holdings since

the life cycle will explain a substantial amount of the variance for individuals

whose ages are separated by a substantial number of years as would be true

for fathers and sons. This result, in a sense, indirectly confirms the presence

of an age—income or age—wealth profile. When the contribution of age to the

economic position of an individual is accounted for, the intraclass correlations

for income are very close to those estimated from brothers. For wealth holdings,

however, we find about 20 percent of the variance is explained by the unobserved

common background shared by fathers and sons. The unobserved background shared

by brothers explains about 30 percent of the variance for brothers.

   Considering fathers and sons rather than brothers indicates the ambiguity

in the notion of "unobserved family background". For brothers, family background

is that unobservable that is common to brothers; for fathers and sons, family

background is that unobservable that is common to fathers and sons. Sons

share one half of the genes of their father. Brothers may share from virtually

0 to 100 percent but on average would also share 50 percent of the genes of

their common father. However, fathers and sons are not raised in the same

homes and hence not in the same home environments. Conversely, brothers,

who have a wider variance in shared genes, are raised in a common home by

a common mother.

   While we cannot estimate the relative contributions of genes and environment,

we can jointly estimate the two family effects, father—son and brother—brother.

We assume an error—components model where the error is partitioned into a

brother—brother family component, a father—son family component and a stochastic

component. By construction, the brother—brother component includes only those
                                     25

things common to brothers that are not common to fathers and sons while the

father—son component includes only those things common to fathers and sons

that are not common to brothers. We jointly estimate the components using

a maximum likelihood extimator (LISREL). Table 9 summarizes the results.

   The estimated brother—brother variance component is significantly above

the estimated father—son variance component. For log wealth, that unobservable

common to brothers alone explains about 20 to 23 percent of the variance

while that unobservable common to fathers and sons explains about 8 to 10

percent of the variance. For log incomes the percentages are about 10 percent

and 15 percent respectively.



VIII INDIVIDUAL VERSUS FAMILY EFFECTS

   The panel nature of our data allow us to consider unobserved individual

effects as well as unobserved family effects since we can use observations

on the same individual at different points in time. Unobserved individual

effects would include those aspects of individual ability that do not change

with time and which are not shared with a sibling. Those aspects of ability

that might change with time are not considered in our analysis. Some, however,

will be captured by the changes in observed individual characteristics such

as occupation that occur with time. We estimate, then, a variance or error

components model using paired brothers with paired observations on each individual

(since we have more than pairs of observations on each Individual, our data

allow for potentially richer and more complex specifications than that estimated

here. We intend to pursue such models later.)    We assume that the error

 is generated by a process that includes a family effect, an individual effect

 and a stochastic element,
                                          26




(5)       eJ =    u.
                       +
                           v   +
                                   Wijk
where i indexes the family, j indexes the individual and k indexes time.

While we use a maximum likelihood estimator (LISREL), loosely, the covariances

between years for the same individual estimate the sum of an individual variance

component and a family variance component while the covariances between sibs

estimate the family component. The family variance component is, thus, directly

estimated while that for the individual is easily recoverable. The observed

error variances for individuals estimate the sum of the family individual

and stochastic components. Table 10 provides estimates for log income and

log wealth for brothers.

      Adjusting for the differences in the variances of log income and log wealth

we find that the percentage of the variance attributable to the unobserved

family effect continues to be in the .22—.28 range for wealth and the .15—.19

range for income. The interesting aspect of this model of the covariance

structure for brothers is the relative importance of individual effects for

wealth and income. For wealth, we find that the unobserved individual variance

component is about one half that of the unobserved family variance component.

For income, however, the unobserved individual effect dominates, being over

twice that for the family effect. Moreover, while observable characteristics

explain over 20 percent of the variance in wealth and about 10 percent of

the variance in log income, the total variance explained by observable and

unobservable family and individual characteristics is about 50 percent of

the variance of wealth but around 65 percent of the variance of income.

       Again, if ability differences are enhanced by efficient human capital

transfers from parents to children but these transfers are then offset by
                                     27

wealth transfers that are compensatory, the pattern we observe of relatively

larger individual effects and smaller family effects for income and relatively

smaller individual effects and larger family effects for wealth would be produced.

Nothing in this explanation would suggest, of course, that the combined effects

would explain a large or small amount of the variance. It is simply the case

for our data, that the explained variance from the regression analysis on

observed characteristics alone gives a much distorted picture of the nature

of the stochastic contribution to the distributions of income and wealth.



IX CONCLUDING COMMENTS

   The variance in family backgrounds appears to be an important contributor

to the dispersion of individual income and wealth. We conclude, based on

the differences between the effect of unobserved family background on income

and wealth, that these effects are more likely related to permanent differences

than transitory differences in the distribution. While we find that part of

this effect is reflected in occupational choices made by related individuals

and another part is explained by the observed socioeconomic position of the

father, most of the effect cannot be explained by either of these two avenues

of intergenerational transmission.

   We also find that unobserved individual differences are important contributors

to the variance in socioeconomic positions. Observable individual charac-

teristics, unobservable individual characteristics and unobservable family

effects explain over one half of the variance in income and in wealth. This

poses a problem for policy arguments that are based on stochastic elements

dominating the distributions or on providing greater equality of opportunity

within which individuals can make choices.      Models of family allocational
                                       28

rules,   ability, and socioeconomic rewards should accommodate two important

empirical results. First, we found that while unobservable Individual effects

were important determinants of both income and wealth distributions, they

are relatively more important determinants of the distribution of income.

Second, while we also found that unobservable family effects were important

determinants of both income and wealth distributions, they are relatively

more important in determining the distribution of wealth.

   We have suggested at various points, that much of what we observe seems

to us to be consistent with an efficient investment—cum—compensatory transfer

allocational rule but our efforts do not provide a direct test of an allocational

model since none of our specifications are specifically constrained by such

a rule. Thus, the relatively more important family effect for wealth could

reflect either equal transfers within family where resources differed (including

time) between families or else compensating transfers such that sibling wealth

positions looked more alike than would be predicted from incomes.

   We do suggest that permanent/transitory differences between wealth and

income may explain the larger family effect on wealth. This cannot be a complete

explanation, however, or we would expect that unobserved individual differences,

also   presumed to be more permanent, would also explain proportionally more
of the distribution of wealth than the distribution of income. Since this
is not the case, a more complex phenomenon is presumably generating the data
we have collected and analyzed.
TABLES
                                                                              Table   1
                                                         Recent Measures of Intraclass Correlation
                                                                                          Taubman   Taubman
                                OSG*     NORC     Project Talent         Kalamazoo          DZ        MZ      Cleveland   Gorsel me   NLS      NLS
    Year                        1973    1973—74       1971—72             1973—74          1974      1974     1965—66       1927      1969    1973
                               25—64     25—64           28—29             35—59           47—57     47—57      25—64                          ——
    Age
    N                           15817     300             198               692            1814      2038        104         312      584     494
                                                         (in                                                                          --        --
    in    y                     9.17     9.19     1.48           wage)     9.63            9.64      9.67       9.10         ——
    S.D.          in   y        .774     .870            .406              .446            .567       .528       .485        .688      .404   .441
C
           (without
    background                                                             .080                                  .12
    measure)                    .089     .045            .080                               .11       .11
    Intraci ass                                                             .22                                              .37       .11
    correlation                  ——       .13             .221                              .30       .54        .446                          .31
              (   r)
    *Natlonal sample without family relationships
    Source:                Jencks. Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success.                                            543.
                           Griliches, "Sibling Models arid Data in Econometrics." Journal oi Political Economy. (October, 1979), p.
                                                       Table 2A
                                   Structure of the Father—Son Data Sets for Income
1.   Year            1855   1861      1866     1870    1875       1880   1885         1890   1895   1900
2.   Father's
     Mean Age...      55     59        62      64       64        64      65           66     70     70
3.         Mean
     Age              26     29       32       33       33        33      33           34     39     39
4.   Mean Ln
     of Father's
     Income.....     6.31   6.45      6.39    6.14     6.25       6.24   6.09         6.06   5.77   5.95
5.   Mean Ln
     of Son's
     Income.....     6.17   6.07     6.13     5.90     5.99       5.86   5.86         5.84   5.75   5.80
6.   Variance
     of Ln Income
     of Father        .54   .72       .66      .89      .95       .72     .87         .90    .91    1.04
7.   Variance
     of Ln Income
     of Son.....      .33   .59       .80      .92      .69       .61     .51         .60    .76
8.   Simple
      Correl ation
     of Father's
     and Son's
     Income          .06    .14       .12      .00      .09       .12     .07         .12    .05    .31
9.   Number
     of Father—
     Son Pairs...     80    260       191      161      163       216     330         248    121    245
                                       32


                                  Table 2B

              Structure of the Father—Son Data Sets for Wealth

1. Year                1860     1870         1870    1880    1890    1900
                      Census   Census         Tax     Tax     Tax     Tax
                                            Assess— Assess— Assess— Assess—
2. Father's                                  ment    ment    ment    ment
                        59       64           65      67      67      71
     Mean Age...
3.         Mean
                        31       34           34      37      38      41
     Age

4. Mean Ln
     of Father's
     Wealth...,.       7.12     7.30         7.03    7.01    7.58    7.31
5. Mean Ln
     of Son's
     Wealth            6.56     6.78                         7.06    6.64
6. Variance
     of Ln Wealth
     of Father..       .73      1.09          .82    1.07    1.09     1.36
7. Variancp
     of Ln Wealth
     of Son.....       .66      .93           .52     .67     .84     1.23


8. Simple
      Correl ation
     of Father's
     and 5flg
     Wealth             .22      .29          .29     .17     .23     .02


9. Number
     of Father—
                       264      359           131     160     217     252
     Son pairs
                                                    Table 3A
                                  Structure of the Brother Data Sets for Income
1.   Year           1855   1861    1866     1870     1875      1880    1885       1890   1895   1900
2.   Mean of
     First
     Brother's
                    31     34       37       40       41        43      40         43     49     48
     Age
3.   Mean of
     Second
     Brother's
                     31     33      36       39       41        43      41         44     50     48
     Age
4.   Mean Ln
     of First
     Brother's
     Income.....    6.13   6.21    6.20     6.10     6.20      6.07    6.05       5.98   5.96   5.93
5.   Mean Ln
     of Second
     Brother's
     Income         6.12   6.19    6.26     5.97     .599      6.07    6.08       5.96   5.82   5.91
6.   Variance
     of Ln Income
     of First
     Brother....    .33    .67      .78      .65      .72       .61     .54        .72   .75     .75
7.   Variance
     of Ln Income
     of Second
     Brother....    .29    .52      .75      .83      .65       .65     .62        .67   1.00    .93
8.   Simple
     Correlation
     of Brothers
     Income.....    .13    .36      .12      .06      .07       .09     .13        .20    .29    .29
9.   Number
     of Brother
                     59    265      195      173      188       235     401        361    192    410
     Pairs      .
                                      34


                                Table 3B

              Structure of the Brother Data Sets for Wealth


1, Year              1860     1870         1870    1880    1890    1900
                    Census   Census         Tax     Tax     Tax     Tax
                                           Asses— Assess— Assess— Assess—
2. Mean of                                 nient   ment    ment    ment
   First
   Brother'
   Age                34       39           38      41      39      45
3. Mean of
   Second
   Brother's
   Age       ..       34       39           38      41      41      47

4, Mean Ln
   of First
   Brother's
   Wealth....,       6.77     6.87          6.51    6.58   7.13    6.86
5. Mean Ln
   of Second
   Brother's
   Wealth....,       .80       .699         6.64    6.59   7.13     6.95

6. Variance
   of Ln Wealth
   of First
   Brother....        79       .79          .59     .77     1.01    1.57
7. Variance
   of Ln Wealth
   of Second
   Brother....        .95      .93          .56     .64     .86     1.44

8. Simple
   Correl ation
    of Brother
   Wealth.....        .43      .43          .37     .34     .33     .20

9. Number
    of Brother
    Pairs             280      399          169     246     443     435
                                        35




                                       Table 4

                 Intraclass Correlation of Lnlncome for Brothers

                       Specification    r of inlncome    t

                             1               .196       14.9

                             2               .205       15.6

                             3               .192       14.6

                             4               .174       13.2


Specification 1: Sweeping Regression includes constant and year dummies.

Specificaton 2: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age
   and age

Specification 3: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
   age ,   T, R, and FB.

Specification 4: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
   age , T, R, FB, W, C, L, and S.


See Table A.1 for estimates.
                                     36




                                    Table 5

               Intraclass Correlation of LnWealth for Brothers


                    Specification    r of LnWealth    t

                          1               .314       20.7

                          2               .303       20.0

                          3               .295       19.4

                          4               .278       18.2


Specification 1: Sweeping Regression includes constant and year dummies.

Specificatjon 2: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age
   and age'.

Spec1fcation 3; Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
   age , T, R, ad FB.

Specifcation 4: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
   age , T, R, FB, W C, L, and S.


See Table A.2 for estimates.
                                       37




                                      Table 6

                  Comparison of Intraclass Correlations for
                            Full and Half Brothers


                              Full Brothers                 Half Brothers
                          Ln(Y)             Ln(W)       Ln(Y)          Ln(W)
       Specification      r    t            r   t       r    t        r     t

             1          .194 (13.1)     .350 (20.4)   .198 (7.0)    .212 (6.5)

             2          .201 (13.6)     .313 (18.2)   .205 (10.3)   .271 (8.4)

             3          .191 (12.9)     .302 (17.5)   .189 (6.7)    .260 (7.9)

             4          .178 (12.0)     .290 (16.7)   .146 (5.1)    .225 (6.9)



Specification 1: Sweeping Regression includes constant and year dummies.

Specificaton 2: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age
  and age

Specification 3: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
  age , T, R, and FB.

Specification 4: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
   age , T, R, FB, W, C, L, and S.


See Tables A.3 and A.4 for estimates for full brothers and Tables A.5 and
   A.6 for half brothers.
                                       38




                                    Table 7

                    Intraclass Correlation of Brothers with
                       Measured Common Family Attributes


                    r of lnWealth           t   r of lnlncome    t
   Speci fication

         1               .307          (20.1)        .12        (5.0)


         2               .272          (20.4)        .16        (6.7)


         3               .255          (9.7)         .14        (6.0)


         4               .223          (8.7)         .13        (5.8)


         5               .208          (7.8)         .11        (4.7)


         6               .188          (7.0)         .10        (4.2)



See Table 4 and Tables A.9 and A.10.

For specification S we add, for each brother, the father's characteristics
   except wealth to the sweeping regression.

For specification 6 we add, for each brother, the father's characteristics
   and          wealth or income to the sweeping regression.
                                        39




                                    Table 8

                  Intraclass Correlations of Fathers and Sons


                                           Income     Wealth
                                       r        t     r        t

                  Specification 1      .09    5.92    .10   5.15

                  Specification 2      .18    12.57   .22   11.69

                  Specification 3      .17    11.98   .20   10.96

                  Specification 4      .15    10.48   .18   9.70


Specification 1: Sweeping Regression includes constant and year dummies.

Specification 2: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age
   and age

Specification 3: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
   age , 1, R, and FB.

Specifcatlon 4: Sweeping Regression includes constant, year dummies, age,
   age , T, R, FB, W, C, L, and S.

See Table A.7 and A.8 for estimates.
                                               40




                                          Table 9

                       Different Aspects of Common Family Background


                              All Brothers                            Full Brothers
                      Ln Wealth           Ln Income            Ln Wealth          Ln Income
                   Varince      t     Variance     t        Variance     t     Variance    t

                     .08      3.30      .07         4.22      .09     3.65       .08     4.09
    Fathers/Sons

                     .20      6.84      .10         4.66      .20     6.56       .11     4.84
    Brothers
 2                   .48     30.29      .44         34.39     .41     26.40      .40     29.93

2   wealth or
     income          .98                 .73                  .88                .71
                                       41




                                     Table 10

             Measurement of Individual and Family Effects for Brothers


                                              Ln Income             Ln Wealth
                                       2                       2
                                                 % of total          % of total
                                                variance              variance

Mean Total Variance                     .68       100         .95       100

Estimated Variance
Accounted for by:

  Observed Characteristitcs
  (Occupation, age, etc)              .09          13         .17       18

  Unobserved Individual Effect        .22         32          .08        8

  Unobserved Family Efect             .11          16         .18       19
                                     42




                                 BIBL IOGRAPHY

Balestra, Pietro and Marc Nerlove, "Pooling Cross Section and Time Series
   Data in the Estimation of A Dynamic Model: The Demand for Natural Gas,"
   Econometrica, 34(3), (July 1966), pp 585—610

Becker, Gary A. and Nigel Tomes, "An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution
   of Income and Intergenerational Mobility," The Journal of Political Economy,
   87(6), (Dec 1979) pp 1153—1189

Behrman, Jere R., Robert A. Pollak and Paul Taubman, "Parental Preferences
   and Provision for Progeny," The Journal of Political Economy, 90(1), (Jan
   1CQ
    .) L_ /
   .1.
            rS
             V I-'   -— ' —



Behrman, Jere R., Z. Hrubec, Paul Taubman and 1. J. Wales, Socioeconomic Success: A
   Study of the Effects of Genetic Endowments, Family Environment and Schooling,
   New York: North—Holland, 1980

Behrman, Jere, Paul Taubman and Terrance Wales, "Controlling for and Measuring
   the Effects of Genetics and Family Environment in Equations for Schooling
   and Labor Market Success," from Kinometrics: Determinants of Socioeconomic
   Success Within and Between Families, Paul Taubman, ed., New York: North
   Holland, 1977, pp 35—96

Behrrnan, Jere and Paul Taubman, "Intergenerational Transmission of Income
   and Wealth," American Economic Review, 66, (May, 1976) pp 436—440

Blinder, Alan S., "A Model of Inherited Wealth," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
   87, (Nov 1973), pp 608—626

Brjt-tain, John A., The Inheritance of Economic Status, Washington, D.C.: The
   Brookings Institution, 1977

Chamberlain, Gary, "Education, Income and Ability Revisited," from Latent
   Variables in Socio—Econo(nicModels, Dennis J. Aigner and Arthur S. Goldberger
   eds., New York: North—Holland, 1977, pp 143—162

Chamberlain, Gary and Zvi Griliches, "Unobservables with a Variance Components
   Structure: Ability, Schooling and the Economic Success of Brothers," from
   Latent Variables in Socio—Economic Models, Dennis J. Aigner and Arthur
   S. Goldberger, eds., New York: North—Holland, 1977, pp 253—284

Chamberlain, Gary, "Omitted Variable Bias in Panel Data: Estimating the Returns
   to Schooling," Annales de l'INSEE, 30/31, (1978), pp 49—82

Chamberlain, Gary and Zvi Griliches, "Unobservables with a Variance Components
   Structure: Ability, Schooling and the Economic Success of Brothers,"
   national Economic Review, 16, (June 1975), pp 422—449
                                      43

Chamberlain, Gary and Zvi Griliches, "More on Brothers," from Kinometrics:
   minants of Socioeconomic Success Within and Between Families, Paul Taubman,
   ed., New York: North—Holland, 1977, pp 97—124

Griliches, Zvi, "Errors in Variables and Other Unobservables," from Latent
   Variables in Soclo—Economic Models, Dennis J. Aigner and Arthur S. Goldberger,
   eds., New York: North—Holland, 1977, pp 1—34

Griliches, Zvi and William M. Mason, "Education, Income and Ability from Structural
   Equation Models in the Social Sciences, Arthur S. Goldberger and Otis D. Duncan,
   eds., New York: Seminar Press, 1973, pp 285—316

Griliches, Zvi, "Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginnings of a Survey,"
   The Journal of Political Economy, 87(5 pt 2), (Oct 1979) pp S37—S64

Griliches, Zvi, "Estimating the Returns to Schooling: Some Econometric Problems,"
   Econometricp, 45, (1977), pp 1—22

Goldberger, Arthur S. "Structural Equation Models: An Overview," from Structural
   Equation Models in the Social Sciences, Arthur S. Goldberger and Otis D. Duncan,
   eds., New York: Seminar Press, 1973, pp 1—18

Goldberger, Arthur S., "Twin Methods: A Skeptical View," from Kinometrics:
   minants of Socioeconomic Success Within and Between Families, Paul Taubman,
   ed., New York: North—Holland, 1977, pp 299—322

Goldberger, Arthur S. "Unobservable Variables in Econometrics," pp 193—213
   from Frontiers of Econometrics, ed. by P. Zarembka, New York: Academic
   Press, 1974.

Haggard, Ernest A., Intraclass Correlation and the Analysis of Variance, New
   York: Dryden Press, 1958

Hause, J., "The Covariance Structure of Earnings and the On—the—Job Training
   Hypothesis," Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 6(4), (1977), pp
   33 5—3 65


Hausmari, Jerry A., "Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica, 46(6),
   (Nov 1978), pp 1251—1271

Hausman, Jerry A. and William E. Taylor, "Panel Data and Unobservable Individual
   Effects, Econometrica, 49(6), (Nov 1981) pp 1377—1398

Ishikawa, Tsuneo, "Family Structures and Family Values in the Theory of Income
   Distribution," The Journal of Political Economy, 83(5), (Oct 1975), pp
   987—1008

Jencks, Christopher, Who Gets Ahead? The Determinants of Economic Success
   in America, New York: Basic Books, 1977

Joreskog, Karl G., and Dag Sorborn, LISREL: Users Guide, Version V, Chicago: Inter-
   national Educational Services, 1981
                                     44


Joreskog, Karl, "A General Method for Estimating a Liner Structural Equation
   Systems" from Structural Equation Models in the Social Sciences, Arthur
   S. Goldberger and Otis D. Duncan, eds., New York: Seminar Press, 1973,
   pp 85—112

Kearl, 3. R., Clayne L. Pope and Larry T. Wimmer, "Household Wealth in a Settlement
   Economy: Utah, 1850—1870," Journal of Economic History, 40(3), (September,
   1980), pp. 477—496.

Kearl, J. R. and Clayne L. Pope, "Life Cycles in Income and Wealth," (Working
   Paper, May, 1983b).

Kearl, J. R. and Clayne L. Pope, "Economic Mobility in Utah from 1850 to 1900,"
   (Working Paper, March, 1983a).

Leibowitz, Arleen, "Family Background and Economic Success: A Review of the
   Evidence," from Kinometrics: Determinants of SocioeconLtUcIithifl
   and Between Families, Paul Taubman, ed., New York: North—Holland, 1977,
   pp 9—34

Lillard, Lee A. and Yoram Weiss, "Components of Variation in Panel Earnings
   Data: American Scientists 1960—70," Econometrica, 47(2), (March 1979),
   pp 437—454

Loury, Glenn C., "Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,"
   Econornetrica 49(3), (July 1981), pp 843—868

Maddala, G. S., "The Use of Variance Components Models in Pooling Cross Section
   and Time Series Data", cnQmtrjc, 39(2), (March 1971), pp 341—358

Menchik, Paul L. "Primogeniture Equal Sharing and the U. S. Distribution
   of Wealth," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94, (March 1980), pp 299—316

Mundlak Yajr, "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section Data" Econometrica,
   46(1), (Jan 1978), pp 69—85

Nerlove, Marc, "A Note on Error Components Models," EQantd' 39, (1971),
   pp 383—396

Olneck, Michael R., "On the Use of Sibling Data to Estimate the Effects of
   Family Backgrounds Cognitive Skills and Schooling: Results from the Kalamazoo
   Brothers Study," from jjjinfliQs,: Dterrninantssf
   Within and Between Families, Paul Taubman, ed., New York: North—Holland,
   1977, pp 125—162

Searle, S. R., Linear Models, New York: Wiley, 1970

Sewell, William H. and Robert M. Hauser, "On the Effects of Families and Family
   Structure on Achievement," from Kinometrics: Determinants of Socloeconocmic
   Success Within and Between Families, Paul Taubman, ed., New York: North—
   Holland, 1977, pp 255—284
                                     45


Sheshinskj, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, "Inequality Within and Between Families,"
   The Journal of Political Economy, 90(1), (Jan 1982), pp 105—127

Taubman, Paul, Sources of Inequality in Earnings, New York: North—Holland,
   1975

Taubman, Paul, "The Determinants of Earnings: Genetics, Family and Other Environ-
   ments: A Study of While Male Twins," American Economic Review, (Dec 1976)

Tomes, Nigel, "The Family, Inheritance and the Intergenerational Transmission
   of Inequality," The Journal of Political Economy, 89(5), (Oct 1981), pp
   928—958

Wallace, T.D., and Ashiq Hussain, "The Use of Error Components Models in Combining
   Cross Section with Time Series Data," Econometrjcp, 37(1), (Jan 1969),
   pp 55—72
APPENDIX
                                         TABLE A. 1

                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                                INCOME OF BROTHERS


                                         EQUATION 1


VARIABLE            MEAN      STANDARD         ESTIMATED     STANDARD      T—RATIO
NAME                          DEVIATION        COEFFICIENT   ERROR         5568 DF
LNINCOME      6.05146         0.82302
D55           0.02115         0.111389          0.21339      0.080)411     2.6528
D57
mr
_,_i
D61
              0.07169
              r'J.'JJ,,,
                 n'rin
              0.O9498
                                lIi
                              0.25799
                              r'J.I.J?
                              0.2932
                                                rLJ..ItUy
                                                   1JIn
                                                0.2141428

                                                0.28737
                                                             0.0)4983
                                                             n  niQi
                                                             'J.UVIL)I
                                                             0.011553
                                                                           11.9027
                                                                           0   Ji'700
                                                                           6.3112
D66           0.06989         0.251199          0.311450     0.05025       6.2583
D70           0.06201         0.211119          0.11698      0.05237       2.2335
D75           0.06738         0.25071           0.18016      0.05088       3.51107
D80           0.081423        0.27776           0.15762      0.014727      3.33116
D85           0.1)4373        0.350811          0.111936     0.014057      3.6812
D90           0.12939         0.33566           0.05193      0.011170      1.211514
D95           0.06882         0.25317          —0.02376      0.05052      —0.147035
DOO           0.1)4695        0.351109
AGE          )40.552         12.233
AGE2       1794.1          1O83.4
FBE           0.2141198       0.143012
T            114.965         11.680
R             0.822011        0.38251
W             0.08298         0.27587
C             0.091462        0.29272
S             0.031514        0.171179
L             0.08190         0.27112)4
INTERCEPT                                       5.9155       0.02853     207.314

R2            0.01 116
N          5580
r                                               0.195811     0.01313      111.915
                                    TABLE A. 1 (Cont'd)

                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                                INCOME OF BROTHERS


                                         EQUATION 2


VARIABLE          MEAN       STANDARD          ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION         COEFFICIENT   ERROR        5568 DF

LNINCOME      6.05)46        0.82302
D55           0.02115        0.1)4389           0.140729     0.08081      5.0)401
D57           0.07169        0.25799            0.145265     0.05205      8.6970
D59           0.03979        0.195147           0.39291      0.06275      6.2613
D61           0.091498       0.29322            0.1414133    0.014716     9.3585
D66           0.06989        0.251199           0.39509      0.0507)4     7.7859
D7O           0.06201        0.2)4119           0.16500      0.05225      3.1579
D75           0.06738        0.25071            0.21766      0.050143     14.3159
D8O           0.081423       0.27776            0.192814     0.0)4670     14.1292
D85           0.1)4373       0.350814           0.21051      0.0)4051     5.1966
D9O           0.12939        0.33566            0.10090      0.014123     2.141172
D95           0.06882        0.25317           —0.022314     0.014962    —0.145015
DOO            0.1)4695      0.351409
AGE          110.552        12.233              0.06810      0.00525     12.960
AGE2       17911.1        1083.11              —0.00067      0.00006    —11.1472
FBE           0.2)41498      0.143012
T            1)4.965        11.680
R             0.8220)4       0.38251
W             0.08298        0.27587
C             0.091462       0.29272
S             0.0315)4       0,171479
L             0.08190        0.2714214
INTERCEPT                                       14.2930      0.11790     36.1411

R2            0 .O5O4
N          5580
r                                               O.2O451      0.01311     15.6014
                               TABLE A. 1 (Corit'd)

                 REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               INCOME OF BROTHERS


                                     EQUATION 3


VARIABLE      MEAN           STANDARD       ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T— RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION      COEFFICIENT   ERROR        5568 DF

LNINCOME      6.O546         0.82302
D55           0.02115        0.114389        0.146352     0.08132      5.7002
D57           0.07169        0.25799         O.4614'47    0.05311      8 .7145 9
T'O           flflQ7Q        fl1QLL7         nRoq         0.06R58      5.986)4
                             0:222                14119   0.011796     9. 3796
D66           0.06989        0.25499         0.140855     0.05090      8.0271
D70           0.06201        0.24119         0.19781      0.05239      3.7757
D75           0.06738        0.25071         0.23600      0.05035      14   . 6 86   9
D80           0.081423       0.27776         0.19086      0.04697      14.0639
D85           0.114373       0.350814        0.23631      0.014067     5.8106
D9O           0.12939        0.33566         0.13538      0.0)4111     3.2936
D95           0.06882        0.25317        —0.02125      0.014930    —0.11310)1
DOO           0.14695        0.351409
AGE          140.552        12.233           0.06261      0.00530     11.817
AGE2       17914.1        1083.14           —0.00070      0.00006    —11 .881
FBE           0.2)41498      0.143012        0.02583      0.02567      1 .006 2
T            14.965         11.680           0.00871      0.00190      14.5895
R             0.8220)1       0.38251        —0.26270      0.02875     —9.1372
W             0.08298        0.27587
C             0.091462       0.29272
S             0.031514       0.17)479
L             0.08190        0.2714214
INTERCEPT                                    14.6168      0.12122     38.0 88

R2            0.0673
N          5580
r                                            0.19190      0.0131)4    114.603
                               TABLE A. 1 (Cont'd)
               REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                             INCOME OF BROTHERS


                                      EQUATION 14


VARIABLE     MEAN          STANDARD         ESTIMATED     STANDARD      T—RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION        COEFFICIENT   ERROR         5568 DF
LNINCOME     6.0546        0.82302
D55          0.02115       O.14389           0.57622      0.08006       7.1975
D57          0.07169       0.25799           0.57)465     0.0526)4     10.917
D59          0.03979       0.19547           0.1470146    0.06255       7.5219
D61          0.09)498      0.29322           0.5)4801     0.0)47)47    11.5)45
D66          0.06989       0.25)499          0.148118     0.05012       9.6001
D70          0.06201       0.2)4119          0.26592      0.05155       5.1583
D75          0.06738       0.25071           0.28322      0.0)49)47     5.72)47
D80          0.08)423      0.27776           0.2363)4     0.04617       5.1193
D85         0.114373       0.350814          0.26772      0.03994       6.7031
D90         0.12939        0.33566           0.16)400     0.0)404       4.0651
D95         0.06882        0.25317           0.00236      0.0)4830      0.'4884o
DOO         0.1)4695       0.35)409
AGE       40.552          12.233             0.0618)4     0.00521      11.875
AGE2    1794.1          1083.4              —0.00068      0.00006     —11.7914
FBE         0.2)4)498      0.143012          0.01428)4    0.02519       1.7005
T           14.965        11.680             0.00933      0.00186       5.0228
R            0.82204       0.38251          —0.23154      0.02878      —8.0464
W            0.08298       0.27587           0.55720      0.03918      14.223
C            0.09462       0.29272          —0.05692      0.03668      —1.5517
5            0.03154       0.17479           0.01913      0.06041       0.31660
L            0.08190      0.274211          —0.18635      0.03882      —4.8009
INTERCEPT                                    4.5015       0.12068      37.300
            0 .1069
        5580
                                             0.17415      0.01318      13.208
                                        TABLE A. 2

                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               WEALTH OF BROTHERS


                                        EQUATION 1


VARIABLE      MEAN        STANDARD            ESTIMATED     STANDARD      T— RATIO
NAME                      DEVIATION           COEFFICIENT   ERROR         3938 DF

LNWEALTH     6.8751          1.0050
D60          0.111199       0.3)4908          -.0.11358     0.05355       -.2.1212
D70          0.20233        0.4O179            0.02603      0.0)48)4)4     0.537)4
DD7O         0.08570        0.27996           —0.32701      0.06335       —5.1623
D80          0.12475        0.330147          —0.31603      0.05575       —5.6687
D90          0.22)465       0.417)40           0.22801      0.0)1717       )4.8335
DOO          0.22059        0.1411470
AGE         )40.182        11.393
AGE2     17)44.14        101)4.6
FBE          0.25685        0.43695
T           1)4.137        10.1109
R             0.80857       0.393148
W             0.07201       0.25853
C             0.10066       0.30092
L             0.08316       0.27617
S             0.030)43      0.17178
INTERCEPT                                      6.9021       0.03351      205.99

R2           0.0330
N        3914)1
r                                             0.31378       0.01512      20.7)49
                                 TABLE A. 2 (Cont'd)
                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               WEALTH OF BROTHERS


                                         EQUATION 2

VARIABLE      MEAN         STANDARD             ESTIMATED    STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION            COEFFICIENT ERROR         3938 DF
 LNWEALTH     6.8751        1 .0 050
 D6O          0.114199      0.314908           0.29638      0.05311       5.5808
 D70          0.20233       0.40179            0.2147614    0.0146148     5.3275
DD7O          0.08570       0.27996           —0 .0667'i    0.06038      —1.1057
D80           O.1475        o   .33047        —0.13790      0.05271      —2.6162
D90           0.22465       0.1417140          0.141713     0.011490      9.2 91 1
DOO           0.22059       0.1411470
AGE          40.182        11.393              0.0 9809     0.00734      13.3670
AGE2      17411.14       10114.6              —0.00078      0.00008      —9.4507
FBE           0.25685       0.143695
T            14.137        10.1409
R             0.80857       0.3 93148
W             0.07201       0.25853
C             0.10066       0.30092
L             0.08316       0 .276 17
S             0.030143      0.17178
INTERCEPT                                      14.1221      0.16369     25.182
R2           0.1538
N        391414
r                                              0.30250      0.01518     19.926
                               TABLE A. 2 (Cont'd)

                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               WEALTH OF BROTHERS


                                       EQUATION 3


VARIABLE      MEAN         STANDARD           ESTIMATED      STANDARD      T—RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION          COEFFICIENT    ERROR         3938 DF

LNWEALTH     6.8751          1.0050
D6O          0.114199       0.314908         0.33829        0.051402      6.2625
D7O          0.20233        0.140179         0.332)47       0.014684      7.0977
DD7O         0.08570        0.27996          O.O21b)4       0.06025       0.3592
D80          0.121475       0.33047         —0.09052        0.05226      —1.7321
D90          0.221465       O.14174O         0.147381       0.014451     10.6450
DUO          0.22059        0.411470
AGE         )40.182        11.393            0.09326        0.00733      12.7260
AGE2     17414.14        1014.6             —0.00082        0.00008     —10.1390
FBE          0.25685        0.143695        0.176111        0.031425     —5.1512
T           114.137        10.1409           0.01321        0.002)40      5.5040
R             0.80857       0.393)48        —0.3)4890       0.03776      —9.2401
W             0.07201       0.25853
C             0.10066       0.30092
L             0.08316       0.27617
S             0.03043       0.17178
INTERCEPT                                    11.4869        0.16507     27.182

R2           0.1798
N        3914)4
r                                            0.29)486       0.01522     19.3714
                                TABLE A. 2 (Cont'd)

                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               WEALTH OF BROTHERS

                                         EQUATION )4


VARIABLE       MEAN         STANDARD            ESTIMATED      STANDARD     T— RATIO
NAME                        DEVIATION           COEFFICIENT    ERROR        3938 DF
LNWEALTH       6.8751         1.0050
D6O            0.1)4199      0.311908           0.112889      0.053145      8.02140
D7O            0.20233       0.110179           0.39568       O.Ol62O       8.5655
DD7O           0.08570       0.27996            0.07721       0.05921       1.30)40
D80            0.12)475      0.330)47          —0.0)4709      0.051)40     —0.9162
D9O            0.22)465      0.1117140          0.117836      0.0)436)4    10.9610
DOO            0.22059       0.1111170
AGE          110.182        11.393              0.08865       0.00721      12.3010
AGE2       17411.11       101)4.6              —0.00077       0.00008      —9.7207
FBE            0.25685        0.113695         —0.1)4751      0.03368      —'4.3803
T            1)4.137         10.1409            0.01)415      0.00235       6.0210
B             0.80857        0.393)48          —0.3680)4      0.03779      —9.7)4014
W             0.07201        0.25853            0.23766       0.05687       4.1787
C             0.10066        0.30092           —0.39603       0.01186)4    —8.1426
L             0.08316        0.27617           —0.52661       0.05251     —10.0290
S             0.030113       0.17178           —0.170141      0.08377     —2.03)43
INTERCEPT                                       4.6179        0.16362     28.22)4

R2            0.2158
N       3911)4
r                                               O.277t9       0.01530     18.135
                                            TABLE A. 3

                      REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                                 INCOME OF FULL BROTHERS


                                            EQUATION 1


VAR IABLE            MEAN     STANDARD            ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T-. RATIO
NAME                          DEVIATION           COEFFICIENT   ERROR        143141   DF

LNINCOME       6.06520           0.81576
AGE           40.66900          12.33300
AGE2        1806.00000        1092.30000
T              114.92700        11.67000
,
tt              n flnt,r.,
                U.OULf)5
                                 fl
                                U.53OOI
FBE             0.214874        0.43233
W               0.07385         0.26155
C               0.10357         0.301473
F               0.70553         0.145586
S               0.03155         0.17482
L               0.07842         0.26886
D55             0.02561         0.15797            0.22369      0.081477     2.6389
D57             0.086142        0.28102            0.26717      0.05543      14.8197
D59             0.014527        0.20791            0.21116      0.06817      3.0976
D61             0.113140        0.31711            0.30976      0.05158      6.0050
D66             0.08093         0.27276            0.35031      0.056148     6.202u
D70             0.070142        0.25588            0.114690     0.058o8      2.14950
D75             0.070142        0.25588            0.19951      0.05888      3.3886
D80             0.08962         0.28567            0.18709      0.05487       3.14095
D85             0.13352          0.314017          0.165149     0.014962     3•335
D90             0.11203          0.315143          0.09852      0.051(14      1.9040
D95             0.06081          0.23902          0.014566      0.06166
DUO             0.11157          0.311487
INTERCEPT                                          5.8918       0.03662     160.88

R2              0.0164
N           143147
r                                                  0.19378      0.0114814    13.060
                                 TABLE A. 3 (Cont'd)

                    REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               INCOME OF FULL BROTHERS


                                          EQUATION 2


VARIABLE         MEAN        STANDARD            ESTIMATED     STANDARD
NAME                         DEVIATION           COEFFICIENT   ERROR       4314l DF

LNINCOME       6.06520         0.81576
AGE          140.66900        12.33300            0.06828      0.00590      11.57140
AGE2       1806.00000       1092.30000           —0.00066      O.000u7     —10.0630
T            114.92700        11.67000
R             0.801453         0.39661
FBE            0.2148714       0.143233
W              0.07385         0.26155
C              0.10357         0.301473
F              0.70553         0.145586
S              0.03155         0.171482
L              0.078142        0.26886
D55            0.02561         0.15797            0.1414002    0.08572       5.1332
D57            0.086142        0.28102            0.1491462    0.058143      8.14658
D59            0.014527        0.20791            0.141315     0.06970       5.9275
D61            0.113140        0.31711            0.148135     0.05386       8.9379
D66            0.08093         0.27276            0.14143143   0.057142      7.7227
D70            0.070142        0.25588            0.1914614    O.0589'4      3.30214
D75            0.070142        0.25588            0.22235      0.05837       3.8092
D80            0.08962         0.28567            0.22355      0.051425      14.1207
D85            0.13352         0.3)4017           0.22800      0.0149148     14.6081
D90            0.11203         0.315143           0.114218     0.05097       2.7895
D95            0.06081         0.23902           —0.014625     0.060147     —0.76147
DUO            0.11157         0.311487
INTERCEPT                                         14.2306      0.133514     31.679

R2             0.05149
N          143147
r                                                 0.20139      0.011481     13.5914
                                  TABLE A. 3 (Cont'd)
                     REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                                INCOME OF FULL BROTHERS

                                           EQUATION 3

VARIABLE            MEAN     STANDARD             ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T— RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION            COEFFICIENT   ERROR        143141 DF


LNINCOME    6.06520             0.81576
AGE        '40.66900           12.33300           0.063914      0.00595     10.7)180
AGE2     1806.00000          1092.30000          —U.000bt5      U.UUUU(     —1U.JUU
T             114.92700        11.67000           0.00665       0.0O2i3      3.12014
R              0.801453         0.39661          —0.2141214     0.03101     —7.7803
FBE            0.2148714        0.143233          0.0)4012      0.028140     1.14127
W              0.07385          0.26155
C              0.10357          0.301473
F              0.70553          0."5586
S              0.03155          0.17)182
L              0.078142         0.26886
D55            0.02561          0.15797           0.148262      0.08678      5.5615
D57            0.086)42         0.28102           0.149933      0.06002      8.3198
D59            0.014527         0.20791           0.39610       0.07078      5.5960
D61            0.113)40         0.31711           0.148599      0.0514914    8.81452
D66            0.08093          0.27276           0.145296      0.05758      7.86614
D70            0.070)12         0.25588           0.22070       0.05913       3.7321
D75            0.070142         0.25588           0.23333       0.05822      14.0080
D8O            0.08962          0.28567           0.21)405      0.0514148    3.9292
D85            0.13352          0.314017          0.24592       0.0)1960     14.9583
D90            0.11203          0.315)43          0.16)136      0.050714     3.2390
D95            0.06081          0.23902          —0.0)4924      0.06014     —0.8187
D00            0.11157          0.31)487
INTERCEPT                                         4.5122        0.13676     32.992

R2             0.0700
N          143147
r                                                 0.19109       0.01)185     12.873
                                 TABLE A. 3 (Cont'd)
                    REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               INCOME OF FULL BROTHERS


                                          EQUATION 14


VARIABLE        MEAN         STANDARD           ESTIMATED     STANDARD    T—RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION          COEFFICIENT   ERROR       143141 DF


LNINCOME    6.06520            0.81576
AGE        140.66900          12.33300          0.06291       0.00588      10.7020
AGE2     1806.00000         1092.30000         —0.00066       0.00007     —10.21490
T            114.92700        11.67000          0.007114      0.00210       3.14009
H             0.801453         0.39661         —0.22)406      0.03128      —7.1624
FBE            0.2148714       0.143233         0.051Ui3      0.02807       1.9535
W              0.07385         0.26155          0.1468514     0.0146214    10.13)40
C              0.10357         0.301473                       0.03967      —1.1769
F              0.70553         0.145586
S              0.03155         0.171482         0.014509      0.06811       0.6621
L              0.078142        0.26886                        0.0141466    —5.37143
D55            0.02561         0.15797           0.561417     0.08590       6.5677
D57            0.086142        0.28102           0.58151      0.05972       9.73714
D59            0.0)4527        0.20791           0.146550     0.07001       6.6)488
D61            0.113140        0.31711           0.56099      0.051456     10.2820
D66            0.08093         0.27276           0.50286      0.05695       8.8306
D70            0.070)42        0.25588           0.263)43     0,058iJ4       14.5078
D75            0.070)42        0.25588           0.26338      0.057)45       14.58)45
D8O            0.08962         0.28567           0.2)4125     0.05378        14.14860
D85            0.13352         0.314017          0.26010      0.014891       5.3176
D9O            0.11203         0.315143          0.18370      0.05005        3.670u
D95            0.06081         0.23902         —0.032314      0.05925      —0.51458
D00            0.11157         0.314o7
INTERCEPT                                        14.14510     0.13683      32.528
R2             0.0997
N          143)47
r                                                0.17855      0.011488     11.991
                                      TABLE A. 14

                 REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                           WEALTH OF FULL BROTHERS


                                      EQUATION 1

VARIABLE        ME A N     STANDARD        ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION       COEFFICIENT   ERROR        30314 DF
LNWEALTH     6.89570        0.96879
AGE         140.143600     11.50000
AGE2       1767.20000    1031.30000
D60           0.17632       0.38115        —0.19100      0.058149     —3.2655
D70           0.23158      0.142191        —0.03560      0.0514914    —0.6)480
DD7O          0.10263      0.303143        —0.38333      0.06807      —5.631
D80           0.13158      0.33809         —0.314506     0.06321      —5.4591
D90           0.18618      0.38932          0.1814146    0.05772       3.1956
D00           0.17171      0.37719
W             0.06151      0.2)4031
C             0.10855      0.31113
L             0.08322      0.27627
S             0.03092      0.17313
FBE           0.28586      0.145190
R             0.80789      0.391102
T         114.20500       10.37300
INTERCEPT                                   6.9880       0.0)4163    167.85
R2           0.0360
N       3014u
r                                           0.34679      0.01702     20.379
                                  TABLE A. 14 (Conttd)

                    REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              WEALTH OF FULL BROTHERS


                                          EQUATION 2


VARIABLE            MEAN      STANDARD         ESTIMATED     STANDARD   T— RATIO
NAME                          DEVIATION        COEFFICIENT   ERROR      30311 DF

LNWEALTH    6.89570            0.96879
AGE        140.113600         11.50000          0.097514     0.00800     12.1930
AGE2     1767.20000         1031.30000         —0.00080      0.00009     —8.9695
D6O         0.17632            0.38115          0.20090      0.058714     3.14201
D70         0.23158           0.142191          0.17763      0.05319      3.3398
DD7O        0.10263           0.303)43         —0.14731      0.065110    —2.2523
D80         0.13158            0.33809         —0.19784      0.05998     —3.2983
D9O         0.18618            0.38932          0.32611      0.051482     5.911811
DUO         0.17171            0.37719
w           0.06151            0.214031
C       .    0.10855           0.31113
L            0.08322           0.27627
S            0.03092           0.17313
FBE          0.28586           0.145190
R            0.80789           0.39)402
T             1)4.20500       10.37300
INTERCEPT                                       )4.2625      0.18051    23.6111

R2              0.11478
N           30140
r                                               0.313147     0.01723    18.195
                                TABLE A. 11 (Cont'd)

                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                            WEALTH OF FULL BROTHERS


                                        EQUATION 3


VARIABLE          MEAN       STANDARD        ESTIMATED     TANDARD    T—RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION       COEFFICIENT   ERROR      3034 DF

LNWEALTH    6.89570          0.96879
AGE        140.43600        11.50000           0.09180     0.00797    11.5250
AGE2     1767.20000       1031.30000          —0.00083     0.00009
D60         0.17632          0.38115           0.22976     0.05985     3.8393
D70         0.23158          0.42191           0.24606     0.053u3     4.6398
DD7O        0.10263          0.303)43         —0.07528     0.06488    —1.1604
D80         0.13158          0.33809          —0.15646     0.05923    —2.6418
D90         0.18618          0.38932           0.37057     0.051105    6.85611
D00         0.17171          0.37719
W           0.06151          0.211031
C           0.10855          0.31113
L           0.08322          0.27627
S           0.03092          0.17313
FBE         0.28586          0.45190          —0.21721     0.03595    —6.0)427
R           0.80789          0.39)402         —0.338011    0.041146   —8.1527
T            111.20500      10.37300           0.01285     0.00258     4.9800
INTERCEPT

R2            0 .1783
N          3040
r                                              0.30289     0.01729    17.517
                              TABLE A. 4 (Cont'd)

                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                          WEALTH OF FULL BROTHERS

                                  EQUATION 4


VARIABLE        MEAN       STANDARD    ESTIMATED     STANDARD   T— RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION   COEFFICIENT   ERROR      3034 DF

LNWEALTH      6.89570       0.96879
AGE          40.43600      11.50000     0.08659      0.00788    10.989
AGE2       1767.20000    1031.30000    —0.00078      o.oooog    —8.9773
D6O           0.17632       0.38115     0.30912      0.05933     5.2102
D70           0.23158       0.42191     0.30290      0.05243     5.7769
DD7O          0.10263       0.30343    —0.02916      0.06396    —0.45597
D80           0.13158       0.33809    —0.12335      0.05835    —2.1139
D90           0.18618       0.38932     0.37717      0.05318     7.1037
DOO           0.17171       0.37719
w             0.06151       0.24031     0.22547      0.06680     3.3755
C             0.10855       0.31113    —0.33499      0.05195    .6.14478
L             0.08322       0.27627    —0.46928      0.05805    —8.0845
S             0.03092       0.17313    —0.24455      0.09206    —2.6563
FEE           0.28586       0.45190    —0.18481      0.03553    —5.201u
R             0.80789       0.39402    —0.37062      0.011155   —8.9210
T            114.20500     10.37300     0.0137(      0.00254     5.4296
INTERCEPT                               4.8121       0.18106    26.577

R2            0.2086
N          3040
r                                       0.28975      0.01736    16.686
                                    TABLE A. 5

               REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                          INCOME OF HALF BROTHERS


                                    EQUATION 1


VARIABLE      MEAN          STANDARD      ESTIMATED      STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                        DEVIATION     COEFFICIENT    ERROR        1206 DF

LNINCOME       6.0159        0.814808
AGE          240.12500      11.86000
AGE2       1750.60000     10149.70000
T            15.10100       11.72100
R             O.ö557         U.31b'4b
FBE           0.231314       0.242187
w             0.11609        0.320146
C             0.06219        0.214160
F             0.691486       0.146066
S             0.03151        0.172476
L             0.091453       0.29268
D55           0.001498       0.07039      0.142792      0.314865      1 .22724
D57           0.018214       0.13388      0.22270       0.18633       1.1952
D59           0.01990        0.13972      0.1401420     0 .17890      2.2593
D61           0.02819        0.16559      0.27106       0.1 5241      1.7785
D66           0.02985        0.17025      0.16022       0.124852      1.0788
D70            0.03151       0.171476     0.031144      0 .1141495    0.2169
D75            0.05639       0.23076      0.161490      0.11266        1.24637
D80            0.061468      0.214606     0.09360       0.10650       0.6789
D85            0.18076       0.381498     0.132475      0.07378       1.8263
D90            0.19237       0.392433    —0.03128       0.072243     —0.24319
D95            0.097814      0.29723      0.024)415     0.09071       0.24867
D0O            0.27529       0.2414685
INTERCEPT                                 5.9503        0.0246245    128.10
R2             0.00240
N           1206
r                                         0.19782       0.02825       7.002
                                TABLE A. 5 (Cont'd)

                   REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              INCOME OF HALF BROTHERS


                                      EQUATION 2


VARIABLE      MEAN           STANDARD       ESTIMATED     STANDARD   T—RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION      COEFFICIENT   ERROR      1206 DF

LNINCOME     6.0159           0.811808
AGE        40.12500           11.86000      0.06909       0.01181     5.8520
AGE2     1750.60000         1049.70000     —0.00071       0.00013    —5.3952
T          15.10100           11.72100
R           0.88557            0.31846
FBE         0.2313)4           0.42187
w           0.11609            0.32046
C           0.06219            O.2lIlbO
F           0.69486            0.46066
S           0.03151            0.17)476
L              0.091453        0.29268
D55            0.00)498        0.07039      0.58815       0.314521    1.7037
D57            0.01824         0.13388      0.45228       0.18886     2.39148
D59            0.01990         0.13972      0.53057       0.17882     2.9671
D61            0.02819         0.16559      0.43192       0.154140    2.7975
D66            O.02935         0.17025      0.2607)4      0.114880    1.7523
D70            0.03151         0.17476      0.16472       0.14606     1.1278
D75            0.05639         0.23076      0.29045       O.11149     2.5414
D80            0.06468         0.214606     0.15085       0.10621     1.4203
D85            0.18076         0.38498      0.20216       0.07)492    2.6983
D90            0.19237         0.39433      0.02579       0.07310     0.3529
D95            0.09784         0.29723      0.048)42      0.08939     0.5417
D0O            0.27529         0.144685
INTERCEPT                                   4.3685        0.26267    16.631
R2             0.0329
N           1206
r                                           0.20453       0.019914   10.258
                               TABLE A. 5 (Cont'd)
                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                           INCOME OF HALF BROTHERS


                                      EQUATION 3

VARIABLE       MEAN          STANDARD        ESTIMATED     STANDARD    T—RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION       COEFFICIENT   ERROR       1206 DF

LNINCOME        6.0159        0.814808
AGE           140.12500      11.86L000        0.057914     0.01189      11.8738
AGE2        1750.60000     10149.70000       -0.00075      0.00013     —5.731
T             15.10100       11.72100         0.01871      0.Oo116      11.3901
R              0.88557        0.318146       —0.388614     0.07779     —4.9961
FBE            0.231314       0.142187       —0.02936      0.06555     —0.141479
D55            0.001198       0.07039         0.8228)4     0.3)4279     2.1400)4
D57            0.0182.14      0.13388         0.52819      0.18923      2.7913
D59            0.01990        0.13972         0.5885ti     0.1814143    3.1913
D61            0.02819        0.16559         0.146792     0.16030      2.9190
D66            O.02955        0.17025         0.35003      0.15588      2.21456
D70            0.03151        0.171476        0.251452     0.114789     1.7210
D75            0.05639        0.23076         0.37892      0.116014     3.2653
D80            0.061168       0.214606        0.21162      0.10789      1.9615
D85            0.18076        0.38)198        0.27265      0.07626      3.5753
D90            0.19237        0.39)433        0.1207)4     0.07387      1.63)45
D95            0.0978)4       0.29723         0.06860      0.088211     0.777)4
D00            0.27529        0.14.11685
W              0.11609        0.320)46
C              0.06219        0.214160
F              0.691486       0.146066
S              0.03151        0.17)176
L              0.091153       0.29268
INTERCEPT                                     14.8957      0.27183     18.010

R2             0.0635
N           1206
1'                                            0.18889      0.02830      6.675
                                  TABLE A. 5 (Cont'd)
                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                           INCOME OF HALF BROTHERS


                                        EQUATION 14


VARIABLE      MEAN              STANDARD        ESTIMATED       STANDARD
NAME                            DEVIATION       COEFFICIENT     ERROR       120b DF

LNINCOME        6.0159           0.814808
AGE          140.12500          11.86000          0.05967       0.0111414    5.2179
                                                                            ,- Or1
                                                                            —.oui
AGE2       1750.60000         10119.70000        —0.00073       0.00013
T            15.10100           11.72100          0.018'16      0.001410     11.50142
R             0.88557            0.318116        —0.32528       0.07536     14.3166
FBE           0.2313k            O.)42187         0.01091       O.O63uO      0.1731
W             0.11609            0.320116         0.769147      0.07)4)48   10.3310
C             0.06219            0.2)4160        0.131469       0.095911    —1.)4O4O
F              0.69)486          0.146066
S              0.03151           0.17)476        —0.06193       0.13130     O.14717
L              0.09)453          0.29268         —0.03215       0.07991     0.11023
D55            0.001498          0.07039          0.9873)4      0.32820      3.008)4
D57            0.018214          0.13388          0.7214142     0.18179      3.9850
D59            0.01990           0.13972          0.66866       0.17656      3.7873
D61            0.02819           0.16559          0.61956       0.151436     14.0136
D66            0.02985           0.17025          0.11)461411   0.1119112    2.9878
D70            0.03151           0.171176         O.41551       0.114218     2.922'4
D75            0.05639           0.23076          0.148327      0.111143     14.3370
D80            0.061468          0.214606         0.33520       0.1039)4     3.2250
D85            0.18076           0.38)498         0.361459      0,07351      11.9599
D90            0.19237           0.39)433         0.181914      0.07098      2.56311
D95            0.0978)4          0.29723          0.111141      O.O8'156     1.3175
DO0            0.27529           0.1414685
INTERCEPT                                         14.5878       0.26472     17.331

R2             0 •   114514
N           1206
r                                                 O.11554       0.02851      5.105
                                             TABLE A. 6
                   REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              WEALTH OF HALF BROTHERS


                                             EQUATION 1

VARIABLE           MEAN      STANDARD
NAME                         DEVIATION            COEFFICIENT   ERROR      889 DF
LNWEALTH      6.80570        1 .11620
AGE          39.33100       10.99100
AGE2       1667.60000      953.01000
D60           0.02655        0   •   16085       —0.17295       0.23085    —0.7)492
D70           0.10398        0.305)41            —0.02652       0.12715    —0.2086
DD7O          0.02876        0.16723             —0.55253       0.22239    —2.48145
D80           0.10177        0.30251
D90
                                                 —0.43)433      0.12823
              0.35398        0.1478147             0.28198
DO0            0.38)496      0 .486 85
W              0.10730       0.30967
C              0.07)412      0.26210
L              0.08297       0.27598
S              0.02876       0.16723
FBE            0.15929       0.36615
R              0.8108)4      0.39185
T            13.91000       10.53300
INTERCEPT                                         6.7734        0.059     115.52
R2             0.0396
N           90)4
r                                                 0.21203       0.03254    6.516
                                 TABLE A. 6 (Conttd)

                   REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              WEALTH OF HALF BROTHERS

                                          EQUATION 2


VARIABLE           MEAN       STANDARD         ESTIMATED     STANDARD
NAME                          DEVIATION        COEFFICIENT   ERROR      889 DF

LNWEALTH    6.80570           1.11620
AGE        39.33100          10.99100           0.09393      0.01796     5.2311
AGE2     1667.60000         953.01000          —0.00063      0.00021    —3.09311
D6O         0.02655           0.16085           0.118980     0.22126     2.2137
D70         0.10398           0.305111          0.29903      0.12109     2.116911
DD7O        0.02876           0.16723           0.06763      0.21281     0.3178
D80         0.10177           0.30251          —0.05056      0.123i7    —0.11105
D9O         0.35398           0.1478117         0.59826      0.08290     7.2170
DUO         0.381496          0.148685
W           0.10730           0.30967
C             0.071412        0.26210
L             0.08297         0.27598
S             0.02876         0.16723
FBE           0.15929         0.36615
R             0.810814        0.39185
T            13.91000        10.53300
INTERCEPT                                       3.9150       0.390      10.031

R2            0.1729
N           9011
r                                               0.27051      0.03205     8.1139
                                TABLE A. 6 (Cont'd)

                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                             WEALTH OF HALF BROTHERS

                                        EQUATION 3


VARIABLE          MEAN       STANDARD        ESTIMATED     STANDARD   T.-RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION       COEFFICIENT   ERROR      889 DF

LNWEALTH      6.80570         1.11620
AGE          39.33100        10.99100         0.09619      0.01794     5.3604
AGE2       1667.60000       953.01000        —0.00074      0.00021    3.6162
D60           0.02655         0.16085         0.37469      0.23087     1.6229
D70           0.10398         0.30541         0.38589      0.12997     2.9691
DD7O          0.02876         0.16723         0.21007      0.21556     0.9745
D80           0.10177         0.30251        —0.00771      0.12266    —0.6283
D9O           0.35398         0.47847         0.67350      0.08375     8.01119
DO0           0.38496         0.48685
FBE           0.15929         0.36615        —0.00473      0.10347    —0.4575
R             0.810814        0.39185        —0.43687      0.08952    —'4.8802
T            13.91000        10.53300         0.00952      0.00627     1.51711
W             0.10730         0.30967
C             0.07412         0.26210
L             0.08297         0.27598
S             0.02876         0.16723
INTERCEPT                                     14.1889      0.39289    10.662

R2            0 • 1   926
N           90k
r                                             0.25524      0.03219     7.928
                                 TABLE A. 6 (Cont'd)

                   REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              WEALTH OF HALF BROTHERS


                                          kQUATION II


VARIABLE           MEAN      STANDARD          ESTIMATED     STANDARD   T— RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION         COEFFICIENT   ERROR      889 DF

LNWEALTH    6.80570           1.11620
AGE        39.33100          10.99100           0.09332      0.01737     5.3726
AGE2     1667.60000         953.01000          —0.00072      0.00020    —3.655
D60         0.02655           0.16085           O.498O3      0.22616     2.2021
D70         0.10398          0.305111           0.118216     0.12635     3.8161
DD7O        0.02876           0.16723           0.33383      0.210111    1.5886
D80         0.10177           0.30251           0.07918      0.12001     0.6597
D90         0.35398           0.1178117         0.65758      0.08132     8.0861
D00         0.381196          0.48685
W           0.10730           0.30967           0.29713      0.11155     2.6635
C             0.071fl2        0.26210                        0.12680    —5.1090
L             0.08297         0.27598          —0.66933      0.120117   —5.5559
S             0.02876         0.16723           0.12237      0.19618     0.6238
FBE           0.15929         0.36615           0.00556      0.10023     0.55145
R             0.810811        0.39185          —0.140310     0.08955    —14.5015
T            13.91000        10.53300           0.01109      0.00607     1.8269
INTERCEPT                                       14.2667      0.38592    11.056

R2            0 .2469
N           9011
r                                               0.22467      0.O3215     6.925
                                       TABLE A. 7

                 REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                          INCOME OF FATHERS AND SONS


                                       EQUATION 1


VARIABLE       MEAN        STANDARD          ESTIMATED     STANDARD    T— RATIO
N A ME                     DEVIATION         COEFFICIENT   ERROR       4612 DF

LNINCOME     6.06330       0.86465
D55          0.03460       0.18279           0.36219       0.07762     14.66614
D57          0.07915       0.27001           0.37080       0.O58e9     6.2962
D59          0.014931      0.21653           0.23608       0.068314    3.145147
D61          0.112146      0.31596           0.380)47      0.05367     7.0892
D66          0.08261       0.27533           0.38507       0.05818     6.6185
D70          O.O6964       0.251456          0.11412)4     0.06115     2.3096
D75          0.07050       0.25602           0.2)4302      0.06093     3.9888
D80          0.093143      0.29106           0.17199       0.05626     3.0572
D85          0.114273      0.314984          0.099142      0.05083     1.9559
D90           0.10727       0.30949          0.0719)4      0.05430     1.3250
D95           0.0523)4      0.22273         —0.11566       0.06697    —1.7269
D00           0.10597       0.30783
AGE          47.92400      17.99000
AGE2       2620.3        1797.8
FBE           0.30255      0.1459141
T            15.76800      13.12600
R             0.82288      0.38181
W             0.06856      0.25272
C             0.12284      0.32829
S             0.02379      0.15241
L             0.08715      0.28209
F             0.691420     0.146079
INTERCEPT                                    5.8763        0.03851

R2            0.0281
N
r                                            0.08672       O.01465     5.918
                               TABLE A. 7 (Conttd)
                 REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                          INCOME OF FATHERS AND SONS

                                       EQUATION 2


VARIABLE      MEAN         STANDARD         ESTIMATED     STANDARD      T—RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION        COEFFICIENT   ERROR         14612 DF

LNINCOME      6.06330      0.861465
D55           0.031460     0.18279          0.1421481     0.07500       5.6639
D57           0.07915      0.27001          O.li3003      0.05719       7.5197
D59           0.014931     0.21653          0.28086       0.06605       14.2525
D61           0.112146     0.31596          0.140109      0.05201       7.71114
D66           0.08261      0.27533          0.37150       0.05609       6.6239
D70           0.069614     0.251456         0.13025       0.05880       2.2154
D75           0.07050      0.25602          0.245140      0.05856       4.1909
D8O           0.093)43     0.29106          0.18901       0.051412      3.14926
D85           0.1)4273     0.3)49814        0.12060       0.01488       2.14670
D90           0.10727      0.309149         0.07850       0.05215       1.50514
D95           0.052314      0.22273        —0.11063       0.06419      —1.7234
DOO           0.10597       0.30783
AGE          47.9214       17.990          0.07787        0.00398      19.547
AGE2       2620.3        1797.8           —0.00073        0.000014    —18.329
FBE           0.30255      0.459)41
T            15.768       13.126
R             0.82288      0.38181
W             0.06856      0.25272
C             0.122814     0.32829
S             0.02379      0.152141
L             0.08715      0.28209
INTERCEPT                                  4.01453        0.09757      141.462

R2            0.1073
N
r                                          0.18180        0.0114116    12.569
                                TABLE A. 7 (Cont'd)
                    REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                             INCOME OF FATHERS AND SONS


                                          EQUATION 3


VARIABLE       MEAN          STANDARD          ESTIMATED     STANDARD    T-.RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION         COEFFICIENT   ERROR       11612 DF

LNINCOME       6.0633         0.86)465
D55            0.03)460       0.18279           0.66891      0.08129       8.228)4
D57            0.07915        0.27001           0.6)4756     0.06503       9.9581
D59            0.014931       0.21653           0.147662     0.07176       6.61119
D61            0.112116       0.31596           0.60825      0.05865      10.371
D66            0.08261        0.27533           0.55628      0.06052       9.1911
D70            0.O6961        0.25)456          0.29862      0.06156       11.8510
D75            0.07050        0.25602           0.38106      0.06033       6.3165
D80            0.093)43       0.29106           0.28702      0.05552       5.1698
D85            O.1l4273       0.3)49814         0.22)4711    0.014982      11.5106
D90            0.10727        0.309)49          0.151)47     0.05232       2.89511
D95            0.052311       0.22273          —0.07967      0.06365     —1.2517
D00            0.10597        0.30783
AGE           147.9211       17.990             0.07018      0.00)408     17.207
AGE2       2620.3          1797.8              —0.00071      0.000014    —18.006
FBE           0.30255         0.1459111        —0.02113      O.026b2      —0.79378
T            15.768          13.126             0.01354      0.00167       8.099)4
R             0.82288         0.38181          —0.16823      0.03212     —5.2368
W             0.06856         0.25272
C              0.122811       0.32829
S              0.02379        0.152)41
L              0.08715        0.28209
INTERCEPT                                       14.1702      0.10031      41.571

               0.1250
           1162)4
                                                0.17357      0.01)4)49    11.982
                               TABLE A. 7 (Cont'd)
                    REGRESS0NS AND UlTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                             INCOME OF FATHERS AND SONS


                                        EQUATION 11


VARIABLE       MEAN         STANDARD         ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                        DEVIATION        COEFFICIENT   ERROR        4612 DF

LNINCOME       6.0633        0.86)465
D55            0.031460      0.18279          0.72876      0.08081      9.0187
D57            0.07915       0.27001          0.70863      0.061483    10.930
D59            0.011931      0.21653          0.53168      0.07135      7.11520
D1             0112)4                         fl7fl).I       flt11F    11J!i
D66            0.08261       0.27533          0.61288      0.060111    10.191
D70            0.06964       0.251456         0.311377     0.06107      5.6288
D75            0.07050       0.25602          0.240156     0.05972      6.7238
D80            0.093)43      0.29106          0.328314     0.05513      5.9561
D85            0.111273      0.34984          0.23521      0.0)4930     )4.7707
D90            0.10727       0.30949          0.16355      0.05176     3.1597
D95            0.05234       0.22273         —0.07)467     0.062911   —1.1863
DOO            0.10597       0.30783
AGE           47.92)4       17.990            0.06852      0.001405    16.913
AGE2       2620.3         1797.8             —0.00069      0.00004    —17.595
FBE           0.30255        0.459)41        —0.00528      0.026)47    —0.19959
T            15.768         13.126            0.01365      0.00165      8.2519
R              0.82288       0.38181         —0.1637)4     0.03198     —5.1207
W              0.06856       0.25272          0.112561     0.011813     8.8)133
C              0.1228J4      0.32829         —0.12843      0.03673    —3.4967
S              0.02379       0.152141                      0.07819    —0.317b0
L              0.08715       0.28209         —0.161180     0.0)4274   —3.8563
INTERCEPT                                     14.152)4     0.10159    '10.873

R2             0.11160
N          116214
                                              0.15239      0.011154    10.1483
                                       TABLE A. 8

               REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                         WEALTH OF FATHERS AND SONS


                                       EQUATION 1


VAR IABLE      MEAN             STANDARD     ESTIMATED    STANDARD     T— RATIO
NAME                            DEVIATION COEFFICIENT ERROR            2760 DF

LNWEALTH       6.9730           1.0276
D60            0.19089          0.39307     —0.12799     0.06301      —2 • 0312
D70            0.25958          0.43848       0.06790    0.05880       1.15)47
DD7O           0.09472          0.29288     —0 • 17577   0.07707      —2 • 2808
D80            o.1156q          O.R1991     —0.25849     0.07232      —3.57)40
D90            0.15691          0.36378      0.34765     0.06626       5.2)468
DUO            0.18221          0.38609
AGE           50.528           17.759
AGE2        2868.3        1   866 .3
FBE            0.3304)4         0.470)46
T             17.910           12.332
R              0.82538          0.37971
W              0.06580          0.24798
C              0.12473          0.33047
L              0.09436          0.29238
S              0.02965          0.16964
INTERCEPT                                    6 .971 8    0.04507     154.69

R2             0.0304
N           2766
r                                           0.09751      0.01893      5.151
                                 TABLE A. 8 (Cont'd)

                   REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                             WEALTH OF FATHERS AND SONS


                                      EQUATION   2



VARIABLE           MEAN         STANDARD    ESTIMATED   STANDARD    T—RATIO
NAME                           DEVIATION COEFFICIENT    ERROR       2760 DF
LNWEALTH       6.9730         1.0276
D60            0.19089        0.39307       0.00569     0.06068      0.0938
D70            0.25958        O.4381!8      0.1350)4    0.05602      2.14108
DD7O           0.09472         0.29288     —0.12)495    0.07302     —1.7112
D80            0.11569         0.31991     0.211061     0.06833     —3.5210
D90            0.15691         0.36378      0.357)48    0.06265      5.706)4
D0O            0.18221         0.38609
AGE           50.528          17.759        0.09538     0.00651     1)4.660
AGE2        2868.3          1866.3         —0.00078     0.00006    —12.58)4
FBE            0.330)4)4      0.1170)46
T             17.910         12.332
R              0.82538        0.37971
W              0.06580        0.2)4798
C              0.121473       0.330)47
L              0.09)436       0.29238
S              0.02965        0.1696)4
INTERCEPT                                   4.3378      0.16130     26.893
R2             0.1397
N           2766
r                                          0.21711!     0.01857     11.695
                             TABLE A. 8 (Cont'd)

               REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                         WEALTH OF FATHERS AND SONS


                                     EQUATION 3

VARIABLE      MEAN         STANDARD   ESTIMATED       STANDARD   T-. RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION COEFFICIENT      ERROR      2760 DF
LNWEALTH     6.9730        1 .0276
D60          0.19089       0.39307        0.45)4)49   0.07368      6.1681
D7O          0.25958       0.438148      0.147995     0.06212      7.7265
DD7O         0.09472       0.29288       0.22281      0.07677      2.902)4
D80          0.11569       0.31991      —0.006 87     0.06904    —0.0996
D90          0.15691       0.36378       0.47585      0.06098      7.803)4
DO0          0.1 8221      0.38609
AGE         50.528        17 .759        0.08541      0 .00635   13 .413
AGE2      2868.3        1866.3          —0.00078      0.00006    —13.130
FBE          0.33044       0.47046
T           17.910        12.332         0.028314     0.00247     11 .1181
R            0.82538       0.37971      —0.35858      0.04656    —7.7021
W            0.06580       0.214798
C            0.12473       0.330147
L            0.09436       0 .2 9238
S            0.02965       0 .16 964
INTERCEPT                                14.14666     0.162914   27.413

R2            0.2036
N          2766
r                                        0.20402      0.01862     10.957
                               TABLE A. 8 (Cont'd)

                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                          WEALTH OF FATHERS AND SONS


                                    EQUATION 14


VARIABLE      ME A N         STANDARD     ESTIMATED   STANDARD   T— RATIO
N A ME                       DEVIATION COEFFICIENT    ERROR      2760 DF

LNWEALTH      6.9730         1.0276
D60           0.19089        0.39307      0.149707    0.07271      6.8366
D70           0.25958        0.1438148    0.52379     0.06116      8.56142
DD7O           0.091472       0.29288     0.26995     0.07555      3.5733
D80           0.11569         0.31991     0.02091     0.06777      0.308147
D90           0.15691         0.36378     0.146673    0.05979      7.8067
DO0           0.18221         0.38609
AGE          50.528          17.759       0.079142    0.00630     12.598
AGE2       2868.3          1866.3        —0.00072     0.00006    -.12.109
FBE            0.330141!     0.1470146   —0.1931414   0.03730     —5.1858
T             17.910        12.332        0.02718     0.002142    11.222
R              0.82538       0.37971     —0.369145    0.0)4613    —8.0087
W              0.06580       0.214798     0.1414178   0.07133      6.1939
C              0.121473      0.330147    —0.270143    0.05353     —5.0523
L              0.091436      0.29238                  0.06039     —6.7973
S              0.02965       O.16964     —0.032114    0.10192     —0,31536
INTERCEPT                                 '4.6128     0.16319     28,266

R2             0.2351
N           2766
r                                         0.181143    0.01871      9.700
                                        TABLE A. 9
                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                                INCOME OF BROTHERS
                         (WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS)

                                        EQUATION 1


VARIABLE      MEAN           STANDARD          ESTIMATED   STANDARD    T—RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION         COEFFICIENT ERROR       1632 DF
LNINCOME      6.04830       0.79167
AGE          33.80400        9.'4689O
AGE2       1232.30000     764.68000
W             0.09097       0.28765
U             U.U9bU        U.?5Li54
F             0.70269       0.45722
S             0.03968       0.19527
L             0.08730       0.28236
FBE           0.214908      0.43261
T             9.221110      8.13820
B             0.8)4005      0.36667
D55           0.02198       0.14666            0.12760     0.14616     0.87303
D57           0.07936       0.27039            0.08562     0.091404    0.910)48
D59           0.05250       0.22311            0.06189     0.10628     0.58230
D61           0.15140       0.35855            0.07734     0.08100     0.95473
D66           0.08791       0.28325            0.20206     0.09152     2.20770
D70           0.063)49      0.24392            0.04404     0.10021     0.439118
D75           0.07082       0.25660            0.11255     0.09707     1.15950
D8O           0.085147      0.27967            0.06901     0.09220     0.7)4855
D85           0.16239       0.36892           —0.10290     0.07995    —1.28720
D9O           0.10379       0.30507           —0.03015     0.08783    —0.34330
D95           0.02686       0.16173           —0.05936     0.131496   —0.43982
DOO           0.09402       0.29194
LNFINCOME 6.28860           0.98115
FAGE         66.31700        8.914610
FAGE2      4)478.O00OO   1230.30000
FW            0.06960       0.254514
FC            0.12332       0.32891
FF            0.74359       0.43678
FS            0.01709       0.12966
FL            0.046)40      0.21041
FFBE          0.32357       0.46798
FT           23.114200     13.76200
FR            0.8)4127      0.365514
KIDS         14.66900       8.23390
INF           1.31620       1.91230
SIB          13.26300       6.98010
PLURAL        2.67520       1.60620
WIVES         1.90230       1.19870
INTERCEPT                                      6.0107      0.06362    914.1476

R2            0.00514
N          1638
                                               0.11989     0.02402     14.991
                                 TABLE A. 9 (Cont'd)

                 REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               INCOME OF BROTHERS
                        (WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS)

                                         EQUATION 2

VARIABLE       MEAN          STANDARD          ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                         DEVIATION         COEFFICIENT   ERROR        1632 DF

LNINCOME    6.0)4830         0.79167
AGE        33.80)400         9.)4689O           0.05779      0.00950      6.08580
AGE2     1232.30000       76)4.68000           —0.000114     0.00012     —3.77860
W           0.09097          0.28765
C           0.06960          0.2514514
F           0.70269          0.115722
S           0.03968          0.19527
L           0.08730          0.28236
FBE         0.2)4908         0.113261
T             9.221110       8.13820
R             0.8'lOOS       0.36667
D55           0.02198        0.114666           0.14)4293    0.14)41)4    3.07290
D57           0.07936        0.27039            0.112330     0.09601      4.4O890
D59           0.05250        0.22311            0.1411143    0.10759      3.82)410
D61           0.151)40       0.35855            0.3811)41    0.08318      11.621110
D66           0.08791        0.28325            0.35967      0.08977      4.0O67O
D70           0.063119       0.211392           0.15851      O.09747      1.62620
D75           0.07082        0.25660            0.26195      0.09)477     2.76)420
D80           0.085)47       0.27967            0.15723      0.08961      1.75470
D85           0.16239        0.36892            0.06372      0.07873      0.80933
D9O           0.10379        0.30507            0.072811     0.08538      0.85303
D95           0.02686        0.16173           —0.10709      0.13105     —0.81720
DOO           0.09)402       0.2919)4
LNFINCOME 6.28860            0.98115
FAGE         66.31700        8.911610
FAGE2      111178.00000   1230.30000
FW            0.06960        0.25)4514
FC            0.12332        0.32891
FS            0,01709        0.12966
FL            0.0146)40      0.21041
FFBE          0.32357        0.146798
FT           23.1)4200      13.76200
FR            0.84127        0.36554
KIDS         1)4.66900       8.23390
INF           1.31620        1.91230
SIB          13.26300        6.98010
PLURAL        2.67520        1.60620
WIVES         1.90230        1.19870
FF            0.714359       0.)13678
INTERCEPT                                       4.4201       0.20681     21.372
R2            0.0718
N          1638
r                                               0.16709      0.02386      7.0011
                               TABLE A. 9 (Cont'd)
                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              INCOME OF BROTHERS
                       (WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS)


                                        EQUATION 3

VARIABLE       MEAN         STANDARD           ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                        DEVIATION          COEFFICIENT   ERROR        1632 DF

LNINCOME      6.0)4830      0.79167
AtE          33.80)400      9.246890            0.05080      0.01040      '4.88620
AU2        1232.30000    7b4.b000              —0.000'44     0.00012     —3.74S70
W             0.09097       0.28765
C             0.06960       0.25)4514
F             0.70269       0.145722
S             0.03968       0.19527
L             0.08730       0.28236
D55           0.02198       0.1)4666            0.511)40     0.1)4)403    3.55060
D57           0.07936       0.27039             0.141025     0.097214     24.21910
D59           0.05250       0.22311             0.241859     0.108110     3.861)40
D61           0.151)40      0.3585,             0.1111430    0.08)405     11.92930
D66           0.08791       0.28325             0.39014)4    0.08976      24,3)4970
D70           0.063)49      0.2)4392            0.21721      0.098112     2.20710
D75           0.07082      0.25660              0.29965      0.091450     3.17100
D80           0.085)47     0.27967              0.15905      0.08951      1.77690
D85           0.16239      0.36892              0.124724)4   0.08012      1.8)4020
D90           0.10379      0.30507              0.114980     0.08589      1.7)4410
D95           0.02686      0.16173             —0.08735      0.13015     -.0.67114
T             9.22)410     8.13820              0.01082      0.00386      2.80000
R             0.811005     0.36667             —0.315)49     0.05362     —5.881420
FBE           0.214908     0.143261             0.02)468     0.04496      0.54905
D00           0.09)402     0.291914
LNFINCOME 6.28860          0.98115
FAGE         66.31700       8.924610
FAGE2      4478.O0O00    1230.30000
FW            0.06960       0.25)4514
FC            0.12332      0.32891
FS            0.01709      0.12966
FL            0,046140     0.210241
FFBE          0.32357      0.246798
FT           23.14200      13.76200
FR            0.8)4127      0.365514
KIDS         1)4.66900      8.23390
INF           1.31620       1.91230
SIB       13.26300          6.98010
PLURAL     2.67520          1.60620
WIVES      1.90230          1.19870
FF         0.7)4359         0,243678
INTERCEPT                                       1.7839       0.21995     21.750

R2            0.0931
N          1638
r                                               0.15238      0.02391      6.372
                                TABLE A. 9 (Cont'd)
                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA-.CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               INCOME OF BROTHERS
                       (WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS)


                                        EQUATION 14


VARIABLE       MEAN         STANDARD           ESTIMATED   STANDARD    T—RATIO
NAME                        DEVIATION          COEFFICIENT ERROR       1632 DF
LNINCOME      6.011830      0.79167
AGE          33.801100      9.116890           0.05172      0.01015     5.09670
AGE2       1232.30000     7611.68000          0.000141      0.00012    3.561114O
P55           O.Ud19        U.lLIbbb           U.b59U5      U.1415t$    4.b55UU
D57           0.07936       0.27039            0.589146     0.09670     6.09600
D59           0.05250       0.22311            0.59166      0.10721     5.51880
D61           0.151110      0.35855            0.58329      0.08397     6.9116140
D66           0.08791       0.28325            0.52915      0.0887)4    5.96290
D70           0.063119      0.211392           0.29818      0.096142    3.092110
D75           0.07082       0.25660            0.37312      0.09256     11.03130
D8O           0.085)47      0.27967            0.211988     0.08816     2.83)4110
P85           0.16239       0.36892            0.18922      0.07806     2.142)400
D90           0.10379       0.30507            0.22720      0.08395     2.70650
D95           0.02686       0.16173           —0.020147     0.12703    —0.16117
P00           0.09)402      0.291911
T             9.221410      8.13820            0.00990      0.00375     2.6)4210
R             0.814005      0.36667           —0.29588      0.05291    —5.592110
FBE           0.2)4908      0.113261           0.0314811    0.011393    0.79307
W            0.09097        0.28765            0.607914     0.06740     9.02000
C            0.06960        0.25145)4         —0.00213     2 0.0729    —0.29256
F            0.70269        0.145722
S            0.03968        0.19527           —0.111266     0.09519    —1.149870
L            0.08730        0.28236           —0.2)46148    0.06585    —3.711300
LNFINCOME 6.28860           0.98115
FACE         66.31700       8.914610
FAGE2      1178.OO0O0    1230.30000
FT          23.114200      13.76200
FR           0.814127       0.3655)4
FFBE         0.32357        0.116798
FW           0.06960        0.25)4511
FC           0.12332        0.32891
FF           0.7)4359       0.43678
FS           0.01709        0.12966
FL           0.0116140      0.210141
KIDS      111.66900         8.23390
INF        1.31620          1.91230
SIB       13.26300          6.98010
PLURAL     2.67520          1.60620
WIVES      1.90230          1.19870
INTERCEPT                                      14•5755      0.21968    20.828
R2           0.1 J488
N       1638
r                                              0.13756      0.02397    5.7110
                                         TABLE A. 10

                 REGRESSIONS AND INTRA-CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               WEALTH OF BROTHERS
                        ( WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS )


                                         EQUATION   1




 VARIABLE      MEAN         STANDARD          ESTIMATED     STANDARD    T—RATIO
 NAME                       DEVIATION         COEFFICIENT   ERROR       1304 DF

LNWEALTH       6.78630       0.93108
AGE           36.15700       8.83670
AGE2        1385.140000    72)4.30000
D60            0.17099       0.37665         —0.066)4)4     0.08495     —0.78202
D70            0.21374       0.41010          0.07130       0.08037      0.88718
DD7O           0.09)466      0.29285         —0.17438       0.10137     —1.7203
D80            0.13740       0.34)4)41       —0.29980       0.09025     —3.3221
D90            0.19389       0.39550          0.14849       0.08228      1.80)47
DOO            0.18931       0.39191
W              0.08015       0.27163
C              0.07786       0.26806
L              0.08092       0.27281
S              0.02595       0.15906
FBE            0.25038       0.433140
T            11.15)400       7.6114)40
R          0.73588           0.144103
LNFWEALTH 7.140460           1.10730
FAGE      69.38000           8.880)40
FAGE2   4892.40000        1245.40000
FW         0.06107           0.23955
FC         0.10840           0.31100
FL         0.07176           0.25818
FS         0.02290          0.1)496)4
FFBE       0.33893          0.147353
FT           26.146900     1)4.09100
FR         0.66718          0.471140
KIDS      16.31000         10.70600
INF        1.147630         2.071480
PLURAL     2.714050         1.65920
SIB       14.75100          9.19230
INTERCEPT                                     6.8113        0.05852    116.38

R2         0.0202
N       1310
r                                             0.26198       0.02615     10.018
                                   TABLE A. 10 (Cont'd)

                    REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                                  WEALTH OF BROTHERS
                           C WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS

                                            EQUATION 2


VARIABLE      MEAN            STANDARD            ESTIMATED
NAME                          DEVIATION          COEFFICIENT   ERROR      13O DF
LNWEALTH      6.78630          0.93108
AGE          36.15700          8.83670            0.09118      0.01427
AGE2       1385.1O000        72)4.30000          —0.00067      0.00017
D6O           0.17099          0.37665            0.36567      0.08635     )4.2348
D70           0.2137)4         0.111010           0.33500      0,07827     4.2803
DD7O          0.09)466         0.29285            0.1)486)4    0.098)45    1.5099
D80           O.137I0          0.3)4)4)41        —0.05)492     0.08716    —0.6301
D90           0.19389          0.39550            0.39620      0.07968     24.97211
D00           0.18931          0.39191
w             0.08015          0.27163
C             0.07786          0.26806
L             0.08092          0.27281
S             0.02595          0.15906
FBE           0.25038          0•)433)40
T            11.15)400         7.61)4)40
R             0.73588          O.414103
LNFWEALTH 7.40460              1.10730
FAGE         69.38000           8.880)40
FAGE2      14892.140000     12)45.240000
FW            0.06107          0.23955
FC            0.108110         0.31100
FL            0.07176          0.25818
FS            0.02290          0.1)4964
FFBE          0.33893          0.117353
FT           26.46900         1)4.09100
FR            0.66718          0.471)40
KIDS         16.31000         10.70600
INF           1.117630         2.07)480
PLURAL        2.7)4050         1.65920
SIB          1)4.75100         9.19230
INTERCEPT                                       11.2008        0.3026b    13.879

R2            0 •   13)40
N          1310
r                                               0.27347        0.02606    10.492
                                TABLE A. 10 (Cont'd)

                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              WEALTH OF BROTHERS
                       ( WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS )


                                         EQUATION 3

VARIABLE      MEAN         STANDARD           ESTIMATED     STANDARD    T—RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION          COEFFICIENT   ERROR       13O4 DF
LNWEALTH      6.78630       0.93108
AGE          36.15700       8.83670            0.0829)4      0.01)461    5.6766
AGE2       1385.140000    724.3OOOO           —0.00061       0.00017    —3551
D60           0.17099       0.37665            0.1414991     0.088)41    5.0890
D70           0.213714      O.)41010           0.142220     0.07916      5.3332
DD7O          0.09)466      0.29285            0.19)465     0.09827      1.9809
D80           0.1374O       0.3)4)4)41       —0.0350)4      0.08653     —0.14050
D90           0.19389       0.39550            0.146787     0.08066      5.800)4
DUO           0.18931       0.39191
W             0.08015       0.27163
C             0.07786       0.26806
L             0.08092       0.27281
S             0.02595       0.15906
FBE           0.25038       0.1433)40        —0.10222       0.05618     —1.8193
T            11.151400      7.61)4)40         0.0112)4      0.00383      2.9353
R           0.73588         0.1414103        —0.27087       0.05)477    —14.9)45)4
LNFWEALTH 7.1401460         1.10730
FAGE       69.38000          8.880)40
FAGE2   14892.140000     12)45.140000
FW            0.06107       0.23955
FC            0.108140      0.31100
FL            0.07176       0.25818
FS            0.02290       0.1)496)4
FFBE          0.33893       0.147353
FT          26.146900      1)4.09100
FR            0.66718       0.1471)40
KIDS      16.31000         10.70600
INF        1.147630         2.07)480
PLURAL     2.7)4050         1.65920
SIB       14.75100          9.19230
INTERCEPT                                     )4.)4658      0.30)485    1)4.6)49
R2         0 • 1514)4
N       1310
r
Ni                                            0.25632       0.02619      9.786
                                 TABLE A. 10 (Cont'd)
                 REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                               WEALTH OF BROTHERS
                        C WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS )


                                            EQUATION   11




VAR IABLE     MEAN          STANDARD              ESTIMATED     STAND A RD    T— RATIO
NAME                        D E VIA TI ON         COEFFICIENT   ERROR         13O4 DF
LNWEALTH       6.78630       0.93108
AGE           36.15700       8.83670               0.08029      0.01)408       5.7010
AGE2        1385.U0000     724.3OO00              —0.00057      0.00017       3.14237
D60            0.17099       0.37665               0.5713)4     0.08558        6.6757
D70            0.21374       O.4i0iO               0.50236      0.07633        6.5816
DD7O          0.091466       0.29285               0.26251      0.091466       2.7732
D8O           0.137140       0.31414141            0.02812      0.08393        0.3350
D90           0.19389        0.39550               0.146922     0.07738        6.06)40
DOO           0.18931        0.39191
w             0.08015        0.27163               0.61590      0.08802        6.9976
C              0.07786       0.26806              —0.)458j6     0.08636       —5.3130
L              0.08092       0.27281              —0.116300     0.08)456
S              0.02595       0.15906              —0.3)4295     0.1)4635      —2.3)43)4
FBE            0.25038       0.1433)40            —0.05669      0 .05)4)411   —1   .01412
T             11.15)400      7.6114)40             0.012214     0.00367        3.3352
R            0.73588         0.1414103            —0.23618      0.05367       —11.1100)4
LNFWEALTH 7.1401460          1.10730
FAGE       69.38000           8.880140
FAGE2    14892.140000     12)45.140000
FW           0.06107         0.23955
FC           0.108110        0.31100
FL           0.07176         0.25818
FS           0.02290         0.1149614
FFBE         0.33893         0.147353
FT          26.146900       1)4.09100
FR           0.66718         0.1471110
KIDS        16.31000        10.70600
INF          1.147630        2.071480
PLURAL       2.714050        1.65920
SIB         114.75100        9.19230
INTERCEPT                                          14.14310     0.295115      114.997

R2             0.2257
N           1310
r                                                  0.22653      0.02639        8.583
                               TABLE A. 10 (Cont'd)
                  REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                                WEALTH OF BROTHERS
                         C WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS


                                       EQUATION 5

VARIABLE      MEAN         STANDARD         ESTIMATED     STANDARD   T—RATIO
NAME                       DEVIATION        COEFFICIENT   ERROR      13O4 DF

LNWEALTH      6.78630       0.93108
AGE          36.15700       8.83670         0.08734       0.01454     6.0069
AGE2       1385.40000     724.30000        —0.00062       0.00017    —3.6649
D60           0.17099       0.37665         0.96979       0,24239     14.0009
D70           0.21374       0.111010        0.79584       0.18474     4.3O79
DD7O          0.09466       0.29285         0.61668       0.19732     3.1253
D80           0.13740       0.34441         0.26166       0.14437     1.8125
D90           0.19389       0.39550         0.54553       0.09865     5.5297
DOO           0.18931       0.39191
W             0.08015       0.27163         0.45781       0.10013     4.5121
C             0.07786       0.26806        —O.49574       0.08915    —5.5606
L             0.08092       0.27281        —0.47137       0.081468   —5.5666
S             0.02595       0.15906        —0.37704       0.114623   —2.5784
FBE           0.25038       0.433140       —0.14827       0.08262    —1.7945
T            11.151400      7.61440         0.01225       0.00376     3.2550
H          0.73588          0.414103       —0.13078       0.06503    —2.0109
LNFWEALTH 7.140460          1.10730
FAGE      69.38000          8.88040        —0.00363       0.00351    —1.0327
FAGE2   4892.40000       12145.40000
FW         0.06107          0.23955         0.31219       0.12144    2.5707
FC            0.108'IO      0.31100         0.08487       0.08183     1.0371
FL            0.07176       0.25818         0.25060       0.09252     2.7088
FS            0.02290       0.114964       —0.31589       0.155147   —2.0318
FFBE          0.33893       0.47353         0.11379       0.07886     1.4429
FT           26.116900     14.09100         0.01045       0.00603     1.7328
FR         0.66718          0.47140        —0.10890       0.06246
KIDS      16.31000         10.70600
INF        1.47630          2.07480
PLURAL     2.74050          1.65920        —0.00287       0.01572    —0.18240
SIB       14.75100          9.19230        —0.00343       0.00346    —0.99154
INTERCEPT                                   4.0238        0.44917     8.9581

R2            0.2381
N          1310
r                                           0.20694       0.02651    7.806
                                TABLE A. 10 (Cont'd)

                REGRESSIONS AND INTRA—CLASS CORRELATIONS FOR
                              WEALTH OF BROTHERS
                       C WITH FATHER'S CHARACTERISTICS )


                                         EQUATION 6


VARIABLE      MEAN          STANDARD           ESTIMATED     STANDARD     T—RATIO
NAME                        DEVIATION          COEFFICIENT   ERROR        13014 DF

LNWEALTH      6.78630       0.93108
AGE          36.15700       8.83670             0.08591      0.011436      5.9823
AGE2       1385.140000   72)4.30000            —0.00060      0.00017      —3.57514
D60           0.17099       0.37665             0.82979      0.214055      3.141196
D70           0.213714      0.141010            0.67389      0.18362       3.6701
DD7O          0.09)466      0.29285             0.51698      0.19559       2.61432
D80           0.137140      0.31414141          0.17613      0.1)4331      1.2290
D90           0.19389       0.39550             0.146236     0.098)46      14.6961
DUO           0.18931       0.39191
w             0.08015       0.27163             0.141233     0.09918       14.1573
C             0.07786       0.26806            —0.50086      0.088011     —5.6893
L             0.08092       0.27281            0.1414551     0.08373      —5.3206
S             0.02595       0.15906            0.140195      0.1)4)4)46   —2.7825
FBE           0.25038       0.1433)40          —0.15560      0.08160      —1.9070
T            11.151400      7.61)4)40           0.00893      0.00376       2.3755
H            0.73588        0.14)4103          —0.121439     0.06)423     —1.9367
LNFWEALTH 7.1401460         1.10730             0.15315      0.02630       5.8226
FAGE       69.38000          8.880140           0.00319      0.00366       0.8704
FAGE2    14892.)40000    12145.140000
FW           0.06107        0.23955             0.214)407    0.120)49      2.0257
FC            0.108)40      0.31100             0.05767      0.0809)4      0.7125
FL            0.07176       0.25818             0.21712      0.09153       2.3720
FS            0.02290       0.11496)4          —0.31629      0.15352      —2.0602
FFBE          0.33893       0.147353            0.17901      0.07867       2.2755
FT           26.146900     1)4.09100            0.00578      0.00601       0.9621
FR            0.66718       0.1471)40          —0.088115     0.06178      —1.11317
SIB          14.751OO       9.19230            —0.01122      0.00367      —3.0573
PLURAL        2.7)4050      1.65920             0.001479     0.01557       0.3078
KIDS         16.31000      10.70600
INF           1.147630      2.071480
INTERCEPT                                       2.7530       0.149)432     5,569)4

R2            0.2571
N          1310
r                                               0.19393      0.02658       7.296
