NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAX EXPENDITURE ESTIMATION AND REPORTING:
A CRITICAL REVIEW
Rosanne Altshuler
Robert D. Dietz
Working Paper 14263
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14263

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We thank Daniel Feenberg for providing invaluable help with TAXSIM. We also thank Thomas Barthold,
Timothy Dowd, Patrick Driessen, Edward Kleinbard, Gary Koenig, and attendees of the NBER Conference,
"Incentive and Distributional Consequences of Tax Expenditures," for valuable comments. Nothing
in this paper should be construed as reflecting the views of the National Association of Home Builders
or its members. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Rosanne Altshuler and Robert D. Dietz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Tax Expenditure Estimation and Reporting: A Critical Review
Rosanne Altshuler and Robert D. Dietz
NBER Working Paper No. 14263
August 2008
JEL No. H20
ABSTRACT
We examine the measurement of tax expenditures, as well as review issues concerning the classification
of tax expenditures generally. We use calculations from NBER's TAXSIM to illustrate some of the
problems with the current methodology for estimating tax expenditures. Unlike most previous work
on the topic, we focus on how features of the current tax system including the alternative minimum
tax and sunset rules complicate and compromise the value of information provided by the tax expenditure
budget.

Rosanne Altshuler
Department of Economics
Rutgers University
75 Hamilton Street
New Brunswick, NJ 08901
altshule@rci.rutgers.edu
Robert D. Dietz
National Association of Home Builders
1201 15th St NW
Washington, DC 20005
rdietz@nahb.com

INTRODUCTION
To most tax policy analysts, the term “tax expenditure” means a special provision of the
tax system that results in reduced tax liability for certain subsets of taxpayers. Moreover, for
many in the tax policy community, the term suggests tax breaks for limited constituencies that
result in a narrow tax base and higher marginal tax rates. Some are blunter: tax expenditures are
loopholes that need to be closed. We leave it to other authors to examine the legitimacy of tax
expenditure provisions from tax policy or economic efficiency perspectives. Instead, the present
analysis examines the measurement of tax expenditures and details some of the complications and
challenges associated with interpreting and applying its results.
The technical definition of tax expenditure is found in the Congressional Budget and
Impoundment Act of 1974 (“Budget Act”), which established the modern Congressional budgetmaking process.1 The Budget Act requires annual publication of a list of tax expenditures in
order to improve the transparency of the federal government budget and account for proxy
spending programs governed by the nation’s tax code. The Budget Act formally defines a tax
expenditure as:
“Revenue losses attributable to provisions of Federal income tax
laws which allow a special exclusion, exemption, or deduction
from gross income or which provide a special credit, a
preferential rate of tax, or a deferral of tax liability.”

As is well known, this definition is open to considerable interpretation. The legislative
history for the Budget Act indicates that tax expenditures are to be determined in reference to
“normal income tax law.” While not codified, legislative history can provide guidance for
implementing the law. However, determining what is “normal” is an open question and almost
certainly a normative exercise.

1

Public Law 93-344.

Interestingly, by the time the Budget Act was enacted both the Congressional Joint
Committee on Taxation (JCT) and the Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis (OTA)
had been producing tax expenditure analysis for years. The term “tax expenditure” is attributed
to Assistant Secretary of the Treasury (Tax Policy) Stanley Surrey.2 In 1967 Surrey instructed his
staff to compile a list of preferences and concessions in the income tax that were similar to
expenditure programs. While Surrey’s stated motivation was to improve the budget process, he
was also interested in drawing attention to subsidies in the tax code in hopes of building
momentum for base-broadening tax reform.
Surrey’s efforts resulted in Treasury’s first tax expenditure budget report in 1968.
Classifying certain provisions of the Internal Revenue Code as deviations from a comprehensive,
progressive income tax, the Department of the Treasury reported tax expenditures for the
individual and corporate income tax systems, a process that has continued to the present.3 While
the first tax expenditure lists from Treasury were not included in the official budget, the Budget
Act mandated that tax expenditures be reported as part of the Administration budget. The Budget
Act required no distributional or other economic analysis beyond an estimate of the magnitude of
the cost in terms of lost revenue of each listed tax expenditure.
Reflecting reconsiderations in the concept and presentation of tax expenditures, the
Treasury presentation has evolved over time. Starting with the Fiscal Year (FY) 1983 Budget,
Treasury introduced an additional tax baseline to classify and estimate tax expenditures. The new
baseline, called the “reference” tax baseline, is closer to present law than the normal tax baseline
and results in a more narrow definition of tax expenditures. Beginning with the FY 1984 Budget
2

As Shaviro (2003) notes, the tax expenditure concept seems to have been invented twice, or at the very
least, earlier elsewhere. As early as 1954, writers in Germany had noticed the equivalence between special
tax deductions, credits, and other allowances and government subsidies. As a result, in 1959, the German
government began reporting on subsidies in the federal budget, including those supplied through the tax
system. Budgetary reports on tax subsidies that were classified as indirect spending were being made
regularly by 1967.
3
Until 2003, Treasury also included a list of tax expenditures against a transfer-tax baseline (estate and gift
taxes). Tax expenditures for other taxes, such as excise taxes, are not reported. As always, there are limited
exceptions. For example, both JCT and Treasury have reported the reduction in excise tax receipts that
result from the alcohol fuel and biodiesel credits.

2

and until recently, Treasury presented outlay equivalent estimates for tax expenditures in addition
to the traditional revenue-based estimates.4 The goal of this approach is to provide estimates that
more closely correspond to estimates of direct outlay programs.5 Starting with the FY 1995
Budget, Treasury has reported present-value calculations of tax expenditures that involve either
the deferral of tax payments into future periods or other long-term effects.
Recently, the Administration has expressed concern with the arbitrary tax base used to
calculate tax expenditures. The FY 2002 Budget states that “(B)ecause of the breadth of this
arbitrary tax base, the Administration believes that the concept of ‘tax expenditure’ is uncertain
(OMB 2002, p. 61).” The FY 2003 Budget describes a Treasury Department effort to reconsider
and revise the tax expenditure presentation and notes that “(D)ue, in part, to the degree of
arbitrariness in the tax expenditure baseline, the Administration believes the meaningfulness of
tax expenditure estimates is uncertain (OMB 2003, p.95).” To address these concerns, the
Administration began estimating tax expenditure estimates against a comprehensive income tax
baseline and a consumption tax baseline in its FY 2004 Budget. In addition, the FY 2004 Budget
introduced a number of innovations including changes in the accelerated depreciation baseline,
the inclusion of or identification of negative tax expenditures, an estimate of the tax expenditure
for net imputed rent for owner-occupied housing, and an estimate of the (negative) tax
expenditure for the double-taxation of corporate income against a comprehensive income tax.

4

The Administration explains in its FY 2008 Budget that outlay equivalents are no longer included
“because they were often the same as the normal tax expenditure estimates, and the criteria for applying the
concepts as to when they should differ were often judgmental and hard to apply with consistency across
time and across tax expenditure items (OMB 2008, p. 286).”
5
While the linkage of tax expenditures to direct spending programs has conceptual merit, there are
numerous analytical complications that hinder reporting comparable numbers for these two classes of
government fiscal policy. Although government accounting is not perfect, auditors and policymakers know
with reasonable confidence what resources the federal government dedicates to various spending programs.
The same cannot be said of all tax expenditures because of various information asymmetries. The
government has access to its spending records. It does not necessarily have access to tax expenditure data.
To take just one example, income exclusions that involve no information reporting (e.g. enterprise zone
capital gain provisions) cannot be estimated with IRS data. Thus, such tax expenditure estimates rely on
the educated guesses of government economists rather than the tabulation of reports by accountants.

3

The JCT began to estimate tax expenditures in 1972. In contrast to the Treasury analysis,
the JCT presentation had remained relatively constant, usefully allowing analysts to make
intertemporal comparisons. However, recently JCT announced planned changes to its methods of
presentation and measurement of tax expenditures (see JCT 2008). The most significant change
involves a revision of the classification of tax expenditures. JCT announced it will identify tax
expenditures as either “Tax Subsidies” (tax law provisions that are deliberately inconsistent with
an identifiable general rule of present law) or “Tax-Induced Structural Distortions” (structural
elements that materially affect economic decisions in a manner that imposes substantial economic
efficiency costs).6 Further, JCT has announced that it will now include negative tax expenditures
in its analysis. Finally, the revision will use a reference baseline for estimation purposes. This
last change reflects an acknowledgement of the limits of defining tax expenditures relative to a
normal income tax baseline. The JCT has indicated that it will publish more details of its
proposed changes later in 2008.
The evolution of the Treasury and JCT tax expenditure reports reflect, at least in part, the
concerns of analysts writing on the subject from within and outside of government agencies (both
in the United States and abroad).7 Legal scholars and economists have wrestled with the tax
expenditure concept since Surrey developed the idea.8 A growing literature debates the
usefulness of tax expenditure analysis for expenditure control, social and economic policy, and
tax reform.9 And recommendations to improve tax expenditure reporting by providing more

6

JCT will further divide tax expenditures labeled as Tax Subsidies as Tax Transfers (payments made to
taxpayers with regard to tax liability; e.g. child tax credit), Social Spending (policies intended to subsidize
or induce behavior; e.g. deduction for charitable giving), or Business Synthetic Spending (provisions
intended to subsidize or induce behavior directly related to the production of business or investment
income, excluding Tax Subsidies related to labor supply; e.g. section 199 deduction).
7
The literature on tax expenditures is too extensive to list here. For review of tax expenditure practices in
other countries see Polackova et. al. (2004).
8
See Bittker (1969), Andrews (1972), Surrey (1973), Fiekowsky (1980), Surrey and McDaniel (1985),
Thuronyi (1988) and Shaviro (2003), for example.
9
See, for example, Toder (2002), Burman (2003), and Toder (2005).

4

detail have recently been put forward by the Century Foundation Working Group on Tax
Expenditures (Century Foundation Press 2002).10
In this paper, we address the methodology of tax expenditure estimation to illustrate some
of the problems with the current methodology.11 Unlike most previous work on the topic, we
focus on features of the current tax system that were not in place when Surrey introduced the
expenditure concept, such as the alternative minimum tax (AMT) and sunset rules, and how these
features complicate and compromise the value of information provided by the tax expenditure
reporting. We begin in the next section with a discussion of the issues that arise in defining the
“normal” income tax structure. We review how this definition has been implemented by the JCT
and Treasury and illustrate some of the consequences of the choice of the normal tax structure
using estimates from NBER’s TAXSIM model. The third section reviews the basics of tax
expenditure estimation, explores how “scoring” conventions affect the information provided by
estimates, and considers the distributional analysis of tax expenditures. In both the second and
third sections, we consider the additional information provided from hypothetical tax
expenditures calculated using TAXSIM. The final section concludes.

WHAT’S NORMAL?
A tax expenditure estimate shows the change in Federal income tax revenues due to the
hypothetical elimination of a provision of the Internal Revenue Code. To qualify as a tax
expenditure, the provision must be classified as a divergence from the defined normal income tax
system. As noted above, the Budget Act does not define the reference normal tax. Hence,
building a list of tax expenditures requires analysts to first define what constitutes the normal

10

Among other proposals, the Century Foundation recommended: (1) combined tax expenditure estimates
for groups of tax expenditures to account for interaction effects; (2) historical reporting of tax expenditures
using comparable methods; and (3) distributional tax expenditure reporting for major provisions.
11
In a companion paper, Altshuler and Dietz (2008), we offer recommendations for reform of tax
expenditure reporting.

5

income tax. Baseline tax revenues for the estimation exercise can then be generated in reference
to this “normal” tax.12

Defining the normal income tax
Defining the baseline tax structure is inherently a subjective exercise since it assumes
some parts of existing law are “normal,” while others are intentional policy deviations. At a basic
level, defining the normal income tax requires analysts to specify the tax base, the rate structure,
and the tax unit.13 The staffs of the JCT and OTA define the normal structure of the income tax
as one personal exemption for each taxpayer, one exemption for each dependent, the standard
deduction, the prevailing rate structure for the individual income tax, a separate corporate income
tax with one marginal tax rate, and deductions for expenses related to earning income. Consistent
with the tax code, tax brackets differ based on marital status. Thus, the tax unit is the individual
taxpaying unit for the individual tax and the corporation for the corporate tax.
The staff of the JCT defends the inclusion of the personal exemption and the standard
deduction by asserting that these provisions implicitly define a “zero bracket”; the OTA cites tax
administration as a possible reason to include these provisions in the normal tax base (see JCT
2007 and OMB 2008). Neither reason is entirely compelling using basic tax policy principles.14
One could argue that all provisions that make up the tax liability threshold, or the income level at
which a family begins to pay positive tax, should be part of the normal tax. Under this scenario,
the child credit and earned income tax credit (EITC), for example, would not be tax expenditures
because they constitute part of the zero bracket. Alternatively, one could treat the personal

12

The revenue baseline is generated using projections of Federal receipts either from the Congressional
Budget Office, for the JCT estimates, or the Office of the Management and Budget, for the Treasury
Department estimates.
13
As the paper by Carroll, Joulfaian and Mackie (2008) in this volume makes clear, a provision that is a tax
expenditure under one tax base (a comprehensive income tax, for example) may not be classified as an
expenditure under an alternative base (a consumption tax, for example).
14
Including the standard deduction for tax administration reasons is justified on tax administration grounds.
It is unclear whether this argument applies to the personal exemption.

6

exemption and standard deduction as tax expenditures, which they would be, for example, if the
normal income tax was structured as the current alternative minimum tax (AMT).
More fundamentally, these uneven distinctions between what is a tax expenditure and
what is part of the normal income tax reveal differences that may be meaningful within a tax law
context but not within an economic context. As in the case of the EITC, a credit is almost by
definition a tax expenditure. However, one could imagine a set of deductions and credits that
generates the equivalent tax liabilities for lower-income taxpayers as the prevailing set of
marginal tax rates. Under existing practice, the set of deductions and credits is a tax expenditure
(for income support) and the set of rates is part of the normal tax system. This discussion serves
to illustrate the subjective nature of tax expenditure estimation and classification.
Present practice is not even entirely consistent with respect to rates of tax. While the
progressive tax structure in the individual tax is considered normal, the graduated corporate rates
that are part of the corporate income tax are treated as a tax expenditure.15 Furthermore, the
reduced rates of tax on long-term capital gains and dividends enacted with the Jobs and Growth
Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 (JGTRRA) are classified as tax expenditures by the staff
of the JCT but not by the staff of the OTA. As of 2007, these special rates represent the largest
single tax expenditure in the JCT tax expenditure list (JCT 2007).16

The normal income tax versus a comprehensive income tax
The Administration budget presentation includes a detailed discussion of how the normal
tax structure differs from a comprehensive income tax (see also Carroll, Joulfaian, and Mackie

15

The staff of the JCT includes the lower rates as a tax expenditure arguing that they provide a tax benefit
for small businesses.
16
OTA has included the reduced rates on dividends and capital gains as part of the normal tax since 2005.
The Budget document explains that “In a gradual transition to a more economically neutral tax system
under which all income is taxed no more than once, the lower tax rates on dividends and capital gains on
corporate equity under current law have not been considered tax preferences since 2005 (OMB 2007, page
299).” As a result, the OTA tax expenditure estimates for the lower rates on capital, step-up in bases, and
inside build-up on tax-preferred assets are limited to capital gains from sources other than corporate equity.

7

2008). We briefly highlight the main differences in this section. As mentioned above, the normal
tax structure used by JCT and OTA includes a separate corporate income tax. Under a
comprehensive income tax, the two systems would presumably be integrated so that all income
would be subject to taxation once at the recipient’s personal tax rate. Although the normal
structure does include a foreign tax credit and dividends received deduction to prevent double
taxation at the corporate level, the present concept does not include any provision to mitigate the
double taxation of income that results from having both corporate and individual tax systems. As
mentioned in the introduction, the staff of the OTA includes an appendix to the tax expenditure
section of the Budget that reports the “double tax on corporate profit” as a negative tax
expenditure. The estimate is negative since the “provision” raises rather than loses revenue
relative to the baseline tax system.
Another major departure from a comprehensive income tax base involves the timing of
taxes. While a comprehensive income tax would tax all income as it is earned, the normal
structure taxes capital gains only upon realization. Thus, deferral of tax on capital gains is not
considered a tax expenditure under the normal tax structure.17
A comprehensive income tax would levy tax on real as opposed to nominal gains in
capital asset or debt values. But present law fails to provide any indexing of the bases of capital
assets or debt. Both the JCT and OTA follow present law in their normal tax definition.
A comprehensive income base would include accrued and imputed income such as
imputed rent from housing and imputed services from consumer durable goods. Until 2006, the
revenue loss from the exclusion of imputed rent was not reported in either the JCT or OTA tax
expenditure exercises. Starting with the FY 2006 Budget, the Treasury began estimating the tax
expenditure for the exclusion of implicit rental income of homeowners net of depreciation,
interest and taxes. The present treatment creates an inconsistency, however. The OTA estimate
17

It is interesting to note that some provisions in the tax code that allow deferral of taxation are identified
as such. For example, the deferral of gain on like-kind exchanges and interest on savings bonds are tax
expenditures.

8

for net imputed rent appears in the regular listing of tax expenditures. But if imputed rent is
treated as a tax expenditure, then the mortgage interest deduction and deduction for taxes on
owner-occupied homes should not be reported as tax expenditures. OTA lists all these provisions
as tax expenditures, which results in double counting. Moreover, the OTA does not report
similar, although smaller, imputed-rent tax expenditures for other durable goods, such as vehicles.
The individual AMT and passive loss rules create their own complexities with respect to
tax expenditure classification. A comprehensive income tax would (presumably) not include an
AMT and would allow for the full deduction of losses generated from passive activities. The
annual JCT tax expenditure pamphlet explains that the AMT and the passive activity loss rules
are not part of the normal income tax. Instead, they are viewed as provisions that reduce the
magnitude of the tax expenditures to which they apply. Exceptions to the AMT and the passive
loss rules are therefore not classified as tax expenditures by the staff of the JCT because the
effects of the exceptions are already incorporated in the estimates of related tax expenditures.
The OTA lists the AMT and passive loss rules as part of the normal tax system.
Like the individual AMT, the corporate AMT is part of the normal tax structure for the
OTA but not for the JCT. Both agencies consider the prevailing rules providing for carrybacks
and carryforwards of business net operating losses as a part of the normal tax structure. Under a
comprehensive income tax, however, losses would be fully and immediately deductible. Another
difficult issue for any tax system involves the tax treatment of the recovery of capital costs.
Analysts must specify the “normal” treatment of depreciation for tax purposes. A comprehensive
income tax would provide inflation adjusted allowances for economic depreciation. The OTA
follows this treatment and uses estimates of real, inflation adjusted, economic depreciation in its
normal tax baseline. In contrast, the JCT treats capital cost recovery allowances that are more

9

generous than those provided under section 168(g), which allows straight-line depreciation over a
period that is longer than under the current law accelerated system, as tax expenditures.18

Differences in normal tax baseline across institutions
As should be clear, the definition of the normal tax is not obvious. The normal tax is not
analogous to a comprehensive income tax or the current tax system and changes over time.
Further, JCT and OTA employ slightly different definitions. In addition, as mentioned in the
introduction, the staff of the OTA currently uses two baselines: a normal tax baseline and a
reference tax baseline with the latter being closer to existing tax law.
Table 1 shows the differences between the JCT and OTA definitions of “normal tax” as
well as the difference between the OTA “normal” and “reference” tax baselines. As the table
demonstrates, the JCT methodology uses a somewhat broader definition of the normal income tax
base. Accordingly, the JCT list of tax expenditures includes some provisions that are not
contained in the Treasury list.19 The most striking differences, in terms of the magnitudes of the
estimates, are the omissions from the OTA tax expenditure list of reduced rates on dividends and
capital gains, cash accounting, and the exclusion of the value of Medicare Part A (hospital
insurance), Part B (supplementary medical insurance), and Part D (prescription drug insurance) in
excess of premiums.

The normal tax structure and tax expenditure estimates
Tax policy proposals that change the normal tax structure by definition change the
magnitude of tax expenditure estimates. A decrease in marginal tax rates or an increase in the
18

Prior to 2004, OTA used the JCT methodology.
Nonetheless, there are tax expenditures reported by OTA that are not reported by the JCT. Until 2007,
the JCT pamphlet has included a list of tax expenditures that are scored by the JCT but not by Treasury
(and vice-versa). An interesting difference in particulars but not to the general rule is that Treasury counts
a credit against excise taxes that has no effect on income tax liabilities, the alternative fuel and fuel mixture
tax credit, as a tax expenditure. JCT provides an estimate for an income tax credit provided for the carrying
of excise taxes paid on distilled spirits in wholesale inventories.
19

10

standard deduction, for example, will decrease the tax expenditure for the mortgage interest
deduction. As a result, both the size and distribution of tax expenditures can be affected by
intentional as well as unintentional policy changes.

Consequences of the standard deduction
Including the standard deduction in the normal tax structure has an important impact on
the tax expenditures for itemized deductions. As explained further in the next section, the
procedure for estimating tax expenditures essentially consists of running taxpayers through a tax
calculator under the baseline normal tax structure with and without the tax provision and
comparing tax revenues. A taxpayer that would not itemize in the absence of a particular
itemized deduction is assumed to claim the standard deduction (this is sometimes called “tax form
behavior”). As a result, the standard deduction reduces the estimate of some tax expenditures
arising from itemized deductions. Some examples of the effect of the standard deduction on the
tax expenditure estimates are shown in Table 2.
The hypothetical taxpayer in Table 2 itemizes and claims a total of $13,100 in itemized
deductions for state and local income taxes, real estate taxes, home mortgage interest, and
charitable contributions. The standard deduction is assumed to be $10,000 and the taxpayer is
assumed to face a marginal tax rate of 20 percent regardless if s/he itemizes. We ignore
complications related to the AMT for now. The first column shows the base case; the next four
columns show the tax expenditure estimates for each of the itemized deductions.
Note first that although the deductions this taxpayer claims for state and local income
taxes and for real estate taxes are different, the tax expenditure estimates are identical. This is
shown in columns (2) and (3). Both the itemized deduction for state and local income taxes and
for real estate taxes are large enough that if either were removed, the taxpayer would claim the
standard deduction. The increase in taxable income is simply the difference between the

11

taxpayer’s itemized deductions ($13,000) and the standard deduction ($10,000). Thus, the
revenue gain from eliminating either deduction is 20 percent of $3,100 or $620.
Now consider what happens if the mortgage interest deduction is disallowed. In this case
the tax expenditure estimate is based on the full amount of this taxpayer’s mortgage interest
payments and the standard deduction has no effect on the estimate (see column 4). Our example
also shows how tax expenditure estimates vary with the magnitude of the standard deduction. For
example, increasing the standard deduction by $2,000 makes all of this taxpayer’s itemized
deductions “marginal” in the sense that the taxpayer takes the standard deduction in the absence
of any one of their itemized deductions. As a result, the tax expenditure is the same for all four
deductions.
The last row of table 2 shows clearly that the tax expenditure estimate of an itemized
deduction does not reflect how revenues would change if the itemized deduction were an “above
the line” deduction or a statutory adjustment. Of course, this is not the exercise that tax
expenditure estimates were meant to address but is one that can be of interest to policy analysts.
Our example ignored the phase-out of itemized deductions under current law which is
part of the normal tax baseline (and has been since the so-called Pease provision was put in place
in 1990). The phase-out reduces expenditure estimates of itemized deductions for taxpayers over
certain income thresholds under the regular tax but not under the AMT leading to complicated
interactions between the standard deduction, itemized deductions, and the AMT. Barthold et. al.
(1998) show how these phase-outs, phase-ins, and other income tests with respect to certain tax
provisions can create conditions under which a taxpayer’s effective tax rate can exceed their
statutory marginal tax rate, with additional complications for revenue and tax expenditure
estimation.

12

Consequences of the AMT
The AMT reduces the value of tax preferences by “recapturing” them. The AMT also
affects the value of certain tax preferences by changing effective marginal tax rates.20 To
demonstrate the importance of the AMT, we use TAXSIM to calculate how a set of tax
expenditures estimates vary across different AMT policy scenarios. TAXSIM is the individual
income tax simulation model operated by the NBER.21 Like the models used by JCT, OTA, and
some think tanks (the Tax Policy Center, notably), TAXSIM is essentially a large Turbo-Taxstyle calculator aggregating tax form results over thousands of simulated, statistically-weighted
taxpayers.22 The underlying data for TAXSIM is the IRS Statistics of Income (SOI) public-use
file. JCT and OTA have access to the set of confidential IRS taxpayer data, which is both larger
in terms of sample size and more detailed with respect to tax variables reported.
We calculate tax expenditures for the years 2000-2011 under three AMT scenarios: (i)
current law, (ii) current law with no AMT, and (iii) current law in the absence of a patch for the
AMT. By “current law” we mean the law in place in the year of the estimate so that the 2004 tax
expenditure for the child credit, for example, uses the Internal Revenue Code in place (and thus
the normal tax structure) for 2004. The “patch” refers to recent annual adjustments to the AMT
exemption amounts for inflation to prevent a large increase in the number of taxpayers who
would otherwise pay AMT. By “no AMT patch” we mean that the patch applied in 2001 to the
AMT is no longer indexed.23 The TAXSIM estimates are reported in our appendix table.
Figure 1 shows the tax expenditure for the mortgage interest deduction, the state and
local income tax deduction, and the property tax deductions available to itemizers from 2000 to
20

For example, mortgage interest paid, with the exception of home equity loan interest not used for home
improvement, may be deducted under the regular income tax and the AMT. Moving from the income tax
paying-status to AMT-paying status implies changing the applicable marginal tax rate and thus the value of
the tax expenditure.
21
We thank Daniel Feenberg for his exceptional efforts in employing TAXSIM for this project.
22
As discussed further in the next section, tax expenditure estimates do not allow for any taxpayer
behavior. Revenue estimates produced by JCT and OTA allow for microeconomic behavior while holding
the size of the economy constant. As a result, information beyond what is produced by a tax calculator is
required for revenue estimates.
23
The TAXSIM estimates are available upon request from the authors.

13

2007 under our three AMT scenarios. We focus on the period through 2007 because from 2008
onward the “current law” and “current law with no AMT patch” scenarios are the same. The
decline in the tax expenditure estimates for all three deductions between 2001 and 2003 is a result
of the decrease in rates enacted with the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of
2001 (EGTRRA).
Note that the tax expenditure for the property tax and state and local income tax
deduction would have remained near the 2003 level if the AMT exemption levels had not been
“patched.” This is because these itemized deductions are preferences under the AMT. Figure 1
shows that the AMT has had a substantial effect on these tax expenditures. With no AMT, both
tax expenditures would have increased substantially between 2003 and 2007: from $43.4 billion
to $60 billion for the state and local income tax deduction and from $23.8 billion to $32.7 billion
for the property tax deduction.
The effect of the AMT on the mortgage interest deduction is much different. Because
most mortgage interest expenses may be deducted under the AMT, the TAXSIM estimates for the
“current law” and “current law with no AMT” scenario are almost the same. Whether the AMT
is patched, however, has a substantial impact on the expenditure estimate. It turns out that the tax
expenditure for the mortgage interest deduction is higher when the AMT is not patched than
under current law with the patch (see also Burman et al). With no patch, more taxpayers end up
on the AMT. Because there is no standard deduction under the AMT, there is no carve-back to
decrease the tax expenditure of the provision. In addition, under the AMT there is no phase-out
for itemized deductions, which again increases the expenditure estimate. Finally, the rate at
which mortgage interest (and other itemized deductions) are deducted under the AMT and under
the regular tax differ. Using TAXSIM, Feenberg and Poterba (2004) calculate that the weighted
average marginal tax rate for the mortgage interest deduction is about two percentage points
greater under the AMT than without the AMT in 2007, for example.

14

The AMT affects a wide range of tax expenditures. Figure 2 shows the impact of the
AMT on the itemized deductions examined above for 2007 as well as on three additional tax
provisions: the reduced rates for dividends and capital gains, the child tax credit and the Lifetime
and Hope education credits. We chose these provisions for illustrative purposes.
The reduced rates on dividends and capital gains apply under the AMT, but due to an
interaction with the AMT exemption amount, the benefits of the rates can be reduced (see
Leiserson 2007 for a detailed example). When a taxpayer realizes capital gains, s/he increases
AMT taxable income which in turn decreases the AMT exemption through the exemption phaseout. The phase-out raises the effective rate on capital gains and dividends.
According to our TAXSIM calculations, the 2007 tax expenditure for the reduced rates
on dividends and capital gains is $88.9 billion. With no AMT to carve back the provision, the tax
expenditure increases to $92 billion; a not inconsiderable difference. With no patch of the AMT
exemption amounts, the tax expenditure is slightly higher than the current law estimate and lies
between these two estimates at $89.1 billion because of the reduced ability of the AMT to
recapture the benefits of the reduced rates.
The treatment of tax credits under the AMT has changed recently. For taxable years
beginning before 2007, nonrefundable individual credits were allowed against both the regular
tax and AMT. Starting in 2007, these credits are effectively disallowed --- they may only be
claimed to the extent that the individual’s regular income tax liability exceeds the individual’s
minimum tax liability (see JCT 2007 for details). The adoption credit, child credit, and saver’s
credit, however, are exceptions to this rule and may be claimed against both the regular tax
(reduced by other nonrefundable personal credits) and the AMT.
Figure 2 shows clearly that the AMT has an important and uneven impact on tax
expenditures. Much has been written concerning the uncertainty created by the AMT (see
Ackerman and Altshuler 2006, for example). This uncertainty spills over to tax expenditure
estimates that are presented only for present tax law baselines and not alternative scenarios that

15

may be more realistic such as an extension of the AMT patch. An open question that we address
later is whether tax expenditures should be calculated under a variety of AMT scenarios.

Hypothetical tax expenditures
We have noted that what is considered “normal” is subject to judgment. In this section,
for illustrative purposes, we consider some hypothetical tax expenditures that would arise under
different definitions of the normal tax. These “new” expenditure estimates provide information
regarding the cost of the structure of the prevailing tax system.
Suppose first that the standard deduction and personal exemptions were classified as tax
expenditures (listed as income support policies, for example). Using the TAXSIM model, we
find that the personal exemption estimate is $129 billion in 2007 and represents 12.8 percent of
baseline revenues. Clearly, this deviation from a pure income tax with no deductions or
exclusions is large relative to other policy divergences in the tax code.
The standard deduction is more difficult to estimate using TAXSIM since it requires
imputations for itemized deductions for taxpayers that do not itemize under present law. If we
assume that in the absence of the standard deduction there exists a floor on the itemized
deductions equal to the current standard deduction, then the hypothetical tax expenditure for the
standard deduction is $75 billion for 2007, a value that clearly rivals other major existing tax
expenditures.
Similarly, the progressive structure is a set of preferred tax rates, and special rates are
considered a tax expenditure under the Budget Act. Therefore, an argument can be made that this
system is itself a tax expenditure. In fact, as noted earlier, one could construct a set of
deductions/credits under a pure flat tax that generates the same tax liabilities as the progressive
rates create under present law. The set of deductions/credits would be tax expenditures; the set of
progressive rates would not. Nonetheless, most tax analysts would agree that the ability-to-pay
principle, and thus the progressive system of rates, is an important element of the existing income

16

tax. However, if one were to report a tax expenditure for this component, it would be similar to
the following exercise.
Assume that for the purposes of this hypothetical tax expenditure, the maximum statutory
marginal income tax rate in a given year (35 percent for our purposes) is the “normal” rate. All
other rates under present law are therefore preferential rates, assigned on the basis of income type
(e.g. wages or capital gains) or other criteria (adjusted gross income of the taxpayer). These
preferred rates are tax expenditures.
We estimate tax expenditures for each of the rates using 2005 SOI data. 24 Figure 3
shows our expenditure estimates for the 2005 individual tax brackets. The tax expenditure for the
10 percent bracket (the estimate for taxing income in this class at 10 percent rather than 35
percent) is equal to $244.7 billion, a number that substantially exceeds most existing tax
expenditures. The estimate for the 15 percent rate is $344 billion, for the 25 percent rate is $72.1
billion, and for the 28 percent rate is $17 billion. In total, the hypothetical tax expenditure for
“income support for the progressive system of rates” is $827.4 billion per year, an estimate that
exceeds almost all official tax expenditures.
Combined with the estimates for the standard deduction and the personal exemptions,
these calculations provide information regarding the amounts that are dedicated in tax
expenditure terms to the progressive system of rates and reveal the relative size of this important
policy element to other, existing tax expenditures. As with other tax expenditures, the
distributional aspects of this hypothetical tax expenditure are revealing. Appendix Figure 1
shows that the benefit of the progressive system of rates accrues roughly to middle-income
taxpayers.

24

One could imagine other methods of calculating these tax expenditures. Instead of using the maximum
statutory rate as the baseline rate, one could use the average marginal rate or the average effective tax rate.
However, doing so would require reporting negative tax expenditures for income taxed at above average
rates, which presents its own conceptual issues that are discussed in more detail below. Alternatively, one
could use the lowest rate as the base, and calculate negative tax expenditures, or use the revenue neutral
rate.

17

Comparing estimates over time
Many researchers have studied how tax expenditures have changed over time.25 But, as
noted above, the baseline “normal” tax changes when tax policy changes alter any provisions of
the prevailing tax structure. Hence, Congress implicitly changes policy towards tax-favored
activities when it changes tax rates, the standard deduction, the AMT, or any other part of the
normal tax structure. To demonstrate how policy changes affect tax expenditure estimates, we
use TAXSIM to calculate a set of tax expenditures under present law in place in each year and
under pre-2001 law (we call this “constant” law since it holds constant the provisions in place
prior to EGTRRA). In our discussion, we focus on the mortgage interest, state and local income
tax, and property tax deductions.
Figure 4 shows the effect of tax policy changes enacted from 2001 onward on the growth
of the tax expenditure estimate for the mortgage interest deduction. Our calculations indicate that
this tax preference to housing increased by 14 percent between 2000 and 2007. In the absence of
the 2001 and 2003 tax policy changes (under “constant law”), the tax expenditure estimate would
have increased by 26 percent. Note that between 2008 and 2010, the tax expenditure estimates
are quite similar. This is due to the AMT which is not patched under current law for those years,
and, as we have seen, actually increases the tax expenditure for this itemized deduction.
The evolution of the tax expenditure for state and local income taxes under constant (pre2001) law and current law is shown in Figure 5 and is striking. Between 2000 and 2007, this
expenditure decreased by about 1 percent under current law but would have increased by 36
percent under constant law. The noticeable decrease from 2007 to 2008 is due to recapture
effects from the AMT, which is not patched for 2008 under our present law baseline. The
difference in the benefits for the property tax deduction under actual law and the constant law
baseline, shown in Figure 6, is also dramatic. The tax expenditure increases by 24 percent
25

See, for example, US GAO (2005), Neubig and Joulfaian (1988), Toder (1998), and Steuerle (2004).

18

between 2000 and 2007. Under constant law this expenditure would have grown by 72 percent.
This exercise illustrates clearly how tax policy changes can effect the growth of tax expenditures.

Sunsets, budget windows and timing issues
Tax expenditure analysis treats sunsets as permanent features, which is consistent with
revenue estimation practice. This approach is consistent with treating tax expenditures as
reporting the effects of present law, rather than analyzing policy proposals. For example, many
major and minor elements of the tax code are scheduled to sunset in the near future. In fact, most
of the major 2001 and 2003 tax cuts are scheduled to expire on January 1, 2011, a date some
observers have called “tax policy doomsday.” The scheduled sunsets lead to some interesting
patterns of tax expenditure estimates as we have already seen in Figures 4, 5, and 6. Reading a
tax expenditure table across time requires fairly sophisticated knowledge of U.S. tax policy and is
a bit like reading tea leaves. Consider the tax expenditure estimate for the state and local income
tax deduction under current law. The estimates for 2000-2011 assume that the AMT is not
patched for 2008-2011 and the 2001 and 2003 tax cuts expire as scheduled.26 It is hard to think of
this pattern of tax benefits as being equivalent to an expenditure program outlay given how it
fluctuates with tax rules.27
Sunsets can also give rise to negative tax expenditures. For example, the 2007 JCT tax
expenditure publication reports negative tax expenditure estimates for the tax code section 198
brownfield expensing provision for individual taxpayers (i.e. pass-through entities and small
businesses) for fiscal years 2009 through 2011. This is due to the fact that the provision expires
under present law at the end of 2008. Expensing accelerates qualified brownfield remediation
cost deductions. The acceleration generates a positive tax expenditure in the year of expensing

26

In particular, the marginal income tax rate cuts, including the creation of the 10% bracket and the
reduction of the maximum rate from 39.6% to 35%.
27
Nonetheless, expenditure programs have their own quirks with respect to reporting, including the annual
appropriation process and some baseline issues.

19

with a corresponding set of negative tax expenditures due to the loss of deductions in future
years. An expensing provision with no sunset would not typically reveal these negative tax
expenditures because the expensing behavior in each fiscal year would exceed the loss of the
otherwise permitted expense deductions.28 Negative tax expenditures that arise in this manner
appear for other provisions, including section 179 small business expensing, GO-Zone bonus
depreciation, and Indian reservation accelerated depreciation.
Another class of examples of negative values appearing on tax expenditure tables is the
set of expiring business tax credits, such as the credit for fuel cell and microturbine power plant
installation in OTA’s 2008 tax expenditure listing. Here, the provision provides a credit to the
qualifying taxpayer, but the credit also requires a corresponding reduction in basis of the asset.
This consequently reduces future depreciation deductions and raises gains taxation, if applicable,
in future years. Beyond the sunset of the credit, this gives rise to larger tax receipts than in the
baseline and therefore a negative tax expenditure.
Nonetheless, as a general rule, negative tax expenditures are not presently reported as a
matter of convention.29 In the examples noted above, these negative estimates arise only within a
few or even single years.30 Over the full reporting period for the tax expenditure, in general no
negative tax expenditures are currently estimated and reported in tax expenditure budgets
produced by either the JCT or OTA.31
This raises a fundamental question: what is a negative tax expenditure? For many, a
negative tax expenditure represents a disproportional statutory tax burden on a particular kind of
income or economic activity. As an outlay equivalent, it may be thought of as a fee or transfer
28

However, the original rules for the brownfield expensing provision was limited to certain locations. If all
such locations were redeveloped, then even a permanent version of the original rules would have exhibited
negative tax expenditures for individual years. We thank Tom Barthold for noting this point to us.
29
JCT (2008) announced that they will report negative tax expenditures in the future.
30
However, this raises the question of whether a negative tax expenditure should continue to be reported
for an expired provision that has only a negative tax expenditure for the budget window.
31
One exception illustrates the previous explanation of temporary provisions giving rise to negative tax
expenditures. The 2007 OTA report provides a negative tax expenditure over the reporting period (20082012) for the deferral of gain allocable to disposition of electrical transmission property due to FERCmandated restructuring.

20

payment from the taxpayer to the Treasury. However, for others, a negative tax expenditure is
simply a tax and thus no special accounting is necessary. Indeed, the Budget Act does not refer to
negative tax expenditures. Nonetheless, a certain respect for symmetry requires that more
thought and analysis be given to negative tax expenditure reporting.32
OTA lists several examples of tax rules that may be considered negative tax expenditures
under a comprehensive income tax. These include the passive loss rules, the restrictions on
carrybacks and carryforwards for net operating losses, and restrictions on the deductibility of
capital losses. For example, owners of a personal residence are not permitted to deduct a loss
from the sale of the property. The gain exclusion for principal residences is reported as a positive
tax expenditure, but the corresponding restriction on loss deductions is not. There are other
theoretical negative tax expenditures that are worth considering. For example, the double
taxation of corporate income may be considered a tax expenditure. And, in fact, beginning in
2004, the OTA has been reporting the double taxation of corporate profits as a negative tax
expenditure in an appendix to the tax expenditure presentation in the budget. As another
example, the taxation of gains due to inflation might be considered a negative tax expenditure.

Alternative baselines
As this section has made clear, different “normal” tax structures will generate different
tax expenditure estimates. The staff of the OTA has studied how the expenditure budget would
change under a comprehensive income or consumption tax base using the current rate structure
(see OMB 2008 and Carroll, Joulfaian and Mackie 2008). It is also interesting to consider the
impact of the current progressive rate structure on expenditure estimates. One way to explore this
issue is to use a flat tax structure to estimate tax expenditures. We ran some experiments with
TAXSIM replacing the normal marginal tax rates (and special rates on dividends and capital

32

Indeed, the JCT has indicated that in the future it will report estimates for some negative tax expenditures
(JCT 2008).

21

gains) with a flat rate of 19 percent, the rate that most closely corresponds to a revenue neutral
rate according to TAXSIM for 2008.
Again, for expository purposes, we focus on the tax expenditures for the mortgage
interest, state and local income tax, and property tax deductions. In addition to current law and
pre-EGTRRA law estimates, Figures 4, 5, and 6 include series showing estimates for our flat rate
experiment. The growth of the mortgage interest deduction over the period, shown in Figure 4, is
similar under current law and current law with the flat rate because of its relative lack of
interaction with the AMT. The estimates plotted in Figures 5 and 6 reveal the more significant
interactions between the AMT and the state and local income tax and real property tax
deductions. The flat rate experiment shows a relatively smooth pattern over the time period while
the current law experiment illustrates the significant carve-back of these deductions by the AMT.
Also interesting is the fact that the flat rate estimate exceeds the 2010 and 2011 estimates for preEGTRRA law due to the relatively lower marginal rates faced by taxpayers deducting property
taxes.

Summary
It is clear from the preceding discussion that tax expenditure reporting involves numerous
definitional and interactive complications that distinguish it from outlay or government
expenditure accounting for which tax expenditures are intended to be comparable. Debates
regarding the appropriate “normal” income tax structure, timing issues, interactions with the
AMT and standard deduction, as well as more fundamental issues regarding the correct income
definition suggest that tax expenditure reporting must be examined within the context of certain
standing and generally accepted assumptions regarding tax policy. Nonetheless, as the following
section illustrates, even the more mechanical estimation process, done under a given set of such
assumptions, is complicated by common misunderstandings regarding the methodology used to
generate estimates of tax expenditures.

22

SCORING TAX EXPENDITURES
Estimating Considerations
The economists of the JCT and the OTA employ certain standing assumptions when they
calculate tax expenditure estimates. First and most importantly, unlike official revenue estimates,
tax expenditure estimates do not incorporate any change in taxpayers’ economic behavior.
Revenue estimates include forecasts of behavior that will change, including consumption,
investment and other economic actions. These modeled micro-dynamic responses allow
taxpayers to respond to changes in after-tax prices and other tax-related incentives. However, as
is well known, revenue estimation does not allow macroeconomic feedback or changes in
national income in response to changes in tax policy.
In contrast, tax expenditure estimates include neither the micro-dynamic response nor
macroeconomic feedback. As discussed in the previous section, a tax expenditure is simply the
change to the existing baseline or forecast of a particular line item of tax revenue. This tax
expenditure methodology is thus intended to include the induced or ex post effects of the tax
expenditure provision. This is analysis presented as a state-of-the-world as it currently exists,
rather than incorporating expected behavior effects from a future change in policy. Consequently,
it is important to note, as some analysts fail to do, that a tax expenditure estimate is not a revenue
estimate. In part this confusion exists because revenue estimates are not reported side-by-side
with tax expenditure estimates.33
For example, the tax expenditure for the mortgage interest deduction is calculated by
summing for all itemizing taxpayers the amount of mortgage interest paid times the applicable
marginal income tax rate applied against itemized deduction amounts. As noted earlier, there is
an interaction with the standard deduction due to the itemization decision. However, the tax
33

However, the staff of the JCT has recently indicated that “where helpful and feasible” the staff will report
accompanying revenue estimates. (see JCT 2008). The CBO currently presents many revenue options of
large scale tax policy proposals in its biannual Budget Options report.

23

expenditure estimate does not allow the taxpayer to modify the own-rent decision regarding
housing, nor does it allow the taxpayer to change debt and investment allocation decisions. It is
reasonable to assume that if Congress were to eliminate the mortgage interest deduction, many
taxpayers would reduce their holdings of low-yield assets to reduce mortgage debt holdings due
to the change in after-tax mortgage interest rates.34 While a revenue estimate would reflect these
actions, the tax expenditure estimate does not. For most cases, the tax expenditure estimate tends
to be larger than the corresponding revenue estimate because of this assumption.
As another example, the tax expenditure estimate for the Hope credit for student expenses
does not allow taxpayers to change education decisions in order for the taxpayer to qualify for
other tax incentives. There are numerous education incentives in the Internal Revenue Code,
some with overlapping qualifying criteria. The interaction of these incentives is discussed more
below.
To examine the difference between a revenue estimate and a tax expenditure estimate,
consider the following partial equilibrium example for an economic action, Q, with price, P.

Suppose that the marginal cost curve (MC) includes a broad-based tax, t. The marginal cost and
marginal benefit cost curve yield the after-tax partial equilibrium. Further suppose that there
34

Poterba and Sinai (2008) examine this tax expenditure in detail.

24

exists a separate tax provision that provides a tax expenditure targeted directly to this market.
The tax expenditure takes the form of a per-unit subsidy in the amount of p2 minus p1, thereby
shifting the applicable marginal cost curve to MC`. The tax expenditure increases the amount of
the activity undertaken from q* to q. Under the prevailing tax rules, the tax expenditure induced
quantity, q, is the baseline quantity for tax expenditure analysis purposes.
The tax expenditure estimate of the incentive is equal to (p2-p1)q.35 However, the
revenue estimate of repealing this tax expenditure is equal to (p2-p1)q – t(q-q*). The revenue
estimate is lower because it includes a revenue loss associated with the microdynamic response: a
reduction in the amount of the activity undertaken by the taxpayer from q to q*.
It is difficult to provide an example of a set of official estimates illustrating the difference
between a revenue and tax expenditure estimates, typically because tax expenditure estimates are
calculated for large provisions or bundles of small, related provisions of the tax code. Revenue
estimates typically are issued for smaller, more detailed policy changes associated with these
provisions. For example, in 2005 the JCT published a revenue estimate for repealing the
deduction for home equity loan interest paid (JCT 2005). With respect to this provision, only the
total tax expenditure for the mortgage interest deduction is publicly available. In contrast, the
repeal would have affected only a portion of the mortgage interest deduction, so a direct
comparison between the tax expenditure and the revenue estimate cannot be made. Despite these
data limitations, it is certainly the case that the 2005 revenue estimate included a number of
behavioral responses to the proposed policy change and was therefore lower than its hypothetical
tax expenditure.
An example that can be used to illustrate this point is the tax exclusion for employer-paid
life insurance. The JCT reports that the tax expenditure for this provision in years 2009, 2010
and 2011 is approximately equal to $2.7 billion. However, in the 2007 CBO Budget Options

35

We assume here that the tax expenditure does not take the form of an itemized deduction to abstract from
any interaction with the standard deduction.

25

report, the JCT reported that the revenue estimate for this provision is only equal to $2.1 billion in
2009, $2.2 billion in 2010, and $2.3 billion in 2011. The smaller revenue estimate is consistent
with what theory would predict. The tax incentive for employer-provided life insurance increases
its use, and repealing that tax expenditure would not result in a full capture of the benefit because
of shifting of taxpayer behavior. Therefore the revenue estimate should be lower than the tax
expenditure.
As noted earlier, there is one notable exception to the general rule that tax expenditure
estimates do not incorporate taxpayer behavior: tax form behavior. In this sense, tax expenditure
estimates automatically include a realistic accounting of most tax form interactions, including
whether to itemize or not. This tax form behavior creates the possibility of changing the relative
sizes of various tax expenditures, as our earlier example from Table 2 illustrated. In general, tax
expenditures of large provisions generate relatively higher estimates than tax expenditures of
relatively smaller provisions because of the itemization decision. Given that tax expenditures are
often compared to one another, this biasing of tax expenditures in terms of size may be
problematic for tax policy analysts. On the other hand, the recapture produced by the standard
deduction is clearly an important component of the revenue estimate and thus this estimate may
in fact be more realistic.
However, there are tax incentives that have overlapping qualifying criteria for which only
one tax incentive may be claimed as a matter of law. How should such provisions be estimated
for tax expenditure analysis? Because the qualifying criteria are similar, the taxpayer may qualify
for another tax expenditure with no change in economic behavior, if the one claimed under
current law were to be eliminated. However, this type of tax form behavior is not likely to be
automatically captured by an Individual Tax Model (ITM), and thus can lead to differing
estimates.
As an example of the differences in scoring conventions for this situation, consider the
JCT and OTA tax expenditure estimates for the tax credits for post-secondary education (HOPE

26

credit and the lifetime learning credit).36 The credits have differing but similar qualifying criteria,
such that if one credit were repealed, then some taxpayers could claim the other credit. The
differences in the JCT and OTA estimates for these provisions demonstrate that they indeed use
different conventions for this estimate. The fiscal year 2008 estimate from JCT for both credits is
$4.4 billion. The OTA estimate is broken out for each credit, with $3.4 billion for the HOPE
credit and $2.2 billion for the lifetime learning credit. It is clear that the JCT economists are
allowing taxpayers to substitute between the two credits, when the taxpayers are otherwise
qualified and one credit is hypothetically repealed for tax expenditure estimation purposes. This
produces some recapture, through increased use of another tax incentive, and a smaller tax
expenditure estimate. In contrast, the OTA estimates examine the credits in isolation and do not
include such tax form behavior. Nonetheless, for both estimates, it is important to note that this
tax form behavior does not equate to change in economic behavior. There is no increase or
decrease in the underlying qualifying activity of higher education expenditures by the taxpayer.37
The JCT approach in this regard is justified as being similar to tax form behavior used to
determine whether a taxpayer, for tax expenditure purposes, itemizes their deductions.
There are many other overlapping provisions in the tax code. For example, the major
savings incentives, traditional and Roth IRAs and 401(k)-style accounts, reward a similar
underlying economic behavior: saving. The report of the President’s 2005 Advisory Panel for
Federal Tax Reform notes that there are at least a dozen tax-preferred options in the current code.
The interaction of tax expenditures raises a known issue that is routinely ignored with
respect to the reporting of bundles of tax expenditures. Tax expenditures cannot be summed.
Because of the previously identified issues concerning itemization and other tax form behavior,
summing of tax expenditure estimates often results in double counting and biased estimates. For
36

Another interesting example of overlapping provisions involves the treatment of export income. Prior to
the Jobs Act, U.S. multinational corporations received favorable treatment of income from sales abroad
through the export source rules and the foreign sales corporation provisions.
37
There may be other interactions in this example with the tuition and fees deduction that may be claimed
on the front of the 1040 individual tax form.

27

example, Hungerford (2006) performed a simulation in which twelve selected tax expenditures
were eliminated in isolation and then simultaneously. Hungerford finds that the sum of the
individual tax expenditure estimates was 17.5 percent higher than the tax expenditure calculation
for simultaneous repeal of the twelve provisions. The Government Accountability Office asked
OTA to conduct a similar exercise with five major itemized deductions (U.S. General
Accountability Office 2005).38 The analysts at OTA found a 25 percent difference between the
simultaneous estimate and the sum of the individual tax expenditures. Despite this, researchers
have produced reviews of tax expenditures that rely on summing tax expenditures to present an
aggregate picture of the role tax expenditures play in the federal government’s budget.39
Using TAXSIM, we calculated the tax expenditure for two bundles of tax expenditures.
For 2007, TAXSIM reports a tax expenditure for the mortgage interest deduction of $82.4 billion
and $25.8 billion for property taxes for owner-occupied homes. Summing these two tax
expenditures yields $108.2 billion. However, the tax expenditure estimated simultaneously for
these two provisions generates an estimate of $99.1 billion, a decline of 8.4 percent. As a second
and somewhat different example, the 2007 tax expenditure for the state and local income tax
deduction is $47.4 billion. Summing with the tax expenditure for the property tax deduction
yields $73.2 billion for 2008. The simultaneous estimate of these tax expenditures produces
$74.8 billion, representing an increase of 2.1 percent. This unusual case, where the simultaneous
repeal of two tax expenditures yields a larger estimate than the sum of their individual tax
expenditures is due to the AMT. As noted earlier, the AMT can also produce interaction effects,
particularly given the combined effect of lower tax rates and unindexed AMT exemption
amounts, which is forecasted to increase the number of AMT-payers for future tax years. In the
absence of the AMT, the 2007 tax expenditure for the state and local income tax deduction is $60

38

The five itemized deductions include charitable contributions, home mortgage interest expenses, state
and local income taxes, state and local property taxes, and medical expenses.
39
See, for example, Neubig and Joulfaian (1988), Toder 1998, Steuerle (2004), and GAO (2005), and most
recently Weiner (2008).

28

billion and the tax expenditure for the property tax deduction is $32.7 billion. The simultaneous
estimate of these tax expenditures is $95.5 billion, representing a decrease of 3.7 percent from the
sum of the two tax expenditures ($92.8 billion).
Putting aside the complexities caused by the AMT, these examples suggest that the
interaction effects among tax expenditures, particularly for large tax provisions, can be
significant. Given these estimates, there would be certain transparency benefits for JCT and OTA
reporting of bundles of policy-related or issue-related tax expenditures. For example, an estimate
could be reported for all housing-related tax expenditure or other similarly-related bundles of tax
incentives, thereby yielding more accurate estimates of common bundles of tax expenditures.
Alternatively, as estimated by Burman, Geissler and Toder (2008), bundles of tax
expenditures could be grouped by their tax-form character (exclusions, itemized deductions,
refundable credits, special rates, etc.). For 2007 estimates, Burman et. al. find that the tax
expenditure for the sum of income exclusions (life insurance contributions, retirement benefits,
and other exclusions) is six percent higher than the sum of the individual tax expenditures. They
attribute this effect to the progressive character of the income tax rates. When tax exclusions are
consider simultaneously (or “stacked” in the ITM jargon), the effective marginal income tax rate
of the taxpayer increases due to greater amounts of taxable income or AMT-paying status. For a
bundle of itemized deductions (mortgage interest, state and local taxes, charitable contributions,
medical expenses and casualty losses), they find the opposite effect. The tax expenditure of the
set is 15 percent smaller than the sum of the individual tax expenditures because of the recapture
effect produced by the standard deduction.
We consider an experiment that bundles the top tax expenditures. The idea is to use a
variant of tax expenditure estimation (a bundled estimate) to gauge the revenue gains from base
broadening. We are able to estimate thirteen major expenditures with TAXSIM including the
mortgage interest deduction ($82.4 billion), the deduction for unreimbursed medical and dental
expenses ($8.3 billion), the deduction for state and local income taxes ($47.4 billion), the

29

deduction for property taxes on owner-occupied homes ($25.8 billion), the deduction for
charitable contributions ($42.7 billion), the earned income tax credit ($41.4 billion), the
refundable child tax credit ($46.2 billion), the lifetime earning and Hope credits ($6.6 billion), the
child and dependent care credit ($2.6 billion), the tax-exemption on municipal bonds ($17.6
billion), the preferred tax rates on capital gains and dividends ($88.9 billion), the tax preferences
for IRAs and Keogh plans ($4.0 billion), and the exclusion for certain pensions and annuities
($17.6 billion).40 Summing these tax expenditure yields $431.4 billion. Simultaneously
estimating the repeal of these provisions produces a 2007 estimate of $387.7 billion, a difference
of 10.1 percent.
It is worth noting the size of this estimate. In 2007, TAXSIM forecasts a total of $1.02
trillion in individual income tax receipts. Hence, these 13 items represent about 38 percent of this
total. As these are tax expenditure estimates, without actual revenue estimates it cannot be
calculated the extent to which income tax rates could be reduced if these provisions were
eliminated. Nonetheless, these expenditures represent a considerable amount of tax base
narrowing. And without the AMT to carve back the benefits of many of these expenditures, the
TAXSIM forecast for the 13 items increases to $453.4 billion or 46 percent of tax revenues. It is
also interesting to compare how the size of the revenue loss due to this group of expenditures has
evolved over time. Under our current law scenario, the share of revenues accounted for by the
top 13 individual tax expenditures has increased from about 33 percent in 2000 to 38 percent in
2007. Using our constant law scenario, or pre-EGTRRA rules, the percentage increases by only
one percentage point to 34 percent in 2007. With no AMT, the percentage goes from about 35
percent in 2000 to 41 percent in 2007.

40

Pensions and annuities not included in AGI includes only has social security benefits due to data
limitations on the SOI Public Use File.

30

Tax Expenditures Distributional Considerations
As with any appropriation item of the federal budget, the distributional aspects of tax
expenditures are important, particularly for tax provisions attempting to achieve a policy
objective beyond raising revenue for the government.41 The best source of information regarding
the distribution of government tax expenditure estimates is the JCT tax expenditure publication.42
In each edition, the JCT presents the distribution of major tax expenditures: mortgage interest
deduction, student loan interest, education credits, child tax credit, untaxed social security and
railroad retirement benefits, child care credit, earned income credit, charitable contribution
deduction, state and local tax deduction (income, sales and personal property), medical expense
deduction and the owner-occupied home property tax deduction.43
As with other forms of distributional analysis, selection of an income classifier is
important. JCT uses an expanded income classifier which is equal to adjusted gross income
(AGI) plus the following items: tax-exempt interest, employer contributions for health and life
insurance, employer share of payroll taxes, workers’ compensation, nontaxable Social Security

41

See Joint Committee on Taxation (1993) for an extensive discussion of the methodological issues
involved in producing distributional analysis. See Cronin (1999) for a discussion of the OTA distribution
methodology.
42
Congressional Budget Office reports are another source of distributional information for tax
expenditures. The most recent example is a February 2008 report on the deductibility of state and local
taxes (CBO 2008). Outside of the government, the Tax Policy Center (TPC) uses their ITM to distribute a
variety of individual tax expenditures including, among others, the child tax credit, earned income tax
credit, tax benefits for health insurance, and special rates for capital gains and dividends. While the TPC
methodology follows the JCT approach, there are some differences. The TPC use a measure of cash
income that differs somewhat from the JCT expanded income detailed above. Cash income is AGI minus
taxable state and local tax refunds, plus total deductions from AGI, non-taxable pension income, taxexempt interest, non-taxable social security benefits, cash transfers, worker’s compensation, employer’s
contribution to tax deferred retirement savings plans, employer’s share of payroll taxes and corporate tax
liability. The inclusion of the employer share of payroll taxes and corporate taxes puts income on a pretax
basis. Another difference from JCT is that the TPC examines the impact of tax expenditures on after-tax
income, as well as the share of the tax benefit received and the size of the tax benefit.
43
In addition to being relatively large, these provisions have the benefit that the data requirements
necessary to confidently estimate the distributional aspects of the tax expenditures are available in the
confidential SOI data. For other large tax expenditures, the data and off-ITM model estimations provide
less reliable methods of determining distributions.

31

benefits, the insurance value of Medicare benefits, alternative minimum tax preference items, and
excluded income of U.S. citizens living abroad.
Beyond the income classifier concept itself, it is also important to note that the JCT
distributional methodology uses the unit of analysis provided by the SOI data: the tax unit. With
the possibility of multiple tax returns being filed by households or families, as these concepts are
defined in Census data for example, there is some difficulty in using this analysis to make
comparisons to other kinds of distributional analysis. This is particularly true for married
taxpayers filing separate returns. Furthermore, there can be a difference between the statutory
incidence of a tax expenditure and the economic incidence of the tax provision. For example, the
mortgage interest deduction is claimed on an individual tax form, but the underlying deduction
represents expense allocable to investment for a household.
We use the SOI Public Use File for 2004 and TAXSIM to illustrate simple distributional
analysis of the state and local income tax deduction, some grouped expenditures, and a major
expenditure that is not distributed by JCT, the special rates on dividends and capital gains. As
before, we consider three scenarios: current law, current law with no AMT and current law with
no AMT patch. We use a modified version of cash income that can be calculated using
information from TAXSIM as an income classifier.44 To simplify the presentation, we show
results only for 2004 and by income decile (instead of also by income class).45 One goal of this
exercise is to demonstrate how incremental changes in presentation can increase available
information regarding tax expenditure. To this end, we follow the JCT approach and calculate

44

Cash income is AGI minus state and local tax refunds, plus tax-exempt interest, non-taxable Social
Security benefits, deductions for IRA contributions, student loan interest, alimony paid, tuition & fees,
Health Savings Accounts, one-half of the self-employment tax, self-employed health insurance, selfemployed SEP, SIMPLE and qualified plans, and penalties on the early withdrawal of saving, minus other
income. The Public Use File does not report other income. To calculate other income, we took the
difference between reported AGI and the signed sum of the reported components of AGI. The difference
includes moving expenses, foreign earned income, and net operating losses from previous years as well as
errors due to censoring and rounding. Returns of dependents are excluded from the analysis.
45
See the notes to Table 7 for decile breakpoints.

32

the distribution of benefits and not some other possible distributional measures such as the effect
of the expenditure(s) on after-tax income.
We begin by showing the distribution of tax liability in Table 7. As is well-known, tax
liability is concentrated in the top decile. Somewhat surprisingly, the distribution of tax liability
changes little under the two alternative AMT scenarios. Table 8 shows the distribution of the tax
expenditure for the state and local income tax deduction. The first column shows the distribution
of those taxpayers that claim an itemized deduction for state and local income taxes across
income deciles. The second column reports the average deduction. The results are not surprising
given what is known about the distribution of this expenditure from the JCT distribution tables,
for example. The benefits are highly concentrated at the top of the distribution (as is tax liability
and the group of taxpayers that itemize their returns).
Our analysis both complements the JCT analysis by showing information by income
deciles (with detail on the top decile) and adds to the analysis by considering how the distribution
changes under alternate AMT scenarios. Without the AMT, the benefit of this itemized deduction
is skewed even more to the top of the distribution. Without an AMT patch, on the other hand, the
benefits are somewhat less skewed across the income deciles. However, the benefits do become
more concentrated within the top one percent to returns.
Table 9 shows the distribution of the special rates on dividends and capital gains. Given
the concentration of this income in the top decile, this distribution of benefits is not surprising.
Nevertheless, it is striking that 99 percent of the benefit goes to taxpayers in the top five percent
of the distribution. Moreover, the distribution of this tax expenditure is less progressive than the
others reported in this paper.
Table 10 shows the distribution of our hypothetical tax expenditure that bundles the top
thirteen tax expenditures in TAXSIM. Taxpayers across all deciles benefit from this group of tax
expenditures, with the earned income tax credit and child credit most important in the bottom
deciles. Table 11 shows how the distribution of the top expenditures is affected by these two

33

credits by removing them from the analysis. While only about one half of the top thirteen
expenditures in TAXSIM go to the top ten percent of tax units, once we eliminate the EITC and
child credit, almost 70 percent of the top expenditures are claimed by this group. The average
expenditure in each of the bottom five deciles falls significantly and the total benefit received by
the bottom half falls from 20.5 percent to 4.5 percent.
Burman et al. find that eliminating most major tax expenditures simultaneously would
make the tax system less progressive as tax expenditures constitute a larger percentage of lowerincome taxpayer’s AGI than higher-income taxpayers. The analysis in our paper generally
confirms these results, as can be seen by comparing the distribution of liability in Table 7 to, for
example, the distributions reported in Tables 10 and 11.
In theory, the distributional consequences of tax expenditures are not limited to income
concepts. For example, unlike almost all revenue estimates, JCT and OTA report tax
expenditures estimates by taxpayer type: corporate or individual. While this additional
information is useful, it can also be misleading. Many business sectors are dominated by passthrough entities that report tax liability on individual income tax forms. This conflates individual
income tax data with business tax data and can thus be misused in certain contexts. Furthermore,
like other tax variables, there may be uneven allocation of tax expenditure benefits across
geographic space. Unfortunately, OTA and JCT do not report spatial analyses of tax provisions
and proposals.46

CONCLUSION
Despite the challenges associated with tax expenditure classification and estimation, the
annual reporting of tax expenditure estimates is an important source of information for
economists and tax law observers. We have reviewed the evolution of the tax expenditure
46

For a recent examples of the spatial estimation of housing-related tax expenditures, see Gyourko and
Sinai (2004) and Dietz (2006). For recent information regarding the deductibility of state and local taxes,
see CBO (2008).

34

reporting process and identified examples of inconsistencies between present and theoretically
ideal practice. Using NBER’s TAXSIM, we have demonstrated the complications produced by
the AMT, the standard deduction, the grouping of tax expenditures, expiring provisions, and
interactive effects in the estimation process. A fuller understanding and appreciation of the
complications associated with tax expenditure classification, estimation, and reporting will enable
tax analysts to more efficiently use these tools to better understand the present-law tax system, as
well as possible, future reforms.

35

REFERENCES
Altshuler, Rosanne and Robert D. Dietz (2008), “Reconsidering Tax Expenditure Estimation:
Challenges and Reforms,” Rutgers University Working Paper 2008-04.
Ackerman, Jonathan Z. and Rosanne Altshuler (2006). “Constrained Tax Reform: How Political
and Economic Constraints Affect the Formation of Tax Policy Proposals.” National Tax
Journal, 59(1): 165-187.
Andrews, William D. (1972). “Personal Deductions in an Ideal Income Tax.” Harvard Law
Review 86.
Andrews, William D. (1984). “A Source of Inspiration.” Harvard Law Review 98(2): 332-334.
Barthhold, Thomas A., Thomas Koerner, and John F. Navratil (1998). “Effective Marginal Tax
Rates under the Federal Individual Income Tax: Death by One Thousand Pin Pricks?”
National Tax Journal 51(3): 553-64.
Bittker, Boris I. 1969. "Accounting for Federal 'Tax Subsidies' in the Budget." National Tax
Journal 22(2):244-61.
Burman, Leonard (2003). “Is the Tax Expenditure Concept Still Relevant?” National Tax Journal
56(3):613-628.
Burman, Leonard, Christopher Geissler, and Eric Toder (2008). “The Growth, Distribution and
Opportunity Cost of Individual Tax Expenditures.” Tax Policy Center Discussion Paper.
Forthcoming.
Carroll, Robert, David Joulfaian, and James Mackie (2008). “Income versus Consumption Tax
Baselines for Tax Expenditures,” mimeo.
Century Foundation (2002). Bad Breaks All Around: The Report of the Century Foundation
Working Group on Tax Expenditures. New York: The Century Foundation Press.
Congressional Budget Office (2008). The Deductibility of State and Local Taxes. February.
Congressional Budget Office (2007). Budget Options. February.
Cronin, Julie-Anne (1999). “U.S. Tresury Distributional Analysis Methodology,” Office of Tax
Analysis Working Paper 85, Washington, DC.
Davie, Bruce (1994). “Tax Expenditures in the Federal Excise Tax System.” National Tax
Journal 47(1): 39-62.
Dietz, Robert (2006). “Local Use of the Mortgage Interest and Real Estate Tax Deductions.”
Housing Economics Online. Washington, D.C.: National Association of Home Builders,
June.

36

Feenberg, Daniel R. and James M. Poterba (2004). “The Alternative Minimum Tax and Effective
Marginal Tax Rates,” National Tax Journal 57(2): 407-27.
Fiekowsky, Seymour (1980). “The Relation of Tax Expenditures to the Distribution of the "Fiscal
Burden.” Canadian Taxation 2 (Winter): 211-219.
Gyourko, Joseph and Todd Sinai (2004). “The (Un)Changing Geographic Distribution of
Housing Tax Benefits, 1980-2000.” In J. Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy 18,
165-208.
Hungerford, Thomas L. (2006). “Tax Expenditures: Trends and Critiques.” Library of Congress,
Congressional Research Service Report. RL33641, September.
Joint Committee on Taxation (2008). “A Reconsideration of Tax Expenditure Analysis,” JCS-3708.
Joint Committee on Taxation (2007). “Estimates of Federal Tax Expenditures For Fiscal Years
2007-2011,” JCS-3-07.
Joint Committee on Taxation (2007). “Present Law and Background Relating to the Individual
Alternative Minimum Tax,” JCX-38-07.
Joint Committee on Taxation (2005). “Options to Improve Tax Compliance and Reform Tax
Expenditures,” JCS-02-05.
Joint Committee on Taxation (1993). “Methodology and Issues in Measuring Changes in
the Distribution of Tax Burdens,” JCS-7-93.
Leiserson, Greg (2007). “The 15 Percent Rate on Capital Gains: A Casualty of the Alternative
Minimum Tax,” http://www.urban.org/url.cfm?ID=901052.
Polackova, Hana Brixi, Christian M.A. Valendue, and Zhicheng Swift, eds. (2004). Tax
Expenditure: Shedding Light on Government Spending through Taxation. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Poterba, James and Todd Sinai (2008). Revenue Cost and Incentive Effects of Tax Expenditures
on Owner-Occupied Housing, mimeo.
Neubig, Thomas S. and David Joulfaian (1988). “The Tax Expenditure Budget Before and After
the Tax Reform Act of 1986,” U.S. Treasury Department OTA Paper 60, October.
President’s Advisory Panel on Federal Tax Reform (2005). Simple, Fair, and Pro-Growth:
Proposals to Fix America’s Tax System. Washington, DC: November.
Shaviro, Daniel (2003). “Rethinking Tax Expenditures and Fiscal Language.” Mimeo.
Steuerle, C. Eugene (2004). Contemporary U.S. Tax Policy. Washington, DC: Urban Institute
Press, 43-44.
Surrey, Stanley S. (1967). The U.S. Income Tax System – the Need for a Full Accounting.
Speech before the Money Marketers, November 15.

37

Surrey, Stanley S. (1973), Pathways to Tax Reform. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Surrey, Stanley S. and Paul R. McDaniel (1985). Tax Expenditures. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press.
Thuronyi, Victor (1988). “Tax Expenditures: A Reassessment,” Duke Law Journal 1988(6):
1155-1206.
Toder, Eric (1998). “The Changing Composition of Tax Incentives: 1980-1999.” National Tax
Association – Proceedings of the 91st Annual Conference, 411-420.
Toder, Eric (2002). "Evaluating Tax Incentives as a Tool for Social and Economic Policy." In
Bad Breaks All Around: Report of the Century Foundation Working Group on Tax
Expenditures. New York: Century Foundation Press.
Toder, Eric (2005). “Tax Expenditures and Tax Reform: Issues and Analysis.” National Tax
Association – Proceedings of the 98th Annual Conference, 472-479.
U.S. General Accountability Office (2005). “Tax Expenditures Represent a Substantial Federal
Commitment and Need to Be Reexamined,” GAO-05-690. Washington, D.C.:
September.
U.S. Office of Management and Budget (2008). Analytical Perspectives, Budget of the United
States Government, Fiscal Year 2009, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
Office.
Weiner, Joann (2008). Tax Expenditures and the Federal Budget, Tax Notes, February 4, 586592.

38

Table 1
A Comparison of Baselines
JCT Normal Tax
Individual tax
• One personal exemption for each taxpayer and dependent
• Standard deduction
• Includes all cash transfer payments from the Government
• Deductions for investment and employee business expenses
• Prevailing tax rate schedule and tax brackets
• Capital gains taxed upon realization
• All employee compensation subject to tax currently
o Employee stock options taxed at regular rate when options exercised (with
corresponding deduction for employees). Income is difference between purchase price
of stock and the market price on the day the option exercised.
• All other income and transfers subject to tax
o Social security income excluded only for the portion of retirement benefits that represent
a return of payroll taxes paid during working years; Medicare benefits excluded only for
the portion of HI tax contributions; public assistance benefits (food stamps, Medicaid,
public housing) subject to tax; gifts excluded
• Imputed income from owner-occupied homes excluded (but not classified as tax
expenditure due to administrative necessity)
• Income tax levied on nominal not real gains in asset values (no indexing)
• Foreign tax credit
Business income taxation
• Treatment of capital costs
o Cost recovery allowances more favorable than straight-line recovery
o No indexing
• Accounting standards
o Accrual method of accounting, standard of “economic performance” used to determine
whether liabilities are deductible, and general concept of matching income and
expenses. Tax provisions that do not satisfy all three are viewed as tax expenditures.
• Prevailing carryback and carryforward periods for net operating losses
• Top statutory rate on corporate income (no graduated rates)
• Special tax rules for pass-through entities and nonprofit corporations exempting them from
corporate income tax
• Controlled foreign corporations (CFCs) not considered separate entities from controlling
U.S. shareholders
• Foreign tax credit
Notes: See JCT (2007) and OMB (2008) for further details

39

Treasury Normal Tax
JCT normal tax with the following
exceptions
• Includes prevailing rates on
capital gains on corporate equity
and dividends (since 2005
Budget)
• Includes AMT and passive loss
rules as part of the baseline
• Includes net imputed rental
income

JCT normal tax with the following
exceptions
• Includes corporate AMT
• Includes cash method of
accounting for certain
businesses
• Uses economic depreciation in
baseline

Treasury Reference Tax
Treasury normal tax with the
following exception
• Gross income does not include
transfer payments

Treasury normal tax with the
following exceptions
• Includes prevailing graduated
corporate rates
• Includes accelerated
depreciation
• CFCs are considered separate
entities (except for tax haven
activities)

Table 2
Tax Expenditure Estimates for a Hypothetical Taxpayer

Base
case
(1)

Eliminate
state and
local
deduction
(2)

Itemized deductions:
State and local income
taxes
$6,500
$0
Real estate taxes
3,500
3,500
Home mortgage interest
deduction
1,100
1,100
Charitable contributions
2,000
2,000
Sum of itemized deductions
13,100
6,600
10,000
10,000
Standard deduction
Yes
No
Taxpayer itemizes?
Itemized deductions claimed
13,100
10,000
by taxpayer
Tax expenditure estimate for
eliminated itemized
deduction(s)
620
Tax expenditure if standard
deduction raised to $12,000
220
Tax expenditure if itemized
deduction were an above
the line deduction or an
adjustment
1,300
Note: Assumes a flat marginal tax rate of 20 percent.

40

Eliminate real
estate
deduction
(3)

Eliminate
home
mortgage
interest
deduction
(4)

Eliminate
charitable
contributions
deduction
(5)

$6,500
0

$6,500
3,500

$6,500
3,500

1,100
2,000
9,600
10,000
No

0
2,000
12,000
10,000
Yes

1,100
0
11,100
10,000
Yes

10,000

12,000

11,100

620

220

400

220

220

220

700

220

400

Figure 1
Effect of AMT on Select Tax Expenditure Estimates, 2000-2007
100
Current Law

Current Law with No AMT

Current Law with No AMT Patch

90

80

Mortgage interest deduction

70
Billions of
60
dollars

State and local income tax deduction

50

40

30
Property tax deduction
20

10

0
2000
Notes:

2001

2002

2003

2004

Authors' calculations using NBER TAXSIM. See text for further details.

41

2005

2006

2007

Figure 2
Effect of AMT on Selected Tax Expenditure Estimates, 2007
120
Current Law

Current Law with No AMT

Current Law with No AMT Patch

100

Billions of dollars

80

60

40

20

0
Mortgage interest
deduction
Notes:

Property tax
deduction

State and local
Special rates for
income tax deduction dividends and capital
gains

Authors' calculations using NBER TAXSIM. See text for further details.

42

Child tax credit

Lifetime and Hope
Credits

Figure 3
Tax Expenditure Estimate for Graduated Individual Marginal Tax Rates, 2005
350

300

Billions of dollars

250

200

150

100

50

0
10 percent

15 percent

25 percent
Marginal Tax Rates

Notes: Authors' calculation from SOI data. See text for details.

43

28 percent

33 percent

Figure 4
Tax Expenditure Estimate for Mortgage Interest Deduction, 2000-2011
140.0

120.0

100.0
Billions of
dollars
80.0

Current Law

Pre-EGTRRA Law

Current Law w/ Flat Rate
60.0

40.0

20.0

0.0
2000
Notes:

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Authors' calculations using NBER TAXSIM. See text for further details.

44

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 5
Tax Expenditure Estimate for State and Local Income
Tax Deduction, 2000-2011
80

70

60
Pre-EGTRRA Law
Billions
of
50
dollars

Current Law w/ Flat Rate

40

Current Law

30

20

10

0
2000

Notes:

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

Authors' calculations using NBER TAXSIM. See text for further details.

45

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Figure 6
Tax Expenditure Estimate for Property Tax Deduction, 2000-2011
50

45

40

35
Pre-EGTRRA Law
Billions 30
of
dollars
25

Current Law w/ Flat Rate

20
Current Law
15

10

5

0
2000
Notes:

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

Authors' calculations using NBER TAXSIM. See text for further details.

46

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Table 7
Distribution of Individual Income Tax Revenues under three AMT Scenarios
(in millions of dollars)

Income decile
Bottom
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
Top
Detail on top decile
Top 5%
Top 1%
Total

Assuming
2004 AMT
0
-6,286
-12,671
-8,114
-28
14,445
26,985
43,264
64,898
104,805

Percentage
of liability
-0.8
-1.6
-1.0
0.0
1.8
3.3
5.4
8.0
13.0
71.8

484,370
311,965
806,894

60.0
38.7
100.0

Tax liability under 2004 law
Assuming no Percentage
AMT
of liability
-0.8
-54
-1.6
-6,294
-1.0
-12,684
0.0
-8,127
1.8
-33
3.4
14,405
5.5
26,965
8.2
43,211
13.2
64,750
71.4
104,409
471,885
305,602
792,973

59.5
38.5
100.0

Assuming no
AMT patch
1
-6,282
-12,671
-8,114
-26
14,460
27,058
43,440
65,444
108,416

Percentage of
liability
-0.8
-1.5
-1.0
0.0
1.8
3.3
5.3
7.9
13.1
72.0

494,337
312,482
826,335

59.8
37.8
100.0

Notes: Calculations from NBER TAXSIM using 2004 Statistics of Income Public Use File. The income concept used to place tax returns
into income classes is adjusted gross income (AGI) minus state and local tax refunds, plus tax-exempt interest, non-taxable Social Security
benefits, deductions for IRA contributions, student loan interest, alimony paid, tuition & fees, Health Savings Accounts, one-half of the selfemployment tax, self-employed health insurance, self-employed SEP, SIMPLE and qualified plans, and penalties on the early withdrawal of
saving, minus other income. The Public Use File does not report other income. To calculate other income, we took the difference between
reported AGI and the signed sum of the reported components of AGI. The difference includes moving expenses, foreign earned income,
and net operating losses from previous years as well as errors due to censoring and rounding. Returns of dependents are excluded from
the analysis. Returns with negative income are excluded from lowest income group but included in totals. Decile breakpoints are,
respectively, $8,425, $14,618, $20,370, $27,310, $35,280, $44,876, $57,070, $73,865, and $104,687 ($145,801 for top 5% and $360,419
for top 1%).

47

Table 8
Distribution of the Tax Expenditure for the State and Local Income Tax Deduction under three AMT Scenarios, 2004
Money amounts in millions of dollars, returns in thousands
Under 2004 law

Income decile
Bottom
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
Top
Detail on top
decile
Top 5%
Top 1%
Total
See notes to table 7.

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
deduction
0.0
0.3
1.0
2.6
5.7
9.4
12.7
17.2
23.7
27.4

13.7
2.8
100.0

Under 2004 law with no AMT

Average
deduction
19
56
86
125
172
269
395
490
803
3,450

Percentage
of total
deduction
claimed
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.8
1.9
3.8
6.4
14.5
72.2

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
deduction
0.0
0.3
1.0
2.5
5.6
9.2
12.5
16.9
23.4
28.5

5,526
18,429
1,309

57.9
38.7
100.0

14.8
3.0
100.0

48

Under 2004 law with no AMT patch

Average
deduction
19
56
86
125
172
269
395
492
813
4,117

Percentage
of total
deduction
claimed
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.6
1.6
3.2
5.4
12.4
76.4

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
deduction
0.0
0.4
1.1
2.9
6.4
10.4
14.0
18.8
23.8
22.2

Average
deduction
19
56
86
125
172
269
391
488
794
3,546

Percentage
of total
deduction
claimed
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.3
0.9
2.4
4.7
7.9
16.2
67.5

6,604
20,166
1,535

63.8
39.8
100.0

10.8
3.0
100.0

6,177
18,757
1,167

57.2
47.7
100.0

Table 9
Distribution of Hypothetical Tax Expenditure for Special Rates on Dividends and Capital Gains under three AMT Scenarios
Money amounts in millions of dollars, returns in thousands
Under 2004 law

Income decile
Bottom
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
Top
Detail on top
decile
Top 5%
Top 1%
Total
See notes to table
7.

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
deduction
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.7
1.3
3.8
10.8
83.2

72.1
27.2
100.0

Under 2004 law with no AMT

Average
deduction
0
0
46
244
56
596
685
868
1,221
39,777

Percentage
of total
deduction
claimed
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.4
99.5

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
deduction
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.7
1.4
3.7
10.8
83.3

45,549
109,377
33,273

98.7
89.5
100.0

72.3
27.3
100.0

49

Under 2004 law with no AMT patch

Average
deduction
0
0
46
244
56
603
685
845
1,183
41,160

Percentage
of total
deduction
claimed
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.4
99.5

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
deduction
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.7
1.3
4.0
10.8
83.0

Average
deduction
0
0
46
244
56
603
686
981
1,369
39,777

Percentage
of total
deduction
claimed
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.5
99.4

47,121
113,418
34,452

98.9
90.0
100.0

71.9
27.1
100.0

45,508
109,346
33,225

98.5
89.3
100.0

Table 10
Distribution of Hypothetical Tax Expenditure Combining the Top 13 TAXSIM Tax Expenditures under three AMT Scenarios
Money amounts in millions of dollars, returns in thousands
Under 2004 law
Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
6.8
7.9
7.3
8.5
9.0
10.3
11.2
12.2
12.9
13.8

7.0
1.4
100.0

Income
decile
Bottom
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
Top
Detail on
top decile
Top 5%
Top 1%
Total
See notes to table 7.

Under 2004 law with no AMT

Average
1,087
2,185
2,442
2,119
1,696
1,720
1,994
2,218
2,942
13,762

Percentage
of total
claimed
2.0
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.1
4.8
6.0
7.3
10.3
51.1

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
6.8
7.9
7.3
8.5
9.0
10.3
11.2
12.2
12.9
13.8

23,079
81,163
3,705

43.4
30.7
100.0

7.0
1.4
100.0

50

Under 2004 law with no AMT patch

Average
1,087
2,184
2,442
2,119
1,696
1,720
1,994
2,218
2,948
14,484

Percentage
of total
claimed
1.9
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.0
4.6
5.9
7.1
10.0
52.4

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
6.8
7.9
7.3
8.5
9.0
10.3
11.2
12.2
12.9
13.8

Average
1,087
2,185
2,442
2,119
1,696
1,722
1,997
2,240
3,155
13,609

Percentage
of total
claimed
2.0
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.1
4.8
6.0
7.4
11.0
50.4

24,472
85,142
3,805

44.8
31.3
100.0

7.0
1.4
100.0

22,824
80,804
3,715

42.8
30.5
100.0

Table 11
Distribution of Hypothetical Tax Expenditure Combining 11 TAXSIM Tax Expenditures under three AMT Scenarios
Money amounts in millions of dollars, returns in thousands
Under 2004 law
Percentage
of all returns
claiming
0.1
2.2
4.0
6.4
8.9
11.8
13.8
15.6
17.6
19.5

10.0
2.0
100.0

Income
decile
Bottom
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
Top
Detail on top
decile
Top 5%
Top 1%
Total
See notes to table 7.

Under 2004 law with no AMT

Average
84
272
552
762
1,026
1,275
1,557
1,656
2,322
13,624

Percentage
of total
claimed
0.0
0.2
0.6
1.3
2.4
3.9
5.6
6.7
10.6
68.9

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
0.1
2.2
4.0
6.4
8.9
11.8
13.8
15.6
17.6
19.5

23,072
81,175
3,860

59.5
42.2
100.0

10.0
2.0
100.0

51

Under 2004 law with no AMT patch

Average
88
272
552
762
1,025
1,275
1,557
1,655
2,329
14,355

Percentag
e of total
claimed
0.0
0.2
0.6
1.2
2.3
3.8
5.4
6.5
10.2
70.0

Percentage
of all
returns
claiming
0.1
2.2
4.0
6.4
8.9
11.8
13.8
15.6
17.6
19.5

Average
84
272
552
762
1,026
1,279
1,562
1,682
2,548
13,478

Percentage
of total
claimed
0.0
0.2
0.6
1.3
2.4
3.9
5.6
6.8
11.6
67.8

24,468
85,176
4,003

60.9
42.6
100.0

10.0
2.0
100.0

22,818
80,817
3,876

58.7
41.9
100.0

APPENDIX TABLE
Estimates of Selected Tax Expenditures, 2000-2011
(Billions of dollars)
1. Individual income tax revenues
Current Law
with No AMT
Patch
959.9
830.9
766.8
721.1
829.4
921.2
1001.1
1086.3
1151.6
1227.0
1318.9
1520.1

Pre-EGTRRA
Law
959.9
873.1
817.0
846.9
967.7
1059.1
1139.5
1199.3
1279.6
1354.8
1447.1
1513.5

Current law
with flat rate of
19%
865.1
812.1
780.0
799.0
891.4
975.1
1048.7
1092.9
1139.6
1196.1
1268.4
1303.9

2. Tax expenditure for mortgage interest deduction
Current Law
with No AMT
Current Law
Patch
Current Law with No AMT
2000
72.0
71.7
72.0
2001
75.5
75.3
75.6
2002
72.8
72.4
73.0
2003
62.6
61.9
66.4
2004
66.1
64.9
70.8
2005
72.0
70.4
78.0
2006
77.7
76.2
86.1
2007
82.4
79.9
97.2
2008
104.0
85.2
104.0
2009
111.3
90.3
111.3
2010
118.8
95.8
118.8
2011
124.5
117.9
124.5

Pre-EGTRRA
Law
72.0
76.7
75.0
74.1
77.5
79.7
86.3
90.9
101.8
108.7
115.9
124.5

Current law
with flat rate of
19%
51.1
55.4
55.3
51.9
54.0
58.0
62.5
65.5
69.2
73.1
77.3
84.5

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Current Law
959.9
829.4
764.5
705.6
810.0
896.6
964.8
1017.3
1151.6
1227.0
1318.9
1520.1

Current Law
with No AMT
944.7
821.3
756.9
695.6
795.9
879.4
950.3
994.4
1044.7
1104.6
1172.5
1469.0

3. Tax expenditure for medical expenses deduction
Current Law
with No AMT
Current Law
Current Law with No AMT
Patch
2000
5.1
5.1
5.1
2001
5.3
5.4
5.3
2002
5.7
5.8
5.7
2003
5.6
5.6
5.5
2004
6.7
6.8
6.6
2005
7.3
7.4
7.2
2006
7.9
8.0
7.7
2007
8.3
8.4
8.3
2008
8.9
9.0
8.9
2009
9.6
9.6
9.6
2010
10.2
10.1
10.2
2011
12.2
12.7
12.2

Pre-EGTRRA
Law
5.1
5.6
6.1
6.7
8.0
8.3
9.0
9.5
9.9
10.5
11.1
12.0

Current law
with flat rate of
19%
5.0
5.7
6.2
6.4
7.6
8.1
8.7
9.2
9.7
10.3
10.8
11.9

4. Tax expenditure for property tax deduction
Current Law
with No AMT
Current Law
Patch
Current Law with No AMT
2000
20.8
22.4
20.8
2001
22.1
23.7
21.5
2002
22.7
24.8
21.7
2003
20.4
23.8
15.5
2004
22.2
26.8
16.5
2005
23.2
28.9
16.8
2006
24.9
31.2
16.5
2007
25.8
32.7
15.9
2008
15.9
34.9
15.9
2009
16.1
36.9
16.1
2010
15.8
39.1
15.8
2011
31.3
47.1
31.3

PreEGTRRA
Law
20.8
22.8
24.2
26.3
29.1
31.4
33.9
35.7
29.3
29.7
29.3
30.4

Current law with
flat rate of 19%
16.2
17.7
19.1
20.0
22.2
23.8
25.5
26.7
28.2
29.8
31.4
33.5

53

5. Tax expenditure for state and local income tax deduction
Current Law
Prewith No AMT
EGTRRA
Current Law
Current Law with No AMT
Patch
Law
2000
47.9
52.5
47.9
47.9
2001
48.5
53.1
47.6
49.5
2002
43.7
47.6
42.4
46.0
2003
37.6
43.4
30.2
47.9
2004
40.9
49.0
32.5
53.4
2005
42.8
52.5
33.6
56.9
2006
45.7
57.2
33.9
62.0
2007
47.4
60.0
33.8
65.2
2008
34.6
64.5
34.6
59.3
2009
35.4
68.1
35.4
60.9
2010
35.5
72.8
35.5
61.4
2011
62.8
84.3
62.8
61.8

Current law with
flat rate of 19%
32.4
33.7
31.4
31.0
34.4
36.7
39.8
41.7
44.5
46.8
49.9
51.5

6. Tax expenditure for charitable contributions deductions
Current Law
Prewith No AMT
EGTRRA
Current Law
Patch
Law
Current Law with No AMT
2000
34.6
34.6
34.6
34.6
2001
33.2
33.2
33.2
33.7
2002
32.5
32.4
32.5
33.4
2003
30.5
30.3
31.5
35.2
2004
34.8
34.5
36.1
40.0
2005
37.7
37.2
39.3
42.2
2006
40.5
40.1
42.7
45.5
2007
42.7
42.1
46.8
47.8
2008
49.7
44.7
49.7
51.7
2009
52.8
47.2
52.8
54.7
2010
56.1
50.1
56.1
58.0
2011
60.6
59.5
60.6
60.7

Current law with
flat rate of 19%
23.1
23.0
23.3
23.7
26.5
28.4
30.5
32.0
33.8
35.5
37.6
39.5

54

7. Tax expenditure for municipal bond interest deduction
Current Law
Current Law
with No
with No AMT
Pre-EGTRRA
Current Law
AMT
Patch
Law
2000
18.0
18.3
18.0
18.0
2001
18.0
18.1
17.9
18.1
2002
16.9
17.0
16.8
17.3
2003
15.0
15.1
15.0
16.8
2004
14.8
15.0
14.9
16.7
2005
15.9
16.1
16.0
17.9
2006
16.8
17.0
16.9
18.9
2007
17.6
17.8
17.8
19.8
2008
18.6
18.6
18.6
20.6
2009
19.6
19.5
19.6
21.6
2010
20.5
20.4
20.5
22.6
2011
24.1
24.6
24.1
24.0

8. Tax expenditure for special rates for dividends and capital gains
Current Law
Current Law
with No
with No AMT
Pre-EGTRRA
Current Law
AMT
Patch
Law
2000
76.2
83.6
76.2
76.2
2001
30.6
32.0
30.6
39.5
2002
22.6
23.4
22.5
29.1
2003
32.3
33.0
32.4
36.3
2004
56.5
58.0
56.5
61.0
2005
79.3
81.5
79.4
83.8
2006
92.3
95.6
92.5
97.5
2007
88.9
92.0
89.1
94.7
2008
87.4
90.9
87.4
92.2
2009
87.1
90.7
87.1
92.1
2010
102.8
107.8
102.8
108.2
2011
62.9
65.5
62.9
66.8

55

Current law with
flat rate of 19%
10.6
10.8
10.5
10.2
10.0
10.6
11.2
11.7
12.2
12.8
13.3
14.3

9. Tax expenditure for earned income tax credit
Current Law
Current Law
with No
with No AMT
Current Law
AMT
Patch
2000
32.2
32.2
32.2
2001
33.1
33.1
33.1
2002
36.9
36.9
36.9
2003
36.4
36.4
36.4
2004
38.6
38.6
38.6
2005
39.6
39.6
39.6
2006
40.5
40.5
40.5
2007
41.4
41.4
41.4
2008
42.5
42.5
42.5
2009
43.5
43.5
43.5
2010
44.5
44.5
44.5
2011
46.0
46.0
46.0

Pre-EGTRRA
Law
32.2
33.2
36.9
36.6
38.6
39.6
40.5
41.5
42.5
43.5
44.6
46.0

10. Tax expenditure for child tax credit
Current Law
with No AMT
Patch
19.9
27.8
27.9
44.2
47.0
47.4
47.8
29.1
28.3
27.4
26.5
12.0

PreEGTRRA
Law
19.9
23.4
23.6
23.8
24.7
24.8
24.9
24.7
18.7
17.9
17.2
11.9

11. Tax expenditure for Lifetime and Hope Credits
Current Law
with No AMT
Current Law
Current Law with No AMT
Patch
2000
4.8
4.8
4.8
2001
4.9
4.9
4.9
2002
4.9
4.9
4.9
2003
5.8
5.8
5.8
2004
6.0
6.0
6.0
2005
6.2
6.2
6.2
2006
6.6
6.6
6.6
2007
6.6
6.6
4.4
2008
4.4
6.7
4.4
2009
4.3
6.7
4.3
2010
4.2
6.7
4.2
2011
5.3
7.2
5.3

PreEGTRRA
Law
4.8
5.2
5.1
6.2
6.5
6.6
7.1
7.1
5.6
5.4
5.3
5.3

2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011

Current Law
19.9
27.8
27.9
44.2
47.0
47.4
47.8
46.2
28.3
27.4
26.5
12.0

Current Law
with No AMT
19.9
27.7
27.9
44.2
47.0
47.4
47.8
48.0
48.2
48.4
48.5
19.8

56

12. Hypothetical tax expenditure: Personal Exemption
Current Law
with No AMT
Current Law
Current Law with No AMT
Patch
2000
121.0
122.5
121.0
2001
118.5
119.9
117.6
2002
119.1
121.1
117.5
2003
106.8
109.2
96.5
2004
111.2
114.3
98.2
2005
117.2
121.5
100.5
2006
125.2
130.2
101.2
2007
129.0
135.8
83.5
2008
85.0
145.6
85.0
2009
83.8
152.3
83.8
2010
83.0
163.0
83.0
2011
153.5
186.3
153.5

PreEGTRRA
Law
121.0
126.0
128.6
130.0
134.3
142.1
152.0
159.1
148.1
150.8
154.6
150.2

Current law with
flat rate of 19%
116.9
122.5
126.7
128.2
131.5
137.7
145.1
151.3
158.7
164.9
173.5
176.3

13. Hypothetical tax expenditure: Thirteen items
Current Law
Prewith No AMT
EGTRRA
Current law with
Current Law
Patch
Law
Current Law with No AMT
flat rate of 19%
2000
315.9
326.0
315.9
315.9
122.9
2001
279.9
285.1
279.0
289.1
130.3
2002
268.0
272.5
266.8
277.9
130.6
2003
274.2
280.3
273.8
290.5
125.8
2004
316.4
325.0
317.2
334.5
135.8
2005
352.5
362.9
355.4
363.4
144.2
2006
383.4
396.5
387.9
398.5
155.9
2007
387.7
403.3
375.2
407.4
162.7
2008
389.3
420.8
389.3
408.4
173.5
2009
403.1
434.5
403.1
421.5
182.3
2010
436.6
471.7
436.6
455.7
194.6
2011
416.9
445.1
416.9
419.7
205.0
Notes: The thirteen items are the top thirteen expenditures in terms of tax revenues lost that
can be estimated using the TAXSIM model. These items include the mortgage interest
deduction, deduction for medical and dental expenses, deduction for state and local income
taxes, deduction for property taxes on owner-occupied homes, deduction for charitable
contributions, the EITC, the child tax credit, the Lifetime and Hope credits, the child and
dependent care credit, the tax exemption on municipal bonds, the special rates on capital
gains and dividends, the tax preferences for IRAs and Keogh plans, and the exclusion for
certain pensions and annuities. See text for further details.

57

14. Hypothetical tax expenditure: Eleven items
Current Law
Prewith No AMT
EGTRRA
Current Law
Current law with
Current Law with No AMT
Patch
Law
flat rate of 19%
2000
263.8
274.0
263.8
263.8
122.9
2001
219.0
224.2
218.1
232.6
130.3
2002
203.2
207.6
201.9
217.4
130.6
2003
192.6
198.7
192.2
229.7
125.8
2004
230.5
239.1
231.2
271.1
135.8
2005
265.1
275.5
268.0
298.9
144.2
2006
294.8
307.9
299.3
333.1
155.9
2007
300.1
313.5
308.1
341.1
162.7
2008
322.0
329.7
322.0
348.9
173.5
2009
335.6
342.3
335.6
361.9
182.3
2010
368.9
378.4
368.9
396.0
194.6
2011
359.9
378.7
359.9
362.9
205.0
Notes: The eleven items consist of all of the expenditures included in the "13 items" above
with the exception of the EITC and child care credits. See text for further details.
15. Hypothetical tax expenditure: Standard deduction
Current Law
with No AMT
Current Law
Patch
Current Law with No AMT
2000
65.6
65.7
65.6
2001
60.0
59.9
59.9
2002
59.1
59.1
59.0
2003
62.0
62.0
60.5
2004
63.5
63.6
61.5
2005
67.7
67.8
64.4
2006
71.8
71.9
66.5
2007
75.2
75.7
63.6
2008
65.6
80.0
65.6
2009
66.7
83.9
66.7
2010
67.7
88.0
67.7
2011
90.9
98.2
90.9

58

PreEGTRRA
Law
65.6
65.9
65.6
69.2
70.3
80.6
85.4
90.3
89.2
92.3
95.3
89.7

Current law with
flat rate of 19%
71.6
72.5
73.2
83.2
83.8
87.8
92.0
96.8
100.8
104.9
109.2
105.6

16. Hypothetical tax expenditure: Property tax and mortgage interest deductions
Current Law
Prewith No AMT
EGTRRA
Current Law
Current law with
Current Law with No AMT
Patch
Law
flat rate of 19%
2000
86.5
87.6
86.5
86.5
61.4
2001
91.1
92.5
90.6
92.8
66.9
2002
88.6
90.3
87.8
92.0
67.7
2003
75.5
78.4
75.6
93.1
64.2
2004
80.4
84.1
81.2
99.0
68.2
2005
86.8
91.1
88.9
101.6
73.3
2006
93.9
99.0
97.1
110.4
79.2
2007
99.1
103.7
108.5
116.2
82.9
2008
115.4
110.9
115.4
121.8
87.9
2009
123.1
117.7
123.1
129.1
92.9
2010
130.8
125.2
130.8
136.2
98.5
2011
147.8
154.5
147.8
147.1
108.4
17. Hypothetical tax expenditure: Property tax deduction and State and local income
tax deduction
Current Law
Prewith No AMT
EGTRRA
Current law with
Current Law
Patch
Law
Current Law with No AMT
flat rate of 19%
2000
67.3
72.5
67.3
67.3
46.7
2001
69.3
74.4
68.3
70.8
49.5
2002
65.4
70.0
63.8
68.6
48.5
2003
57.7
64.3
49.0
72.5
48.4
2004
63.3
72.5
53.2
80.9
53.8
2005
66.8
78.0
55.4
85.1
57.5
2006
71.9
85.2
56.0
93.0
62.4
2007
74.8
89.4
55.8
97.8
65.4
2008
57.2
96.2
57.2
92.6
69.8
2009
58.9
101.7
58.9
95.7
73.6
2010
59.2
108.9
59.2
97.4
78.4
2011
100.6
127.5
100.6
99.0
82.1

59

