NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CULTURE, CONTEXT, AND THE TASTE FOR REDISTRIBUTION
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Monica Singhal
Working Paper 14268
http://www.nber.org/papers/w14268

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2008

We thank George Borjas, Paola Giuliano, Ed Glaeser, Rafael Marques, and seminar participants at
Harvard, the National Tax Association meetings, and the NBER workshop on Income Distribution
and Macroeconomics for helpful comments. We thank Octavia Foarta, Andra Hibbert, Jill Gentry
Leandro, Kate Mikels, and Adam Ruder for excellent research assistance. Erzo Luttmer gratefully
acknowledges funding from the Taubman Center for State and Local Government and the National
Institute on Aging through Grant Number T32-AG00186 to the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Monica Singhal gratefully acknowledges funding from the Taubman Center for State and Local Government
and the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2008 by Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Monica Singhal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution
Erzo F.P. Luttmer and Monica Singhal
NBER Working Paper No. 14268
August 2008
JEL No. D72,H23,Z10
ABSTRACT
Is culture an important determinant of preferences for redistribution? To separate the effect of culture
from the effect of the economic and institutional environment ("context"), we relate immigrants' preferences
for redistribution to the average preference in their birth countries, controlling extensively for individual
characteristics and country-of-residence fixed effects. We find a strong positive relationship. This
cultural effect is larger for non-voters, those with shorter tenure in the country of residence, and those
who move to countries with a large number of immigrants from their own birth countries. Immigrants
from countries with a higher preference for redistribution are also more likely to vote for a more pro-redistribution
political party. The effect of culture persists strongly into the second generation.

Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Kennedy School of Government, Mailbox 25
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
erzo_luttmer@harvard.edu
Monica Singhal
Harvard University
JFK School of Government
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
monica_singhal@harvard.edu

1. Introduction
Preferences for redistribution vary in systematic ways across countries. Individuals in
European countries tend to have stronger redistributive preferences than people in the United
States (Alesina et al. 2001, Alesina and Glaeser 2004), and individuals in former socialist
countries tend to have stronger preferences than those in Western nations (Corneo and Grüner
2002). The persistence of these differences suggests that redistributive preferences may have an
important cultural component,1 but isolating the effects of culture from contemporaneous effects
of the economic and institutional environment is challenging. This paper provides evidence on
the effect of culture on preferences for income redistribution by examining the determinants of
preferences among immigrants across 32 countries. If preferences were based solely on current
context, then the preference for redistribution in an immigrant’s country of origin should not
matter after controlling for relevant factors in the country of residence. However, it is possible
that immigrants take cultural values with them from their countries of origin and that these
cultural values affect preferences for redistribution, regardless of current context.2
Voting patterns during the large waves of immigration into the United States during the
nineteenth century suggest that immigrants were influenced by home country culture. Political
allegiances during this time were often sharply split along ethnic lines (McCormick 1974), and
attitudes toward government did appear to reflect the prevailing attitudes in immigrants’
countries of origin. Benson (1966, pp. 298-299), for example, argues that Dutch immigrants in
New York “abided by their fathers’ faith in state rights and negative government” and therefore
supported the Democratic Party, which “preached the doctrines of the negative liberal state and
1

We follow Guiso et al. (2006) in defining culture as “those customary beliefs and values that ethnic, religious, and
social groups transmit fairly unchanged from generation to generation.”
2
Bisin and Verdier (2004) identify an alternative channel through which culture can affect the amount of
redistribution: the cultural transmission of values associated with “work ethic” will affect the level of redistribution
that the political equilibrium can sustain.

1

state rights.” Immigrants from Scandinavia and Germany were often supporters of early
progressive movements, such as socialist political parties. Lipset and Marks (2000, pp. 139-140)
note that “the leadership of Germans in the American socialist movement has been linked to the
political sources of emigration from Germany … The German Social Democratic Party was the
strongest socialist movement in the world before World War I, and many newcomers brought
their ideological sympathies to America.” These anecdotes suggest a persistent cultural
component to political preferences. Our empirical analysis formalizes this relationship by
relating the preferences of contemporary immigrants to attitudes in their birth countries.
We find that the average preference for redistribution in an immigrant’s country of birth
has a large and significant effect on her own preference for redistribution. Our main findings can
be illustrated in Figure 1, which plots individual preference for redistribution (in deviation from
the mean preference of natives in the country of residence) against the mean preference of
natives in the immigrant’s country of birth. Preferences for redistribution are measured on a
five-point scale, and each point on the graph represents the average for all immigrants born in a
particular country, irrespective of the current country of residence.3 Immigrants born in a
country with a high preference for redistribution tend to have higher preferences for
redistribution than the natives of the countries in which they reside.
This relationship is verified in the regression analyses, where we include country of
residence dummies and rich controls for economic and demographic characteristics. We find
that a one unit increase in the mean preference for redistribution in an immigrant’s country of
birth is associated with a 0.34 unit increase in her own preference for redistribution. This effect
is robust to the choice of economic controls and to a number of sample and specification tests.
Overall, the influence of birth country culture appears to be stronger for immigrants who are less
3

Country observations are weighted by the number of immigrants born in that country.

2

politically or socially assimilated into the destination country. We also examine the
intergenerational transmission of preferences by looking at individuals born in their country of
residence who have an immigrant parent. A higher mean preference for redistribution in the
parent’s country of birth is associated with a significantly higher individual preference; the effect
is two-thirds as large as the own country of birth effect.
These findings have a number of important implications. Individual preferences for
income redistribution cannot be fully explained by economic self-interest or by economic,
political, or social aspects of the current environment, since individual preferences continue to be
influenced by country of origin even in a common environment.4 This also suggests that culture
may be an important factor in explaining the large observed differences in systems of
redistribution across countries. Finally, the inherited cultural values of immigrants can, as the
anecdotes above suggest, shape the policies of the societies to which they migrate. Thus, while
our primary focus is on using immigrants as a mechanism to identify the effects of culture, the
results also have implications for the political economy of immigration policy.5
We consider several alternative explanations for our findings. First, there may be
unobserved economic factors that affect preferences for redistribution both in the birth country
and the country of residence. In particular, we might be concerned about selective migration
driven by economic self-interest. We demonstrate that the results are robust to rich controls for
an individual’s likely gain or loss from redistribution and that the results are also evident in
several subsamples of countries. A second possibility is that individuals update information
about the current context slowly, and our estimates are simply picking up this slow updating

4

We discuss models of preferences for redistribution in Section 2.
See Dancygier and Saunders (2006) for a description of differences in preferences for social spending and
redistribution between immigrants and natives in Germany and the United Kingdom and a discussion of the
implications for nations receiving large flows of immigrants.
5

3

rather than a true effect of culture. However, we find strong cultural effects even for immigrants
who have lived in their country of residence for more than 20 years and in the second generation.
Finally, it is possible that cultural factors influence the way in which individuals respond to
survey questions but do not affect “true” preferences. We find that a higher mean preference for
redistribution in the country of birth is associated with an increased probability of voting for a
more pro-redistribution party, indicating that cultural influences do affect real behavior.
Two studies that relate specifically to the effects of culture on redistributive preferences
are Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln (2007) and Guiso et al. (2006). Alesina and Fuchs-Schündeln
use the separation and reunification of Germany as a natural experiment to examine how
Communism affects preferences. They find that those who lived in the former East Germany
more strongly prefer redistribution after reunification.6 The authors convincingly show that
living in East Germany as opposed to West Germany influences one’s preferences for
redistribution. By the nature of their natural experiment, however, it is hard to know whether this
effect is driven by cultural differences developed under Communism, Communist indoctrination
per se, or another aspect of living in East Germany during this time period. In addition, they
focus specifically on the effects of Communism, whereas we examine the effects of culture more
broadly. Guiso et al. (2006) explicitly note the potential role of culture in explaining preferences
for redistribution. They find that country of ancestry fixed effects are significant determinants of
preferences for redistribution in the United States General Social Survey. This is suggestive of a
lasting effect of culture but, as the authors note, it is difficult to know what exactly is captured by
the fixed effects.7

6

Corneo (2004) also notes higher preferences for redistribution among East Germans relative to West Germans.
Giuliano (2007) and Fernández and Fogli (2007) argue that country of birth dummies cannot relate individual
behavior to a specific determining factor in the country of origin. They therefore proxy for culture using the mean
behavior of interest in the country of origin. We follow this approach. Abramitzky (2008) examines the effects of
7

4

The approach of studying immigrant behavior has been used in a growing literature on
the economic effects of culture.8 Blau (1992), Carroll et al. (1994), Fairlie and Meyer (1996),
and Antecol (2000, 2001) analyze the behavior of immigrant groups to determine the effects of
culture on fertility, savings, employment rates, and wage gaps. In their study of women’s work
behavior and fertility choices, Fernández and Fogli (2006) advance this literature by formalizing
the empirical methodology and more carefully considering issues of selection and omitted
variable bias. Related studies using variants of this strategy have found strong effects of culture
in explaining other aspects of women’s labor supply and fertility (Fernández and Fogli 2007;
Fernández 2007; Alesina and Giuliano 2007; Guinnane, Moehling, and Ó Gráda 2006),
household living arrangements (Giuliano 2007; Alesina and Giuliano 2007), youth labor force
participation and geographic mobility (Alesina and Giuliano 2007), and trust (Algan and Cahuc
2007).9 While our basic identification strategy is very similar to the strategy used in these
studies, we look at immigrants not only coming from multiple source countries but also going to
multiple destination countries. This approach limits the scope for selection bias since we would
expect the form of selection to differ across different destination countries.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we discuss models of
preferences for redistribution and formalize our empirical strategy. Section 3 describes the data
and Section 4 presents the results. Section 5 concludes.

2. Empirical Strategy
culture/ideology on preferences for redistribution in a different context, demonstrating that Israeli kibbutzim
affiliated with socialist political parties are able to sustain higher levels of redistribution.
8
Fernández (2008) provides a detailed discussion of this strategy, which she terms an “epidemiological approach,”
as well as an overview of recent literature on culture and economics.
9
Other studies have used similar strategies to identify the effects of culture on behavior. Ichino and Maggi (2000)
exploit movement of bank employees across regions in Italy to examine the effect of individual background on
shirking behavior. Fisman and Miguel (2007) show that among diplomats in New York City those from more
corrupt countries are more likely to commit parking violations.

5

Our goal is to examine the extent to which cultural factors influence preferences for
redistribution. Under standard economic models, such as Meltzer and Richard (1981), an
individual’s preference for redistribution is determined exclusively by her expected benefit or
loss from redistribution, which in turn depends on the current institutional environment.10 It is
possible that an individual’s preference for redistribution may, in addition, be determined by
country-specific “cultural influences.” While this channel has been suggested in the literature
(e.g., Alesina and Glaeser 2004), it is difficult to distinguish empirically the effect of cultural
influences from objective country characteristics. Separating the two within a country is
especially challenging because institutions at least partially reflect culture (Tabellini 2007).
Examining immigrants provides a way to identify whether cultural influences exist and
are important determinants of preferences. If the standard model is correct and we can control
for the relevant economic factors, we should not expect the birth country preference for
redistribution to be an explanatory factor in the preferences of immigrants.
We estimate specifications of the following form for immigrant preferences:
____

prefi = β1 ( pref b ) + X i β2 + θ r + ε i
____

where pref i denotes immigrant i’s preference for redistribution, pref b is the average preference
for redistribution among natives in birth country b of immigrant i, Xi is a vector of individual
characteristics, θ r is a fixed effect for residence country r of immigrant i, and εi denotes the error
term. We adjust standard errors to allow for clustering of error terms by birth country. The
vector of individual characteristics, Xi, includes demographic characteristics, such as age and
10

Economic factors have been found to influence preferences and voting in a number of studies, e.g., Ravallion and
Loshkin (2000), Corneo and Grüner (2002), Leigh (2005), Brunner et al. (2008). Individuals who have an
expectation of upward mobility may also prefer less redistribution. This prospect of upward mobility (POUM)
hypothesis was proposed by Bénabou and Ok (2001) and has found empirical support (Alesina and La Ferrara
2005).

6

gender, as well as measures such as income and education that are meant to capture how much
the individual stands to gain or lose from more redistribution. The residence country fixed effect
captures both the effects of objective characteristics of the residence country, such as political
institutions, and the effects of cultural influences of the residence country; we cannot separate
the two.
____

The average preference of natives in the birth country, pref b , reflects both objective
characteristics and cultural influences in the birth country. However, there is no reason that the
characteristics of and institutions in the birth country should directly affect preferences for
____

redistribution in the residence country. For immigrants, the coefficient on pref b should
therefore only capture the effect of cultural influences. The identifying assumption for β1 is that
there are no omitted factors that are correlated with the average preference for redistribution in
the birth country and that affect the individual’s preference for redistribution in the country of
residence.
There may also be “behavioral” factors that affect individuals’ preferences for
redistribution. For example, all individuals may have some taste for fairness. If this fairness
preference is common across countries, it will not affect our estimate of β1 . We consider
systematic variation in taste for fairness across countries to be an element of culture, and such
____

variation should be captured in pref b . Preferences may also be affected by the characteristics of
potential beneficiaries. Individuals may prefer to redistribute to members of their own racial or
ethnic group (Luttmer 2001) or to those perceived to be hard-working (Fong 2007). To the
extent that the relevant factors, such as racial heterogeneity or low-income labor force
participation, vary at the country level, they will be captured by the residence country fixed

7

effects. Remaining variation not captured by individual controls will fall in the error term but
____

should not affect our estimate of β1 unless it is correlated with pref b .
Our focus is on determining whether individual preferences for redistribution exhibit a
cultural component. In our empirical analyses, we therefore take the birth country preference
(shown in Figure 1) as given. We do not attempt to identify the determinants of birth country
preference, although previous studies suggest that attitudes toward the recipients of redistribution
may play in important role. Alesina et al. (2001) and Alesina and Glaeser (2004) show that
individuals in European Union countries are more likely to report that they believe the poor are
“trapped in poverty” and that “luck determines income” and less likely to report a belief that “the
poor are lazy” than those in the United States. It is not clear that these differences in beliefs are
supported by the empirical evidence.11 Ultimately, we would expect differences in preferences
for redistribution to be reflected in the redistributive policies of countries. In practice, however,
the political process may result in differences between preferred and actual redistribution,
perhaps explaining why preferred redistribution at the country level does not perfectly correlate
with aggregate measures of redistribution, such as government spending. Gaining a better
understanding of why countries fall where they do in the distribution of redistributive
preferences is an important question but one that lies outside the scope of this paper.

3. Data
11

Several theoretical papers have noted that differences in beliefs may arise from multiple equilibria in the
interaction between beliefs and redistribution systems; see, for example, Piketty (1995), Alesina and Angeletos
(2005), and Bénabou and Tirole (2006). However, we should not expect old beliefs to persist under a new system of
redistribution over long periods of time and across generations unless the beliefs, once formed, become part of
culture. At the individual level, Corneo and Grüner (2002) show that individuals who believe that hard work is
important “for getting ahead in life” have weaker preferences for redistribution. Fong (2001) shows that individuals
prefer more redistribution if they believe poverty is determined exogenously and argues that this relationship cannot
be explained by imperfectly measured self-interest.

8

We use data from three rounds of the European Social Survey (ESS), a biennial crosssectional survey administered in a large sample of (mostly) European nations. The survey was
initiated by the European Science Foundation with the goal of measuring and comparing
attitudes and behaviors across countries and over time in a methodologically rigorous way. The
three rounds of the survey were conducted in 2002/2003, 2004/2005, and 2006/2007. Thirty-two
countries participated in at least one round of the survey, and seventeen countries participated in
all three rounds. The countries participating in each round are given in the first column of Table
1.
Respondents are given the statement “the government should take measures to reduce
differences in income levels” and asked if they agree strongly, agree, neither agree nor disagree,
disagree, or disagree strongly. We code this question on a five-point scale, with 1 being
“disagree strongly” and 5 being “agree strongly.” Although the question does not specify a
particular country when it refers to “government,” the question immediately preceding this
question asks about policies specifically in the country of residence.12 We define the preference
for redistribution in an immigrant’s birth country as follows: we calculate the mean preference
among natives in the birth country in each ESS round, weighted by individual weights, and then
average across rounds.13
Our primary sample consists of individuals who are immigrants; that is, individuals
whose country of birth differs from the country of residence. We restrict this immigrant sample
12

In Round 1, the immediately preceding question asks respondents their level of agreement with the following
statement: “The less that government intervenes in the economy, the better it is for [country].” In Rounds 2 and 3,
the immediately preceding question asks respondents to “please say what you think overall about the state of health
services in [country] nowadays” on a scale from extremely bad to extremely good. In both cases, [country] is
replaced with the name of the country in which the survey is conducted.
13
If a country did not participate in all rounds of the survey, the birth country preference for that country is defined
by the average across the available rounds. In practice, the mean preference for a given country across rounds is
almost perfectly correlated. This means that we will retain immigrants from a given birth country in all rounds as
long as we observe the birth country in any round. However, we have observations for immigrants to a given
destination country in a given round only if the destination country participated in that round.

9

to individuals who are 18 years of age or older and whose birth country is an ESS survey
country.14 We drop observations for which the preference for redistribution is missing (3.7% of
observations in the immigrant sample). We also drop observations for which gender is missing
(less than 0.1% of observations). Demographic characteristics of this sample (N=6249) are
given in Appendix Table A1.
Table 1 summarizes immigrant flows across countries in our immigrant subsample of the
ESS. The first set of columns tabulates patterns of emigration from countries of birth; the second
set of columns tabulates patterns of immigration into countries of residence. For example, 100
individuals in the sample were born in Austria but reside in a different sample country, and 335
individuals resided in Austria at the time of the survey but were born in a different sample
country. These numbers are unweighted. The table is meant to illustrate the variation in our
sample but is not representative of aggregate immigration flows across the sampled countries.
We observe substantial diversity in the sample: each birth country has at least four distinct
destination countries. Among the 930 possible country pair cells, we observe individuals in 43%
of them.

4. Results
4.1. Determinants of Preferences for Redistribution
In Table 2, we test for the effects of culture on individual preferences for redistribution
and explore the effects of traditional economic determinants of preferences. A one unit increase
in the mean preference for redistribution in the individual’s country of birth, calculated on a 1 to
5 scale, is associated with a 0.36 unit increase in the individual’s own preference for
14

We drop observations for which age is missing (less than 1% of observations). We also drop 12 observations for
which individuals reported being born outside the country of residence but country of birth is missing or the birth
country and indicator for native-born are inconsistent.

10

redistribution (column 1). This effect is highly statistically significant (t=4.09). The
specification in column 1 includes country of residence fixed effects as well as demographic and
socioeconomic status controls.15 We also control for income in the country of birth, measured by
the log of purchasing power parity adjusted GDP in 2004. Standard errors are clustered by birth
country, since the preference variable of interest varies at the birth country level.
The economic variables affect preferences for redistribution in the direction that is
consistent with economic self-interest. Higher-income households stand to lose more from
income redistribution and, consistent with that, household income has a negative effect on
preferences for redistribution.16 Similarly, individuals with less than secondary education have a
higher preference for redistribution, and individuals with more than secondary education have a
lower preference; the same pattern is observed for spousal education. Individuals who have ever
been unemployed for a twelve month period have a higher preference. We also examine the
effects of primary source of income, with the omitted category being wage and salary income.
Relative to this group, individuals whose primary source of income is self-employment and those
whose primary source is investment income have lower preferences for redistribution. Those
whose primary source of income is pension, unemployment benefits, or social benefits have a
higher preference for redistribution, though the effect of pension income is not statistically
significant. Age has a positive effect on preferences, as does being female.
The log of purchasing power parity adjusted GDP in the birth country is included as a
control to capture economic differences across countries. To the extent that these differences in
15

We control for age, gender, education, spouse’s education, marital status, log of household income, log of
household size, whether the individual is currently working, whether the individual has ever been unemployed for
more than 12 months, the primary income source, whether the individual has a child in the home, an indicator for
residence in an urban area, and an indicator for ESS round. We include dummy variables to indicate missing
information.
16
Household income is coded in a series of income ranges. We define income as the midpoint of the relevant range
for each household.

11

economic environment affect the cultural preference for redistribution, we are perhaps
overcontrolling. However, we wanted to capture differences in birth country culture over and
beyond simple differences in the level of economic development of the birth country. The GDP
coefficient is positive and significant in our base specification, but its magnitude and significance
level are sensitive to the choice of sample. Hence, we mainly regard it as a control variable and
do not attach an economic interpretation to it.
We next compare the effects of our control variables on preferences in the immigrant
sample and the native sample. This comparison allows us to test whether demographic and
economic factors affect the preferences of immigrants differently than the preferences of natives.
Column 2 regresses the individual preference for redistribution on the same set of control
variables as in column 1, but excludes the birth country preference and GDP measures since
these variables cannot be identified separately from the residence country fixed effects in the
native sample. Column 3 presents the same regression for the sample of natives. Overall, the
coefficients appear quite similar, indicating that the economic determinants of preferences for
redistribution are similar for natives and immigrants.17 These results alleviate the possible
concern that individual characteristics do not capture the expected benefit or loss from
redistribution as well among immigrants as among natives and that, as a result, the coefficient on
birth country preferences could reflect economic self-interest rather than a cultural effect.
4.2. Robustness Analysis
A concern when examining the preferences of immigrants is selection. Although crosscountry migration decisions are clearly non-random, our primary concern here is whether
selective migration could spuriously generate an effect of birth country preference for

17

We cannot reject the hypothesis that the individual characteristics predicting preferences for redistribution have
the same effects for natives and immigrants (p-value: 0.38).

12

redistribution on own preference. We explore the possibility of economically motivated
selective migration by testing the sensitivity of our results to the choice of economic controls
(Table 3). In row 1, we regress individual preference for redistribution on the birth country
preference, controlling only for residence country fixed effects. This specification corresponds
to the graph shown in Figure 1. The estimated preference coefficient is 0.26 (p<0.01). This
estimate is quite close to the slope of the line in Figure 1 (0.30). Row 2 presents the results with
a basic set of controls; this specification is the same as column 1 in Table 2, and the estimated
preference coefficient is 0.36.
We next include richer control variables (row 3). We define the own education indicators
more narrowly, resulting in seven possible educational attainment categories. We include 3rd
order polynomials in the log of household income and household size, a quadratic term for age,
more detailed controls for employment status and history, indicators for religious affiliation,
indicators for the length of residence in the residence country, and a dummy variable for
linguistic minority that is equal to one if the language most commonly spoken at home is not one
of the primary residence country languages.18 The estimated preference coefficient in this
specification is 0.34 (p<0.01). We define the set of control variables used in row 3 as our
baseline set of controls. These controls are included in all further analyses, unless otherwise
indicated.
In row 4, we add controls for citizenship, whether the individual voted in the last national
election, and frequency of religious attendance. We do not include these variables in the
baseline set of controls because they may be partially determined by preferences for

18

We include whether your spouse is currently working and whether you have ever had a paid job. We define a
language as a “primary” language of a given country if it is a language most commonly spoken at home by at least
30% of natives in that country. These results and the results in Section 4.3 are very similar if we instead use a 10%
or 50% cutoff for linguistic minority.

13

redistribution, but their inclusion does not affect the estimate. The specifications in rows 3 and 4
include 3rd order polynomials in income, but the effects of these income variables on an
individual’s gain or loss from redistribution may depend on the tax and transfer systems of the
country of residence. We therefore include interactions of income, income-squared, and income
cubed and residence country dummies, allowing the effects of income to vary flexibly by country
(row 5). The estimated coefficient is 0.32 (p<0.01). Finally, we add an even more extensive set
of economic controls (row 6), resulting in an estimated coefficient of 0.29 (p<0.01).19
The estimates in Table 3 demonstrate that the preference effect is robust to the choice of
controls for economic factors. Although the point estimates generally decrease slightly as we
add more controls, including even the richest set of economic controls results in a large and
significant estimate that is similar to the baseline. Selection on unobservables could still be a
potential concern if the birth country preference is capturing economic characteristics of
immigrants that remain unobserved by us but are relevant for taxes and transfers. This may
seem unlikely, given that we found little selection on a rich set of observable characteristics (for
education, income, and labor market experiences). However, we cannot completely rule out the
possibility of selection on unobservables. Immigrants may, for example, have private
information about expected economic mobility.
We next test the robustness of our results to the choice of sample and specification (Table
4). Row 2 presents the results excluding the two birth countries with the lowest mean preference
for redistribution (Denmark and the Netherlands) and the two countries with the highest mean
preference (Bulgaria and Greece). The estimated coefficient is slightly higher than the baseline

19

We include all the controls in rows 4 and 5 and add controls for main economic activity over the last week, union
membership, mother’s and father’s education, occupation and industry indicators, and dummies for within-host
country region. There are 96 controls included in the baseline and 458 controls included in the regression with
comprehensive controls (row 6).

14

(0.38) and remains highly significant. Our results are also robust to dropping individuals for
whom the birth country is a former Communist country (row 3).20 This indicates that cultural
influences are important within Western Europe; we are not capturing only the effects of
Communism or other factors that might drive differences in preferences between Eastern and
Western Europe.
Our baseline specification included an indicator variable for the ESS round. We now
examine the three rounds separately (rows 4-6). While the effect is strongest in the Round 2
sample, the coefficient of interest is significant at the 10% level or better in all three rounds. The
effect is also robust to restricting the sample to the 17 countries surveyed in all rounds (row 7)
and to restricting the sample to the EU-15 countries, the 15 member countries of the European
Union prior to the 2004 expansions (row 8). These results indicate that cultural influences
appear to be important determinants of preferences even among countries that are relatively
homogeneous.21 The fact that we observe significant effects of birth country preference across
many different subsamples of countries also provides further suggestive evidence against the
selection hypothesis, since we would expect the form of selection to differ in these subsamples.
4.3. Heterogeneity
We next explore whether the birth country effect differs for different types of immigrants.
We examine heterogeneity in the birth country effect by regressing an immigrant’s preference
for redistribution on her birth country mean preference interacted with the relevant indicator
variable (Table 5). The direct effect of birth country preference is excluded, so each regression
20

Former Communist countries in the sample are: Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland,
Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Ukraine.
21
We perform three additional robustness checks: we omit individuals with any missing income or demographic
information (row 9), we run an ordered probit rather than an OLS specification (row 10), and we weight the data
using individual weights (row 11). Since the root mean squared error in the OLS specification happens to be 1.00,
the probit coefficient can be meaningfully compared to the OLS coefficient. In all three robustness checks, the
coefficients are very close to the baseline coefficient and statistically significant at the 1% level.

15

has two coefficients of interest: one measures the average effect of birth country among
immigrants for whom the indicator equals one and the other measures the average effect for
those for whom the indicator equals zero. The table also reports the p-value on a test of whether
the two coefficients in each regression are equal.
Rows 1, 2, and 3 test whether the effect varies based on the length of time the immigrant
has lived in the residence country, citizenship, and voting. We construct three indicator
variables. Tenure is equal to one if the immigrant has lived in the residence country for more
than 20 years (which is about the median tenure). Citizenship is equal to one if the individual is
a citizen of the residence country, and Voting is equal to one if she voted in the last national
election. Individuals with longer tenure, citizens, and voters have smaller effects of birth country
preference,22 but the preference effect is still highly significant for each of these groups. The
tenure effect suggests that the result is unlikely to be driven solely by slow updating of economic
information, since birth country preference is a significant determinant of own preference even
among immigrants who have lived in their country of residence for more than twenty years.
The effect of birth country preference also varies with social measures of assimilation.
Row 4 shows that individuals in a residence country with a large population of other immigrants
from the individual’s own birth country have a significantly stronger effect of birth country
culture. Borjas (1992) notes the potential importance of an individual’s ethnic group in
determining intergenerational earnings mobility; a similar mechanism may act to slow
assimilation in this case. Row 5 shows that immigrants who are members of linguistic minorities
in their residence countries have stronger preference effects, perhaps because they are less easily
able to assimilate into the residence country, although this difference is not statistically
significant.
22

The differences are significant at the 5% level for tenure and voting and just above the 10% level for citizenship.

16

These economic and social measures are correlated with each other, so we are not able to
separately estimate the partial effect of each measure. Taken together, however, these results do
suggest that individuals are less influenced by birth country culture when they are more
assimilated into the residence country. This may be because immigrants’ preferences begin to
converge to cultural norms in the country of residence or because those who choose to assimilate
have preferences that are more divergent from their birth country preferences to begin with.
Individuals with children in the household have significantly stronger birth country
preference effects (row 6). This result may be somewhat surprising, since we might expect
children to hasten the assimilation process. A possible explanation of this finding is that parents
want to pass on their birth country culture to their children and that this strengthens the effect on
their own preferences.
4.4. Cultural Effects and Voting Behavior
A question when interpreting these findings is whether culture affects true preferences or
only reporting behavior. We therefore examine the effects of birth country preferences on
individual voting decisions. This exercise is limited by the fact that only 46% of the immigrant
sample was eligible and chose to vote in the last national election. As discussed in the last
section, the subsample of immigrants who vote are less influenced by their birth country culture.
Party ideologies are classified in two ways. First, we construct a measure of each party’s
preference for redistribution by using the voting behavior of the native sample. This party
preference variable is defined for each immigrant as the mean preference for redistribution
among natives who voted for the immigrant’s party. A higher value of this variable implies that
the party for which the immigrant voted is likely to be more in favor of redistribution. Second,

17

we categorize political parties as right, center, or left using the Database of Political Institutions
constructed by Beck et al. (2001).23
Before looking at voting behavior, we examine the effect of birth country preference on
own self-reported preference for the subsample of immigrants for whom party voting data are
available. Row 1 of Table 6 presents our baseline specification for the sample of immigrants for
whom our measure of party preference can be constructed. Row 3 presents the specification for
the subsample for which the Beck political party classification can be made. The preference
effects for these samples are 0.184 (p<0.05) and 0.179 (p<0.10), respectively. These estimates
differ slightly from the effect for all voters estimated in Table 5 because even among immigrants
who voted, the political party for which they voted is unavailable in 18% of cases. We are unable
to match the political party to a Beck database classification in a further 30% of cases.
In row 2, we replace the dependent variable with our constructed measure of the
redistributive preference of the party for which the immigrant voted. Note that this measure is
scaled in a way that makes it directly comparable to the individual preference measure. We find
that immigrants from birth countries with a high preference for redistribution are significantly
more likely to vote for a more pro-redistribution political party in their countries of residence.
The estimated effect is 0.10, and it is significant at the 1% level. The effect is somewhat smaller
than the effect on preferences for redistribution for this sample (row 1) but is estimated with
greater precision. This finding is not surprising; we would expect a voting-based measure of
preferences to be less noisy than the self-reported categorical measure. This difference is also

23

The Beck data were supplemented with data from the Huber-Inglehart (1995) classification of party politics.
Please see the notes to Table 6 for more detail. We also added cases where we were able to discern the party match
from other sources with confidence; these were generally parties where the left-right classification was clear but the
party was not a main government or opposition party and therefore not included in the Beck database. All party
classifications were made prior to running the empirical analyses.

18

reflected in the R-squared: we can explain over half of the variation in the voting measure, as
compared to 10-15% of the variation in the preference measure.
We also find that birth country culture increases the immigrant’s preference for
redistribution when we measure this preference by the Beck classification of the party for which
she voted. An increase of one unit in the birth country mean preference is associated with a 0.25
unit movement to the left on the three-unit Beck scale (row 4), and the effect is significant at the
5% level. We conclude that Table 6 provides strong evidence against the concern that the
estimated effects of culture only capture reporting behavior rather than true preferences.
4.5. Intergenerational Transmission of Preferences
In Rounds 2 and 3 of the ESS, individuals are asked not only their own country of birth
but also the country of birth of their mother and father. We construct the sample of individuals
who are residing in their own country of birth but who have at least one parent who was born in a
different ESS survey country. This sample consists of 4649 individuals. Of these, 2920 have a
mother and 2958 have a father who was born in a different ESS survey country.24
We first examine the effect of the mean preference for redistribution in the parent birth
country, where parent could be the mother or father. We define the parent birth country mean
preference as the average of the mean preferences in each parent’s country of birth. A slight
majority of individuals in this sample has one parent who is a native in the country of residence
and another parent who emigrated from an ESS survey country. We include the birth country
preference of the native parent in the average to correctly scale the cultural effect of the
immigrant parent, but this does not drive the estimates because we capture the direct effect of the
native parent’s birth country preference by the residence country fixed effects.
24

Of those with an ESS immigrant mother, 55% have a native father and 42% have an immigrant father from an
ESS survey country. Of those with an ESS immigrant father, 56% have a native mother and 42% have an immigrant
mother from an ESS survey country.

19

A one unit increase in the parent birth country preference is associated with an increase
of 0.23 in the individual preference, and the effect is statistically significant at the 5% level
(Table 7, row 1). This effect is approximately two-thirds as large as the own country of birth
effect. In row 2, we include an interaction of the mean preference in the parent birth country with
a dummy variable that equals one if both parents come from the same birth country.25 The base
effect (for those whose parents do not come from the same birth country) is 0.18 (p<0.10). The
marginal effect of having a common parental birth country is 0.14. This suggests that having
two parents from the same birth country amplifies the cultural effect, although the interaction is
not estimated with precision. The country of origin effect appears to be stronger for immigrant
mothers: the effect of mother’s birth country preference is 0.16 (p<0.05) and the effect of
father’s birth country preference is 0.11 (not significant).26 However, we cannot reject the
hypothesis that the mother’s and father’s effect are equally strong.
These results suggest that cultural effects persist strongly at least into the second
generation, a finding that is consistent with previous work on the intergenerational transmission
of preferences and with research documenting cultural effects of country of ancestry among
second generation immigrants in the United States.27 These results also provide evidence against
the selective migration and slow updating hypotheses, since the samples consist of individuals
born in their country of residence.

25

This indicator is equal to one for 1077 individuals in the sample.
The sample in row 3 consists of natives with an immigrant mother from an ESS survey country; the sample in row
4 consists of natives with an immigrant father from an ESS survey country. These samples overlap slightly, since
some individuals have parents from the same source country and some individuals have parents from two different
survey countries. The preference variables in these specifications are the source country mean preference of the
mother and father respectively.
27
See, e.g., Bisin and Verdier (2008) for a brief and lucid overview of models and evidence of cultural transmission.
Guiso et al. (2007) present evidence of cultural effects persisting over a period of well over 500 years.
26

20

5. Conclusion
By studying immigrants, we are able to credibly disentangle cultural determinants of
preferences for redistribution from economic and institutional determinants. We find that
individuals’ preferences for redistribution are strongly affected by preferences in their countries
of birth: the average preference for income redistribution in the culture where an immigrant is
raised continues to have an effect once they emigrate. This effect is highly statistically
significant and robust to rich controls for economic factors and to the choice of sample and
specification. Our results show that these cultural influences also affect real behaviors, such as
voting. Cultural determinants of preferences for redistribution appear to be strongly persistent
across generations.
At a fundamental level, this paper provides evidence on the nature of preferences for
redistribution. We find that these preferences cannot be fully explained by economic selfinterest or by economic, political, or social aspects of the current environment, since individual
preferences continue to be influenced by country of origin even in a common environment. We
take this as evidence that culture is an important determinant of preferences for redistribution.
At a more applied level, this finding has three important implications. First, it suggests that
culture may be an important factor in explaining the large observed differences in systems of
redistribution across countries. Second, it implies persistence in preferences for redistribution.
This persistence means that in settings with multiple equilibria for the amount of redistribution
(e.g., as in Piketty 1995), we are unlikely to observe a sudden shift from one equilibrium to
another, which underscores the importance of those factors that determine the selection of the
initial equilibrium. Third, while our primary focus is on using immigrants as a mechanism to
identify the effects of culture, our findings shed light on the political economy of immigration

21

policy because the cultural values that immigrants bring along can shape the social policies of
their destination countries well into the future. Even if the immigrants themselves have little
effect on current policy (e.g., because they are not allowed to vote), the transmission of their
cultural values to their children can affect future policy and have a lasting impact.

22

References
Abramitzky, Ran. 2008. “The Limits of Equality: Insights from the Israeli Kibbutz.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Alesina, Alberto, and George-Marios Angeletos. 2005. “Fairness and Redistribution,” American
Economic Review, 95(4): 960-980.
Alesina, Alberto, and Nicola Fuchs-Schündeln. 2007. “Good Bye Lenin (or Not?): The Effect
of Communism on People’s Preferences,” American Economic Review, 97(4): 1507-28.
Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano. 2007. “The Power of the Family,” NBER working paper
no. 13051.
Alesina, Alberto, and Edward L. Glaeser. 2004. Fighting Poverty in the U.S. and Europe: A
World of Difference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Alesina, Alberto, Edward L. Glaeser, and Bruce Sacerdote. 2001. “Why Doesn’t the United
State Have a European-Style Welfare State?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2001(2):
187-254.
Alesina, Alberto, and Eliana La Ferrara. 2005. “Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of
Opportunities,” Journal of Public Economics, 89(5-6): 897-931.
Algan, Yann, and Pierre Cahuc. 2007. “Social Attitudes and Economic Development: An
Epidemiological Approach,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 2935.
Antecol, Heather. 2000. “An Examination of Cross-Country Differences in the Gender Gap in
Labor Force Participation Rates,” Labour Economics, 7(4): 409-426.
Antecol, Heather. 2001. “Why Is There Interethnic Variation in the Gender Wage Gap?: The
Role of Cultural Factors,” The Journal of Human Resources, 36(1): 119-143.
Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh. 2001. “New
Tools in Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions,” World Bank
Economic Review, 15(1): 165-176.
Bénabou, Roland, and Efe A. Ok. 2001. “Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution:
The POUM Hypothesis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2): 447-487.
Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole. 2006. “Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 121(2): 699-746.
Benson, Lee. 1966. The Concept of Jacksonian Democracy: New York as a Test Case. New
York: Atheneum.

23

Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2004. “Work Ethic and Redistribution: A Cultural
Transmission Model of the Welfare State,” Unpublished Manuscript. New York University.
Bisin, Alberto, and Thierry Verdier. 2008. “Cultural Transmission,” New Palgrave Dictionary
of Economics, 2nd edition, Stephen Durlauf and Lawrence Blume (eds.), New York: Palgrave
Macmillian.
Blau, Francine D. 1992. “The Fertility of Immigrant Women: Evidence from High Fertility
Source Countries,” in Immigration and the Workforce: Economic Consequences for the United
States and Source Areas, George Borjas and Richard Freeman (eds), Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 93-133.
Borjas, George. 1992. “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 107(1): 123-150.
Brunner, Eric J., Stephen L. Ross, and Ebonya Washington. 2008. “Economics and Ideology:
Causal Evidence of the Impact of Economic Conditions on Support for Redistribution and Other
Ballot Proposals,” NBER Working Paper No. 14091.
Carroll, Christopher D., Byung-Kun Rhee, and Changyong Rhee. 1994. “Are There Cultural
Effects on Saving? Some Cross-Sectional Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(3):
685-699.
Corneo, Giacomo. 2004. “Wieso Umverteilung? Einsichten aus ökonometrischen
Umfrageanalysen.” In Finanzpolitik und Umverteilung, ed. Bernd Genser. Berlin: Duncker &
Humblot.
Corneo, Giacomo, and Hans Peter Grüner. 2002. “Individual Preferences for Political
Redistribution,” Journal of Public Economics, 83(1): 83-107.
Dancygier, Rafaela, and Elizabeth N. Saunders. 2006. “A New Electorate? Comparing
Preferences and Partisanship between Immigrants and Natives.” American Journal of Political
Science, 50(4): 962-981.
Fairlie, Robert W., and Bruce D. Meyer. 1996. “Ethnic and Racial Self-Employment
Differences and Possible Explanations.” The Journal of Human Resources, 31(4): 757-793.
Fernández, Raquel. 2007. “Women, Work, and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 5(2-3): 305-332.
Fernández, Raquel. 2008. “Culture and Economics,” New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics,
2nd edition, Stephen Durlauf and Lawrence Blume (eds.), New York: Palgrave Macmillian.
Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2006. “Fertility: The Role of Culture and Family
Experience,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 4(2–3): 552–561.

24

Fernández, Raquel, and Alessandra Fogli. 2007. “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of
Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” Unpublished manuscript, New York University.
Fisman, Raymond, and Edward Miguel. 2007. “Corruption, Norms, and Legal Enforcement:
Evidence from Diplomatic Parking Tickets,” Journal of Political Economy, 115(6): 1020-1048.
Fong, Christina M. 2001. “Social Preferences, Self-Interest, and the Demand for
Redistribution,” Journal of Public Economics, 82(2): 225-246.
Fong, Christina M. 2007. “Evidence From an Experiment on Charity to Welfare Recipients:
Reciprocity, Altruism and the Empathic Responsiveness Hypothesis,” Economic Journal,
117(522): 1008-1024.
Giuliano, Paola. 2007. “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin
Matter?” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(5): 927-952.
Guinnane, Timothy W., Carolyn M. Moehling, and Cormac Ó Gráda. 2006. “The Fertility of
the Irish in the United States in 1910,” Explorations in Economic History, 43(3): 465-485.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2006. “Does Culture Affect Economic
Outcomes?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(2): 23-48.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2007. “Long Term Persistence,” Unpublished
Manuscript, European University Institute.
Huber, John, and Ronald Inglehart. 1995. “Expert Interpretations of Party Space and Party
Locations in 42 Societies.” Party Politics, 1(1): 73-111.
Ichino, Andrea, and Giovanni Maggi. 2000. “Work Environment and Individual Background:
Explaining Regional Shirking Differentials in a Large Italian Firm,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 115(3): 1057-90.
Leigh, Andrew. 2005. “Economic Voting and Electoral Behavior: How Do Individual,
Local and National Factors Affect the Partisan Choice?” Economics and Politics, 17(2):
265-296.
Lipset, Seymour Martin, and Gary Marks. 2000. It Didn’t Happen Here: Why Socialism Failed
in the United States. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Luttmer, Erzo F.P. 2001. “Group Loyalty and the Taste for Redistribution,” Journal of Political
Economy, 109(3): 500-528.
McCormick, Richard L. 1974. “Ethno-Cultural Interpretations of Nineteenth-Century American
Voting Behavior,” Political Science Quarterly, 89(2): 351-377.

25

Meltzer, Allan H., and Scott F. Richard. 1981. “A Rational Theory of the Size of Government,”
Journal of Political Economy, 89(5): 914-927.
Piketty, Thomas. 1995. “Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 110(3): 551-584.
Ravallion, Martin, and Michael Lokshin. 2000. “Who Wants to Redistribute? The Tunnel
Effect in 1990s Russia,” Journal of Public Economics, 76(1): 87-104.
Tabellini, Guido. 2007. “Institutions and Culture,” Unpublished Manuscript, Bocconi.

26

Figure 1: Immigrant Preferences for Redistribution by Preferences in Country of Birth

Note: Immigrant preference for redistribution in country of residence is measured in deviation from the mean preference of natives in the country of residence. It is then
averaged over all countries in which immigrants from a given birth country currently reside. Thus, the country labels indicate countries of birth. The size of each circle is
proportional to the number of immigrants from the indicated country in the ESS dataset. The regression line has a slope of 0.30 with a standard error of 0.08. The adjusted R2
equals 0.38.

27

Country:
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria+*
Cyprus+*
Czech Rep.#
Denmark
Estonia+
Finland
France
Germany
Great Britain
Greece#
Hungary
Iceland+#
Ireland
Israel*#
Italy#
Latvia+*
Luxembourg#
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania+*
Russia+*
Spain
Slovakia+
Slovenia
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey+#
Ukraine+

Table 1: Immigration Flows within ESS Sample Countries
Immigration Flows by Birth Country
Immigration Flows by Country of Destination
Number
Number of
Number
Number of
Distinct
Most Prevalent
Immigrating to
Immigrants in
Most Prevalent Immigrating from
Immigrants from Destination
Destination
Most Prevalent
Destination Distinct Birth
Birth
Most Prevalent
Country
Country
Country
Birth Country
Countries
Country
Countries
Country
100
13
Switzerland
54
335
23
Germany
115
165
18
Luxembourg
93
274
19
France
66
60
15
Greece
18
10
4
Romania
4
13
4
Greece
6
27
9
Greece
14
126
14
Slovakia
56
124
8
Slovakia
92
78
11
Norway
33
88
21
Germany
15
27
6
Finland
13
576
6
Russia
487
158
9
Sweden
131
93
12
Sweden
49
404
20
Luxembourg
126
169
19
Portugal
46
740
28
Switzerland
213
433
27
Poland
99
471
19
Ireland
315
163
23
Ireland
60
54
16
Cyprus
14
171
19
Germany
50
91
17
Austria
26
67
6
Romania
49
13
5
Denmark
5
9
3
Denmark
5
72
8
Great Britain
60
384
15
Great Britain
315
9
8
Netherlands
2
282
17
Romania
69
387
16
Switzerland
140
35
13
Switzerland
7
22
8
Estonia
6
141
5
Russia
117
8
4
Belgium
4
701
21
Portugal
252
160
15
Belgium
53
177
22
Turkey
42
43
10
Sweden
27
169
20
Sweden
34
296
22
Germany
99
43
8
Germany
27
367
9
Luxembourg
252
69
11
France
37
238
22
Israel
69
1
1
Ukraine
1
1142
24
Estonia
487
55
5
Ukraine
47
108
16
Switzerland
27
102
18
Romania
20
123
11
Czech Rep.
92
76
6
Czech Rep.
56
21
7
Austria
9
47
8
Germany
19
117
12
Finland
49
321
24
Finland
131
45
12
Italy
7
719
25
Germany
213
321
14
Germany
88
14
5
Bulgaria
8
270
19
Estonia
76
374
9
Russia
348

Note: + indicates that the survey was not fielded in the first round of the ESS in that country. * indicates that the survey was not fielded in the second round of the ESS in that
country. # indicated that the survey was not fielded in the third round of the ESS in that country.

28

Table 2: Predictors of Preferences for Redistribution
Dependent Variable: Subjective Preference for
Income Redistribution
Birth country redistribution preferences
Birth country log GDP per capita
Age
Female
Own Low education
Own High education
Spouse Low Education
Spouse High Education
Divorced or separated
Widowed
Never married
Log household income
Primary Income Source:
Self-Employed
Pension
Unemployment benefits
Social benefits
Investment
Other
Log household size
Paid work last week
Has a child in the household
Ever unemployed for more than 12 months
Lives in metropolitan area
ESS Round 2
ESS Round 3
Residence country dummies (32)
N
Adjusted R2

Immigrants
Coefficient
(S.E.)
0.363*** (0.089)
0.191*** (0.064)
0.004**
(0.002)
0.090*** (0.030)
0.048
(0.057)
-0.086*** (0.026)
0.057*
(0.028)
-0.162*** (0.040)
0.084
(0.099)
0.019
(0.071)
0.082
(0.064)
-0.074**
(0.031)
-0.206***
0.048
0.161*
0.243**
-0.356**
-0.218
0.020
0.002
0.065*
0.140***
0.014
-0.002
0.111**

(0.051)
(0.038)
(0.088)
(0.089)
(0.163)
(0.140)
(0.026)
(0.032)
(0.037)
(0.038)
(0.041)
(0.040)
(0.051)
Yes
6249
0.1066

Immigrants – Controls Only
Coefficient
(S.E.)

0.004**
0.086**
0.065
-0.094***
0.072**
-0.159***
0.090
0.022
0.092
-0.077**

(0.002)
(0.032)
(0.059)
(0.027)
(0.030)
(0.037)
(0.100)
(0.072)
(0.064)
(0.031)

-0.206*** (0.053)
0.043
(0.037)
0.158*
(0.084)
0.228**
(0.093)
-0.335*
(0.168)
-0.229
(0.145)
0.015
(0.025)
0.005
(0.032)
0.074*
(0.037)
0.136*** (0.035)
0.020
(0.043)
-0.002
(0.038)
0.109**
(0.049)
Yes
6249
0.1005

Natives – Controls Only
Coefficient
(S.E.)

0.003***
0.125***
0.057***
-0.159***
0.055***
-0.105***
0.091***
-0.001
0.052***
-0.101***

(0.001)
(0.017)
(0.016)
(0.019)
(0.012)
(0.019)
(0.013)
(0.019)
(0.014)
(0.013)

-0.178***
(0.025)
-0.008
(0.019)
0.104***
(0.037)
0.109**
(0.040)
-0.386***
(0.058)
-0.116***
(0.034)
0.041***
(0.009)
0.007
(0.011)
0.006
(0.011)
0.134***
(0.024)
-0.037**
(0.017)
0.031
(0.023)
0.085***
(0.026)
Yes
118323
0.1328

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by birth country are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1 percent. The dependent variable is
subjective support for income redistribution. Birth country redistribution preferences are measured as the mean subjective preference for redistribution among natives in the
immigrant’s country of birth. Log GDP per capita is measured in purchasing power parity US dollars. Low education includes the two categories “Not completed primary
education” and “Primary or first stage of basic.” Secondary education is the omitted category and corresponds to the category “Lower secondary or second stage of basic.” High
education includes the following four categories: “Upper secondary,” “Post-secondary, non-tertiary,” “First stage of tertiary,” and “Second stage of tertiary.” The omitted marital
category is “Married.” The omitted income source is “Salary and wages.” (Unreported) dummies are included for missing regressors.

29

Table 3: Effect of Birth Country Culture on Immigrants’ Preferences for Redistribution
in Residence Country
Dependent Variable: Subjective Preference
Coefficient on
for Income Redistribution
Birth Country
Redistribution
Specification:
Preferences
(S.E.)
Adjusted R2
N
1. Country dummies as only controls
0.264***
(0.092)
0.0701
6249
0.363***

(0.089)

0.1066

6249

***

(0.084)

0.1100

6249

4. Baseline, but more controls

***

0.339

(0.082)

0.1100

6249

5. Baseline, but interacting a cubic in log
household income with country dummies

0.322***

(0.080)

0.1140

6249

6. Comprehensive controls

0.291***

(0.072)

0.1313

6249

2. Baseline, but fewer controls
3. Baseline

0.341

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by birth country are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5
percent; *** 1 percent. (Unreported) dummies are included for missing regressors. The baseline regression with fewer controls
corresponds to Column 1 of Table 2. The baseline regression adds several controls: We include more detailed controls for own
education (“not completed primary education,” “primary or first stage of basic,” “lower secondary or second stage of basic,”
“upper secondary,” “post-secondary, non-tertiary,” “first stage of tertiary,” and “second stage of tertiary”); 3rd order polynomials
in the log of household income and household size; a quadratic term for age; indicators for whether the spouse is currently
working and whether the respondent has ever had a paid job; a dummy for linguistic minority coded as 1 if the respondent’s
primary language spoken at home is spoken at home by less than 30% of the native population; a set of five 0/1 dummies to
express the length of time a respondent has lived in the residence country; and a set of eight 0/1 dummies to express religious
affiliation. The regression with more controls (row 4) adds a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent attends religious services once a
month or more, a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent voted in the last national election, and a dummy equal to 1 if the respondent
is a citizen of the residence country. Row 6 includes all of the controls in rows 4 and 5 and adds the following additional
controls: a set of eight 0/1 dummies for main activity over the last week, three 0/1 dummies to indicate union membership, ten
occupational categories, sixteen industry categories, mother’s and father’s education (defined as in Table 3), and a full set of
dummies for within-residence country region.

30

Table 4: Robustness to Sample Selection and Specification
Dependent Variable:
Subjective Preference
for Income Redistribution
Specification:
1. Baseline

Coefficient on
Birth Country
Redistribution
Preferences
0.341***

(S.E.)
(0.084)

Adjusted R2
0.1100

N
6249

2. Omitting Denmark, the Netherlands, Bulgaria
and Greece

0.383***

(0.101)

0.1066

5897

3. Omitting former Eastern Bloc birth countries

0.334***

(0.080)

0.1048

3833

**

(0.119)

0.1025

2005

***

(0.056)

0.1155

2306

*

(0.135)

0.1203

1938

7. Only countries represented in all ESS rounds

**

0.270

(0.097)

0.0930

2521

8. Only EU-15 countries

0.224**

(0.085)

0.1108

2416

9. Omitting observations with missing income or
demographic information

0.307***

(0.078)

0.1178

4774

0.361***

(0.087)

0.0491

6248

***

(0.097)

0.1134

6249

4. ESS Round 1

0.315

5. ESS Round 2

0.440

6. ESS Round 3

0.251

10. Ordered probit
11. Weighted by design weights

0.360

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by birth country are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5
percent; *** 1 percent. All regressions include the same control variables as the baseline regression reported in row 3 of Table 3.
Denmark and the Netherlands are the two birth countries with the lowest mean preference for redistribution; Bulgaria and Greece
are the countries with the highest mean preference. Former Eastern Bloc countries included in the ESS are Bulgaria, Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Ukraine. Countries in each of the three
rounds and those represented in all rounds are shown in Table 1. Design weights correct for the probability of sampling within a
country but do not adjust for differences in population across countries.

31

Table 5: Which Immigrants Are Most Influenced by Their Birth Country?
Dependent Variable: Subjective Preference for
Coefficient on birth
Income Redistribution
country preference
for income
(S.E.)
Specification:
redistribution
p-value
Adjusted R2
1. By tenure
Has lived in the country for ≤20 years
0.482***
(0.132)
0.1107
Has lived in the country for >20 years
0.259***
(0.073)
P-value on test of equal coefficients
0.032

N
6249

2. By citizenship
Non-citizen in residence country
Citizen in residence country
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.416***
0.270***

(0.114)
(0.071)
0.110

0.1106

6249

3. By voting
Non-voter in previous national election
Voted in previous national election
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.419***
0.243***

(0.097)
(0.083)
0.025

0.1105

6249

4. By immigrant density
Immigrant density below median
Immigrant density above median
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.191**
0.683***

(0.087)
(0.105)
0.000

0.1130

6249

5. By linguistic minority
Speaks dominant language at home
Speaks minority language at home
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.281***
0.481***

(0.075)
(0.148)
0.129

0.1105

6249

6. By children in the household
Does not have children in the household
Has children in the household
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.276***
0.435***

(0.080)
(0.096)
0.006

0.1103

6249

Note: Robust standard errors are adjusted for clustering by birth country. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5 percent; *** 1
percent. All regressions include the same control variables as the baseline regression reported in row 3 of Table 3. Immigrant
density is measured as the ratio of immigrants from a particular birth country to the total population in the country of residence.
The median of immigrant density is the median taken over all immigrants from ESS countries in the ESS data set. A language is
defined as dominant if more than 30% of the native population speaks it as a primary language in the home.

32

Table 6: Effect of Birth Country Culture on Immigrants’ Voting Behavior
Coefficient on
Birth Country
Redistribution
Dependent Variable:
Preferences
(S.E.)
Adjusted R2
1. Subjective preference for income redistribution
0.184**
(0.090)
0.1124
using sample for voting data is available

N
2328

2. Redistribution preferences of the party for which
the person voted

0.104***

(0.033)

0.5231

2328

3. Subjective preference for income redistribution
using sample for which Beck data is available

0.179*

(0.106)

0.1104

1622

4. Left-right party scale using Beck database

0.251**

(0.115)

0.1640

1622

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by birth country are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5
percent; *** 1 percent. All regressions include the same control variables as the baseline regression reported in row 3 of Table 3.
In the first two regressions, the sample is restricted to immigrant respondents who voted in the previous national election and
reported the party for which they voted. Political party redistribution preferences is the mean preference for income
redistribution among natives voting for the political party for which the respondent voted. In the second two regressions, the
sample is restricted to immigrant respondents who voted for a political party that is coded as left, right, or center in the Beck
database. The Beck database from the World Bank codes the three largest government political parties and the largest opposition
party as left, right, center, or NA. The left-right party scale codes “Right” parties as 1, “Center” parties as 2, and “Left” parties as
3. The Beck data were supplemented with data from the Huber-Inglehart (1995) classification of party politics. These data were
the basis of many of the Beck classifications but include parties not coded in the Beck database. Huber-Inglehart classifies
parties on a 1-10 left-right scale. Based on the Beck cutoffs, we define parties scored less than 5 as left, those from 5-6 as center,
and those above 6 as right. We also added cases where we were able to discern the party match from other sources with
confidence; these were generally parties where the left-right classification was clear, but the party was not a main government or
opposition party and therefore not included in the Beck database. All party classifications were made prior to running the
empirical analyses.

33

Table 7: The Effect of Parental Birth Country Culture on Second Generation Immigrants
Dependent Variable: Subjective Preference
Coefficient on
for Income Redistribution
Birth Country
Redistribution
Adjusted
Preferences
(S.E.)
R2
1. Parental birth country preferences for income redistribution
0.227**
(0.086)
0.1217
2. Parental birth country preferences for income redistribution

0.176*

(0.098)

Interaction on parental birth country preference and both
parents emigrating from the same country

0.141

(0.139)

3. Mother’s birth country preferences for income redistribution

0.164**

4. Father’s birth country preferences for income redistribution

0.109

N
4649

0.1216

4649

(0.068)

0.1357

2920

(0.091)

0.1201

2958

Note: Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering by birth country are in parentheses. Significance levels: * 10 percent; ** 5
percent; *** 1 percent. All regressions include the same control variables as the baseline regression reported in row 3 of Table 3.

34

Appendix Table A1: Summary Statistics

Variable
Preferences for Income Redistribution
Individual preference for income redistribution
Mean preference for income redistribution in
birth country
Political party redistribution preferences
Beck Score of Party
Demographics and Other Characteristics
Age
Female
Own Low education
Own Secondary education
Own High education
Spouse Low education
Spouse Secondary education
Spouse High education
Married
Divorced or separated
Widowed
Never married
Log household income
Primary Income Source:
Wages and salary
Self-employed
Pensions
Unemployment
Social benefits
Investments
Other
Log household size
Paid work last week
Has a child in the household
Ever been unemployed for more than 12 months
Citizen of residence country
Has lived in residence country for more than 20
years
Lives in metropolitan area
Linguistic minority
Voted in last national election
Immigrant birth country density above median
Born in an Eastern Bloc country
Log GDP per capita in birth country
ESS Wave 2
ESS Wave 3

Mean

S.D.

Min.

Max

N

3.82

1.06

1

5

6249

3.92

0.325

3.01

4.45

6249

3.83
2.06

0.431
0.953

1
1

5
3

2328
1622

50.01
0.567
0.312
0.312
0.375
0.316
0.319
0.365
0.587
0.121
0.113
0.180
9.754

16.98
0.496
0.464
0.463
0.484
0.465
0.466
0.482
0.492
0.326
0.317
0.384
1.150

18
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7.49

96
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
12.39

6241
6245
6184
6184
6184
3937
3937
3937
6219
6219
6219
6219
4906

0.589
0.062
0.275
0.025
0.030
0.007
0.013
0.834
0.545
0.43
0.123
0.559

0.492
0.240
0.447
0.156
0.170
0.082
0.112
0.548
0.498
0.495
0.329
0.497

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2.48
1
1
1
1
1

6145
6145
6145
6145
6145
6145
6145
6246
6202
6226
6201
6239
6183

0.629
0.403
0.432
0.463
0.499
0.387
9.69
0.369
0.310

0.483
0.491
0.495
0.499
0.500
0.487
0.583
0.483
0.463

0
0
0
0
0
8.58
0
0

1
1
1
1
1
10.99
1
1

6223
6232
6166
6249
6249
6249
6249
6249

Note: Subjective support for income redistribution is the level of agreement with the statement “the government should take
measures to reduce differences in income levels.” Their responses are coded on a five point scale with 1 being “disagree
strongly” and 5 being “agree strongly.” Political party redistribution preferences is the mean preference for income redistribution
among natives voting for the political party for which the respondent voted. The Beck database from the World Bank codes the
three largest government political parties and the largest opposition party as left, right, center, or NA. Low education includes the
two categories “Not completed primary education” and “Primary of first stage of basic.” Secondary education is the omitted
category and corresponds to the category “Lower secondary or second stage of basic.” High education includes the following
four categories: “Upper secondary,” “Post-secondary, non-tertiary,” “First stage of tertiary,” and “Second stage of tertiary.” A
language is defined as minority if less than 30% of the native population speaks it as a primary language in the home. Immigrant
population is the density of immigrants from a particular birth country. Former Eastern Bloc countries included in the ESS are
Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Ukraine. Log GDP per
capita is measured in purchasing power parity US dollars.

35

