NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIXED INVESTMENT IN THE
AMERICAN BUSINESS CYCLE, 1919—83

Robert

J. Gordon

John M. Veitch

Working Paper No. 1)426

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 198)4

Gordon's research is supported by the National Science Foundation
and the Sloan Foundation. Veitch acknowledges support from the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. The
authors are indebted to Ben Bernanke, Robert Chirinko, Thomas Doan,
Robert Eisner, John Geweke, Fumio Hayashi, Andrew Rose, Allen
Sinai, Larry Summers, Mark Watson, and members of the Northwestern
University Macro—Labor workshop, for helpful comments. They would
also like to thank Nathan Balke for his help with the data and
econometric estimation, and Joan Robinson for preparing a long and
complex manuscript so efficiently.
The research reported here is
part of the NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1426

August 1984
Fixed Investment in the American Business Cycle,
19 19—83

ABSTRACT

Contributions are made by this paper in three areas, methodological, data
creation, and empirical.
The methodological section finds that, while structural model building exercises may be useful in suggesting lists of variables
that may play an explanatory role in investment equations, they generally
achieve identification of structural parameters only by imposing arbitrary and
unbelievable simplifying assumptions and exclusion restrictions. The paper
advocates a hybrid methodology combining guidance from traditional structural
models on the choice and form of explanatory variables to be included, with
estimation in a reduced—form format that introduces all explanatory variables
and the lagged dependent variable with the same number of unconstrained lag
coefficients.
The second contribution is the use of a new set of quarterly data for
major expenditure categories of GNP extending back to 1919. The data file
also contains quarterly data back to 1919 for other variables, including the
capital stock, interest rates, the cost of capital including tax incentive
effects, a proxy for Tobin's "Q', and the real money supply.
The empirical results support the view that there are two basic impulses
in the business cycle, real and financial.
The real impulse appears in our
statistical evidence as an autonomous innovation to investment in structures.
We interpret these structures innovations as due in turn to changes in the
rate of population growth, episodes of speculation and overbuilding, and
Schumpeterian waves of innovation. The financial impulse works through the
effect on investment of changes in the money supply, as well as the real
interest rate (in the case of postwar investment in durable equipment). There
is a strong role for the money supply as a determinant of investment behavior,
relative to such other factors as the user cost of capital or Tobin's "0...
The role of the money supply is interpreted as primarily reflecting the
banking contraction of 1929—33 and the episodes of credit crunches and
disintermediation in the postwar years.
Another feature of the empirical work is the attention paid to aggreCoefficient estimates are more stable when four types of investment
expenditures are aggregated along the structures—equipment dimension than
along the household—business dimension.
Historical decompositions highlight
the role of autonomous innovations in structures investment and in the money
supply, and an inspection of residuals suggests that the main autonomous
downward shift in spending in 1929—30 was in fixed investment, not nondurable
consumption.
gation.

Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60201
(312)

492—3616

John Veitch
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60201
(312)

492—3616

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I.

II.

INTRODUCTION

.1

PITFALLS IN STRUCTURAL ESTIMATION OF INVESTMENT EQUATIONS

8

The Neoclassical Paradigm
Expectations arid
The Q Approach

9

Identification

.

Householdlnvestment
Relation toOther Critiques
The Hybrid Methodology:
Blending Structure with VAR Reduced Forms
III.

30

Development of theBasicVariables

30
33
33

Capital Stock
2.
Real Money Supply and Real Monetary Base
3.
"Average Q"
4.
Real Interest Rate
5.
The Real Price of Capital Services
Fixed Investment in Recessions, 1920—1982

V.

33
34

MeansandStandardDeviations

35
35
37

REGRESSION EQUATIONS EXPLAINING TOTAL INVESTMENT EXPENDITURES

42

Will the Real Accelerator Please Stand Up
Contribution of the Accelerator and the Cost of Capital
Contribution of Q and Real Ml
OtherSpecifications

42
43
45
47

SummaryofDisaggregatedResults
Aggregation Schemes

47
48

INVESTMENT IN A VECTOR—AUTOREGRESSIVE MODEL

50

Correlations Among Contemporaneous Innovations
Multi—variate Exogeneity Tests
InnovationAccounting
Historical Decomposition of Variance
in Both Investment Types

50
52
53

TheTemin'AutonomousShift" in 1930

55
58

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

60

Methodology and DataDescription
Implications for Four Schools of Thought
Deeper Issues and Unsettled Questions for Future Research

60
62
65

.

VI.

26

DATA AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

1.

IV.

12
16
22
23

FOOTNOTES

v—i

DATA APPENDIX

A—i

REFERENCES

"All induction is blind, so long as the deduction of causal connections is left out of account; and all deduction is barren, so long as it
does not start from observation."
J. N. Keynes (1890, P. 164)

I.

INTRODUCTION

The behavior of fixed investment is one of the four core topics
(along with consumption, money demand, and the Phillips curve) that have
dominated theoretical and empirical research in macroeconomics during
the postwar era.

An understanding of the sources of persistent swings

in investment spending would seem to be a key ingredient in any satisfactory explanation of business cycles.

This paper develops a new data

set and uses a new methodology to investigate the behavior of household
and business fixed investment in the United States since 1919.

Its

results have implications for at least four partly overlapping groups of
economists who have strong views about the nature of the fixed investment process and, indirectly, about the sources of business cycles.
Keynesians, following the General Theory, regard investment
behavior as containing a substantial autonomous component; investment
responds to the state of business confidence and incorporates the effect
of episodes of speculation and overbuilding.

The instability and un-

predictability of fixed investment behavior forms, of course, the basis
of Keynesian support for an activist and interventionist role for
government fiscal policy.

A crucial and often unstated component of the

Keynesian view is that these autonomous investment movements exhibit
positive serial correlation and last long enough for government action
to be effective.

2

In contrast monetarists do not single Out investment for special
attention.

Changes in aggregate private spending, consumption and

investment alike, are attributed to prior fluctuations in the supply of
money.

Since monetarists are usually reluctant to provide detailed

structural interpretations of what happens inside the black box through
which the influence of money is channeled to economic activity, they are
not concerned whether the primary channel runs through consumption,
But monetarists would expect (if forced uncharac-

investment, or both.

teristically to devote special attention to fixed investment behavior)
to find a strong role for the money supply as a primary determinant of
investment behavior.

In addition to the general approaches to macroeconomic analysis
advocated by Keynesians and monetarists, two additional groups of
economists have made a special effort to understand investment behavior.
The "neoclassical" school, represented by the work of Jorgenson and his
collaborators, emphasizes changes in the relative price or "user cost"
of capital as a dominant influence, together with changes in output, on
fluctuations in fixed investment.

The user cost of capital is the

primary channel by which both monetary policy (working through interest
rates) and fiscal policy (working through investment tax incentives)
influence the flow of investment spending.
advocates of Tobin's "Q" approach,

The final group consists of

inwhich the influence on investment

of forward—looking expectations regarding output and capital costs is
captured by a single variable, "Q,"
capital to its reproduction cost.
fluctuations in "Q"

is

the ratio of the market value of
Since the dominant portion of

accounted for by changes in stock market prices,

proponents of this approach expect econometric work to single out the

3

stock market as an important (or dominant) factor explaining investment
behavior.

Because of the long time span of data covered in the empirical
portion of this paper, its results have implications for the sources of
business cycles in general and of the Great Depression in particular.
Keynesians view business cycles as the inevitable reflection of the
instability of investment spending, which in turn justifies government
intervention to reduce the amplitude of cycles.

Keynesian interpreta-

tions of the Great Depression, especially Temin (1976), minimize the
role of monetary factors in the first two years of the 1929—33 contraction.

Monetarists reverse the roles of the government and private

sector and view the basic source of business cycles as autonomous and
largely unexplained fluctuations in the money supply that lead to
fluctuations in private spending.

A reduction in the amplitude of

business cycles requires a reduction in the instability originating in
government management of the money supply.

The neoclassical and Q approaches to the explanation of investment
behavior are explicitly partial equilibrium in nature and have not been
developed into broader theories of the business cycle.

The neoclassical

approach is compatible with some aspects of monetarism, since instability in investment can originate from government control over interest
rates and investment tax incentives.

But the policy implications differ

from those of monetarism; to the extent that the monetarist recommendation of a constant monetary growth rate rule would increase the volatility of interest rates, then the neoclassicists would predict the
consequence to be greater rather than lesser fluctuations in investment
spending.

The "Q' advocates have not addressed themselves to business

4

cycle implications, but their approach creates a natural link to those
(like Mishkln, (1978)) who emphasize the role of the 1929 stock market
crash in the Great Depression.

The conflict between the Keynesian and monetarist approaches can be
related to the distinction in business cycle analysis between "impulses"
and "propagation mechanisms."

Keynesians argue for activist monetary

and fiscal policy responses to counter serially correlated investment
impulses, while monetarists view investment as part of the propagation
mechanism that carries the influence of autonomous money—supply impulses
from their origin in the government sector to their effect on private—
sector spending.'

The Keynesian—monetarist debate can be translated

into the modern econometric language of Granger causality and innovation
accounting.

Keynesians would expect to find a large role for "own

innovations" in the empirical explanation of investment spending, with a
relatively small role for feedback from monetary variables.

An extreme

Keynesian would expect investment to be exogenous in the Granger sense
to prior changes in the money supply, and the same expectation would be
held by neoclassicists and Q advocates, none of whom (to our knowledge)
has ever entered the money supply directly as an explanatory variable in
an empirical investment equation.

Monetarists, of course, would expect

to find that the money supply is Granger causally prior to fixed
investment.

This paper reopens the question of exogeneity in investment behavior by inquiring whether the standard approach to the estimation of
"structural

investment equations leads to an overstatement of the

endogeneity of investment spending.

Its primary objective is to decom-

pose fluctuations in fixed investment into three components,

(a) feed—

5

back from policy variables and from non—investment spending, (b) the
propagation mechanism imparted by the investment process itself, which
displays a high degree of positive serial correlation, and (c) "own
innovations' or "shocks" in fixed investment expenditures that remain
after accounting for (a) and (b).

The main contributions of the paper

can be divided into three categories——methodological, data creation, and
empirical.

The methodological section finds that, while structural model
building exercises may be useful in suggesting lists of variables that
may play an explanatory role in investment equations, they generally
achieve identification of structural parameters only by imposing
arbitrary and unbelievable simplifying assumptions and exclusion
restrictions.

Consideration of real—world decision making suggests that

economic aggregates play "multiple roles" in investment behavior, which
imply that the observed coefficients on explanatory variables in
equations describing investment behavior represent a convolution of
numerous structural parameters that cannot be separately identified.

As

a result it is possible only to estimate reduced forms.

The estimation methodology suggested here is the same as that
proposed in a previous paper on inflation (Gordon—King, 1982).

It

starts with guidance from traditional structural models on the choice
and form of explanatory

variables to be included.

Then estimation is

carried out in a format similar to that of the unconstrained "Simsian"
VAR models.

Explanatory variables are typically entered with uncon-

strained lags of the same length, and the list of explanatory variables
typically includes a mixture of those suggested by several structural
models, together with those that may not be suggested by any structural

6

model but might in principle play a role through real wealth effects,
credit constraints, or expectation formation (e.g., the real money
The approach differs from the usual VAR model—building exer-

supply).

cise by focussing mainly on equations for the variable of primary
interest (inflation in Gordon—King, and investment expenditures in this
paper), rather than by giving "equal time" to all of the variables in
the model.

It is less "atheoretical" than most VAR research, because

structural models retain a usefulness in suggesting lists of candidate
variables to be included in reduced—form equations and the form in which
those variables should be entered (in this paper, for instance, stock
market prices enter in the form of Tobin's "Q"

variable),

even if the

underlying structural parameters cannot be identified.

The second contribution is the use of a new set of quarterly data
for major expenditure categories of GNP extending back to 1919.

The

data file also contains quarterly data back to 1919 for other variables
that have been suggested as explanatory "candidates" in investment equations.

These include the capital stock, interest rates, the cost of

capital including tax incentive effects, a proxy for Tobin's "Q",

and

the real money supply.

Equipped with its hybrid methodology and its extended data set, the
paper then proceeds to empirical estimation.
differs from

The empirical section

the usual research on investment that typically attempts to

measure response parameters within the context of a single structural
theory, e.g., neoclassical or "Q".

Instead,

our skepticism that struc-

tural parameters can be estimated leads us to estimate reduced—form
equations.

These include explanatory variables suggested by several

theories and can be used to decompose the variance of investment within

7

particular historical periods among the contribution of lagged values of
explanatory variables (output, interest rates, money, Q),

the contri-

bution of lagged investment, and "own innovations" to investment.

The

analysis of shocks to investment provides a link betwen this paper and
the debate between Temin (1976), Thomas Mayer (1980), and others on the
role of an autonomous shock to consumption in 1930, and to papers in
this volume by Hall on shifts in the consumption function and by
Blanchard—Watson on "shocks—in—general."

Our extended data set also

allows us to investigate changes in investment behavior between the
interwar and postwar periods.

The paper begins in Part

II with a review of the central issues

that lead to our choice of a reduced—form rather than structural approach.

This is not a full—blown survey of the literature, but rather

a

selective analysis of problems with structural estimation that have
emerged over the past 20 years.

Then Part III contains an introduction

to the data set and a description of the behavior of the major variables
in each of the 14 business cycles since 1919, as well as over longer
subperiods.

Part IV presents the estimated equations for four cate-

gories of investment (producer durable equipment, nonresidential and
residential structures, and consumer durable expenditures), and Part V
presents a study of multivariate causality and exogeneity, innovation
accounting, and a historical decomposition of the sources of investment
spending.

Part VI contains a summary of the main results and

implications.

8

II.

PITFALLS IN STRUCTURfiJ.. ESTIMATION OF INVESTMENT EQUATIONS

Most of the investment literature is concerned solely with business
investment.

This orientation reflects the influence of Keynes' General

Theory, especially its preoccupation with the state of business confidence as a determinant of investment plans.

However business investment

constitutes less than half of total private investment in the U. S.
economy.

Consumer expenditures on durable goods have been larger than

producers' durable equipment expenditures since 1920, and residential
structures expenditures have exceeded those on nonresidential investment
in at least half the years since 1929.

One might expect household investment behavior to respond to
different variables than business investment.

For instance, if a sub-

stantial fraction of consumers is credit constrained, then episodes of
"credit crunches" are liable to produce a greater response in the
investment outlays of consumers than of businessmen.2

A systematic

exploration of household investment behavior may need to explore factors
that matter in household decision—making, e.g., disposable income may
matter for households but total GNP for businessmen, and the various tax
incentive terms conventionally included in measures of the user cost of
capital may matter for businessmen but not for households,

Here we

begin with a critique of the more familiar literature on business
investment, and subsequently apply our analysis to the determinants of
household investment.

Chirinko's (1983a) systematic review of assumptions and results
distinguishes four classes of econometric models describing business
investment behavior——Jorgenson's neoclassical approach, Tobin's "Q", the
"General Forward—Looking" approach based on explicit modelling of

9

expectations, and Feldstein's "Return—Over—Cost" and "Effective Tax
Rate" models.

Because they have accounted for the vast majority of

empirical studies completed to date, we concentrate only on the neoclassical and Q frameworks for investment research.

Extended surveys

are presented by Eisner and Strotz (1963), Jorgenson (1971), Helliwell
(1976), and Chirinko (1983a), whereas here we treat only a few selected
issues that lead to our skepticism that traditional structural
parameters can be identified.

The Neoclassical Paradigm
As of the mid 1970s, the neoclassical paradigm was so dominant (at
least outside of New Haven) that Helliwell's (1976) survey makes no
mention of any other framework.

Prior to the mid 1960s, investment

equations had been dominated by the accelerator approach and had added
interest rates, profits,

or other variables as determinants of

investment without explicit constraints based on optimizing behavior.
The studies initiated by Jorgenson and collaborators, particularly
Jorgenson (1963, 1967), Hall—Jorgenson (1967, 1971), and Jorgenson—
Stephenson (1967, 1969), are distinguished by their derivation of the
desired capital—output ratio from specific assumptions about behavior
and about the form of the production function.

The centerpiece in the

determination of the desired capital stock is the expected real rental
price of capital services, which is equated to the expected marginal
product of capital.

If factors are paid their marginal products and the

production function is of the Cobb—Douglas form, the desired capital

stock at a given point in time (K) is a linear function of expected
output (X) divided by the expected real price of capital services

10

=

(1)

Ct

where y is the income share of capital in output.

Decision and delivery

lags make actual net investment a distributed lag on past changes in the
desired capital stock:

J

(2)

=

E

j=0

When the expected variables

(e e

and Ce) are replaced by current

actual values (an unjustified assumption discussed below), and when the
demand for replacement capital is represented by a fixed geometric

depreciation factor (6) times the lagged capital stock (Ki),
the neoclassical investment model becomes:
J

It

=

a0 +

E .A(PX/C). + 6K1

+

3=0

Equation (3) embodies a number of strong assumptions and restrictions, and a large "counterrevolution" literature has developed to
explore the consequences of loosening them.
neoclassical approach assumes a "putty—putty'

The "pure" Jorgensonian
technology without adjust-

ment costs; the capital stock can be adjusted instantly, transformed,
bought, or sold as needed to bring a firm's actual capital stock into
line with its desired capital stock.

As long as expectations are

assumed to be static, the only justification for the lag distribution
included in (3) is the technological gestation lag.

Another inter-

pretation is that investment expenditures involve adjustment costs.

ii
Without adjustment costs or gestation lags, the Jorgenson model is
subject to the criticism that, whenever a gap exists between

and

the rate of investment will be infinitely large and the gap will be
eliminated instantaneously.

However, with either of these assumptions

"tacked on,' the Jorgensonian K is not derived from a complete cost—
minimization problem and is probably not optimal.

Another peculiarity of the approach is apparent in (1), which
allows the desired capital stock to be a function only of the relative
price of capital rather than the relative price of all inputs.

Yellen

(1980) has shown that (1) can be derived only by assuming that real
wages are inversely related to C/P and respond fully and instantaneously
to any changes in C/P.

As a result all factor price changes must be

assumed to leave the profitability of the firm unaffected, even in the
short run.

Thus the neoclassical approach leaves no room for theories

that predict a profit squeeze, investment slump, and growth slowdown
following a period of excessive real wage growth (see Malinvaud 1982).
However, even if one were to accept the formulation in (1) with the
single relative price variable, the measurement of capital's user cost
is fraught with ambiguity.

As shown recently in Auerbach's (1983) sur-

vey, taxes and inflation may not change the cost of capital in the same
way for all firms, leaving the feasibility of aggregation an open
question.

Simple formulae for C/P are also elusive when markets are

incomplete, and when managers use financial leverage and dividend policy
to influence market perceptions.

The empirical 'counterrevolution' begins with Eisner—Nadiri (1968),
an article which takes particular exception to the multiplicative specification in (3) that forces both the short—run and long—run responses to

X and C/P to be identical.

Eisner—Nadiri find that the elasticities

with respect to output are considerably higher than those with respect
to relative prices, and Bischoff (1971) finds that lags are shorter on
output than on relative prices.

Chirinko—Eisner (1983) find in experi-

ments with the DRI and MPS econometric models that splitting apart the X

and C/P variables can cause the implicit relative price elasticity to
fall by more than half, and together with minor redefinitions of the C/P
variable can cause a reduction in that elasticity by a factor of four.
However, even by loosening restrictions in this way they find that
response coefficients to changes in the investment tax credit in six
models still vary by a factor of four (or a factor of about two for the
four most extensively used models——Chase, DRI, MPS, and Wharton).

Expectations and Identification

An even more serious problem in (1) —

(3) is the cavalier treatment

of expectations, which are included in (1) but assumed to be static in
the transition from (1) to (3).

In Helliwell's words, "This important

issue has been dealt with principally by the handy assumption that the
future will be like the present" (1976, p. 15).

At best, expectations

of future output are allowed to depend on a distributed lag of past
values of output, but generally lagged values of other variables that
might be relevant for expectations formation (e.g., the money supply)
have been excluded as an identification restriction.

Since investment

is a forward—looking activity, not only must the X and C/P variables be
represented by expectations that in principle should depend on an information set containing past values of all relevant macroeconomic aggregates, but also the functional parameters entering the investment model

13

should depend on the same general information set.

This point can be illustrated in a generalization of a simple model
set forth recently by Andrew Abel and Olivier Blanchard (1983), that
falls into the class of "general forward—looking models."

In place of

(1) we allow the desired capital stock to depend on a sequence of
expected future sales, with a discount factor a; unlike Abel—Blanchard
we also allow the desired capital stock to depend on the sequence of
expected future rental rates (C/P):4

a(l—a)a' E{{X÷+.,(C/P).]j]}.

(4)

Here

t

is the time an investment order is placed for delivery at t+n,

vith n the length of the delivery or gestation lag.

The parameter a is

the steady—state ratio of capital to output, and

is the information

set relevant at time t to the formation of expectations about all future
variables.

The relevant information set might, for instance, include

past values of output, the interest rate, and the money supply.
It has been an almost universal practice in the empirical literature to express the depreciation rate of capital as a fixed exponential
constant.

In contrast Eisner (1972), Feldstein and Foot (1971) and

Feldstein and Rothschild (1974) have argued that the timing of replacement investment is an economic decision and is motivated by economic
considerations.

In particular, fixed proportions in building or machine

construction create an enormous incentive for net investment and
replacement investment to be considered as part of the same economic
decision—making process.5

Accordingly we replace the fixed replacement

rate in the Abel—Blanchard model by an expected rate (e)

that

depends on

14

the

information set:

(5)

=

[l_E(eIQ)]K÷i + It+n•

where 1t+n represents investment expenditures made at time t+n (strictly
speaking this should be an expectation——see note 6 below).
Investment orders depend on the gap between desired and actual
capital that is expected to occur at time t+n, and the present expectation of the fraction of the capital stock that will be replaced at that
time.
t,

Although the fraction of the gap to be closed is decided at time

and is not an expected value, today's decision regarding the fraction

depends on the expected cost of adjustment during the period of the
gestation lag, e.g., expected interest rates on short—term construction

loans, r:6

(6)

where

o

=

X[E(r

1k?)1[Kd÷

—

K÷1}

+

E(e()K

+

is a disturbance term.

Finally, actual investment expenditures (L) are a sum of past
orders, with a distributed lag indicating that projects have heterogeneous gestation lags:

(7)

I

=

Ew.(Q)O
j=O

Here in (7) for completeness we allow the

coefficients to depend on

the information set, thus introducing the possibility that orders may be
cancelled before delivery or that the gestation lag is influenced by the

15

evolution of the economy between time periods t—j and t.7
appear that the Abel—Blanchard assumption that

E u.
j=O

1

Thus it would
is unrealis—

tically restrictive.

It is obvious from inspection of (4) — (7) that in principle it

is

not possible to identify structural coefficients on current and lagged
economic aggregates in an aggregate investment equation, because any of
those aggregates could be playing double, triple, or even more roles as
ingredients in the information sets

The reduced form involves

complicated convolutions of the variables entering the information set,
which appears in five places in the reduced form:

(8)

It

—

—

It+n_j_1I

+

E(el .)K÷

.+

The research by Abel and Blanchard (1983) provides a good example

of the arbitrary assumptions and simplifications needed to achieve
identification in a model like (4) —

(7).

Their problems occur despite

a much simpler framework that differs by (a) excluding the rental price
from any appearance, even in determining the desired capital stock,

(b)

allowing expectations based on an information set only with regard to
the sequence of expected future output,

(c) allowing only past values of

sales to be included in that information set, and (d) assuming fixed
values of all other parameters.

Further, Abel and Blanchard have two

additional types of data not available in this historical study of
aggregate expenditures,

(e) separate data on orders and expenditures,

and (f) sectoral data that allow a distinction to be made between aggre—

16

gate and sectoral sales.

Despite these differences (a) —

(f),

Abel and

Blanchard achieve identification of a structural model only by assuming
arbitrary fixed values of several parameters, and they find no conclusive evidence to prefer the resulting structural model to the
corresponding reduced form.8

In our application to a set of aggregate data, the more general
model (4) —

(7) does not appear to allow the identification of struc-

tural parameters.
stock prices.

For instance, consider the role of interest rates and

Both would seem to be relevant information for economic

agents forming expectations about future output, not to mention future
interest rates and stock prices (both components of the Jorgensonian
rental price).

Yet how is the estimated coefficient on a lagged inter-

est rate variable to be disentangled to allow identification of separate
roles that this variable plays in forming expectations in different
places in the model in affecting the desired capital stock, in affecting
the desired rate of replacement of old capital, and in affecting the
desired rate of closing the gap between desired and actual capital?

The Q Approach
The expectations quagmire is inherent in the neoclassical approach,
with its identification of key parameters requiring ad hoc exclusion
restrictions in the set of variables allowed into the information set
influencing expectations.

The "pure" Q approach differs from the usual

investment accelerator by explaining investment activity on the basis of
deviations from portfolio balance, and by assuming from the start that
there is no "time to build," i.e., that there are no gestation lags, so

that I

=

Net investment activity takes place when marginal Q, the

17

ratio of the increase in the value of the firm from acquiring an additional unit of capital to its marginal purchase cost, exceeds unity.
Numerous authors, including Abel (1979) and Hayashi (1982), have derived
Q

investment functions in the following form that adds lags to allow for

delivery or gestation lags:9

+ s0ts

(9)
=

+

e.

The theoretical derivation involves "marginal Q,'
looking and hence unobservable.

replacing marginal Q

with

which is forward—

Actual estimation of (9) involves

average Q,

the ratio of the market value of

firms to the replacement cost of their assets.

(Hayashi (1982) has

shown that actual and marginal Q are equal under specified assumptions

but does not test whether these assumptions are empirically sup—
ported.)

If (9) is estimated for data on net investment, then the

constant term

should be zero, since net investment should be zero in

the steady state when Q

is

unity.

When data on gross investment are

used, then the constant term implicitly measures the depreciation
rate.

At a Q

ratio

of unity, the firm should just replace its old

capital but should not buy any new capital.
constant term

More generally, the

reflects the mean value of any omitted variables.

Much of the discussion of possible problems in the Q approach
relates to measurement errors in either the numerator (market value) or
denominator (replacement cost) of the Q

ratio.

For instance, firms may

not pay attention to every quarterly movement in securities prices,
given the possibility of excess volatility in financial markets
(Shiller, 1981).

In addition Hall (1977) and Chirinko (1983b) have

18

emphasized the likelihood of errors due to the indirect measurement of
the value of stocks and bonds, and to the fact that the value of a
firm's shares depends on everything owned by the corporations, not just
their physical capital but also intangible capital, natural resources,
goodwill, monopoly position, and firm—specific human capital.

ratio

denominator of the Q

The

is likely to be measured with error, because

of the absence of a complete inventory of the capital actually in place,
and the need for approximations that may ignore premature retirements
(due, for instance, to changes in energy prices), and mismeasurement of
the replacement price of capital due to inadequate adjustment for
quality change.

To date empirical results with the Q model have been disappointing.
It does not perform as well in the 1970s as other alternatives (Clark,
1979), and yields a relatively low R2 even when carefully adjusted for
tax effects (Summers,

1981).10

One possible problem is illustrated by

the increases in energy prices after the two oil shocks of the 1980s.
These were followed by a sharp decline in the stock market and in
measured average Q,

but not by a marked decline in investment.

This

might reflect a production relation in which capital and energy are
substitutes, so that a higher relative price of energy induces new
capital investment.

Similarly, an episode of "wage push" that increases the share of
labor on a semi—permanent basis could well reduce the Q

ratio

for a long

time by depressing the numerator much faster than the denominator can
adjust.

Recall that the denominator is the replacement cost of capital,

measured as today's capital goods price index times a perpetual inventory measure of the real capital stock.

If the inflation rate is larger

19

than the retirement rate, the denominator of the Q
the numerator is falling.

ratio

can grow while

A decline in the stock market can occur when

higher prices of labor or energy eliminate the profit earned by old
plants, but nevertheless firms may keep operating these plants as long
as they contribute more to cash flow than to variable cost (recent
examples include dinosaur steel plants recently closed by U.

S. Steel or

the 707s finally grounded by TWA four years after the second oil shock).
Even if Q could somehow be measured accurately, with a correct

measure of capital actually in place used to calculate the denominator
of the Q

ratio,

empirical tests of the theory would run aground on a

basic asymmetry in adjustment costs and gestation lags that seems to
have been ignored.

An increase in Q above unity should induce positive

net investment limited only by the size of adjustment costs and delivery
lags, but a decrease in Q below unity induces negative net investment
subject to a quite different set of adjustment costs.

Firms may not

retire capital until its cash flow falls to its variable cost, and there
may be a long transition period that brings with it the danger of bankruptcy before this variable cost point is actually reached.

Firms with

little profit—making potential and with a near—zero value on the stock
market may nonetheless have sufficient residual goodwill or monopoly
power to be able to keep themselves afloat by issuing debt, as has been
so evident in the airline industry.

An implication is that a revival of

industry fortunes (due, for instance, to a decline in energy prices) may
cause stock prices to soar without setting off an investoent boom, as
firms concentrate on paying off debt and restructuring their balance
sheets.

Such portfolio rearrangements can create considerable looseness

20

between stock market movements and investment decisions.

The same

looseness may be caused in part by a differing evaluation of a company's
future formed by firm management from that formed by the market.

In

graduate school we were first exposed to Paul Samuelson's joke that "the
stock market has predicted nine out of the last five recessions," and we

also have heard much from 0dig1iani—Cohn (1979) and others about irrationality in market valuations.

So it seems no wonder that management

should be as skeptical of the market's verdict in making valuations as
we economists have been.

In a recent survey of 600 companies, Business

Week found that 60 percent of responding executives felt that the "real

value" of their company was undervalued by the stock market."
Our criticism of the Q

theory has been based on asymmetric adjust—

ment costs and possible irrationality or differences in opinion in
market valuations.

It is related to the critique by Bosworth (1975),

which stresses that firms will pay little attention to Q, because the
stock market fluctuates excessively, while investment projects take time
to plan and construct.

Bosworth's argument is criticized by Fischer and

Merton (1984), who deny that managers would ignore the stock market even

when granting Bosworth the extreme assumptions that (a) there occurs a
completely exogenous and irrational decline in the stock market (with an
accompanying increase in the expected return on the stock market from 15
to 20 percent) while (b) firm managers' assessments are "completely
unaffected by such animal spirits and they know with certainty the true
objective probabilities" (that the expected equilibrium real return is
15 percent) (p. 39).

Even in such a situation, Fischer and Merton

argue, the stock market would influence investment, since rational
managers would use retained earnings to purchase their own or other

21

firms' shares.

Similarly, they would be reluctant to finance new

investments by issuing equity at the depressed stock market prices.
No doubt some firms are influenced by such considerations.

However, others may forge ahead with new investment projects, for at
least two reasons.

First, animal spirits may influence the stock and

bond markets differently.

The 1973—75 episode of collapsing stock

market was accompanied by negative short—term ex post real interest
rates and by long—term real bond rates that were relatively low, judged
either in terms of the high contemporaneous inflation rate of 1974—75 or
by the average inflation rate of the 1974—81 period viewed retrospectively.

Thus firms may simply have switched from equity to debt issue.

Fischer and Merton would contend that rational managers should have
borrowed short—term to buy back their shares instead of planning new
investment projects, but their view seems to ignore the potentially
large costs of postponing investment projects.

Managers face a tradeoff between the uncertain capital gains to be
made on purchase and subsequent resale of their own shares or those of
other firms, and the less uncertain losses that would be incurred if
(given long lead times and gestation lags) new capacity were not
constructed now in anticipation of the next period of prosperity and
high capacity utilization.

The planning and implementation of invest-

ment in new plant and equipment may be an ongoing bureaucratic process
involving high costs of delay or postponement.

Surely the real world is characterized by both responses, with some
firms responding to a stock market slump that they believe to be tern—

porary by choosing the buy—back route, while others engage in friendly
or hostile take—over bids, and still others continuing with previously

22

planned investment projects.

Fischer and Merton may argue correctly

that the stock market must make some difference to investment expenditures, while we put forth the compatible argument that the stock market
may be used as just one piece of information, in addition to the
traditional factors (expected output, rental prices, etc.).

If this is

a correct interpretation, then the Q model, by including only the single
Q

variable,

as in (9), incorporates arbitrary exclusion restrictions,

just as does the neoclassical paradigm.

When we incorporate looser

restrictions into both approaches, they melt together into a generalized
reduced form in which output, interest rates, stock prices, the money
supply, tax rates, and other variables enter a model like (4) — (7) in
multiple roles, influencing desired capital, expectations, desired
adjustment speeds, and replacement rates.

Household Investment

Household investment in durable goods and residential structures
has received much less attention than business investment in equipment
and structures.'2

This neglect cannot be justified by the share of

household fixed investment in GNP, as this share has been at least as
large as that of business investment throughout the 1919—83 period and
has become relatively larger in the past two decades.

Perhaps it is the

perception that household investment is passive rather than a driving
force in business cycles that has kept it in the background.

Expendi-

tures on consumer durables and residential structures, rather than being
treated on a par with business investment, enter into macroeconomic
model building mainly as a channel of transmission of monetary policy
episodes of disintermediation and credit controls.

23

There are many parallels between the models used for consumer
expenditure and those used to explain business investment.

Both the

simple Keynesian consumption—income relation and Friedman's permanent
income hypothesis are close analogues to certain variants of the
accelerator hypothesis of business investment behavior.

Lagged or

expected GNP is replaced as an explanatory variable by lagged or expected disposable income in moving from business to consumer investment,
but the mechanism remains the same.

More recent attempts at modeling

the consumer's decision, such as Bernanke (1982), treat optimal durable
goods investment within the framework of intertemporal utility maximization under uncertainty.

The resulting model parallels closely the

"business investment in the presence of adjustment costs" literature
that originated with Lucas (1967).

All models like Bernanke's either

implicitly or explicitly require consumers to form expectations of
future values of relevant variables, leading to the same complications
(delivery lags, replacement timing) that occur for business investment
above in equation (8).

As is the case in (8), the estimated coeffi-

cients of the relevant time—serf es variables are under—identified

convolutions of many structural parameters.

Relation to Other Critiques

Christopher Sims (1980a) presented a critique of traditional econometric models and urged the profession to shift from structural estimation to his atheoretical VARs.

In a sense the above critique of

structural investment equations represents a special case of Sims' more
general critique.

Both place particular emphasis on the fact that any

set of lagged variables may in principle influence expectations of a

24

variable, and thus there is little justification for many of the exclusion restrictions that are incorporated in traditional econometric
models.

For instance, there is ample evidence that it is suboptimal to

form expectations of real output using only a univariate autoregression,
as in most empirical implementations of the neoclassical investment

model and in such recent papers as Abel—Blanchard (1983).

In

contrast, our own recent work (Gordon, 1983b) shows that nominal GNP
growth is associated with past changes in interest rates, the monetary
base, and the money multiplier, with different weights in each postwar
decade.

And in another paper (1982) we showed that, for a given nominal

GNP change, real output depends among other things on its own lagged
value, lagged inflation, lagged changes in real energy prices, and
variables to capture the effects of government price—control programs.
Despite the above critique of traditional investment equations and
its similarity to Sims' general critique, there is no need to go as far
as Sims in endorsing completely atheoretical VAR models.

Consideration

of a reduced—form equation like (8), together with the long list of
candidate variables that might influence expectations, suggests that
degrees of freedom are likely to be exhausted even in a relatively large
data set like that used in this paper.

VAR models estimated to date

usually involve short lists of aggregate variables without inclusion of
individual categories of expenditure, e.g., investment, or special
variables that might be important for a particular category.
Gordon and King (1982) recommend an econometric approach that
combines the VAR approach with the estimation of reduced—form equations
suggested by traditional theory.

Both the reduced—form and VAR ap—

proaches can be viewed as selecting different methods of allocating zero

25

restrictions in the face of scarce degrees of freedom.

Like any trade-

off in economics, the best way to allocate these restrictions should
depend on an assessment of benefits and costs.

The VAR technique,

in

which every variable is included on the right—hand side of every
equation with lag distributions of equal length,

is a useful tool for

checking traditional specifications and determining, for instance,
whether stock prices or the money supply "belong" in an investment
equation.

To repeat a phrase frequently used in oral discussions by

Sims, Shiller, and others, the VAR technique is an efficient way to
conduct "exploratory data analysis."

But reduced—form econometrics must be guided by prior structural
analysis.

Excessive pursuit of symmetry in the VAR approach can lead an

investigator to omit particular variables that may matter for one equation but not others, e.g., variables to measure the effect of the
wartime price controls in a study of inflation, or the investment tax
credit in a study of investment behavior.

Gordon and King (and in more

detail King, 1983) have concluded that specifications used in some VAR
applications have been cavalier about detrending and have tended to
yield estimates that mix secular and cyclical effects and can result in
biased coefficients.

The general Simsian critique, and our particular critique of the
investment literature, seem to point to estimation of highly unrestricted and unconstrained specifications.

They appear to move in the

opposite direction from econometric work set in motion by the Lucas
(1976) critique, which has set out on the task of estimating parameters
"at deep levels of choice," e.g., parameters of utility and production
functions, that remain invariant in the face of changes in policy rules.

26

As yet this line of research, represented for instance by Hansen and
singleton (1982), has not yet provided convincing time—series characterizations of the major macroeconomic variables that might be compared
with traditional explanations.

Further, applications of the Hansen—

Singleton methodology appear to achieve "identification via an
'incredible' disturbance assumption," according to a recent critique by
Peter Garber and Robert King (1983).

The Hybrid Methodology:

Blending Structure with VAR Reduced Forms

The central role of investment fluctuations in business cycles has
spawned an enormous number of papers that estimate structural investment
equations in which unconvincing simplifications and exclusion restrictions have been introduced to achieve identification.

Often the focus

is on persuading the reader that the author's favorite explanatory
variable is statistically significant, or that some other author's
favorite variable is insignificant.

Our skepticism regarding the

multiple roles played by aggregate time series variables, and our doubt
that any proxy for Tobin's "Q" can adequately summarize all of the

influences on investment appropriations and expenditures, leads us to
estimate reduced form equations.

Our point of departure is a list of

"candidate" explanatory variables that has been suggested in previous
theoretical research.

Our basic emphasis is on determining which varia-

bles play an important role in the investment process, and how much of
the variance of investment remains to be attributed to "innovations."
The methodological approach adopted here is similar to that previously applied to the econometric explanation of inflation behavior.
This line of research has proven fruitful in developing an inflation

27

equation that over the postwar period appears to remain relatively
stable and which, when estimated for the pre—1981 period, seems able to
track reasonably well the sharp disinflation that has occurred since
then.'4

Insights of previous structural models are used to develop the

list of explanatory variables, and to emerge with a specification that
introduces a few more constraints than typically appear in "pure" VAR
models.

The equation can be used to test for the exogeneity of parti-

cular sets of lagged variables in the inflation process, for temporal
stability, and for biases in one set of coefficients that results from
the omission of another variable.

They can be used to identify signi-

ficant shifts in sets of lagged coefficients between one period and
another.

However, what has been lost in the inflation equation litera-

ture, and what cannot be regained, is the ability to use particular
coefficients to identify specific aspects of the behavior of labor
markets as opposed to product markets.'5
The specification of the investment equation in this paper begins
with the lagged dependent variable.

Just as we are interested in

"inflation inertia," we are interested in "investment inertia."

The

serial correlation properties of the investment process, which result at
least in part from aggregation over heterogeneous projects having
different gestation lags, are part of the basic "propagation mechanism"
by which random shocks in the demand for investment goods are translated
into business cycles displaying persistence in the devfation of output
from

trend.

Most previous econometric work on investment, whether based

on a neoclassical specification like (3) or a "Q"
(9), has omitted the lagged dependent variable.

specification

like

If the "true" invest-

ment process exhibits a high degree of positive serial correlation, then

28

estimated coefficients are likely to be biased when the lagged dependent
Although we exhibit evidence of the effects of

variable is omitted.

this misspeciflcation below, the nature of the bias can be illustrated
in the following simple model.

Imagine that the true model of

investment spending (In) involves both an accelerator effect on the

lagged change in output (LX_i), and dependence on the lagged dependent
variable (I....i):

(10)

It

=

+

pI

÷ e,

while the misspecified regression that is actually estimated is:

(11)

It =

bAXi

+

Ut.

By the usual analysis of specification error in the case of a left—out
variable, we can write the expectation of the estimated accelerator
coefficient as:

(12)

E(b)

=

+

where y is the coefficient of the 'auxiliary" regression of lagged
investment on the lagged change in output.

Since investment is part of

output, there is a presumption that y is positive, although a precise
expression for y requires a more complete specification of the time—
series process generating non—investment output.

A full analysis of

this problem would also need to take account of the fact that most
empirical accelerator equations include a set of current and several

lagged X terms.

It is sufficient here to note simply that tests of the

accelerator hypothesis may yield biased coefficients, as in (12), and
that the error term in (11) is quite likely to exhibit serial correla—

29

tion,
(13)

since it is related to the "true" error term e as follows:

u = e

+

p[(l—y)I

—

+

where N is non—investment output.
The list of. regressors for our investment equations, in addition to

the lagged dependent variable, begins with the two central variables in
the neoclassical approach, the change in output and in the real price of

Tobin's

capital services (C/P).

Q

is

included as well, in combination

with the neoclassical variables rather than alone as in (9).

Because

changes in the money stock may be relevant both for the formation of
expectations and/or as a proxy for the effect of credit rationing, these
are included as well.

The most important variables that are omitted are

the prices of other inputs besides capital, e.g., the real wage and real
energy prices.

This omission is justified by the need to control the

scale of this empirical investigation, which tends to grow with the
square of the explanatory variables considered as candidates.
The empirical equations share with the VAR approach the use of
unconstrained and relatively short lag distributions, and the inclusion
of the same number of lags for each explanatory variable, including the
lagged dependent variable.

In our initial research, as in much other

recent VAR research, lag distributions were limited to four quarters.
Subsequently we adjusted the lag length to eight quarters for the
postwar period, in light of the evidence that the coefficient on the
price of capital services for the postwar period is sensitive to an
extension of lag length.

Contemporaneous values of variables are

excluded from the estimated regressions.

Subsequently we examine

correlations among contemporaneous orthogonalized innovations in a VAR

30

model containing equations for investment and for each of our final set
of explanatory variables.

At that stage we carry out several "innova-

tion accounting" exercises for two alternative choices of the ordering
of contemporaneous errors in the VAR system.

As shown by Gordon and

King (1982, pp. 212—14), such choices amount to decisions about
admitting current variables into the estimating equations.
The specification of the investment equations in this paper differs
from most applications of the VAR technique in its correction for
heteroscedasticity and in its attention to the form of variables.

All

real expenditure series are normalized by "natural real GNP" (XN).

The

money supply is expressed in real terms, since it is entered into an
equation for real investment expenditures, and it is also normalized by
xN.

Our empirical tests also examine shifts in coefficients over time.

The precise values of the individual lag coefficients are of no particular interest.

Instead, we emphasize exclusion tests on the contribution

of all lags of a given right—hand variable, running these tests for both
the interwar and postwar period.

This technique allows us to determine

whether the relative contribution of different sets of variables has
changed over time.

There is no analogy in the paper to the usual search

for significant coefficients, since either positive or negative results
in the exclusion tests are equally interesting.

III.

DATA AND DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS

Development of the Basic Variables
This paper investigates the historical behavior of four categories
of fixed investment:

producers' durable equipment (PDE), nonresidential

structures (NRS), residential structures (RS), and consumer durable

31

expenditures (CD).

While in the previous literature some of these cate-

gories have been analyzed with different theories in separate papers,
here they all seem amenable to analysis within the same reduced—form
methodology.

Our inclusion of consumer durable expenditures as part of

"investment" creates an overlap in coverage with Hall's paper in this
volume.

Quarterly data on the four investment categories for 1947—83 come
from the National Income and Product Accounts.

Investment and real GNP

data for 1919—41 are created by the Chow and Lin (1971) method of interpolation from a variety of sources, as described in the data appendix.
We have been careful to interpolate each component of real GNP on the
basis of separate data sources, in order to avoid a spurious correlation
between dependent and explanatory variables in this study.

The Chow—Lin

method is an iterative procedure in which a regression is run to explain
a data series available only annually (e.g., real GNP), using as explanatory variables the annual average of one or more series available
monthly (e.g., industrial production and real retail sales).

In this

example the coefficients from the regression are used to create monthly
(or in our case quarterly) values for real GNP.

Some investigators have carried out historical studies with raw
monthly data rather than interpolated data.

Examples include Bernanke

(1983b), Sims (1980b), and the papers in this volume by Bernanke/Powell

and Blinder/HoltzEakin.

This makes sense when comparable monthly data

are available for both the interwar and postwar periods.

However,

investigators of postwar investment behavior have uniformly used
national accounts quarterly data, not monthly data on the industrial
production of producers durables and on square feet of nonresidential

32

construction.

To achieve comparability in a study of investment,

interpolated quarterly data for the interwar period are preferable.
Further, to use the raw monthly data would involve discarding the
information available in the annual averages for components of real
GNP.

It seems clear from the literature that the previous absence of

quarterly investment expenditure data for the interwar period has caused
investigators to limit themselves to the postwar period, and it is to be
hoped that the availability of the new data set will spur further
historical research on investment and other components of real GNP.
All expenditure series, real GNP, the real capital stock, and the
real money supply are deflated by the

natural real GNP

(XN)

series,

the creation of which is described in Gordon (1984a, Appendix C).

The

basic procedure is to establish a constant "natural rate of unemployment" for the portion of the labor force not engaged as self—employed
farmers and proprietors——this natural rate is arbitrarily set equal to
the rate estimated for 1954 in a study of inflation dynamics covering
the 1954—80 period.

Then, adjusting for the shrinking share of self—

employed proprietors (who are not counted among the unemployed), the
corresponding total natural unemployment rate series is used to establish the level of

in selected benchmark years (1901, 1912, 1923,

1929, 1949, and 1954).

Since actual and natural unemployment are not

equal in the benchmark years, an assumed "Okun's Law
was used in calculating

coefficient of 2.0

for those years, and the values for inter-

vening years were interpolated using logarithms.

The deflation by

introduced to avoid heteroscedasticitythe level of
billion in 1919 to $1667 billion in 1983.

is

rises from $229

Use of the XN series is

superior to detrending in a study of business cycles, since detrending

33

for a period like 1929—41 yields an unrealistically low estimate of
"normal" conditions.

In addition to data on investment expenditures, thisstudy has
developed five other series as possible explanatory variables.

All are

from original sources, and only the capital stock is interpolated.

The

others are available monthly.
(1)

Capital stock.

This is available as an annual series from

the Commerce Department capital stock study for both producers durable
equipment and nonresidential structures.

Four concepts are available,

gross and net, in current and constant dollars.

In this study the net

real stock is interpolated quarterly (as described in the data
appendix).

It is used and subsequently rejected as an explanatory

variable, and the net real stock times the current investment price

deflator isused as an estimate of the replacement cost of capital for
construction of the
(2)

'Q

proxy" described below.

Real Money Supply and Real Monetary Base.

The "High

Powered Money" series is from Friedman—Schwartz (1970), divided by the
interpolated GNP deflator, and linked to the corresponding postwar
series.

The Ml series has been created by Benjamin Friedman back to

1915 on a basis that is consistent with the current (early 1980s)
definition.
(3)

"Average Q'.

index number, with 1972:Q2
are in different units.

First

a "Q

Proxy" series is calculated as an

1.0, since the numerator and denominator

The numerator is the Standard and Poors 500

stock price index, and the denominator is the replacement—cost net
capital stock index described above.

This quarterly series is used to

interpolate Summers' annual average "conventional Q"

series

(1981, Table

34

3, column 1) for the period 1931—1979.

Data for 1919—30 and 1980—83 are

obtained by linking "Q Proxy" to the interpolated Summers series in 1931
and 1980.
(4)

Real Interest Rate.

The expected inflation rate used to

calculate the real interest rate is typically computed as the predicted
value from a simple time—series regression including lagged inflation
and a few other lagged variables.

Invariably this leads to a predicted

series in which the main weight is carried by the first lag on inflation, and the result is a highly volatile estimate of the expected
inflation rate and the corresponding expected real interest rate
relevant for investment decisions.

In this study the volatile series

produced by this procedure is ignored, and in its place we use a twelve—
quarter "rectangular" weighted average of past inflation.

Even this

arbitrary approximation is flawed, however, because it gives unreasonable values in periods for the first few years after both World War I
and World War II.

As one of us has argued previously (1973), rational

agents would have treated wars and immediate postwar periods as special
episodes, in light of a long history of wartime inflation and postwar
deflation.

Since there was no trend in prices over the century before

World War I, an expected inflation rate of zero is imposed for the

interval 1919—24, and the twelve—quarter average is introduced beginning
in 1925:Q1.

After World War II the same procedure is used for 1947—49,

except that the constant value is set equal to 2.6 percent, the value of
the twelve—quarter average in 1950:Q1.

This series on expected infla-

tion is subtracted from the Baa rate,

to reflect the presumed relevance

of a less—than—highest—grade interest rate for the average investment
decision.

35

(5)

The Real Price of Capital Services (C/P).

Standard

formulae, shown in the appendix, are used to calculate the real price of
capital services from a variety of data sources.

The before—tax real

borrowing rate is taken to be the real Baa rate, from (4) above.

This

facilitates comparisons of the effects ofthe full C/P variable as contrasted with that of the real Baa rate, one of the major components of
C/P.

The depreciation rate included in the estimate of C/P is that

which is yielded by an iterative search for the rate that makes the
quarterly interpolated capital stock series in (1) above consistent with
the published annual capital stock series and our new interpolated
quarterly investment series.

Tax rates are obtained from published

sources, as described in the appendix.

Fixed Investment in Recessions, 1920—1982

Descriptive statistics on the variables used in this paper are
provided in Tables 1,

2, and 3.

The first of these calculates the

percentage decline in three ratios to

over the 13 recessions in our

sample period, five in the interwar period and eight in the postwar
period.

NBER reference cycles are used throughout, and this creates an

inconsistency between the cycle dating procedure actually used (see the
chronology paper by Moore—Zarnowitz in this volume) and the "growth
cycle

concept that would be more relevant given our deflation of real

variables by xN.

Column (1) of Table

1

shows the percentage decline in the "output

ratio" X/XN, ranging from 42.8 percent in 1929—33 to only 2.7 percent in
1960—61.

The next three columns exhibit recession declines in the ratio

of three different investment magnitudes to X——all four types of

3 5A

TABLE

1

Peak to Trough Decline in

Ratios to Natural Real GP, in percent
Thirteen Business Cycles, 1920—82

Four
Real

I

POE

+

Elasticities

Share of Total

Percent Decline
CD

+

CNP

Types

NRS

RS

(1)

(2)

(3)

7.0

l923:Q2—192L+:Q3

9.0
4.1

1926:Q4—1927:Q4

Four

PDE

I

+

CD

+

Four

I

PDE

+

Types RS

CD

+

Types

NRS

RS

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

3.3

3.7

77.8

36.7

41.1

3.4

3.4

3.4

2.1

0.9

1.2

51.2

22.0

29.2

2.1

1.6

2.6

5.5

1.7

1.1

0.6

30.9

20.0

10.9

1.3

1.6

1.0

l929:Q3—1933:Q1

40.2

16.6

9.4

7.2

41.3

23.4

17.9

1.8

2.0

1.6

1937:Q2—1938:Q2

11.9

6.5

4.2

2.3

54.6

35.3

19.3

3.0

3.7

2.3

l948:Q4-1949:Q4

5.3

1.0

2.1

—1.1

18.8

39.8 -21.0

0.8

3.6

—1.7

1953:Q2—1954:Q2

7.2

0.6

45.8

16.8

0.6
2.2

0.8

1.4

7.8
29.0

4.9

5.0

0.3
0.9

12.7

l957:Q3—1958:Q2

0.9
2.3

2.9

0.4
1.6

l960:Q2—1961:Q1

2.7

1.7

0.6

1.1

61.4

20.6

40.8

3.0

2.2

3.7

1969:Q4—1970:Q4

4.2
8.5
3.6
6.3

1.8

1.1

0.7

43.1

25.2

17.9

1.9

2.2

1.6

4.7

2.0

2.7

55.2

23.4

31.8

2.2

2.0

2.4

2.1

0.8
1.4

1.3

59.2

22.2

37.0

2.4

1.9

2.9

0.7

34.0

22.8

11.2

1.5

2.0

1.0

RS

Interwar
1920-Q1-1921:Q2

Pos twar

1973:Q4—1975:Q1

l98O:Q1—1980:Q3

l981:Q3—1982;Q4

2.1

36

expenditure,

the two "business" types (PDE+NRS), and the two "household"

types (.TRS+CD),

respectively.

Leaving aside the mammoth numbers for

1929—33, the largest absolute declines in total investment were in the
recessions of 1920—21, 1937—38, and 1973—75, in that order.

The remaining columns of Table

1

establish the importance of fixed

investment behavior as a contributing factor in business cycles.
for each cycle is the percent of the total decline in the x/xN
accounted for by the decline in the ratio of total investment

Shown

ratio
xN.

to

While these percentages are quite small for the first two postwar
recessions, in other recessions they range from 30 to 78 percent, with
the recessions in which investment played the largest role ranked as
1920—21, 1960—61, and 1980.

Interestingly, the relative contribution of

investment to the Great Contraction of 1929—33 was less than in all five
of the postwar recessions between 1957—58 and 1980.

There seems to be

no systematic difference between the interwar and postwar recessions in
the division of the investment decline between the two business types
and the two household types.

The two business types accounted for a

larger contribution in eight of the 13 recessions, and the two household
types for the remainder.

The three right—hand columns display an elasticity concept,
measured as the percentage change in the ratios shown in columns (5)
through (7) divided by the average value of each ratio in the peak
quarter of each cycle.

An elasticity of unity would indicate that the

decline in investment was proportional to its peak—quarter share, i.e.,
that the percentage responses of investment and non—investment were
equal.

An elasticity above unity indicates that the contribution of

investment to the decline in real GNP was larger than its peak—quarter

37

share in real GNP, and that the contribution of non—investment must have
been smaller.

For all four types of investment (column 8), the elasti-

cities range from 0.6 to 3.8.

The elasticity for the Great Contraction

is a middle—ranked 1.8, less than in the 1920—21, 1923—24, and 1937—38
interwar recessions, and all five of the recessions between 1957—58 and
1980.

At least one example with a low elasticity can be easily

explained, the 1953—54 recession in which the dominant depressing
influence on real CNP was the post—Korea decline in defense spending.

And the relatively high elasticity of household investment In 1980 may
reflect the Influence of the Carter credit controls.

Means and Standard Deviations
Table 2 displays means and standard deviations of the variables
used in this paper over thirteen complete trough—to—trough business
cycles between 1919 and 1982, and one incomplete cycle between 1938 and
1941.

Also shown are averages for the entire interwar period and

postwar period.

Each cell shows the mean, with the associated standard

deviation displayed immediately below in parentheses.
shows that on average the x/xN

ratio

The first column

was considerably higher In the

postwar period than the interwar period, and of this 10.3 percentage
point difference, 5.2 points are accounted for by the four investment
types taken together.

Also evident is the much higher standard deviaton

of the X/X' and the total real investment series during the interwar
period over individual cycles.

The regression equations in the subse-

quent tables of results cover several business cycles in each sub—sample
period, and this implies that regression coefficients depend not just on
the quarter—to—quarter variance of the investment series, but also on

37A

TABLE 2

Means and Standard Deviations of Basic Variables

Cycle
Beginning
in TroughR

Real
(NP

1919:01

1921:02

1924:Q3
1927:Q4
1933:01

l938:02b

Postwar
(1947—1982)
1947:01

1949:04

1954:02
1958:Q2
1961:01

1970:04
1975:01

l980:Q3

Real

Service
Price
C/P

Corporate
Baa
Rate

Tvpe.s

PDE

NRS

RS

CD

Ni

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

89.8
(12.5)

17.2
(6.2)

4.1
(1.4)

4.4

3.3

5.4

(1.6) (1.3)

14.9
(0.4)

147

(2.4)

28.0
(3.3)

(48)

6.6
(3.8)

96.4
(4.2)

19.1
(3.1)

5.7
(1.1)

3.1

(0.5)

4.4
6.0
(0.7) (1.3)

28.7
(2.0)

15.0
(0.4)

104
(14)

7.8
(0.6)

99.1
(6.1)

22.0
(3.3)

4.8
(0.9)

6.5
(1.3)

28.5
(0.9)

15.1

(0.5) (0.8)

(0.3)

115
(10)

7.3
(0.6)

103.4
(1.9)

25.5
(1.3)

5.3
(0.3)

8.0
(9.5)

28.7
(0.7)

12.5
(0.8)

156

(0.5) (0.5)

(19)

4.8
(0.8)

87.8
(13.8)

16.6
(6.7)

3.7
(1.6)

4.9
(2.1)

25.5
(1.2)

16.9
(0.5)

166

(71)

9.1
(4.6)

75.8
(6.7)

10.8
(2.7)

2.9
(0.9)

(0.6)

(0.4) (0.8)

26.1
(2.7)

14.8
(0.5)

153
(40)

6.2
(5.4)

87.0
(7.3)

14.5
(2.3)

3.7
(0.7)

2.8
(0.7)

2.8
(0.5)

32.6
(3.2)

14.0

133

(0.6)

(0.)

(17)

4.2
(0.9)

100.1
(3.4)

22.4
(1.8)

6.3
(0.9)

3.9
(0.5)

4.2

8.0

26.0
(9.0)

15.8
(2.7)

91

3.1

(0.8) (1.1)

(24)

(2.1)

99.5
(1.4)

6.4
21.5
(0.8) (0.6)

4.0
(0.2)

4.5
(0.5)

43.9
(2.5)

11.2
(0.6)

84

(0.4)

(12)

0.8
(0.1)

103.6
(2.6)

21.6
5.7
(1.7) (0.4)

3.9
(0.1)

4.8

7.1

37.3
(1.8)

13.1

67

(0.7) (0.7)

(0.9)

(2)

100.7
(2.3)

21.6
5.5
(1.3) (0.4)

4.2
(0.2)

32.2
(1.9)

15.3
(0.6)

85

(0.5) (0.5)

(6)

1.9
(0.1)

98.4
(1.8)

4.9
20.2
(0.9) (0.3)

4.0
(0.2)

(0.4) (0.3)

28.2
(0.9)

16.4
(0.5)

102
(6)

2.7
(0.6)

101.9
(2.5)

22.4
(1.5)

4.3
(0.3)

4.2
(0.5)

(0.8)

24.2
(1.6)

16.0
(1.0)

124

(0.8)

(12)

3.6
(0.4)

100.2

24.4

7.0

3.7

4.5

9.2

3.6

(1)

Interwar
(1919—1941)

Percent Ratio to Natural Real GNP
Four
I
Real

6.1

2.1

4.6

5.4

2.9

1.4

4.6

4.5

(2.5)
98.0
(2.0)

23.7
(1.5)

7.3
(0.7)

(0.2)

94.3

22.2

7.5

3.3

(2.5)

6.9

5.2

(1.7) (1.4)

(1.9) (0.6) (0.3) (0.8)
3.1

6.1

3.7

4.3

5.2

6.7

7.3

6.8
7.8

2.5

0.7
(0.6)

20.0

16.3

95

(0.6)

(1.0)

(0.4)

(12)

(0.2)

9.6

16.3
(0.8)

16.4
(0.2)

70
(4)

3.2
(1.2)

13.9

22.5

63

(0.5) (0.6)

(1.0) (0.5) (0.1) (0.4)

0

8.8
(0.3)

(0.3)

(1.3)

(3)

7.6

(1.0)

Notes

a) Statistics cover quarters from first quarter after trough to next trough.
b) through 1941:03 only.

38

changes in means across cycles.
In this light it

is interesting to note the high means for both

types of structures investment that reflect the construction boom of the
1920s, which plays a large role in some nonmonetary explanations of the

Great Depression (see Gordon—Wilcox, 1981) and in our analysis below in
Part V.

The ratios to

of nonresidential structures were higher in

the 1921, 1924, and 1927 cycles than in any postwar cycle.

The mean for

the 1924 cycle was highest for residential construction, followed by
1949 and a tie between 1921 and 1954.

The ratios to xN of producers'

durable equipment and consumer durables show quite a different pattern,
with all three of the highest ratios achieved during the 1971—82 period.
Another difference between the two structures types and the two

equipment types concerns the difference between the interwar and postwar
standard deviations.

The standard deviations of nonresidential and

residential structures fell from 2.4 to 0.5 and 1.6 to 0.8 points,
respectively.

The standard deviations of producers and consumer dura—

bles fell much less, from 1.4 to 0.9 and 1.3 to 1.1., respectively.

While nonresidential structures had by far the highest standard deviation in the interwar years, consumer durables had the highest standard
deviation in the postwar years.

Additional insight into the behavior of investment spending is
provided by Figures 1 and 2.

The former displays real GNP (X), total

investment (I), and non—investment GNP (N), each expressed as a ratio to
XN.

Here we note the contrast between the volatility of I in the 1920—

21 recession and subsequent recovery, and its relative stability during
1923—29.

Evident throughout the interwar period is the high positive

covariance between I and N;

this covariance appears to occur at annual

.100

.700

.100•

.600

1.000

1923

1927
1931

1935

1939

1950

1954

,

,

1958

1962

1196$

1970

IN VESTMENT

1974

1978

,

1982

,

.
GNP

FIG. 1 — GNP AND ITS COMPONENTS

.020

.040

.060

.080

1923

1921

PDE

1931

-

1935

1139

PDE

--

NR

-

-

1950

1954

1951

-

1962

-

I

1966

FIG. 2 — COMPONENTS OF INVESTMENT

-

1970

1974

1918

1982

39

and lower frequencies and is not an artifact of our interpolation
procedure.

The postwar period is dominated by the large bulge in N

during the Korean war, although there is a less pronounced hump in I in
1972—74.

Also evident is the downward drift in both X and N relative to

I after 1966.

The robust health of the i/xN

ratio

in the last half of

the l970s suggests the possibility that our average Q

variable

may

perform poorly, in light of its collapse after 1973.

Figure 2 exhibits each of the four categories of investment, also
expressed as a ratio to xN.

The investment boom of the 1920s and the

unusual share of boom contributed by nonresidential structures are
clearly visible.

The 1930s are characterized by a simultaneous collapse

in all four categories, as well as by a milder slump of consumer durable
spending.

By 1939—40, the two equipment categories had each recovered

to within a percentage point of the 1926—29 average, but residential
structures had only recovered to about half of the 1926—29 level, and
nonresidential structures to less than one—third.

Postwar business

cycles exhibit a continuing shift from structures to equipment, together
with a general tendency for booms in residential structures to lead
booms in PDE, with consumer durables in between.

Cycles in nonresiden-

tial structures do not coincide with those in the other four categories,
with the appearance of a process involving much longer lags.
Table 2 exhibits the means and standard deviations of the major
explanatory variables——the real money stock expressed as a ratio to
the price of capital services, average Q, and the real Baa rate.

The

behavior of these variables is illustrated in Figure 3, where each is
expressed as an index with l9l9:Q1 =

1.0.

The most stable variable in

both the interwar and postwar periods was real Ml, the variation of

40

which consists of a slight uptrend at the end of the 1930s and a
consistent downtrend during the postwar period.

The standard deviation

of real Ml is smaller than that of total investment within most interwar
cycles and is about the same order of magnitude during postwar cycles.
The capital service price has a small standard deviation and little
drift.

It exhibits two major humps, in response to high real interest

rates in 1930—34 and 1980—83.

The smaller degree of volatility in the

capital service price than in the real interest rate reflects the
dominant role in the former variable of a fixed depreciation rate.

Both

the service price and the real interest rate exhibit minima in 1936—37,
1952—53, and 1975—77, reflecting 'price increases that are subtracted
from the nominal Baa rate.

The average Q

variable

(expressed as a

percent in Table 2) has a much higher mean in the interwar period than
in the postwar.

The standard deviation of Q averaged over the interwar

period was double that in the postwar, and the average for individual
cycles in the interwar period was more than four times higher than the
average for individual postwar cycles.

The regression analysis in the next part of the paper compares the
differing relative contributions of lagged investment and lagged GNP in
explaining current investment.

As a preliminary, we present a decompo-

sition of variance of the ratios to

of real GNP (X), real investment

(I), and real non—investment CNP (N).

A familiar formula linking the

variances

of these three variables is:

(14)

var(X)

=

var(I)

+ var(N) +

2cov(I,N)

The top half of Table 3 presents a decomposition of variance as in (12)
for the interwar and postwar periods, and for two halves of the postwar.

.700

1.400

2.100

2.800

193)

1935

1939

1950

QSUMMER

Ml

BAA RATE

1954

COST OF CAPITAL

1958

-t

1962

19ö6

-t

1970

1974

rIG. 3 — NORMALIZED MONETARY AND FINANCIAL VARIABLES

1978

1982

TABLE 3
Decomposition of Variance
Real GNP, Investment, and Non—Investment,
Ratios to Natural Real GNP in Percent

1919:Q1
—1941:Q3

1947:Q1
—1965:Q4

l966:Q1
—l983:Q4

l947:Q1

—l983:Q4

Total Real GNP
Var (X)

157.4

7.3

15.8

12.0

Var (I)

38.9

2.0

2.2

3.2

Var (N)

45.7

4.9

10.6

11.2

2 Covar (I, N)

72.8

0.4

3.0

—2.4

Var (1)/VAR (K)

0.25

0.27

0.14

0.27

VAR (N)/Var (X)

0.29

0.67

0.67

0.93

38.9

2.0

2.2

3.2

Var (PDE)

2.0

0.4

0.3

0.9

Var (RS)

2.7

0.3

0.6

0.6

Var (NRS)

5.7

0.1

0.3

0.2

Var (CD)

1.6

0.4

0.4

1.4

26.9

0.8

0.6

0.1

Four Types I
Var (I)

Residual
Covariance Terms

41

The bottom half of the table exhibits a parallel decomposition for the
four components of total investment.

The enormous decline in the variance of all components in the
postwar period is immediately apparent.

There is no decline, however,

in the ratio var(I)/var(X), which is slightly higher in 1947—65 and
1947—83 than in 1919—41.

The most interesting contrast between the

interwar and postwar period is in the covariance term.

The positive

covariance between I and N contributes almost half of the total variance
of real CNP in 1919—41, whereas it contributes a negligible fraction in
1947—65 and is actually negative in the postwar period taken as a whole.
One may conjecture that, while the interwar period was dominated by the
cyclical behavior of private spending, much of the variance of non—
investment in the postwar period was contributed by government spending.
The negative covariance of I and N in the postwar may suggest that
investment was "crowded out" by major increases in government spending.
The bottom half of the table shows that about two—thirds of the
total variance of investment in the interwar period was contributed by
the covariance term, i.e., a shock common to all investment types rather
than to only one.

In the two halves of the postwar the covariance terms

contribute less than half, and virtually nothing for the postwar period
taken as a whole.

The largest "own—variance" in the full postwar period

is for consumer durables, but the smaller value of this term for the two
separate halves of the postwar indicates the dominance of a trend
effect.

Nonresidential structures shifted from contributing the largest own—

variance in the interwar period to the smallest in the postwar period.

42

IV.

REGRESSION EQUATIONS EXPLAINING TOTAL INVESTMENT EXPENDITURES

Will the Real Accelerator Please Stand Up?
The starting point of our hybrid methodology is to determine the
specification for a reduced form investment equation that seems "reason—
able" on an a priori basis.

Our goal is then to use the estimated

reduced form equations to suggest "data—coherent" ways of moving to more
structural models and interpretations.

In arriving at such interpreta-

tions, we recognize the conventional wisdom that many structural models
may imply the same reduced form.
with structural models.

However, there is a similar problem

Quite dissimilar "structural" models may

result

when the same general economic phenomenon is interpreted by different
authors.

For example, a starting point in many studies of investment
behavior, and an ending point in some,

is the accelerator hypothesis.

In its simplest form, dating back to Clark (1917), it explains the level
of real investment as a function of the change in real GNP.

But this

apparently straightforward idea does not imply a single "structural"
specification.

The change in real GNP may enter only as a current

value, or as a combination of current and lagged values.

Or the

investigation may start from the "flexible accelerator" hypothesis, in

which investment depends on the current level of output and one lagged
value of the capital stock.

Or one might adopt a more general dynamic

specification, as in Table 4 below, that allows several lagged values of
investment to enter as well as current and lagged changes in output.
Since the coefficient on lagged investment turns out to be roughly
unity, this last alternative amounts to a regression explaining the

TABLE 4
Equations for Business Investment,
Interwar and Postwar Sample Periods

Explanatory Lagged Variables

I

tN

(2)

(1)

MN
(3)

AC/P

(4)

LQ

mL,B/P

B/Ptm

(6)

(7)

R2

S.E.E. D—W

(8)

(9)

(10)

.08

1.26

.181

.93

.34

.01* .36*** •57***

.96

.28

.27*** •34***

.95

.29

(5)

1921:02—1941 :Q3

Producers'

Durables
*

2.

.96*** —.06

3.

.92w

—.09

.14**

***

***
4•

•93***

.01*

—.14
*

***

***

Non—Residential Structures
1.

2.

3.

4.

.98***

.56

.09

—.19

2.70

.09

—.07

.96

.51

.96

.48

.96

.47

—.11

1.03

.95

.21

.96

.19

—.02

.486

.96

.098

.97

.085

,93***

.30

* **

.17

.19

* **

—.00

.12

—.00

.05

.46**

.048

1949:Q2—1983:Q4
Producers' Durables
1.

2.

.98***

3.

1.00***

.07

—.25

.08
***

_.27***

.51*** _.22**

***

***

.02

•39**

.55***

**

.057

Non—Residential Structures
1.

2.

•97***

3.

.98***

.30**

.30*

.01

—.04

.02

—.01

.01*** .06

.20***

.066

*

Notes:

Numbers shown in each cell are sums of coefficients and asterisks
next to these numbers indicate significance levels of the sums (* for
10 percent
for 5 percent, and *** for 1 percent). Asterisks below
the numbers indicate with the same notation the joint significance of
all lags in an exclusion test. All equations include, in addition to
the listed variables, a constant term.
Purhin—Watson statistics are
not shown for equations containing lagged dependent variables.

43

change of investment spending, in which case the accelerator hypothesis
would call for the output variable to enter as a second difference.

A

rational expectations approach to the accelerator, as in Abel—Blanchard
(1983), would imply a reduced form in which levels of expected future
output appear, rather than lagged values.

These expectations may be

functions of many variables in addition to lagged output.

An extreme

version of the expectational approach to investment behavior might lead
to the conclusion that investment is a random walk, parallel to Hall's
(1978) interpretation of consumption as a random walk.

All these models are merely alternative formulations of a single
underlying structure, the accelerator mechanism.

However each model

results in a different specification for the appropriate reduced form
equation.

This proliferation of structural models is also a problem

with the other mechanisms that are claimed to be of importance for
explaining investment, e.g., the Q approach.

To avoid losing sight of

our objectives by examining a multitude of different formulations, we
choose to set up "straw man"

reduced

forms that are relatively unres-

tricted and allow alternative explanatory variables suggested by alternative theories to enter on equal terms.

Contribution of the Accelerator and the Cost of Capital

We begin by examining reduced—form regressions for each of the four
individual categories of total investment:

consumer durables, residen-

tial structures, producers durable equipment, and nonresidential structures.

We begin at a disaggregated level and subsequently study the

consequences of alternative aggregation schemes.

In Table 4 and later

tables, the full sample period of available quarterly data is divided

44

into 1919—41 and 1947—83.

In preliminary work a break was allowed in

the middle of the postwar period at 1965, but Chow tests rejected the
hypothesis of a structural change for most equations, and so here the
postwar period is treated as a single entity.

There are insufficient

degrees of freedom available to test for a structural break within the

interwar periodat 1929.
structure at World War

Chow tests indicate a decisive break in

ii.16

Our reduced form equations omit the lagged capital stock (K...i)

term, which appears in (3), for two reasons.

First, an identity links

the lagged capital stock and lagged investment, precluding an investment
equation containing several lagged values of investment from also
including several lagged values of the capital stock.

Second, while a

single lagged value of the capital stock may appear, preliminary tests
indicated statistical insignificance in every sample period.
Tables 4 and 5 are arranged in two sections, corresponding to the
two sample periods (interwar and postwar).

Each cell in the table

contains results for each of the four categories of investment spending
in the following format:

the first line of each cell gives the sum of

coefficients with its significance level, and the second line exhibits
the significance level for an F—test on the exclusion of all lags of
that explanatory variable.

A blank on the second line indicates that

the 10 percent level of statistical significance was not attained.
The first line for each investment type in Tables 4 and 5 presents
the

regression

results for what might be termed a

naive accelerator!—

cost of capital" specification of the investment equation.

The log

level of investment spending (I/XN) is regressed on 8 lagged first

differences of real non—investment GNP, N/XN, and 8 lagged values of

TABLE 5
Equations for Household Investment,
Interwar and Postwar Sample Periods

D
(1)

Explanatory Lagged Variables

(2)

MYD
(3)

tr

Q

(4)

(5)

ithB/P

B/Pam

(6)

(7)

2

S.E.E.

D—W

(8)

(9)

(10)

.12

.08

1.22

.102

—.09

.95

.28

.96

.26

.95

.28

.21

—.16

1.79

—.08

.96

.31

1921 :Q2—1941 :Q3

Consumer Durables

• 64***

1.

2.
3.

4.

• 97***

***
•

94***

*

**

•

96***

.04

**

.00

*
.08

*

.07

.002

.23**

.002

.21**

.

*
*

.46**
*
•34**
*

Residential Structures
.48*

1.

2.

.98*** —.00

.072

***

3.

.11

.33

.97

.31

.15

.34

.96

.31

.17

—.06

1.18

—.31

.92

.33

.93

.30

.93

.30

.22

.72

.95

.18

.22

.96

.16

.12

.96

.16

—.11

—.06

—.21

.05

_.12**

***

4.
1949 :Q2—1983:Q4

Consumer Durables
.91*

1.

2.

•97*** —.13
***

**

3.

.56

_.46** —.00

.86*** l.27***
**

.83***

.60*

4.

*

***

1.23***

.098

***

Residential Structures

—2. 24***

1.

***

2.

_.20*

•94*** —.08
***

*

3

—.03

4.

—.05

NOTE:

—. 22*

—.004

*

See bottom of Table 4.

.22*

.02
—.05

***
***

.231

45

first differences of the appropriate real cost of capital series
(LC1P).

In the regressions involving household investment in Table 5,

real personal disposable income, y1jxN, replaces real GNP, and 8 lags

of the first difference of the real Baa interest rate is used as a proxy
for the price of investment. In line 1 both the

and DW statistic are

very low for all categories over all periods, indicating a poor fit and
serially correlated errors.

The "accelerator" variable passes the

exclusion test only for producers durables in the interwar and for

LuLLuLC

ii

LILe pULWL.

kUL eveu jiUUAeL bLIowiLLg s—

exhibited by the "cost of capital," which passes the exclusion test only
for postwar residential structures.

Line 2 in each block is identical to line 1, except that four lags
of the dependent variable are included as additional regressors.

The

results from these regressions further weaken the case for the accelerator and the price of investment.

For all categories and all sample

periods the lagged dependent variables terms enter significantly at the
one percent level.

Both the accelerator and the price of investment

become insignificant for most types and sample periods.

While the

accelerator variable has explanatory power for postwar producers
durables, and consumer durables in both periods, the sums of the coefficients are insignificantly different from zero in every equation.
Overall this formulation of the two traditionally dominant explanations
of investment behavior fares poorly in both the interwar and the postwar
periods.

Contribution of Q and Real Ml

As the sum of coefficients on lagged investment in line 2 of each

46

block is close to unity, the equation amounts to an explanation of the
behavior of the first difference of investment.

To be consistent with

the first difference format, in line 3 the accelerator is expressed as
the first difference of the first difference of real non—investment GNP,

MN/XN, and the remaining explanatory variables are entered as lagged
values of their first differences.

Non—investment GNP and the cost of

capital or interest rate terms enter with 8 lags, while the remaining
explanatory variables enter with 4 lags.

Our measure for Tobin's

average Q has no significant explanatory power, except for postwar

nonresidential structures, and as often as not enters with the wrong
sign.

The change in C/P

continues to be insignificant in the exclusion

tests, although the sum of coefficients is significantly negative for
the two durables categories in the postwar.

Previous research by King (1983) and Sims (1983) has emphasized a
distinction between the role of inside and outside money as a determinIn the work of King this distinction is implemented

ant of real output.

by entering the two multiplicative components of Ml, the money
multiplier and monetary base (Mi/P
for total output.

m(B/P)), separately in VAR models

We can investigate the same issue here and inquire

whether the effect of monetary changes on investment occurs through the
multiplier, the base, or a mixture of the two.

The first difference

specification for the explanatory variables suggests that we should
split the change in Mi. into the level of the multiplier times the first

difference in the base (mtB/P), and the level of the base times the
first difference in the multiplier (l3/Ptm).

Both components enter

significantly into the equations for producers and consumers durables,
interwar and postwar.

The change in the money multiplier has moderate

47

explanatory power for both structures categories in the postwar, as well
as for nonresidential structures in the interwar.

Other Specifications.

The final reduced form specification appears in line 3 or 4 of each
block.

The specification in line 4 differs from that of line 3 only in

the exclusion of variables that are significant but have the wrong
sign.

Both the accelerator and the price of investment are included

along with average Q and the monetary variables.

The accelerator

variable is significant only for postwar producer durables.

We experi-

mented with alternative specifications of the final reduced form in
order to check the robustness of our results.

In these tests the cost

of capital term in the business investment equations was replaced by the
real Baa rate, but this rate was never significant and as often as not
carried the wrong sign.

A variant of the "expectatiorial accelerator" was also estimated by
a two—stage procedure.

Time series models for non—investment GNP and

personal disposable income were estimated and used to generate k—step
ahead forecasts.

Eight leads of these forecasts, in various trans-

formations, were used as explanatory variables but were always insignificant, often with the wrong sign, for all but postwar producers
durable equipment.

This set of results implies that the significant

monetary variables in Tables 4 and 5 enter directly into the determination of investment spending, rather than indirectly through an effect
on expectations of future output.

Summary of Disaggregated Results

Perhaps the most surprising result of these initial reduced form

48

estimates is the small explanatory role accorded conventional variables
and the large role given to unconventional variables like the real money
supply.

The poor showing of the interest rate and cost of capital,

combined with the singular importance of average Q

for

non—residential

structures, lead one to suspect that the financing decision is an
important determinant of investment expenditures.

The broad role played

by the money multiplier may indicate that credit rationing, rather than
interest rate changes, may be the primary constraint in the financing
decision.

This view is consistent with that expressed in Roosa (1950)

as to the dominant channel through which monetary policy affects the
economy.

The similarities in the behavior of the two structures and the two
durable goods categories suggest that aggregation by asset type rather
than by decision maker is preferable.

This approach to disaggregation

would also be in accord with Tobin's asset approach, insofar as durable
goods are normally shorter lived than structures.

However, this

approach is at odds with the conventional structural approach to
investment.

With its focus on the investment decision, the traditional

approach has always aggregated by the decision—maker (i.e., household
vs. business) rather than by the character of the asset (i.e.,
structures vs. equipment).

Aggregation Schemes

Table 6 displays our basic equation for two alternative aggregation
schemes, household/business and durables/structures. The household
/business aggregation scheme is not particularly successful.

In the

interwar period both categories appear to be autonomous, with only

TABLE 6
Equations for Alternative Aggregation Schemes
Interwar and Postwar Sample Periods

Explanatory Lagged Variables

I

N

MYD

r

SC/P

LQ

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

mB/P
(7)

—.01

.27*

B/Pm
(8)

R2

(9)

S.E.E.

(10)

1921 :Q3—1941 :Q3

Household
.96***
*

—.18

**

.07

•75**

.98

.442

l.ll**

.97

.647

Business
•95***
***

.26

.23

.01

.41

*

Durables
.91** —.22

.32**

.01

**

.48***

l.07***

.97

.430

.27

l.36**

•97

•754

.89

.399

•74***

.94

.222

2.23***

.96

.401

.60***
***

.97

.198

***

***

Structures
•94***

.43

.14

—.01

1949:Q1—1983:Q4

Household

.31

_77***

—.02
*

l.16**k1.96***

***

Business

i.0i .46**

_.24**

.03**

•45

***

Durables
.98***

.81**

_97***

***

**

•97*** —.16

—.24

***

.02

l.67***

***

Structures

0TE:

See bottom of Table 4.

.01

.16

49

lagged "own values" passing the exclusion test (as well as the money
multiplier in the business equation).

Both real monetary variables

become highly significant for the two categories in the postwar.

The

only difference in behavior between household and business investment
appears In the postwar, when business investment exhibits a strong
accelerator effect.

If we were to ignore real balance effects, as does

most of the literature, then aggregation by decision—maker would result
in a pair of highly autonomous investment series in the interwar period.
Stated another way, this aggregation scheme would indicate that the
decision—maker does not respond to relevant economic variables.
Aggregation by the asset character of investment leads to more
illuminating results.

Durable equipment and structures exhibit marked

differences in behavior in both sample periods.

Structures investment

for 1919—41 is quite autonomous, but durables expenditures exhibit
sensitivity to interest rates (with the wrong sign) and to real monetary
variables.

More important is the finding that real money balances are

highly significant in explaining both investment categories in the
postwar.

Durable goods are sensitive to the accelerator and interest

rates (with the correct sign), whereas structures depend significantly
on the average Q

variable.

This result may indicate the importance of

the different financing methods that are used for equipment and Structures.

One might think of short—lived assets as financed to a large

extent by internally generated funds, i.e., retained earnings and
disposable income, while investment in structures may depend heavily on
conditions in the bond and security markets.

Using the alternative aggregation criterion of asset durability
produces the most sensible results in Table 6.

Investment behavior is

50

found to differ between short and long—lived assets in a way that is
statistically significant.

The accelerator and the Baa rate are both

important for investment in durables, while structures (dominated by the
non—residential category) respond to average Q.

These results provide

evidence supporting the importance of financial conditions for investment decisions.

What is surprising is the way in which the conventional

investment literature, with its emphasis on the business investment
decision, has overemphasized disaggregation by decision—maker and has
glossed over the importance of the asset characteristics of investment
and the role of real monetary variables.

V.

INVESTMENT IN A VECTOR—AUTOREGRESSIVE MODEL

Correlations Among Contemporaneous Innovations

The equations estimated in Tables 4—6 investigate the feedback from
the various lagged explanatory variables to components of investment,
but they say nothing about the relationships among contemporaneous
innovations in the variables, nor about the feedback from investment to
the explanatory variables.

These issues can be addressed by analyzing a

vector—autoregressive (VAR) system that contains the primary variables
of interest.

We economize on space by restricting attention to a VAR

model containing six variables——real investment in structures (ISTR),
real investment in durable goods (lUG), real non—investment GNP (N), the
real money base (B/P), the Ml money multiplier (m), and the real Baa
interest rate (r).

For the interwar period the interest rate variable

in Table 6 has the incorrect (positive) sign in the equations for both
ISTR and IDG, leading us to choose a five—variable system omitting the
interest rate for 1920—41.

51

All variables (except m and r) are once again expressed as ratios
to natural real GNP

(xN).

To maintain the symmetry required for the VAR

system, all variables are expressed as first differences, in contrast to
Tables 4—6, where investment is expressed as a ratio, output as a second
difference, and the other variables as first differences.

Extra degrees

of freedom allow the inclusion of eight lags on all variables in the
postwar period, as opposed to four lags in the interwar period.
Columns in Table 7 correspond to each of the six variables in the
VAR system.

A slash (I) divides the interwar result from the postwar

result in both the top and bottom sections of the table.

indicate

(———)

model.

The dashes

the exclusion of the interest rate in the interwar

The top section shows correlations among contemporaneous

innovations.

There is a uniformly high correlation between the two

components of investment, ISTR and II)G.

Another similarity between the

interwar and postwar is the positive correlation between the money
multiplier (m) and both ISTR and IDG, the negative correlation between
IDG and the monetary base (B/P), and the high negative correlation
between the base and the multiplier.

Perhaps the most important

difference between the interwar and postwar periods is the sharp decline
in the correlation of durable goods investment (IDG) with non—investment
CNP (N).

This is similar to the decomposition of variance in Table 3

above and may indicate that N in the interwar is dominated by a common
impulse to private spending that also influenced lUG, whereas in the
postwar N was more affected by defense expenditures in the Korea and
Vietnam periods which had no impact or even a negative impact on IDG.
The correlations of the base and the multiplier with non—investment
GNP change signs in the postwar period.

This is suggestive of a change

51A

TABLE 7

Correlation Coefficients and Exogeneity Tests
in Basic VAR Models
(Interwar/Postwar)

AISTR

AIDG

AN

AB/P

Am

Ar

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Correlations

AIDG

AN

.35/ .35

—.04/ .09

.51/ .04

AB/P

.09/ .18

—.17/—.17

—.29/ .17

Am

.19/ .25

.24/ .28

.30/—.07

—.54/—.39

———I—. 26

———I—. 15

——-/-.00

——-I-. 30

---I-. 21

Exogeneity Tests
AISTR

AISTR

/

AIDG

/**

AB/P

/

AB/P

*/

/

/**
___/*

**/***

/

/

/*

/

/

/

/

/

---/

---I

---/
NOTE:

AIDG

/

***/***

___/***

***/**

/**

---/

_/*

Asterisks designate significance levels at the 10 percent (*), 5 percent (**),
Blanks indicate that the interest rate is ex—
and 1 percent (***) levels.
cluded from the model for the interwar period.

52

in the behavior of monetary policy between the two periods.

Another

"structural" shift is suggested by the change of the coefficient of the
interest rate on IDG from positive (shown in Table 6 but not Table 7) to
negative.

This should be interpreted in conjunction with the sharp

decline in the correlation of N and IDG in the postwar period.

These

facts may indicate that durable goods expenditures in the interwar
tended to be more constrained by income or retained earnings, while in
the postwar period the availability and price of credit was relatively
more important.

Multi—variate Exogeneity Tests
The bottom section of Table 7 displays significance levels for the
contribution of each explanatory variable in each equation.

Explanatory

variables are represented by the six columns, and dependent variables by
the six lines.

Asterisks denote the same significance levels as in

Tables 4—6, and are calculated from F—ratios on the joint exclusion of
all lags of a particular variable.

Often such tables reveal a highly

significant set of diagonal elements, reflecting highly significant
lagged dependent variables in the VAR equations.
for lOG, BIP, and

m.

This occurs here only

The insignificance of the other diagonal elements

may reflect the fact that all variables in the model are expressed as
first differences.

Investment in structures appears to be relatively exogenous in both
periods, with modest feedback from non—investment GNP in the interwar
and the money multiplier in the postwar.

Durable goods investment

exhibits substantial feedback from several variables in either or both
periods, and in this sense in much less "autonomous" than investment in

53

structures.

The pattern of monetary influences on IDG and N differs.

While IDG reflects significant feedback from the base and the multiplier
in both periods, N reflects feedback from the base in both periods, the
interest rate in the postwar, and the multiplier in neither period.

A

notable feature of the pattern of exogeneity is the independence of the
money multiplier and the interest rate from almost all the other
variables.

In the postwar the interest rate is totally independent of

all the remaining variables, feeding into only IDG and N. The channel of
influence from the interest rate to investment,

if any, appears to be

indirect, running through non—investment GNP, with only a weak direct
effect in the postwar.

The pattern of these exogeneity results may

suggest the existence of two impulse sources in the business cycle, one
financial (interest rates and money multiplier) and the other real
(investment in structures), whose effects interact through the
propagation mechanism represented here by the remaining variables.

Innovation Accounting

VAR modeling techniques are often criticized for the ambiguity
inherent in the a priori ordering of the variables necessary to carry
out the usual "innovation accounting" exercise.

However the allocation

of the variance of the investment categories between 'own" innovations
and innovations in other explanatory variables is of interest in any
investigation of the role played by investment in business cycles.

As

with our choice of aggregation schemes, we allow our earlier empirical
results to suggest "appropriate" orderings of the variables.

The equa-

tions estimated in Table 6 suggest that investment in structures is
quite autonomous, a result reinforced by the exogeneity tests of Table

54

7.

Our basic model, as it appears in the top half of Table 8, places

structures (ISTR) first in the ordering, followed by investment in
durables (IDG).

Gestation lags in both types of investment make it

plausible that at least one quarter is required before investment
spending can be influenced by changes in non—investment real GNP (N),
the real base (B/P), the multiplier (m), or interest rate (r).

Although

our empirical results cast doubt on other ordering schemes, a priori
notions about the importance of autonomous government spending in the
postwar might suggest an ordering with non—investment real GNP first,
followed by investment in structures, then durables.

ordering appear in the bottom half of Table 8.

Results for this

The interest rate is

placed last in both orderings, as the theory of efficient markets would
suggest an instantaneous response to innovations in other variables.
B/P and m are intermediate variables but are capable of moving quickly,
particularly if the Federal Reserve is operating to stabilize the
interest rate.

[n the ordering with structures first, the own innovation of
structures accounts for the majority of its variance at the 16 quarter
forecast horizon in both sample periods.

This own contribution is not

altered in the slightest by placing N first in the ordering.

Structures

appear to be virtually autonomous, with a highly significant influence
only from the money multiplier in the postwar.

ISTR accounts for more

than 10 percent of the variance of IDG in both periods, N and r in the
postwar, and m in the interwar.

In an alternative version of the model

in which the variables are expressed in levels (not shown in Table 8),
the role of ISTR is substantially greater, accounting for at least one
third of the variance of almost all the other variables in both

54A

TABLE 8

Innovation Accounting at 16—Quarter Forecast Horizon
in Two VAR Models

(Interwar/Postwar)

AISTR

AIDC

AN

AB/P

Am

Ar

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Dependent Variable

AISTR

76.8/58.0

4.4/ 4.2

7.7/ 5.6

3.3/ 2.8

7.8/22.5

———I 7.0

AIDG

13.2/15.8

44.4/45.4

10.0/ 8.1

8.3/ 5.2

24.1/11.7

———/13.7

AN

7.8/10.0

20.9/ 3.3

47.6/56.6

10.5/ 6.7

13.2/10.4

———/13.0

AB/P

6.7/ 4.8

4.9/ 7.3

11.7/ 7.1

63.0/68.6

13.7/ 8.3

———1 3.9

Am

13.2/ 7.4

8.6/ 5.4

13.5/ 6.5

24.7/20.5

40.0/49.4

———/10.8

Ar

——--/10.3

———I 7.1

———I 2.2

———1 7.4

———/11.0

———/62.0

AN

AISTR

A I DC

AB/P

Am

Ar

64.8/57.5

7.7/ 9.1

3.8/ 3.3

10.5/ 6.7

13.2/10.4

———/13.0

5.3/ 6.6

76.9/57.1

6.7/ 4.1

3.3/ 2.8

7.8/22.5

—--—I 7.0

AIDG

19.6/ 8.8

13.7/15.0

34.3/45.5

8.3/ 5.2

24.1/11.7

———/13.7

AB/P

13.5/ 7.8

7.0/ 4.1

2.8/ 7.4

63.0/68.6

13.7/ 8.3

———I 3.9

Am

16.1/ 6.5

13.8/ 7.4

5.4/ 5.4

24.7/20.5

40.0/49.4

———/10.8

Ar

——--I 2.1

———/10.5

———7 7.0

———7 7.4

———/11.0

———/62.0

AN

AISTR

Note:

As in Table 7, blanks indicate that the interest rate is excluded from
the model for the interwar period.

55

periods.
Innovations in IDG

account

for more of the variance of N than vice

versa in the interwar period, which might be interpreted as indicating
that the multiplier was a stronger influence than the accelerator during
that

interval.

Investment in durables displays substantial feedback

from both investment in structures and from the money multiplier in both
periods.

The fact that the money multiplier has a larger effect on the

three categories of spending (ISTR, IDG, and N) than the two other
financial variables (B/P and r) may indicate that the collapse of the
banking system in the 1929—33 period and disintermediation in the
postwar period were important channels of influence, proxied by the
money multiplier, of the financial system on real expenditures.

As

mentioned above, the ordering in the bottom of Table 8 that places N
first does not change these results significantly, and this seems to
support our argument for the exogeneity of investment in structures.

Historical Decomposition of Variance in Both Investment Types

A more revealing display of the implications of the VAR model

is

contained in the historical decomposition of each series in the system
over each of the sample periods.

The ordering used in arriving at these

decompositions was that of our basic VAR model which places the explanatory variables in the order shown
N, B/F, m and r).

in

the top half of Table 8 (ISTR, IDG,

To limit the number of diagrams, we present only the

decomposition of the two categories of investment —
in Figure 4 and durable goods in Figure 5,

interwar

structures

followed by postwar

structures in Figure 6 and durable goods in Figure 7.
The top frame in each diagram compares the actual time path of

FIG. 4 — DECOMPOSITION OF STRUCTURES

là.

2

*cru.i.

SIR

o

o

-

—-—----—

N

0•

1921

1923

1925

1927

1929

1931

1933

1935

1937

1939

1941

FIG. 5 — DECOMPOSITION OF EQUIPMENT

/\

14
13121110-

PROJECTION

9'
8'
7.
6'
5.
4.

3.

ACTUAL

2
1-

0

A

.

I'

:

:
.
———-.—.--,—-

.

\-

SIR

.. .. .

DG

/
N
—

—

—'..———

.

:

N

.

.

8/P

+
I

/

/____'_
—

//

/

/

,/

/

/

,—.——-—-——.—,---.. -

7

-

—,i/
—4-- —--—-----1 921

1923

1925

1927

1929

—I-

1931

1933

1935

1937

1939

1941

56

investment with a "projection" which summarizes the net effect of the
constant terms in all of the equations.

The contribution of each of the

other variables in the system then appears below.

These contributions

do not refer just to the lagged values times the estimated coefficients
in the IDG equation alone, but rather to the contributions of the
innovations in each variable to investment behavior, taking account of
all channels of feedback working through the six—equation model (recall
that interest rates are excluded in the interwar period).
The predominant role of own—innovations in the structures
investment (ISTR) process is evident in Figure 4.

There is a high

plateau in the own—innovations series in 1926—27, a gradual downward
movement in

1928—29, and a sharp downward plunge beginning in l929:Q3,

prior to the fourth—quarter stock market debacle.

Equally interesting

is that the own—innovation series remains negative throughout the 1931—
41 period, supporting the interpretation of "overbuilding" in the 1920s
that required a long period of subsequent adjustment in the 1930s.
Two other variables display interesting patterns in Figure 4.

The

real monetary base (B/F) makes a major negative contrIbution in 1927—31
and a positive contribution in 1938-41.

The latter episode is easy to

understand in light of the large inflow of gold to the U. S. during this
period.

However, the decline in the contribution in B/P in 1927—31 may

seem puzzling, since nominal B varied little in the Great Contraction of
1929—33, while the price level (P) declined substantially.

The behavior

of the B/P contribution can be explained in terms of the "projection"
for B/P (not shown), which displays a sharp upward trend during the
entire 1920—41 period in response to the doubling of B/P between 1920
and 1941.

The actual value of B/P is below this "projection"

57

continuously from 1920 to 1938 and then above it from 1939 to 1941.
Thus the VAR

historical

decomposition algorithm interprets the slow

increase in the real base in 1927—31 as being an actual decline relative
to trend, and this is reflected in the contribution of base innovations
to structures investment in Figure 4.

The other variable making an

important contribution is the money multiplier, which exhibits a sharp
decline during the period of monetary contraction and bank failures
between 1931 and 1933, as well as after the increase in reserve
requirements in 1936—37.

The role of the multiplier makes our analysis

compatible with the emphasis on the financial crisis in Bernanke (1983b).
Figure 5 shows the interwar historical decomposition of innovations
to equipment investment.

Compared to Figure 4 for interwar structures,

the own—innovations in IDC are relatively less important and the
innovations in the monetary base and money multiplier are, more
important.

To some extent the innoVations in the base and multiplier

are offsetting, and this reflects in part the upward trend of the base
and downward trend of the multiplier in the interwar period.

However,

we recall from Tables 4—6 that both the base and the multiplier have
consistently positive coefficients in the interwar regression equations
for expenditures on durables.

Figures 6 and 7 decompose the variance of ISTR and IDC for the
postwar years.

Note that in these figures the scale is compressed

horizontally and expanded vertically, since the ratio of investment to
natural output varied over so much smaller a range in the postwar
period.

Figure 6 for postwar structures shares with the interwar Figure

4 a predominant role for oin

innovations.

However, Figure 7 for

durables is quite different from the other historical decompositions.

FIG. 6 — DECOMPOSITION OF STRUCTURES

ACTUAL

9
B

7
PROJECTION

6—

5—

f-i

o

STR

\Vf

..t'—' V

—

V

1

D.-

N

1

-

—

o

V ___

/

VtV

-

—

-V

M

—
-

—

'—I

0

—-

RAA

— --

VVV,VV V
Vt

-'---—-—,

Vt

1949

1953

1957

1961

1965

1969

1973

1977

19

V

FIG. 7 — DECOMPOSITION OF EQUIPMENT
18
17
16
15
14

13
12
11

C

PROJECTION

58

Structures innovations play a much more important role in explaining
postwar durables expenditure fluctuations than the own—innovations in
durables.

Further, there is a substantial role for real interest rate

innovations in Figure 7, supporting the highly significant negative
coefficients on the real interest rate variable in Tables 4—6.

The

effect of high real interest rates in 1981—83 in reducing investment
expenditures is particularly noticeable.

Thus any conclusion in this paper that investment contains a large
autonomous component must refer mainly to structures, whereas durable
equipment investment displays substantial feedback from both structures
investment and from financial variables.

It does not seem surprising

that there should he feedback from structures investment to equipment
investment, since the two activities are complementary.

Construction of

a new factory, office building, or shopping center requires investment
in equipment, lust as residential construction stimulates investment

in

furniture, appliances, and other components of consumer durable
expenditures.

The Temin "Autonomous Shift'

in 1930

An important part of Temin's (1976) interpretation of the first
stage of the Great Contraction of 1929—33 is an autonomous shift in
consumption in 1930, which he identified by estimating an annual
consumption function.

Our purpose here is not to review the controversy

stirred up by Tenth's result (see Mayer, 1980), but rather to reexamine
his hypothesis using the more definitive microscope provided by our
quarterly data set.
our

interwar

Table 9 exhibits quarter—by—quarter residuals from

VAR models for the sixteen quarters covering 1929—32.

59

Asterisks are used to mark off residuals greater in size than 1.0
standard error of estimate (see notes to Table 9).
The five variables of the model are the first differences of,
respectively, investment in structures (ISTR), investment in durables
(IDG), non—investment real GNP (N), the real monetary base (B/F), and
the money multiplier.

All variables (except m) are expressed as per—

,centage ratios to natural real CNP, and beneath the residuals the table
shows the level of these ratios in 1929:Q2, ranging from 5.6 percent for
Here we

the monetary base to 77.6 percent for non—investment real GNP.
treat the behavior of non—investment real GNF as representing

consump-

tion," actually nondurable consumption, since in 1929 nondurable
consumption made up 85.2 percent of N, and accounted for 74.6 percent of
the decline in N from 1929 to 1930.

The emphasis in this paper on autonomous movements in investment,
There were

particularly structures investment, is supported in Table 9.

three large negative innovations in 1929—30 to ISTR, including one in
1929:Q3, one quarter prior to the business downturn and stock market
crash.

There was a large negative innovation in lOG in 1929:04.

The

cumulative residuals of ISTR and IDG in 1929—30 amount, respectively, to
—25.2 and —17.2 percent of their levels in 1929:Q2.

In contrast, the

only large N residual for 1929—30 is positive in 1929:Q3.

The

cumulative N residuals in 1929—30 amount to only —1.6 percent of its
level in 1929:Q2.

Thus we find no evidence that negative residuals for

nondurable consumption played a key role in the initial stages of the
Great Contraction.

Two other interesting results are evident in Table 9.

First, there

are substantial negative innovations in the real monetary base beginning

TABLE 9

Residuals ("Innovations") in Interwar VAR Model,
1929 :Q1—1932 :Q4

ISTR
(1)

1929:1
2

0.77*
0.10

(2)

—0.14
—0.03

—0.08
—0.11
—0.22
—0.01

0.04
—0.02
—0.05

0.81
1.27

0.34*
—0.14
0.40
0.04

—0.07
—0.09*

1931:1

—0.21
—0.21
—0.54
0.10

—0.46
0.04
—0.45
0.09

—0.69
0.08
0.63
0.34

0.32
0.10
0.15
0.02

3

4

1932:1
2
3

4

Level in
1929:Q2

12.2

Comulative Residuals
1929—30
—3.08
1931—32
—0.46
Cumulative Residuals as
Percent of 1929:Q2 Level
1929—30
—25.2
1931—32
—3.8
Note:

(5)

—1.45
—1.35
—0.11
—0.55

—0.12

2

(4)

tin

—1.11

4

3

(3)

SB/P

—0.38*
—0.10
—0.08

—0.13
—0.48
—0.36
—0.19

2

N
1.10
—0.89
3.10**
—1.07

0.05
—0.29
0.41

3

4

1930:1

IDG

—2.01*
—0.65
0.10
—0.35
—1.42
0.67

—0.21

0.21
0.07

0.12*
—0.04
0.02
—0.03

0.01

—0.09*
—0.04
—0.01

—0.35*

0.06

0.29

0.03

12.2

77.6

5.6

4.4

—2.10
—0.23

—1.22
—1.58

—1.19
0.86

—0.42

—17.2
—1.9

—1.6
—2.0

—20.5
14.8

0.17

3.9
—9.5

Asterisks are used to denote residuals as follows:
(*)indicates
between 1.0 and 1.5 times the sample—period standard error, and (**)
indicates greater than 1.5 standard errors.

60

as early as 1929:Q1 and cumulating to —20.5 percent of the l929:Q2 level
in

1929—30.

Second, the largest cumulative negative residuals in the

1931—32 period are contributed by the money multiplier, supporting a
role for bank failures and the credit contraction in aggravating the
contraction.

Especially interesting is the large negative multiplier

innovation in 1931:Q3, the quarter that the Fed tightened its policy
following Britain's departure from the Gold Standard.
Overall, these results are consistent with our interpretation of
two sources of the business cycle, real and financial, with the negative

innovations in real investment playing a dominant role in 1929—30, and
with the nature of the negative financial innovations shifting from a
contribution of the monetary base in 1929—30 to one by the money
multiplier in 1931—32.

VI.

SUMMARY ANT) CONCLUSION

Methodology and Data Description
Most of the tests of

structural" investment equations that have

been carried out in the literature embody what Sims (1980) calls
"incredible

exclusion restrictions.

The literature on the neoclassical

investment paradigm embodies prior assumptions about the form of the
production function.

In its putty—putty version it neglects expecta-

tions entirely, and in its putty—clay version it fails to allow time—
series aggregate variables to play multiple roles in the formation of
expectations in different phases of the investment process.

As a

result, coefficients on variables like lagged output and interest rates
cannot be interpreted in the structural way that has been typical in the
literature.

61

The Tobin "Q"

theory starts from a plausible point of departure but

then takes itself too seriously, allowing only Q to influence investment.

There seems to he no reason why the single Q

not it is measured with

error,

variable,

whether or

should embody all influences of other

variables on the investment process.

Our discussion emphasizes in par-

ticular the role of asymmetric adjustment costs, as well as the tradeoff
firms face between costly alternatives when the stock market gives one
set of signals and output or other variables give a conflicting set of
signals.

We conclude that the difficulties of structural equation—building
are irremediable.

As a substitute we carry out a hybrid methodology, in

which theory is used to suggest sets of variables and their form, but
empirical estimation is carried out by estimating equations in the
symmetric VAR format, with all explanatory variables entering the

investment

equation, and with the dependent variable included with the

same number of lags.

Our hybrid approach thus combines insights from

structural models with the unconstrained approach to testing and data
exploration tha typifies investigations using VAR models.
Our first empirical task is to establish the importance of fixed
investment in historical business cycles.

Using procedures described in

the Data Appendix, we have created a new set of quarterly data on major
expenditure components of GNP extending hack to l919:Q1.

We include

four types of real investment expenditures in our study——producer's
durable equipment, nonresidential structures, residential structures,
and consumer durable expenditures.

The decLtne in the sum of these four

components ('I") contributes between one—third and one—half of the
decline in real GNF

in recessions, even though the share of I

in GNP

at

62

the typical business cycle peak is about one—quarter.

Total investment

actually was relatively more important in postwar recessions between
1957 and 1980 than it was during the Great Contraction of 1929—33.
A decomposition of variance allows a description of the relation
between investment (I) and non—investment real GNP (N) in major episodes.

The interwar years were characterized by a high own—variance of

investment, narticularly in 1919—29, and after 1929 by a high covariance
between I and N.

The own—variance of N was more important in the

postwar period and was dominated by the Korean war episode.

Of the four

components of investment, the own variance of nonresidential structures

was the largest in the interwar period, while the own variance

of

consumer durable expenditures was largest in the postwar period.

Implications for Four Schools of Thought

Keynesians, monetarists, neoclassicists, and Q advocates all have
an interest in the results of this investigation.
will he disappointed with our results,

Nenhers of each group

if they are seeking support of

"monocausal" or "one—factor' hypotheses of investment behavior.

Yet

ironically the empirical findings offer some solace to each group,

because they provide substantial support for an eclectic view of investment that blends elements of each approach, while providing evidence

against opponents of each approach who insist on some alternative
monocausal explanation.

Keynesians view investment behavior as containing a substantial
autonomous component.

Our empirical investment equations summarized in

Table 6, together with the

support

historical decompositions in Figures 4—7,

the view that autonomous innovations in structures investment

63

are an important driving force in the business cycle.

In Table 8 the

effect of innovations in structures investment on durable equipment
expenditures, as well as on non—investment GNP, is greater than the
reverse feedback from equipment and non—investment GNP innovations to
structures investment, in both the interwar and postwar periods.

The

boom in structures investment between 1923—29, the subsequent slump in
the 1930s,

as well as the smaller negative innovations in the early

1960s and boom in 1971—73, all can he viewed mainly as autonomous events
rather than as a passive reaction to other economic variables.
While monetarists would doubtless be unhappy with a view that
treats major swings in structures investment as autonomous, they
nevertheless have the consolation of learning that the response of both
structures and equipment investment to the real money supply is
significantly greater than to the 'traditional" variables in investment
equations, the accelerator (output change), the user cost of capital,
and "Q".

The effect of money, split here between the real monetary base

and the Ml money multiplier, is suhstantial in both the interwar and
postwar periods.

The regression results in Table 6 find a strong impact

of both the base and multiplier on equipment investment in the interwar
period, and on both structures and equipment investment in the postwar.
The historical, decompositions in Figures 4—7 indicate that base innova-

tions had an important impact on both structures and equipment invest—
ment, as well as on non—investment CNP, in the interwar period, whereas
the multiplier played a role in both the interwar and postwar periods.
It seems ironic that this study of investment behavior provides
more support for the general views of the economy represented by
Keynesians and monetarists than it does for the views of specialists in

64

the investment process, the neoclassicists and Q advocates.

In Tables 4

and 5 the user cost of capital for businesses, and the real interest

rate For households, are insignificant or have the wrong sign in every
The equations for consumer and

equation for the interwar years.

producers durable spending exhibit a significant and correctly signed
(negative) sum of coefficients for the postwar period, but in every
postwar equation the user cost or interest rate variable fails an
"exclusion test" on the joint significance of all lagged values in the
explanation of investment spending.
even more negative.
the Q

variable

The verdict on the Q approach is

In the aggregated regression equations of Table 6,

passes the exclusion test only in one equation, for

postwar structures investment.

This appears in Table 4 to be

attributable to the nonresidential component of structures investment.
Such results pose a new task for Q

theorists,

that is, to determine what

factors would make investment in structures more responsive to 0 than
investment in producers' equipment.

Our empirical work casts doubt on the importance of the accelerator
hypothesis of investment behavior that has been supported by some past
work, e.g., Clark (1979).

The simple device of including four lags on

the dependent variable in equations explaining total I eliminates the
significant explanatory contribution of lagged values of real GNP,
except in the equipment equations for the postwar period.

However we

find that it is possible to obtain significant sums of coefficients for
an accelerator effect in a postwar durable equipment equation only when
real GNP is entered as a second rather than first difference.

These

findings support our basic interpretation that there is a sharp
difference between the behavior of structures and equipment investment,

65

with the former behaving mainly in an autonomous fashion, whereas the
latter reflects feedback both from investment in structures and from
financial and monetary variables.

Deeper Issues and Unsettled Questions for Future Research
In a recent paper Blanchard (1981, p. 154)) reached the conclusion
that

.

.

.

the multiplier is dead and the accelerator alive.'

This

paper reaches the opposite conclusion, particularly for the structures
component of investment.

The accelerator muchanism, interpreted as the

feedback from autonomous movements in non—investment GNP to investment
in structures, seems to be considerably weaker than the multiplier
mechanism, interpreted in the elementary textbook fashion as the effect
on total GNP of autonomous movements of investment, particularly the
structures component.

While there is a substantial effect of monetary

and financial variables on investment, nevertheless there are major and
persistent movements in investment that occur in both the interwar and
postwar periods that cannot he explained by prior changes in output,
money, stock prices, or interest rates.

The fact that we label major movements in structures investment as
'autonomous" does not mean that we leave them unexplained.

Rather, this

basic interpretation of the paper treats structures investment as
exogenous with respect to the explanatory variables included in our
statistical analysis.

This does not rule out other explanations, and in

fact we can offer three complementary explanations of the behavior of
structures investment in the interwar period.

First, the residential

structures boom of the 1920s and subsequent slump of the 1930s can be
explained in part by demographic factors that lie outside the scope of

66

this

paper.

While the rapid population growth of 1900—1920, together

with the postponement of construction during World War I and the 1920—21
recession, may provide a partial explanation of the intensity of the
1920s residential construction boom, the restrictive immigration law of
1924 and subsequent deceleration in population growth may help to
account for the decline in residential construction after 1926.
Hickman (1973) has documented both the effect of the decline in
population growth on the desired housing stock and also the extent of
overbuilding in the mid—1920s.

Hickman's work treats the rate of

population growth as endogenous, with the rate of household formation
responding to the growth rate of income, and he is able to decompose the
observed decline in the rate of population growth between the early
1920s and mid—1930s into two components, that due to the effect of
declining income, and a remaining exogenous decline due primarily to the
decline in immigration.

In order to isolate the effect of the exogenous

component of the decline in household formation, Hickman calculated two
dynamic simulations of his model, one in which standardized households
are assumed to increase steadily at the 1924—25 rate of growth, and
another in which income and other economic variables are identical hut
in which standardized households follow their actual declining path
after 1925.

The impact of the actual demographic slump gradually

becomes more important as the 1930s progress, accounting for a decline
in housing starts between the two simulations of 28.3 percent for 1933
and 39.1 percent for 1940.

His result is consistent with our Figure 4

above, in which the own—innovation in structures investment is negative
throughout the 1930s.

A second factor, more relevant for investment in structures than in

67

equipment, is the element of speculation.

The Florida land boom of the

1920s, the stock market "bubble" of 1928—29, and earlier investment
excesses like the "South Seas bubble" of the early eighteen century, all
have some similarity to the construction boom of the 1920s.

For six

years (1923—28) real residential construction achieved a level more than
double the average of the entire decade before World War I, and in four
successive years (1924—27) the ratio of real residential construction
investment to GNP reached by far its highest level of the twentieth
century.

Hickman estimates that even with a continuation of population

growth at the 1924—25 rate, rather than a post—1925 decline, housing
starts would have fallen by 35 percent between 1925 and 1930 (as a ratio
to natural real GNP,

it actually fell by

percent).

Nor is the phenomenon of overbuilding confined to the interwar
period.

Figure 6 shows that the postwar own innovation to structures

investment peaked in 1972—73.

Several years later contemporary accounts

recognized the phenomenon of overbuilding:
'In Chicago, new apartment construction has just about
ceased.

In Atlanta, where there is at least a three—year

supply of unsold condominiums overhanging the market, mortgage
companies are auctioning off high—rise units to the public at
two—thirds their original asking price

.

.

.

.

The current

problems stem from overbuilding in the early 1970s'

High—rise Bust," Newsweek (August 30, 1976),

p.

"The Great

5.

The third factor that may be an important explanation behind the
apparently "autonomous" structures investment boom of the 1920s and
slump of the 1930s is the "Schumpeterian" bunching of innovations.
hypothesis is developed by R. A. Gordon (1951), who argues that the

This

68

buoyancy of both residential and nonresidential construction in the
1920s reflected in large part the influence of the automobile in
expanding the boundaries of urban areas:

"Between 1923 and 1929 the growing use of automobiles and
trucks had a more important impact on total investment and
employment than did the expansion of motor vehicle output.
Motor vehicle registrations in 1929 were about 75 percent
greater than in 1923 and nearly three times the number in
1920.

.

.

.

large scale investment was necessary for roads and

bridges, oil wells, pipe lines, garages and service stations,
and tire and automobile supply stores, as well as for oil
refining and tire manufacture.

In addition, the automobile

accelerated the trends toward urbanization and 'suburhaniza—
tion', stimulating thereby residential and commercial
building."
Other

industries were also involved in the bunching of investment

opportunities in the 1920s. Among these were
half

electric power——well over

of the installation of electric generating capacity during 1902—40

occurred

during the decade of the 1920s.

Other important new industries

were radio, telephone, and chemicals.
The results in this paper support the view that there are two basic
impulses in the business cycle, real and financial.

The real impulse

appears in our statistical evidence as an autonomous innovation to
investment in structures.
factors that may

This concluding section has suggested three

underlie the

cycle in structures investment.

We choose

to emphasize this element of investment behavior here because it has
received relatively little attention in recent research, however

69

familiar it may seem to experts on the earlier literature on business
cycles.

The financial impulse works through the effect on investment of

changes in the monetary base and money multiplier, as well as the real
interest rate for postwar investment in durable equipment.

In these

results the money multiplier may be acting as a proxy for such phenomena
as the banking contraction of 1929—33 and the episodes of credit
crunches and disintermediation in the postwar years.

Many avenues for future research are opened up by these results.
Past studies of structures investment need to be reviewed for problens
of identification and simultaneity that may have led to a misleading
emphasis on the investment accelerator, rather than autonomous
movements, as the driving force behind structures investment.

Our

inability to find a strong influence of the stock market (working
through our Q

variable)

on investment, except for postwar nonresidential

structures, needs to he reconciled with the recent findings of Fischer
and Nerton (1984), who find a stronger connection between economic
activity and prior movements in the stock market.

Finally we hope that

our new quarterly interwar data on components of expenditures will

stimulate further research into the interrelations of real and financial
variables during the Great Depression.

FOOTNOTES

1.

Recall the famous debate of the mid—1960s set off by the attempt by

Milton Friedman and David Mejselrnan (1963) to characterize "autonomous

spending" and "the money supply" as the driving forces in the Keynesian
and in their own models of income determination, respectively.
2.

The quantitative importance of the credit crunch phenomenon is

explored in the paper 1w Eckstein and Sinai in this volume.
3.

This paragraph reflects an oral history provided to us by Fumio

Hayashi.
4.

Even if a project is financed by issuing a long—term bond on the day

of its completion, time periods after the date of completion are
relevant both for the taxation of earnings and for any capital gains
that may accrue.
5.

Students of U.

S.

twentieth century architecture know that there was

virtually no central—city office building construction between 1930 and
1955; that is, there was neither any expansion in the number of square
feet nor any replacement of old buildings, both for the same set of
reasons.
6.

To be consistent with the rest of the formulation, the term

in (6) should he an expectation, not an actual value.

This

approximation is adopted to simplify the reduced form in (8) below.
7.

As an example, airlines that ordered the Boeing 757 and 767 aircraft

in 1978 reacted to the previously unexpected period of poor profits that
occurred during 1980—82 both by cancelling part or all of their orders,
and by "stretching out" the delivery period.

American Airlines

initially ordered both the 757 and 767, and cancelled its entire order

F- 2

for 757 aircraft.

United Airlines has stretched the delivery dates on

half of its 767 order by up to five years, and has threatened to cancel
that half.
8.

"For the information set containing also aggregate sales, the struc-

tural model performed poorly, being unable to explain the relation —— or
the lack of relation —— between investment in a sector and aggregate
sales

.

.

.

The model

.

maintained assumptions

.

.

.

is

.

.

.

are rejected by the data.

clearly not structural; some of its

additional assumptions made in estimation
the sectors.

.

.

.

Some of the

are rejected for some of

Nor are the econometric results overwhelmingly supportive"

(Abel—Blanchard, p. 44).
9.

Hall (1977, p. 88) shows that with a geometric delivery lag, only

the current value of Q

Hayashi, only current Q

enters.

Tn the basic analysis of Abel and

enters and gestation lags are a special case.

The poor post—sample performance of the Q approach is illustrated

10.

by Clark (1979) on p. 93.

Since his article was written, a national

accounts revision has substantially raised the level of actual investment for the later 1970s, thus implying an even poorer performance of
the Q
11.

20,

12.

approach.
See

1984, p.

14.

There are exceptions, however, particularly for residential

housing.
13.

Companies Feel Underrated by Street," Business Week, February

See deLeeuw (1971), Feldstein (1981), and Polinsky (1977).

Unrealistically restrictive assumptions regarding the set of

variables admissahie into the information set pervade theoretical
papers, not lust empirical tests.

In a related paper John Taylor (1983)

derives a model of investment with gestation lags that shares with (4)

F—3

and (6) the feature that current investment orders depend on
expectations of both future output and capital costs.

Taylor is not

concerned with the identification issues under discussion here, but he
does choose to simplify his model as do Abel—Blanchard, by making
expectations of future output depend only on past output, and in
addition makes future capital cost depend only on future and past
By omitting the multiple roles for past financial variables in

output.

determining expectations of all future variables.

Taylor thus

introduces prior simplifying restrictions that have no empirical
justification.
14.

Art

assessment

of the 1981—83

disinflation experiment' using the

DRI model and a reduced—form approach is presented in papers by Eckstein
(1983) and Gordon (1983a, 1984b).

A detailed quantitative review of the

performance of my equation in post—sample dynamic simulations is
provided by Perry (1983).
15.

See Gordon (1977) and Sims' comments in the printed discussion of

that paper.
16.

Recall that quantitative controls during World War Ii preclude a

meaningful analysis of investment behavior during that period.

Further,

some of the series used for our data interpolation are not available
after 1941, thus our data series have not been created for the 1942—46
interval.

DATA APPENDIX

1.

General Description:

This paper investigates the behavior of investment in the U.S.

economy over both the interwar (1919—41) and the postwar (1947—1983)
periods.

Annual nominal and real expenditures and deflator series are

available as far back as 1929 using Survey of Current Business
supplements, hereafter SCB.

Prior to 1929, however, one must resort to

a number of sources to collect annual data which can be matched up to
the 1929 Commerce figures.

Swanson and Williamson (1971), hereafter

S&W, contains nominal series for all the major national account categories for the period 1919 to 1928, which have been adjusted from
Kuznets' figures to conform to the SCB definitions.

These annual

nominal series are used here for all the national accounts categories
except for investment in structures and foreign trade.

The desired

division of investment into residential and non—residential structures
uses figures from Grebler, Blank and Winnick, hereafter CBW, and adjusts
nominal GNP accordingly.

Net exports are broken down into the two

nominal components, exports and imports, using indices available in the
Statistical History of the U.S., which are then linked to the 1929 SCB
values.

This provides us with a complete set of annual nominal national
income accounts.

The next task is to find implicit deflators for these

nominal series.

Our starting point is the set of 5GB implicit deflators

for all the national income categories for the period 1929 to 1941.

Annual figures for the GNP deflator, 1919—1928, are obtained by linking
Kuznets' GNP deflator to the SCB 1929 implicit GNP deflator.

As both

A-2

current and constant dollar indices are available for exports and

imports, it is possible to construct implicit deflators for both series
For

from 1919 to 1928 which can be matched to the SCB 1929 deflators.

the remaining categories, such as consumption and investment, deflators
are not available for the period 1919 to 1928.

To obtain figures for

this period, our interpolation program is run over the available annual
price series, 1929 to 1941,

to produce quarterly figures.

The final

regression is used to "back—forecast" the quarterly values over the
period 1919 to 1928.

These quarterly values are then averaged to yield

annual price series for the period 1919—1928.

With the complete set of

price deflators it is possible to convert the nominal national accounts
into real series covering the full 1919—41 period.

The real annual

national account series are interpolated to arrive at a complete set of
real quarterly accounts and a corresponding set of deflators.

An interpolation procedure following that of Chow—Lin (1971) is
used in converting the annual series to quarterly observations.

A more

complicated procedure, such as that suggested by Litterman (1981), is
deemed to be too costly compared to the possible gain in accuracy.
procedure itself is fairly simple.

The

As our annual series are annual

averages of quarterly variables, the procedure we use is that termed
"distribution" by Chow and Lin.

In what follows upper case letters

represent annual series, and lower case letters represent the associated
quarterly series.

To each annual series to be interpolated (Yft) is

associated a number of quarterly series (x1) that a priori information
suggests move within the year the way quarterly observations on the
annual dependent variable would.

These quarterly explanatory variables

are annualized (x.) and a regression against the annual dependent

A—3

variable is run;

(Al)

It

1.
it

=

X.

it

+

U

t

is assumed in each interpolation that the quarterly errors follow an

AR(l) process, which induces a complicated covariance structure on the

annual error, U.

The first autocorrelation of U,

A'

is related to

the quarterly autocorrelation coefficient, PQ by the non—linear
formula:
7
6
4.3
5
p+
2p+
3p+
4p+
Jp+ 2p 2 +p

2PQ+ 4PQ+ 6PQ+ 4

Estimating A as the first autocorrelation of the residuals from the
regression in (Al), we can obtain an estimate of

by solving (A2), and

this is used in an iterative GLS procedure to obtain estimates
of

and PQ•

The final estimates from this procedure are then used to

generate quarterly observations for the dependent variable as:

(A3)

it

=

X.

+

Qt—l•

The assumption of AR(l) errors in the quarterly equation overcomes the

artificial choppiness induced if u is assumed to be white noise.

This

procedure is used to derive the quarterly series for the implicit
deflators and real series of the national accounts as well as Summers' Q
and some components of the cost of capital.

TABLE Al

Annual

National
Account Category

Time Period
Interpolated

Independent Series
in Interpolation

1) GNP (0)

—deflator —

OD

—real GNP — 0

derived as residual
1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

IIPTT

1941—4

C

T

CPINF

DPTSLS

2) Consumer Durables (CDG)

—deflator —

PDCDC

1929—1

,

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

IIPDCG

—deflator — PDCNDSV

1929—1

,

1941—4

C

T

CPI

—real — OCNDSV

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

IIPNDCG

1941—4

C

T

WPI

—real —

OCDG

3) Consumer Non—Durables
and Services (CNDSV)

DPTSLS

4) Investment, Producer
Equipment (IPDE)
—deflator — PDIPDE

1929—1

—real — OIPDE

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

IIPPC

—deflator — PDIRSTR

1929—1

,

1941—4

C

T

WPI

—real — OIRSTR

1919—1

1941—4

C

T

CONSTR

1941—4

C

T

WPI

1941—4

C

T

CONSTR

1941—4

C

T

CPWGE

,

CPWGE

5) Investment, Residential
Structures (IRSTR)

,

CPWGE

QRSTR

6) Investment,Nonresidential
Structures (NRSTR)

—deflator — PDINRSTR

1929—1

—real — OINRSTR

1919—1

,

,

CPWGE

7) Investment, Change in
Inventories (IJ3INV)

real — OIBINV

derived as residual

8) Government Purchases (C)

—deflator —
—real —

PDC

OG

1929—1

,

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

WPI

9) Exports (X)

—deflator —

PDX

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

OXPROXY

—deflator — PD1

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

WPI

—real

1919—1

,

1941—4

C

T

OMPROXY

—real —

OX

Imports (M)

—

OM

ONRSTR

A—4

2.

Sources of Annual Interwar and Postwar Quarterly Variables

1) GNP
1919—28

(annual):

Implicit deflator constructed from a nominal and

a real GNP series available on NBER tape, dataset 08A Income and
Employment.

Nominal GNP taken from S&W Table B—i, adjusted for the

use of the investment in structures series taken from GBW.
1919—41 (quarterly):

The quarterly series for the GNP deflator was

calculated by adding up the real and nominal interpolated account

categories, except inventories and dividing the nominal sum by the
real Sum.

1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):

Table

Nominal GNP series from SCB

1.1. Implicit deflator from SCB Table 7.1.

All references to

SCB figures include the most recent updates and revisions.
2) Consumer Durable Expenditures
1919—28 (annual):

Nominal expenditures from S&W Table B—2.

Implicit deflator constructed from interpolation.
1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):
1 •

Nominal series from SCB

Table

1, deflator from SCE Table 7 .1.

3) Consumer Non—Durables and Services
1919—28 (annual):

Implicit deflator constructed from interpolation.

Nominal series is the sum of consumer semi—durables, perishables and
services from S&W Table B—2.

1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):

Nominal and real series are

the sum of consumer durables and services from SCB Tables 1.1 & 1.2

with the implicit deflator defined as the ratio of the nominal sum
to the

real

sum.

A-5

4) Investment in Producers' Equipment
Implicit price deflator from interpolation,

1919—1928 (annual):

nominal series from S&W Table B—3.
Nominal and real series are

1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):

the sum of the corresponding residential and non—residential
investment in producers' durable equipment SCB Tables 1.1 & 1.2
Implicit deflator is the ratio of the nominal sum to the real sum.
5) Investment Residential Structures
1919—28 (annual):

Implicit deflator from interpolation.

Nominal

series taken from GBW Table K—4 col. 4, does not include residential
investment in farm structures.

Nominal series for

1929—41 (annual) 1947—1983 (quarterly):

residential construction, non—farm taken from SCB Table 1.1,
implicit deflator taken from SOB Table 7.1.

6) Investment in Non—Residential Structures
1919—28 (annual):

Implicit deflator from interpolation.

series from GBd Table K—4 col.

Nominal

5, includes farm investment in

structures.

1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):

Real and nominal series are

the sum of non—residential and residential farm investment in
structures, SCB Tables 1.1 & 1.2.

Implicit deflator is arrived at

by dividing the nominal sum by the real sum.
7) Change in Business Inventories
1919—1941 (quarterly):

Both real and nominal series were arrived at

as residuals by subtracting from total real (nominal) GNP the real
(nominal) sum of all other account categories.
1947—83 (quarterly):

Both real and nominal series taken from SOB

A-6

Tables 1.1 & 1.2.

8) Government Purchases of Goods and Services
1919—28 (annual):

Price deflator from the interpolation, nominal

purchases from S&W Table B—i.
1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):

Deflator from SCB Table 7.1

and nominal series from SCB Table 1.1
9) Exports
1919—28 (annual):

Real and nominal series constructed by matching

constant arid current dollar indices from the Statistical History of

the U.S., series U21 and U22, to the SCB export series in 1929.

The

deflator was then defined as the ratio of the real and nominal
series.

1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):

Deflator from SCB Table 7.1

and nominal series from SCB Table 1.1
10) Imports
1919—28 (annual):

Real and nominal series constructed by matching

constant and current dollar indices from the Statistical History,
series 1J33 and U34, to the SCB import series in 1929.

The deflator

is then defined as the ratio of the real and nominal series.
1929—41 (annual) 1947—83 (quarterly):

Deflator from SCB Table 7.1

and nominal series from 5GB Table 1.1
11) Capital Stock, Equipment and Structures
1925—1983 (annual)

Nominal and real series for the two types of

capital stock, equipment and structures, was taken from various
issues of SGB.

Nominal and real series for the capital stok of

consumer durables was taken fron ?1usgrave (1979).

In order to

utilize the information available from our associated quarterly

A-7

investment series in constructing each quarterly capital stock
series, we followed the iterative procedure:
a.

the annual series provide a beginning and ending value

for the capital stock
b.

assuming a fixed exponential rate of depreciation, the

quarterly series must satisfy
Kt

The procedure

=

+ (1—)K1

uses the starting value of the capital stock and the

associated quarterly I series, iterating on ô until the value of
the quarterly capital stock at the end of the period is "close" to
the specified ending value.

Below we present the estimated annual

depreciation rate for each type of capital stock in each of the sub—
periods.

Non—residential Structures

Consumer Durable Goods

Producers' Durable Equipment

1919—1941
1947—1983

1919—1941
1947—1983

1919—1941
1947—1961
1962—1983

6.396

6

5

=

6.036

=

20.40
20.63

=

14.88

5

=
=

13.80
14.96

A-8

3.

Rental Price of Capital Services

The rental price of capital services, for equipment and for
structures, was constructed using for equipment:

—

CE

E5E r)(1

—

RITCE_ DUM•ZEITAX*RITCE_ ZETAX)
(1 — TAX)

-

and for structures:

r)(1

RITC

—

Z.TAX)

(1 — TAX)

—

A

—

composite cost of capital series was constructed by weighting each

of CE and Cs by their share in the sum of the capital stock of
equipment and structures.

Individual components of the cost of

capital services are:
=

Depreciation

rate of the net stock of producer's durable

estimated iteratively as explained above in Section 2.
=

Depreciation

rate of the net stock of nonresidential

structure estimated iteratively as above in Section 2.
DUM

Dummy variable, set equal to 1.0 for the duration of the

Long amendment to the Revenue Act of 1962, and set equal
to zero in all other periods.
=

Implicit

deflator for investment in producers' durable

equipment, from Section 2.

P1

=

Implicit

deflator for investment in nonresidential

structures, from Section 2.
RITCE

=

Rate of investment tax credit on equipment investment,
from Jorgenson and Sullivan, (1981), hereafter J—S.

A-9

RITCs

Rate of investment

=

tax credit on nonresidential

structures investment, from J—S.
TAX

Highest marginal tax rate on corporate income from Tax

=

Foundation (1979).

Discount rate which is calculated as the Moody's Baa

=

r

corporate bond yield minus the expected rate of
inflation.

The construction of the expected inflation

rate is discussed in the text.

Present value of one dollar's worth of depreciation on

ZE

equipment.

Figures for 1947—83 are from J—S, while

figures for 1919—41 are calculated using straight—line
depreciation, average asset life for the period from J—S
and the Baa corporate bond rate.

Z

=

Present value of one dollar's worth of depreciation on
nonresidential structures.
J—S,

while

Figures for 1947—83 are from

figures for 1919—41 are calculated using

straight—line depreciation, average asset life for the
period from J—S and the Baa corporate bond rate.

A- 10

4.

Sources of Interwar Quarterly Variables

The data utilized in this section were made available, in part, by
the Inter—University Consortium for Political and Social Research.

The

data for macroeconomic time series were originally collected by the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

C

=

Constant term used in the regression.

CONSTR

=

Index of total construction, s.a.

Monthly observations from

NBER tape, dataset (J2A Construction:

data originally

collected for Engineering News—Record Yearbook
CPI

=

Consumer price index, all items, s.a.

CPINF

=

Consumer price index, less food, s.a.

Monthly observations

for both taken from NBER tape, dataset 04A Prices:

data

originally collected by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
CPWCE

=

Index of composite wages, s.a.

Monthly observations from

NBER tape, dataset 08A Income and Employment:

data

originally collected by the Federal Reserve board and the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
DPTSLS

=

Physical

volume of department store sales, s.a.

Monthly

observations taken from NI3ER tape, dataset 06A Distribution
of Commodities:

data originally collected by the Federal

Reserve Board.
IIPTT

=

Index of industrial production, total, s.a.

IIPDCG

=

Index of industrial production, durable consumer goods, s.a.

IIPNDCG =

Index of industrial production, durable consumer goods, s.a.

IIPPG

Index of industrial production, producers' goods, s.a.

=

Monthly observations on the above four variables taken from
NBER tape, dataset O1A Production of Commodities:

data

A-il

originally collected by the Federal Reserve Board and the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
QNRSTR

=

Real value of contracts for industrial buildings, s.a.
Quarterly observations arrived at by deflating the value of
contracts for industrial buildings (from NBER tape, dataset
02B Construction: originally collected by the Federal
Reserve Board) by the interpolated deflator for nonresidential structures.

QRSTR

=

Real value of residential construction contracts, s.a.
Quarterly observations arrived at by deflating value of
residential contracts (from NBER tape, dataset 02B
Construction:

originally collected by Engineering News—

Record) by the interpolated deflator for residential
structures.

QMPROXY =

Constructed variable for real imports, s.a.

A quarterly

nominal series on imports, which did not match the SCB
definition, was deflated by

the interpolated

WPI.

The

nominal import series was taken from NBER tape, dataset 07A
Foreign Trade:

originally the data appeared in the Monthly

Summary of Foreign Commerce, various issues.
QXPROXY =

Constructed variable for real exports, s.a.

A quarterly

nominal series on exports, which did not match the SCB
definition, was deflated by the interpolated WPI.

The

nominal export series was taken from NBER tape, dataset 07A
Foreign Trade:

originally appeared in the Monthly Summary

of Foreign Commerce, various issues.
RBAA

Yield on corporate bonds, Moody's Baa rating.

Monthly

A-12

observations originally collected by Moody's Investors
Service, taken from Federal Reserve Board and various issues
of the Federal Reserve Bulletin.
RHCPBD

Yield on corporate bonds, highest rating.

Monthly

observations from NBER tape, dataset 13A Interest Rates:
data originally collected by the U.S. Dept. of Commerce.
STKPRCE =

Index of all common stock prices, N.Y.S.E.

Monthly

observations from NBER tape, dataset hA Security Markets:
data originally collected by Standard and Poor's.
T

=

Trend term appearing in the regression.

WPI

=

Wholesale price index, all items, s.a.

Monthly observations

taken from NBER tape, dataset 04A Prices:

data originally

collected by Babson Statistical Organization.

___________
__________

REFERENCE S

Abel, Andrew B.
York:

(1979).

Investment and the Value of Capital.

New

Garland Publishing.
and Blanchard, Olivier (1983).

"Investment and Sales:

An

Empirical Study,' presented to NBER Macro Conference, July.
Auerbach, Alan J.

"Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and

(1983).

the Cost of Capital," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 21
(September), pp. 905—40.
Bernanke, Ben S.

"Adjustment Costs, Durables, and Aggregate

(1982).

Consumption," NBER working paper no.

(1983a).

1038, December.

"Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the

Propagation of the Great Depression, American Economic Review, vol.
73 (June), pp. 257—76.

(1983b).

"An Equilibrium Model of Industrial Employment,

Hours, and Earnings, 1923—1939," Hoover Institution Working Papers
in Economics, no. E—83—19 (August).
Bischoff, Charles W.

"The Effect of Alternative Lag

(1971).

Distributions," in Gary Fromm, ed., Tax Incentives and Capital
Spending.

Washington:

Blanchard, Olivier J.

Accelerator?"

Brookings Institution, pp. 61—130.

(1981).

"What is Left of the Multiplier

American Economic Review, vol. 71 (May), pp.

Bosworth, Barry (1975).

150—54.

"The Stock Market and the Economy," Brookings

Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 6, no. 2,
Chirinko, Robert S. (1983a).

pp. 257—300.

"Investment and Tax Policy:

A Survey of

Existing Models and Empirical Results with Applications to the High—

___________
__________

R- 2

Technology Sector," a report for the National Science Foundation,
Division of Policy Research and Analysis, October.

(1983b).

"Investment, Tobin's Q, and Multiple Capital

Inputs," paper presented to the Econometric Society winter meetings,
December.

and Eisner, Robert (1983).
Major U.

"Tax Policy and Investment in

S. Econometric Models," Journal of Public Economics, vol.

20 (March), pp.

139—66.

Chow, Gregory C., and Lin, An—lob (1971).

"Best Linear Unbiased Inter-

polation Distribution and Extrapolation of Time Series by Related
Series," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 53 (November),
pp. 372—6.

Clark, J. Maurice (1917).

"Business Acceleration and the Law of Demand:

A Technical Factor in Business Cycles," Journal of Political
Economy, vol. 25 (March), pp. 217—235.
Clark, Peter K.

"Investment in the 1970s:

(1979).

Theory, Performance,

and Prediction," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 10, no.
1,

pp. 73—124.

do Leeuw, Frank (1971).

"The Demand for Housing:

A Review of Cross—

Section Evidence," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 53
(February), pp.

1—10.

Eckstein, Otto (1983).
Inflation:
10.

"Disinflation," in W. D. Nordhaus, ed.,

Prospects and Remedies, Alternatives for the 1980s, no.

Washington:

Eisner, Robert (1972).

Center for National Policy, October, pp.

11—24.

"Components of Capital Expenditures:. Replace-

ment and Modernization versus Expansion," Review of Economics and
Statistics, vol. 54 (August), pp. 297—305.

____________________
__________
___________
__________

R- 3

and Nadiri, M. I.

"Investment Behavior and Neo-

(1968).

classical Theory: A Comment," Review of Economics and Statistics,
vol. 50 (August), pp. 369—82.
and Strotz, Robert H.

(1963).

"Determinants of Business

Investment," in Commission on Money and Credit, Impacts of Monetary
Policy.

Prentice—Hall, pp. 60—337.

Englewood Cliffs:

Feldstein, Martin S. (1981).

"The Distribution of the U. S. Capital

Stock Between Residential and Industrial Uses," Economic Inquiry,
vol.

19, no.

1

(January), pp. 26—37.

and Foot, David K.
ment:

"The Other Half of Gross Invest-

(1971).

Replacement and Modernization Expenditures," The Review of

Econonics and Statistics, vol. 53 (February 1971), pp. 49—58.
and Rothschild, Michael (1974).

"Towards an Economic Theory

of Replacement Investment," Econometrica, vol. 42 (May), pp.

393—

424.

Fischer, Stanley, and Nerton, Robert C.

(1984).

"Macroeconomics and

The Role of the Stock Narket," NBER Working Paper no.

Finance:

1291, March.

Friedman, Milton, and Meiselman, David (1963).

"The Relative Stability

of Monetary Velocity and the Investment Multiplier in the United
States, 1897—1958," in Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilization
Policies.

Prentice—Hall.

Englewood Cliffs:

and Schwartz, Anna J.

United States.

Princeton:

(1970).

(1963).

Princeton University Press for NBER.

Monetary Statistics of the United States:

Estimates, Sources, and Methods.
Press for NBER.

A Monetary History of the

New York:

Columbia University

___________
__________
___________
_________
___________

R- 4

Garber, Peter M. and King, Robert G.
tion?

(1983).

"Deep Structural Excava-

A Critique of Euler Equation Methods," NBER Technical Paper

31, November.

Gordon, Robert A.
Period:

(1951).

"Cyclical Experience in the Interwar

the Investment Boom of the Twenties," in NBER, Conference

on Business Cycles.
Gordon, Robert J.

(1973).

New York, NBER, pp.

163—214.

"Interest Rates and Prices in the Long Run:

A Comment," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 5 (February,
Part II), pp. 46u—i.

(1977).

"Can the Inflation of the 1970s be Explained?"

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 8 (1977, no.

1),

pp. 253—77.

(1982).

"Price Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the

United States, 1890—1980," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90
(December), pp.

1087—1117.

(1983a).

"'Credibility' vs.

Inflation Process," in W.

'Mainstream': Two Views of the

D. Nordhaus, ed., Inflation: Prospects and

Remedies, Alternatives for the 1980s, no.

10.

Washington:

Center

for National Policy, October, pp. 25—34.

(1983b).
Working Paper No.

"The Conduct of Domestic Monetary Policy," NBER
1221, October.

(1984a).

Macroeconomics, third edition.

(1984b).

"Inflation in the Recovery," paper presented to a

Boston:

Little—

Brown.

meeting of academic consultants with the Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, May.

__________
___________________
__________

R- 5

and King, Stephen R. (1982).

"The Output Cost of Disinfla-

tion in Traditional and Vector Autoregressive Models," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity,
and Wilcox, James A.

vol. 13, no.
(1981).

1, pp. 205—42.

"Monetarist Interpretations of

Evaluation and Critique," in Karl Brunner,

the Great Depression:

ed., The Great Depression Revisited.

Boston:

Martinus Nijhoff,

pp. 49—107.

Grebler, Leo, Blank, David M., and Winnick, Louis (1956).
Formation in Residential Real Estate:

Capital

Trends and Prospects.

Princeton University Press for NBER.

Princeton:

"Investment, Interest Rates, and the Effects of

Hall, Robert E. (1977).

Stabilization Policies," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol.
8, no.

1, pp. 61—103.

and Jorgenson, Dale W.
Behavior,

"Tax Policy and Investment

American Economic Review, vol. 57, June, pp. 391—414.

(1971).
Capital Accumulation."
Spending.

(1967).

"Application of the Theory of Optimum
In G. Fromm, ed., Tax Incentives and Capital

Washington, D. C.:

Brookings Institution, pp. 9—60.

Hansen, Lars P. and Singleton, Kenneth J.

(1982).

"Generalized Instru-

mental Variables Estimation of Nonlinear Rational Expectations
Models," Econometrica, vol. 50 (September), pp. 1269—86.
"Tobin's Marginal q and Average q,"

Hayashi, Fumio (1982).

Econometrica, vol. 50 (January 1982), pp. 213—224.
Helliwell, John F.

(1976).

"Aggregate Investment Equations:

A Survey

of Issues," in J. Helliwell, ed., Aggregate Investrnent:'Selected
Issues.

London:

Hickman, Bert G.

Penguin Education, pp. 13—53.

(1973).

"What Became of the Building Cycle?" in Paul

____________________
__________
___________

R- 6

David and Melvin Reder, editors, Nations and Households in Economic
Essays in Honor of Moses Abramovitz.

Growth:

New York:

Academic

Press.

Jorgenson, Dale W.

"Capital Theory and Investment Behavior,"

(1963).

American Economic Review, vol. 53, May, pp. 247—59.

(1967).

"The Theory of Investment Behavior," in R. Ferber

(ed.), Determinants of Investment Behaviour, Universities—National
Bureau Conference Series No. 18 (New York:

Columbia University

Press), pp. 129—55.

(1971).

"Econometric Studies of Investment Behavior:

A

Survey," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 9, December, pp. 1111—
47.

and

Stephenson, James A. (1967).

Investment Behavior in U.

"The Time Structure of

S. Manufacturing, 1947—1960," Review of

Economics and Statistics, vol. 49, February, pp.

(1969).

16—27.

"Issues in the Development of the Neo-

classical Theory of Investment Behavior," Review of Economics and
Statistics, vol.

51, August, pp. 346—53.

and Sullivan, Martin (1981).

"Inflation and Corporate

Capital Recovery," in Charles R. Hulten, ed. Depreciation,
Inflation, and the Taxation of Income from Capital.

Washington:

Urban Institute Press, pp. 171—237.
Keynes, J.
London:

N.

(1890).

The Scope and Method of Political Economy.

MacMillan and Co.

King, Stephen R.

(1983).

"Macroeconomic Activity and the Real Rate of

Interest," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation presserited in 1983 for
Northwestern University degree in June, 1984.

__________

R- 7

Litternian,

Robert A.

(1981).

"A Random Walk, Markov Model for the

Interpolation of Time Series," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Working Paper 190, December.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr.

(1967).

"Adjustment Costs and the Theory of

Supply," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 75 (August, Part I), pp.
32 1—334.

(1976).

"Econometric Policy Evaluation:

A Critique," The

Phillips Curve and Labor Markets, Carnegie—Rochester Conferences in
Public Policy, vol.

1,

Malinvaud, Edmond (1982).

pp.

19—46.

"Wages and Unemployment," Economic Journal,

vol. 92 (March), pp. 1—12.

"Consumption in the Great Depression," Journal of

Mayer, Thomas (1980).

Political Economy, vol. 86 (January), pp.
Nishkin, Frederick S.

(1978).

139—145.

"The Household Balance Sheet and the

Great Depression," Journal of Economic History, vol. 38, pp. 918—37.
Modigliarii, Franco, and Cohn, Richard A.

(1979).

"Inflation, Rational

Valuation and the Market," Financial Analysts Journal, March/April,
pp. 3—23.

Musgrave, John C.

(1979).

"Durable Goods owned by consumers in the

United States, 1925—77," Survey of Current Business, vol. 59
(March), pp.

Perry, George L.

17—25.

(1983).

"What

Have We Learned about Disinflation?"

Brookirigs Papers on Economic Activity, vol.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell (1977).

14, no.

"The Demand for Housing:

2, pp. 587—602.

A Study in

Specification and Grouping,' Econonetrica, vol. 45 (M&rch), pp. 447—
61.

Roosa, Robert (1951).

"Interest Rates and the Central Bank," in Money,

__________
___________

R- 8

Trade, and Economic Growth:
New York:

Essays in Honor of John H. Williams.

MacMillan, pp. 270—95.

Samuelson, Paul (1939).

'A Synthesis of the Principle of Acceleration

and the Multiplier", Journal of Political Economy, vol. 47
(December),

pp. 786—97.

Shiller, Robert (1981).

"Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified

by Subsequent Changes in Dividends?" American Economic Review, vol.
71, no.

3,

pp. 421—36.

Sims, Christopher A. (1980a).

"Macroeconomics and Reality," Econo—

metrica, vol. 48, January, pp. 1—48.

(198Db).
Cycles:

"Comparison of Interwar and Postwar Business

Monetarism Reconsidered," American Economic Review Papers

and Proceedings, vol. 70, no.

(1982).

2,

pp.

250—57.

"Policy Analysis with Econometric Models," Economic

Review, vol. 73 (May), pp. 228—34.
Summers, Lawrence

R.

(1981).

"Taxation and Corporate Investment:

Theory Approach," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol.
no.

1,

A q—
12,

pp. 67—127.

Swanson, J. and Williamson, S.

and Income for the U.

(1971).

"Estimates of National Product

S. Economy, 1919—41," Department of Economics,

University of Iowa working paper 71—32.
Taylor, John (1983).

"Optimal Stabilization Rules in a Stochastic Model

of Investment with Gestation Lags," NBER Working Paper No. 1225.
Tax Foundation (1979).

Facts and Figures Government Finance.

Washington.

Temin, Peter (1976).
New

York:

Norton.

Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression?

R-9

U. S. Bureau of the Census (1965).

The Statistical History of the

United States from Colonial Times to the Present.

Stamford, CT.:

Fairfield Publishing.
U.

S. Department of Commerce (1981).
Accounts of the U.

S., 1929—76.

The National Income and Product
Supplement to the Survey of Current

Business, September.

Wilcox, James A. (1983).

"Disaggregating Data Using Related Series,"

Journal of Business and Economic Statistics (July), pp. 187—91.
Yellen, Janet (1980).

"Jorgensoniari Investment Theory:

The Case of the

Missing Uage Rate," working paper, University of California at
Berkeley, July.

